as June a.d. 1549. It may be remarked that our difficulties of 
identification are increased by the fact that, under Arab rule, 
Syrian and Persian potters were at work in Damascus, in Old 
Cairo and elsewhere. Among the Fostat fragments classified 
by Dr Fouquet are many bearing the signatures of Syrian work- 
men. In the 15th and 16th centuries, too, imitations of Chinese 
blue-and-white porcelain became common throughout the 
nearer East, and quantities of fragments have been found at 
Fostat, Ephesus and elsewhere. 

Turkish Pottery. — This beautiful and striking ware, formerly 
called Persian, and till lately Rhodian because Rhodes was a 
known centre of manufacture, seems to have been fabricated in 
all the countries overrun by the Ottoman Turks in the 13th 
century, so that the name " Turkish," in spite of some opposition, 
is now generally applied to it. (See fig. 42 ; and the 16th-century 
Rhodian or Turkish pieces, Plate V.) It has a fine white body 
of the usual sandy texture, covered, as a rule, with a wash of 
pure white slip; it is painted in strong brilliant colours, chiefly 
blue, turquoise, green, and a peculiar red pigment which is heaped 
up in palpable relief — the whole of the ornament being outlined 
with black or dark green. 
The ware was glazed 
with an alkaline glaze of 
great depth, so that the 
colours soften and some- 
times run, producing one 
of the most brilliant and 
attractive of all the 
oriental wares. In cer- 
tain districts the white 
ground was not used, 
but over it a slip of the 
red colour (Armenian 
bole) , varying in strength 
from bright red to pale 
salmon, was laid over 
the piece, reserving the 
pattern only in the white 
slip, which consequently 
lies lower than the red 
ground. Other examples 
are known where the 
ground has been covered 
with lavender, blue, 
sage, apple and turquoise 
greens, chocolate or coffee-brown, and the sumptuous effect 
of the whole was often increased by the application of gold- 
leaf over the fired glaze. The decorative motives are dis- 
tinguished from those of the Persian wares by a breadth and 
boldness which are in keeping with the brilliant, and not 
always harmonious, colouring. They include, it is true, the 
Persian arabesque, the floral scroll with feathery leaf, the thistle- 
bloom and the cypress tree, but the naturalistic treatment 
which permits immediate recognition of the favourite Turkish 
flowers such as the tulip, hyacinth, carnation, fritillary, corn- 
flower and lily (some of which were imported into Europe by 
the Turks), is as original and distinctive as the arrangement of 
the different elements of the design is artistic and charming. 
Other styles of design include formal patterns and diapers, rarely 
human and animal figures, and occasionally armorial devices 
and ships. Tiles of this ware were extensively used for lining 
the walls of public buildings, replacing the carpets and textile 
hangings which their designs so freely imitated. Of domestic 
articles, dishes are the most numerous, though vases, ewers, 
sprinklers, jugs, tankard-shaped flower-holders, covered bowls 
and mosque lamps are also plentiful. The tiles are found in all 
parts of the Turkish empire, though they were probably made at 
certain centres, such as Nicaea (which gave its name to the ware 
in the 16th century and no doubt supplied many of the mosques 
in Constantinople), Kutaia, Demitoka, Lindus and other 
centres in Rhodes and Damascus. Individual wares cannot be 




Fig. 42. — Rhodian Jug. 



73° 



CERAMICS 



[HISPANO-MGRESQUE 



distinguished, except in some measure those of Damascus and 
Kutaia'. A small jug in the Godman Collection has an Armenian 
inscription stating that it was made by " Abraham of Kutaia " 
in the 16th century. A few fine bowls and vases, painted in 
a beautiful blue with Persian arabesques and rosette scrolls, 
recalling Chinese porcelains of the Ming dynasty, but of very 
characteristic appearance, are also attributed to this place; and 
later, in the 18th and up to the end of the 19th century, an 
inferior ware was largely manufactured here. This late ware 
usually takes the form of small objects — plates, cups, jugs, 
egg-shaped ornaments, &c. — with a thin, well-potted, white 
body and slight patterns of radiating leaves, scale diapers, &c, 
in blue, black and yellow. Turkish pottery was at its best in 
the 16th and the early part of the 17th century, and though good 
tile work of later date exists, the general pottery deteriorated 
before the 18th century. An inferior ware of poor colour is 
still produced in Turkey, Persia and Syria, and some attempt 
has been made of late to revive the old lustre decoration, 
but the results are not likely to be mistaken for those of old 
times. 

Collections. — The Victoria and Albert Museum contains the finest 
collection of the medieval pottery of the nearer East — the British 
Museum collection, though much smaller, has some magnificent 
examples. The Cluny Museum in Paris has a never-to-be-forgotten 
collection of Turkish pottery, especially plates and dishes. The 
museums of the Louvre and of Sevres have also many beautiful 
examples. Berlin, Frankfort and other German towns have collec- 
tions, but much smaller in extent. Private collectors in England and 
France own many fine specimens, and mention may be made parti- 
cularly of those owned by Mr Ducane Godman and Mr George 
Salting. 

Literature. — Fortnum, Majolica (1896) (also in South Kensing- 
ton Museum Handbook); Falke, Majolica (Berlin, 1896); Fouquet, 
Contributions a V etude de la ceramique orientate (Cairo, 1900) ; Kara- 
bacek, " Zur muslimischen Keramik," in Monatsschrift fiir den Orient 
(1884); Lane-P.oole, Art of the Saracens in Egypt (1886); Migeon, 
Manuel de Part musulman, vol. ii. (1907) ; Sarre, Persische Keramik; 
and Jahrbuch der kbniglichen preussichen Kunstsammlung (1905), 
part ii. ; H. Wallis, The Godman Collection (1) Lustred Vases (London, 
1 891); (2) The Tenth Century Lustred Wall-tiles (1894); Notes on 
some Early Persian Lustre Vases (1885); Egyptian Ceramic Art 
(1898). (R. L. H.; W. B.*) 

HlSPANO-MORESQUE POTTERY 

With the doings of the Moslem potters of the countries round 
the eastern Mediterranean fresh in our minds, it is interesting 
to follow the westward trend of the Moslem conquests, and see 
how in their wake there also sprung up in Spain a ware of high 
distinction and beauty. The Iberian peninsula had been the 
scene of pottery-making from prehistoric times —a red unglazed 
ware was made before the dawn of civilization as finely finished 
as that found in the Nile valley by Flinders Petrie (see Egypt: 
Art and Archaeology), and the Romans had one of their great 
provincial pottery centres at Saguntum; but it was only when 
a great part of Spain lay under Mussulman rule that artistic and 
distinctive pottery was produced. What is by no means clear 
is how it came to pass that when the traditional methods, learnt 
by the Arabs in Egypt and Syria, were carried westward they 
should have undergone such a radical change. Oxide of tin, 
the opacifying and whitening material in glazes par excellence, 
was certainly known and used in the East from at least the 6th 
century B.C.; the ancient wares are coated with a covering of 
white tin-enamel to hide the buff or reddish-coloured clay, and 
it was similarly used elsewhere; but its use was sporadic and 
not general in those countries, where we find instead a consistent 
development of the pottery made with a white slip-coating and 
a clear alkaline glaze. Perhaps it was that at this period tin 
was almost as costly as gold, and it was only when potters with 
an oriental training brought their skill to Spain, where tin 
abounded, that the relative cheapness of the material led them 
to employ it, so far as is known, exclusively. (There is a wide 
distinction between the tin-enamelled and the slip-faced wares, 
glazed with an alkaline glaze. In the latter, the more oriental 
type, the slip-coating is of fine white clay and sand, and this is 
finished with a transparent alkaline glaze containing little or 
no lead : in the former there is no need of a coating of slip, for 



the addition of oxide of tin to a glaze rich in lead gives a dense 
coating of white enamel, opaque enough to disguise the color 
of the clay beneath.) Such colours as were used for painted 
patterns were painted over this enamel coating before it was fired, 
so that they became perfectly incorporated with it, and then this 
ground furnished a splendid medium for the development of 
those thin iridescent metallic films that we call " lustres." The 
knowledge of this lustre process had been brought from the East 
also, where it was used on another ground, and with the growing 
use of lustre pigments containing copper as well as silver — until 
the red, strongly metallic copper lustre almost ousted the quieter 
silver lustres — we get the simple technique of one of the most 
distinctive kinds of pottery known. 

Briefly, the wares were " thrown " upon the wheel or 
" pressed " on modelled forms — handles, ribs and dots of clay, 
or strongly incised patterns were often added by hand — and they 
were then fired a first time. A coating of the tin-enamel (rich 
in lead as well as tin) was applied, and on this coating designs 
were painted in cobalt and manganese; sometimes these colours 
were only used as masses to break up the background. Then 
the second firing took place and the piece came from the firing 
all shining and white, except where the blue or brownish purple 




Fig. 43. — Hispano-Moorish Plate, painted in blue and copper lustre. 

had been painted (see fig. 43). The lustre pigments, a mixture of 
sulphide of copper or sulphide of silver, or both with red ochre 
or other earth, was then painted over the glazed surface with 
vinegar as a medium. The repainted piece was fired a third time 
to a dull red heat, and smoked with the smoke from the wood 
used in firing, and when cold the loosely adherent ochre and 
metallic ash left were washed off, leaving the iridescent films in 
all their beauty. 

The technical practices of the Spanish potters and the com- 
position of the lustre pigments are given in Cocks's account of 
the processes followed at Muel (Aragon) in 1585- The Manises 
receipt of 1785 gives: — copper 3 oz., red ochre 12 oz., silver 
1 peseta piece, sulphur 3 oz., vinegar 1 qt. and the ashes scraped 
off the pots after lustring 36 oz. 1 Interesting documents have 
recently been published concerning the works executed by the 
" Saracen," John of Valencia, at Poitiers in 1384, and it is certain, 
from the list of materials supplied to him, that he made there 
tiles that were enamelled and lustred. 

The earliest record of lustred pottery in Spain is the geographer 
Edrisi's mention of the manufacture of " golden ware " then 
carried on at Calatayud in Aragon in 1154. Ibn Sa'id (1214-1286.) 

'See Riaiio, Spanish Arts, Victoria and Albert Museum Hand- 
book, pp. 149-15 1; and Sobre la tnanera de fabricar la antigua loza 
dorada de Manises (1878). 



ITALIAN] 



CERAMICS 



73i 



speaks of the glass and the golden pottery made at Murcia 
(city), Almeria and Malaga. From the 14th century the notices 
which have come down to us divide themselves into two main 
groups relating to the industry (a) at Malaga; (b) at various 
localities, but especially Manises in Valencia. 

Malaga. — Malaga was situated within the Moorish kingdom 
of Granada, which formed, from 1235 until the late 15th century, 
the last remnant of Moorish dominion in Spain. Here under 
the art-loving Nasride dynasty, Mussulman arts and learning 
flourished to an unprecedented degree. In 1337 Ahmed ben- 
Yahya al-Omari enumerates, among the craft productions of 
Malaga, its golden pottery, the like of which he declares is not 
to be met with elsewhere. The Moroccan traveller Ibn Batuta 
mentions (1350) the Malagan golden pottery, as does Ibn al- 
Hatib (1313-1374) of Granada, in his description of Malaga. 
The principal monument of the period is the royal palace of 
Granada, begun in 1273, and finished during the 14th century, 
from which period most of its ornamentation dates. Two vases 
were discovered there, of which the existing one, known as the 
" Alhambra vase," is admittedly the most imposing product 
of Hispano-Moresque ceramic art extant. Its amphora-shaped 
body (4 ft. 5 in. high) is encircled by a band of Arabic inscription, 
above which are depicted gazelles reserved in cream and golden 
lustre upon a blue field; the rest of the body and the prominent 
handles are covered with compartments of arabesques and 
inscriptions in the same colours; and panels on the neck, divided 
by mouldings and decorated with strap-work and arabesques. 
Vases similar in shape and technique, with ornament of Cufic 
characters and arabesques in horizontal rows, are to be found in 
the museums at St Petersburg, Palermo and Stockholm. As to 
the exact date of these, experts are not agreed. Though pre- 
senting all the characteristics of the 14th-century Hispano- 
Moresque ornament, it seems probable that they were produced 
at the same period as the large lustred wall-tile formerly in the 
Fortuny (now in the Osma) collection, an inscription upon which 
is by some held to refer to Yusuf III. of Granada (1409-1418), 
not to Yusuf I. (1333-1354)- Another remarkable example is a 
dish (Sarre collection, Berlin) , which, it is claimed, bears upon 
its back, in Arabic, the word Malaga; it is ornamented with 
eight segmental compartments filled alternately with strap-work 
designs and arabesques in lustre. Malaga was reconquered by 
Ferdinand and Isabella in 1487, and after this its industry 
probably decayed, as it is not mentioned by Lucio Marineo in 
1539 among the localities where ceramics then flourished. 

Valencia. — The emirate of Valencia was reconquered by 
Aragon in 1238. The history of its lustred ware is known from 
1383, when Eximenes (whose evidence has been erroneously 
held to date from 1499) mentions the golden ware {Obra dorado) 
of Manises. Valencian pottery of this kind was an offshoot of 
the Malagan industry, as in documents lately published (ranging 
from 1405 to 1517) it is repeatedly designated Malaga ware (Gbra 
de Malaga). Its decorative qualities became famous throughout 
the whole of Europe and North Africa. The ware was chiefly 
manufactured at Manises by the Moorish retainers of the Buyl 
or Boil family, lords of Manises, who levied dues upon the output 
of the kilns, and occasionally arranged for its sale. It is dis- 
tinguished as regards its ornamentation from the pottery of 
Malaga by the adoption of a more natural rendering of plant 
form motives and by the use of armory. The ware consists of 
drug pots, deep dishes, large and small plates, aquamaniles, 
vases, &c. Some dozen varieties of ornament were employed 
during the 15th and early 16th centuries, including mock arabic 
inscriptions, various flower or foliage patterns taken from the 
vine, bryony, &c, and gadroons. The centres of dishes frequently 
bear the arms of a king or queen of Aragon, of the Buyls of 
Manises, or other Valencian or Italian families for whom they 
were made. Great dexterity is shown in the execution of minute 
and complicated schemes of ornament and in the richness of 
the colour schemes; golden lustre of various hues, with blue 
and manganese, form the simple combinations, but the ruby, 
violet or opalescent lustre combine to produce with the colours 
a wonderful decorative effect. From 1500 the use of blue and 



manganese was gradually discontinued and the ornament 
quickly became nondescript, but the brilliancy of the lustre 
pigment nevertheless obtained a wide popularity for the ware, 
as is attested by Marineo (1539), Viciana (1564) and Escolano 
(1610). After the expulsion of the Moriscoes (1609) the industry 
was carried on by those who had escaped deportation or by 
Spaniards who had learnt the craft; generally speaking their 
productions can be summed up in the word " decadence." In 
the course of the 15th century the manufacture of lustred pottery 
was carried on at various other small towns near Valencia; in 
1484 it was produced at Mislata, Paterna and Gesarte. It is 
known to have flourished at Calatayud in 1507, and at Muel, 
also in Aragon, in 1 589. In the Valencia district much pottery 
for ordinary use, ornamented with blue on white, was also 
produced. 

Majorca.— Scaliger, in 1557, states that Chinese porcelain was 
imitated in the Balearic Isles, and that the Italians called these 
imitations " majolica," changing the letter in the name of the 
islands (then called Majorica) where they originated. The 
truth would appear to be that Valencian wares, being exported in 
Balearic vessels that called at Majorca on the voyage to Italy, 
acquired a reputed Mallorcan origin. There is extant a potter's 
petition praying for permission to establish himself in Majorca 
(1560), in which he states that " Manises ware," &c, had to be 
imported, as it was not made there. 

Collections. — In England, the Victoria and Albert and the British 
Museums have fine collections of this ware. At Paris the Cluny 
Museum collection, and the Louvre; the museum at Sevres contains 
many fine typical pieces. Another good collection is that of the 
archaeological museum at Madrid. The Berlin and the Hamburg 
museums, the Metropolitan Art Museum at New York and the 
Boston Museum of Fine Arts also contain good specimens. The 
private collections of England, France and Italy are rich in these 
wares, among the finest being those of Mr F. D. Godman (Horsham), 
and of Don G. J. de Osma (Madrid). 

Literature. — A. Van de Put, Hispano-Moresque Ware of the 
15th Century (1904) ; F. Sarre, " Die spanisch-maurischen Luster- 
fayencen des Mittelalters," &c. (in Jahrbuch der kgl. preuss. 
Kunstsammlungen, xxiv. (1903) ; G. J. de Osma, " Apuntes sobre 
ceramica morisca : textos y documentos valencianos," No. 1,1906, 
and " Los Letreros ornamentales en la ceramica morisca del siglo xv." 
(in the review CulturaEspanola, No. ii, 1906 ; J. Font y Guma, Rajolas 
valencianas y catalanas (1905); J. Tramoyeres Blasco, " Ceramica 
valenciana del siglo xvii." (in the Almanaque, para iqo8, del periodica 
Las Provincias de Valencia; J. Gestoso y Perez, Historia de los barros 
vidriados sevillanos (1904); also J. C. Davillier, Histoire des faiences 
hispano-moresques a reflets metalliques (1861). (A. v. de P.) 

Medieval and Later Italian Pottery 1 
Little is known of the potter's art in Italy afterthe fall of the 
Roman empire till the 13th century. The traditions of the 
Roman potters appear to have been gradually lost, leaving 
behind only sufficient skill to make rude crocks for domestic use 
and to coat them, if required, with a crude yellowish lead glaze 
sometimes stained to a vivid green with copper oxide. Applied 
ornament of roughly modelled clay and scratched designs were 
the chief embellishments of such wares, which were of the same 
class as the medieval pottery of Great Britain and the north of 
Europe. In the 12th and 13th centuries, however, contact with 
Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt- and Spain, where ceramic skill had 
been highly developed in fresh directions, as we have seen, 
introduced into Italy as well as the rest of Europe those superior 
wares characterized by a white surface decorated with bright 
colours under a brilliant transparent glaze, and glorified by 
metallic lustres. The Italian potters did not long remain 
unaffected by these influences, but though Persian, Syrian and 
Egyptian pottery must have been fairly plentiful in the house- 
holds of the wealthy, it was the distinctively Hispano-Moresque 
wares from which the potters of Italy drew the inspiration for 
a new ware of their own. The technique of a siliceous slip- 
coating with colour painted on that and covered with a trans- 
parent alkaline glaze, was only sparingly used, and then not very 
successfully; it is only the introduction of the tin-enamel that 
was turned to fruitful account and led to the production of the 
magnificent Italian majolica of the 15th and 16th centuries. 
1 See examples in colour, Plate VI. 



732 



CERAMICS 



[ITALIAN 



In the same way the practice of lustre decoration might have been 
learnt from the Orient, but its late appearance on Italian wares 
(16th century) and its evident relationship to the lustres of Spain, 
rather than to the earlier lustres of Egypt, Syria and Persia, are 
further evidence that though oriental decorative motives gave 
the Italians certain early types of design, it is the Hispano- 
Moresque potters from whom the Italians learnt the art they were 
afterwards to develop so splendidly in a new direction. 1 

All the Italian pottery above the level of common crocks may 
be conveniently grouped into four classes. 

i. The native wares, made of coarse and often dark-red clay, 
coated with a white clay slip (a kind of pipe-clay) and covered 
with a crude lead glaze, either yellow or green. The idea of 
rendering this ware ornamental, and fitting it for more than 
vulgar use, led to a great development of the graffiato process; 
where, while the vessel, with its white clay coating was firm yet 
soft enough, patterns were scratched or engraved through the 
white slip to the red body beneath. This decorative method 
has been already mentioned several times, for it was practised 
during the early middle ages in all the countries from India to 
Italy, and the Byzantine potters were adepts in its use. Nor 
has its practice ever ceased in Italy, for through all the times 




Fig. 44.- 



-Italian Graffiato Plate, 16th century. 
Kensington Museum.) 



(South 



when painted majolica was the ware of the wealthy, this earlier 
and humbler pottery was used by those who could not afford the 
former; and the gaily-coloured later wares of this kind have a 
fine decorative quality of their own. From the depth beneath 
the present soil at which fragments of this ware have been 
disinterred, it is obvious that the method was widely practised 
in early times, and no simpler glazed wares are known except 
those covered all over with green, yellow or brown glazes. Early 
examples have been found all over northern Italy — in Faenza, 
Florence, Pisa, &c, and particularly in Padua, where it seems to 
have been extensively made. Pavia was another centre of its 
manufacture, even to the end of the 17th century, and Citta di 
Castello must have been noted for it in the 16th century, for 
Piccolpasso describes this ware as " alia Castellana " (see fig. 44). 
Apparently in the latter half of the 15th century a sudden 
advance takes place in the colouring of this graffiato ware. 
Instead of the simple glazes, of uniform colour, of the earlier 
productions, underglaze colours — green, purple, blue and a 
brown of the tint of burnt sienna which passes into a glossy black 
where it is thick — were applied in bold splashes under the straw- 
coloured glaze, producing a rich and decorative effect by very 

1 There is ample documentary evidence to prove how largely the 
lustred pottery of Spain was imported into Italy from the 12th 
century onwards ; and it is important to- note in this connexion that 
almost all the fine examples of Hispano-Moresque in our modern 
collections have been obtained from the palaces of ancient Italian 
families. 



simple means. As fine examples of this kind we may mention the 
dish with the mandoline players, and one with cupids disporting 
themselves in a tree, in the Victoria and Albert Museum; the 
tazza, supported by three modelled lions, in the Louvre; and 
the dish, with figures of the Virgin and two saints, in the museum 
at Padua. The ware has often been called, quite erroneously, 
mezza-majolica. It had nothing to do with majolica, being the 
natural development of a much older process; and its manu- 
facture was carried on all through the period of majolica manu- 
facture and has never ceased. 

2. Mezsa-Majolica. — This name is accurately applied to certain 
Italian wares that made their appearance in the 12 th century 
or even earlier, when rude patterns — a clumsy star, a rude 
crossing of strokes or some equally elementary work — are found 
painted on a thin white ground covering a drab body. The 
pieces, generally pitchers of ungainly forms, are uncouth in the 
extreme; the body has been shaped in local clay and then thinly 
coated by dipping it into a white slip, which seems at first to 
have been of white clay only, though oxide of tin and lead were 
added to it even in the 1 2th century. The colours used for the 
rude painting were oxide of copper and oxide of manganese, 
and the final glaze, which is generally thin and often imperfectly 
fused, seems to have been based on the alkaline glazes of the 
nearer East. The specimens so assiduously recovered by 
Professor Aragnani, some of which, or similar wares, are to be 
found in the Louvre, the British and the Victoria and Albert 
museums, are typical of the rude work out of which, by a fuller 
knowledge of Spanish methods, the painted majolica grew. 

3. Majolica. — For the last three centuries the word majolica 
has been used to signify an Italian ware with a fine but com- 
paratively soft buff body, coated with an opaque tin-enamel 
of varying degrees of whiteness and purity, on which a painted 
decoration was laid and fired. In the later pictorial wares, a fine 
coating of transparent alkaline glaze was fired over the painting 
to soften the colours — really to varnish them. The word itself 
appears to have been derived from the name of the island 
Majorca, and was originally applied by the Italians to the lustred 
wares of Spain which were largely imported into Italy, probably 
arriving in ships that called at or hailed from Majorca, as we do 
not believe that the ware was actually made in that island. That 
the secret of the tin-glaze, which is the essential feature of Italian 
majolica, was known in Italy in the 13th century is practically 
proved; and there is both literary and archaeological proof of 
its use there in the 14th. Mention of it is made in the Margarita 
Preciosa published at Pola by Pierre Le Bon in 1336, and the 
well-known jug, bearing the arms of Astorgio I., discovered under 
the Manfredi palace at Faenza, must have been made shortly 
after 1393. Its development marched side by side with that of 
the mezza-majolica, until it practically superseded the latter for 
painted wares in the 15th century; but the earliest examples 
have little more than an archaeological interest, and it was only 
after the last decade of the quattrocento or the first of the 
cinquecento that it blossomed into an artistic creation. In its 
prime the production of majolica was confined to a very small 
part of Italy. Bologna on the north, Perugia to the south, Siena 
on the west, and the Adriatic to the east, roughly enclose the 
district in which lie Faenza, Forli, Rimini, Pesaro, Cafaggiolo, 
Urbino, Castel Durante, Gubbio, Perugia and Siena. Towards 
the middle of the 16th century Venice on the one hand, and 
in the 17th and 18th centuries the Ligurian factories at Genoa, 
Albissola and Savona, made majolica of the later decadent 
styles, while, at the end of the 17th and in the early part of the 
1 8th centuries, the southern town of Castelli, near Naples, 
produced a ware which closes the period of artistic majolica. 

4. Lustred Majolica. — This brilliant species of Italian pottery 
(to which alone Piccolpasso applied the name majolica) seems to 
have been mainly produced at Deruta and Gubbio, though 
experiments were made at Cafaggiolo and probably at Faenza 
and Siena. Considering how much the Italian majolist owed 
to the Spanish-Moorish potter, it is remarkable that this beautiful 
method of decoration should have made so tardy an appearance, 
for the earliest specimens do not appear to be much earlier than 



CERAMICS 



Plate L 




\. J iu^u. . A- ^- A jrf3gasBv-«-^-T>--J^--.'->.^jj»; 




I H 




Fk,. 52.— CORINTHIAN JAR. 



Fig. 53.— FRANCOIS VASE. 

(From Furtwangler and Reichhold, Griechische Vasenmalerei, 

by permission of F. Bruckmann.) 





Fig. 54.^BLACK-FICURF.D AMPHORA 
BY EXEKIAS. 
V. 732. 



Fig. 55.— VASE FROM SOUTHERN ITALY. 
Signed by Python. 



Plate II, 



CERAMICS 




Fig. 56.— BOWL MADE AT CALES IN IMITATION OF METAL. 

(2nd cent, b.c.) 





Fig. 58.- VASE OF (5th 
CENT. B.C., IX FORM 
OF HELMETED HEAD. 



Fig. 57.— VASE OF 5th CENT. 
B.C., MODELLED IN FORM 
OF HEAD. 





Fig. 60— AMPHORA OF APULIAN STYLE, WITH 
SCENE FROM EURIPIDES' "HECUBA." 



Fig. 59.- 



-FLASK OF VITREOUS GLAZED WARE. 
(ROMAN PERIOD.) 



Plate III. 




Fig. 6i.— MOULD FOR ARRET1NE BOWL. 



Fig. 62.— JAR OF ARRETINE WARE FROM CAPUA. 




Fig. 63— EARLY ETRUSCAN JAR. 
(VILLANOVA PERIOD.) 



Fig. 64.— STAMP FOR ORNA- Fig. 65.— ETRUSCAN "CANOPIC" 
MENTING ARRETINE VASE. JAR PLACED IN BRONZE CHAIR. 



Plate IV. 



CERAMICS 








mmm 







4m 



Fig. 67. — MEDALLION FROM VASE 
MADE IN S. FRANCE, WITH SCENE 
FROM TRAGEDY. (3rd CENT. AFTER 
CHRIST.) 



Fig. 66.— MOULD FOR BOWL OF GERMAN WARE. 
(2nd CENT. AFTER CHRIST.) 




Fig. 68. — JAR OF RHENISH WARE 
WITH INSCRIPTION. (3rd CENT. 
AFTER CHRIST.) 




Fig. 69.— BOWL OF GAULISH (LEZOUX) WARE WITH FIGURES 
IN "FREE" STYLE. (2nd CENT. AFTER CHRIST.) 



Fig. 70-^JAR OF LATER LEZOUX WARE. 
(3rd CENT. AFTER CHRIST.) 



ITALIAN] 



CERAMICS 



733 



the end of the 15th century, and the process was apparently 
abandoned by the middle of the 16th. The lustre wares of 
Deruta, probably the earliest made in Italy, have strongly- 
marked affinities with their Spanish prototypes; the earlier 
examples are hardly to be distinguished from Spanish wares, 
and to the last the ware remained technically like the earlier 
ware, though with perfectly Italian decorative treatment. Yet 
the best examples of Deruta silver lustre have a quality of tone 
that has never been surpassed; a colour resembling a wash of 
very transparent umber bearing a delicate nacreous film of the 
most tender iridescence. The Gubbio lustre is best known to us 
through the works of Maestro Giorgio, whose distinctive lustre 
is a magnificent ruby-red unlike any other. In all probability 
the lustre process was so quickly abandoned on the fine painted 
majolica, because the increasing efforts to make a " picture " 
were discounted by so uncertain a process. When one of the 
later majolica painters had spent weeks on the decoration of 
some vase or dish, with an elaborate composition of carefully 
drawn figures, it was not likely that he would care to expose it 
to any risks that could be avoided. The risks of the lustre process 
were inordinately great — Piccolpasso says, " Frequently only 
six pieces were good out of a hundred " — so that its use was rele- 
gated only to inferior wares, and then the process was relinquished 
and forgotten until its rediscovery in the second half of the 
19th century. 

The history of the development of these noble wares is by 
no means clear, nor is it always certain what part was played 
by each town in the successive inventions of technical methods, 
decoration and colouring, so that it is better, in such a general 
sketch as this, to treat the subject in its broadest features only. 
In the earlier painted wares the only colours used were 
manganese-purple and a transparent copper-green as on the 
mezza-majolica* but early in the 1 5th century cobalt-blue was 
added to the palette, and, later on, the strong yellow antimoniate 
of lead, mixed with iron. The decorations at this period were 
largely influenced by the wares imported from Persia, Syria, 
Egypt and Spain, specimens of which were so prized as to be 
used for the decoration of church fronts and the facades of public 
buildings. The lustre of the Saracenic wares was not yet under- 
stood, but its place was taken first by manganese and afterwards 
by yellow. The designs were chiefly conventional flower-patterns 
in the Persian or Moorish style, arabesques, and floral scrolls, 
the ground being filled at times with those tiny spirals, scrolls 
and dots to which the Eastern potters were so partial. Figures, 
human and animal, were introduced either among the formal 
ornament or only sundered from it by panels, of which the 
outlines often followed the contours of the central design (see 
the early 15th-century Faenza piece, Plate VI.). The figures 
were, in fact, drawn to conform to the outline of the vessel, and 
not the vessel made to display the figure-subject as in the majolica 
of the succeeding century. The earliest dated example of this 
period is the pavement laid down in the Caracciolo chapel in the 
church of San Giovanni a Carbonara, in Naples, about 1440. 
Specimens of these tiles may be seen in the British Museum, 
and from their style it has been suggested that they were made 
by some Spanish potters brought over to Naples by Queen 
Joanna, who was of the royal house of Aragon. To this period 
also have been referred the large ovoid jars made to contain 
drugs or confections, and decorated with bold scrolls of formal 
oak leaves enclosing spirited figures of men or animals, or heraldic 
devices. These are characterized by a rich blue colour generally 
piled up in palpable relief and sometimes verging on black; the 
outlines are usually in manganese, and transparent green is used 
for details and occasionally even as a ground colour. This ware 
has been definitely assigned to Florence on what seem very 
inadequate grounds, and it is better to speak of it simply as 
Tuscan. Then, essentially Italian ornament began to assert 
itself, and it redounds to the credit of the Italian majolist that 
he soon freed himself from repeating the styles of the wares from 
which he obtained his methods, and produced a distinctive type 
of ornament of his own. He revelled in patterns with bold floral 
scrolls, or those based on peacocks' feathers (see fig. 45), and 




Fig. 45. — Early Faenza plate, with 
peacock-feather design, in blues, yellow 
and orange-red. (Victoria and Albert 
Museum 



LOJXSIOK&IO 32L 



Early Faenza 
Potter's mark. 



Late Faenza 
Potter's mark. 



then he advanced to concentric bands of painted ornament, 
borrowed from classic art yet breathing the true spirit of the 
Renaissance; while cable 
borders, chequer and 
scale patterns, bands of 
stiff radiating leaves, 
festoons of fruit and 
flowers, zigzags and 
pyramidal scrolls occu- 
pied nearly the whole I 
surface or framed an 1 
armorial or emblematic ' 
central subject. Figure- 
subjects occur with in- 
creasing frequency as 
the century advanced; 
Madonnas and other 
sacred subjects, portraits, 
and, occasionally, groups 
of figures after the early 
Italian masters, or scenes 
borrowed from the first 
illustrated editions of the classics, gradually encroach on the 
conventional borders and occupy more and more of the surface 
of the piece. The provenance of these 1 5th-century pieces still 
remains uncertain— Faenza, Forli, Florence, Siena and other 
places offering rival claims, — but there is no doubt that from 
the earliest times 
Faenza was the 
most fertile centre 
of their manufac- 
ture, and almost all 
the motives of the 
quattrocento wares 
are found on fragments discovered there or on examples that 
can be traced to Faventine factories. 

It is customary to treat the enamelled terra-cottas of Luca 
della Robbia, the great Florentine sculptor (1399-1482), and his 
followers, Andrea and Giovanni della Robbia and other members 
of the family, as belonging rather to the domain of sculpture than 
of pottery, and this is right, for there is nothing certainly known 
of the work of this great sculptor which connects it with painted 
majolica. The old theory that Luca invented the tin-glaze is 
long since exploded; what he did was to use coloured glazes 
made with a basis of tin-enamel on his boldly modelled terra- 
cottas — a very different thing, — and it is by no means certain 
that he was the first to do even that. The Victoria and Albert 
Museum is extraordinarily rich in della Robbia ware of every 
kind; and one may see there these beautifully modelled figures 
in high relief covered with pure white tin-enamel, set in a back- 
ground of slatey blue or rich manganese purple and framed in 
wreaths of flowers and fruit which are coloured with blue, green, 
purple and sometimes yellow. There are altar vases too, of 
classic shape with low relief ornament, covered with the same 
peculiar blue glaze; these are sometimes furnished with modelled 
fruit and flowers; and finally there is the rare set of roundels 
painted on the flat with figure-subjects typifying the months; 
but the attribution of these remains doubtful, and their method 
is not that of painted majolica. 

A remarkable development took place at the beginning of 
the 1 6th century, and in the forty succeeding years the highest 
perfection of manipulative skill, both in potting and painting, 
was attained. Artistically regarded, the elaborate and detailed 
methods of painting then adopted are too much allied to fresco- 
painting to be considered as fit treatment for enamelled clay; 
but this view was certainly not accepted at the time, nor is it 
subscribed to by many modern collectors; yet, regarded as 
decorated pottery, the 1 5th-century majolica, simpler and more 
conventional in design and treatment, is eminently preferable. 
The ruling families of northern Italy, who now took the industry 
under their personal patronage, clearly inclined to the opposite 
view and spared no expense to provide subjects for their 



734 



CERAMICS 



[ITALIAN 



pot-painters. During the first two decades the influence of Faenza 
was paramount, and though the encroachments of purely pictorial 
motives are clearly indicated on the wares, room was still found 
for ornamental patterns. The broad rims of the dishes were 
covered with beautiful arabesque designs, frequently including 
grotesque figures, masks, dolphins and cherubs (see the Faenza 
Casa Pirota piece, 1525, Plate VI.). Sometimes reserved in the 
white on a dark blue ground and shaded with light blue and 
yellow, sometimes traced in dark blue on a paler grey-blue glaze 
(called berettino) or painted in darker tints on a ground of orange 
or full yellow, the Faventine arabesques form a conspicuous 
feature of the early wares of this century. Honeysuckle patterns 
and interlaced lines drawn in pure white on a toned tin-enamel 
(white on white or sopra-bianco decoration) commonly appear 
on the sides of the deep wells of the dishes, while in the centre 
is a single figure, a coat of arms, or a small figure-subject. A 
similar treatment, without the sopra-bianco, was accorded to the 
fruit-dishes, shallow bowls on low feet, &c, with moulded 
gadroons or scalloped sides, which are generally attributed to 
Faenza or Castel Durante. The workshops of Siena were .also 
noted for delicately painted grotesques and arabesques, with a 
rich brownish-yellow or deep black ground. At Gubbio, too, 
the " grotesque " decoration was practised with marked success. 
Other developments of this style are the '■' a candelieri " designs, 
in which grotesques were symmetrically arranged round some 
central subject, such as a candelabrum or vase, and " a trofei " 
in which trophies of arms, musical instruments, and other objects 
were symmetrically disposed, or arranged in studied disarray 
throughout the design; these patterns are generally associated 
with the wares of Castel Durante and Deruta. Lovers' gifts, 
dishes in which the whole space is occupied by a portrait bust 
of a girl or man, with the name and a complimentary adjective 
inscribed on a ribbon in the background, were common to 
Faenza, Castel Durante and many other factories. Elaborate 
figure-subjects also were attempted early in the century at 
Faenza and with no little success, as may be seen from a dish in 
the British Museum, which is entirely occupied by the scene of 
the death of the Virgin, after a print by Martin Schongauer, 
delicately painted in shades of blue, and dated about 1 500. 

In the early Faventine school the outlines of the figures are 
almost always traced in blue, even when they are laid on the 
grey-blue berettino ground, and blue was the prevailing colour 
of the shading and details. In the third decade of the century 
the style affected at Urbino superseded that of Faenza. The 
majolica painter's palette was now complete; in addition to the 
primitive blue, manganese-purple, transparent green and yellow, 
we find black, white, orange, greens of varying shades, brown, 
and a great number of intermediate tints obtained by mixing 
the standard colours. All the colours of the majolica of the best 
perioas were painted on the tin-enamel before the final glazing, 
and were capable of standing the full heat of the fire. Such a 
thing as painting in enamels on the finished ware and retiring 
them at a lower heat was unknown before the end of the 17 th 
or beginning of the 18th century. A true red colour seems to 
have been beyond the power of most of the Italian majolists, 
and was only attained at Faenza, and with less complete success 
at Cafaggiolo; the famous red of the Turkish pottery behaves 
very indifferently on tin-enamel. 

In the Urbino style, which now be- 
came general, the ware was given over 
entirely to pictorial subjects, scenes 
from history or romance, scriptural and 
mythological, copied from the com- 
positions of the Italian painters and 
usually set in a background of Italian 
landscape. Guidobaldo II., duke of 
Urbino, spared no pains to develop this 
phase of the art; the cartoons of 
Raphael, engraved by Marc Antonio and others, were placed 
at the disposal of the pot-painters, as well as the paintings of 
Michelangelo, Giulio Romano, Battista Franco, Rosso Rossi, 
Pcrugino, Parmeggiano and many more, and these, together 




Urbino Potter's mark. 



with engravings by Agostino Venetiano, Marco Dente, Enea Vico 
and others, were copied, with more or less fidelity, on the 
majolica. Some of the painters, as, for instance, Xanto Avelli, 
were eclectic in their tastes and made up their subjects by taking 
a figure here or there from various pictures. Thus of three 
figures on a plate in the British Museum, painted with the Dream 
of Astyages, one is borrowed from Raphael and another from 
Mantegna. These " istoriati " wares reached their zenith at 
Urbino between the years 1530 and 1560, when the workshops 
of the Fontana family were in full activity; but their popularity 
was very general, and skilful painters at many other towns 
produced specimens that it is hard to distinguish from those of 
Urbino. Baldasara Manara was a prolific p£?inter in this style 
at Faenza; Pesaro and Castel Durante were little behind Urbino 
in the skill of their artists, the Lanfranchi family in the former 
town having a weli-deserved reputation, while the founders of 
the Fontana factories learnt their art in the latter; and a few 
pieces of considerable merit bear the name of Rimini as their 
place of origin. 

There will always remain a large number of specimens of 
majolica which cannot be assigned with certainty to any par- 
ticular factory, partly because the same style of painting was in 
vogue at many places at the same time, and partly because of 
the itinerant propensities of many of the painters, whose signed 
works prove that they moved from place to place to practise 
their art. There are, however, a few prominent artists whose 
touch is sufficiently well known from the examples that bear 
their signatures to enable us to classify a considerable proportion 
of the finest pieces. First of these is Niccola Pellipario, the 
founder of the Fontana family, who moved from Castel Durante 
to Urbino in 1510, and worked at the latter place in the factory 
of his son, Guido Fontana. There is little doubt that he was 
the painter of the famous service in the Correr Museum at Venice, 
which marks the transition from the style of Faenza to that of 
Urbino, and his free figure-drawing, the oval faces with strongly 
marked classical features, the peculiarly drawn knees, the careful 
landscapes and the characteristic balls of cloud are easily recog- 
nized in quite a number of pieces in the British Museum (see the 
Gonzago Este piece, Plate VI.) . His pupil, who frequently signed 
his name in full, Xanto Avelli da Rovigo, was one of the foremost 
Urbino painters, and his work is characterized by bold colouring 
and fine figure-drawing, with a' marked fondness for yellowish 
flesh tints. But Niccola's grandson, Orazio Fontana (see 
example, Plate VI.), was perhaps the most celebrated exponent 
of the pure Urbino style, and his free drawing and soft har- 
monious colouring, in which a brilliant blue is usually conspicuous, 
are unequalled by any other majolica painter of the period. 

Certain characteristic wares of Faenza have already been 
noted. Those with the grey-blue (berettino) glaze were principally 
made at the factory called Casa Pirota, 
though inferior imitations were also 
produced at Padua, and a blue glaze 
of paler tint was largely used at 
Venice. Dolphins are a frequent 
motive in the arabesque ornaments 
of the same Faventine workshop, and 
many of the wares are marked with a 
circle divided by a cross and contain- 
ing a dot in one of the quarters. A ' 
capital P crossed with a line or paraph 
is another Faventine mark, and a 
somewhat similar monogram, with an 
S added to the upper part, is found 
in the wares of Cafaggiolo. It has 
already been stated that a red colour is peculiar to Faenza 
and in an inferior and browner tint to Cafaggiolo; it was 
used, according to Piccolpasso, at the factory of Vergiliotto 
in the former place. At Cafaggiolo, the factory of the Medici 
family, many fine pieces were painted, mostly in the Faven- 
tine style; a deep blue, heavily applied and showing ib" 
marks of the brush, was freely used in backgrounds, ancS 
delicate running leaf scrolls in paler blue and reminiscent of 




Venetian Majolica 
Potter's mark. 



ITALIAN] 



CERAMICS 



735 




Later 

Cafaggiolo 

Potter's 

mark. 



Persian style often appear on the Cafaggiolo wares (see example, 
Plate VI.)- Not a little can be learnt from the ornament on the 
reverse sides of the dishes and plates; those of Faenza and 
Siena are richly decorated with scale patterns and concentric 
bands; those of Cafaggiolo and Venice are either left blank or 
have one or two rings of yellow. A few pre- 
eminently beautiful dishes, with central figure sub- 
jects of miniature-like finish in delicate landscapes 
with poplar trees in a peculiar mannered style, 
are probably the work of M. Benedetto of Siena. 
Borders of arabesques with black or deep orange 
ground belong to the same factory and were perhaps 
decorated by the same hand. The dishes covered, 
except for a few small medallions, with interlaced 
oak branches (" a cerquate " decoration), are no 
doubt the productions of Castel Durante; and a 
certain class of large dishes with figure subjects in blue on a 
toned blue glaze, and sometimes with formal ornaments in relief, 
are of undisputed Venetian origin. 

Another phase of majolica decoration began about the middle 
of the 16th century and synchronized with the decline of the 
pictorial style. The figure^ subjects were relegated to central 
panels or entirely replaced by small medallions, and the rest 
of the surface covered with fantastic figures among floral scrolls, 
inspired by Raphael's grotesques painted on the walls of the 
Loggie in the Vatican. The prevailing tone of this ornament 
was yellow or orange, and the tin-enamel ground, which is always 
more or less impure in colour on Italian pottery, was washed 
over with a pure milk-white, known as bianco di Ferrara or 
bianco allatato, said to have been invented by Alphonso I., duke 
of Ferrara, who took an active interest in his private factory 
founded at Ferrara, and managed by potters from Faenza and 
Urbino. 

The new style flourished at Urbino, Pesaro and Ferrara; 
at the first-named particularly in the workshops of the Patanazzi 
family, and lasted far into the 17th century. But the majolica 
was now in full decline, partly through the falling off of princely 
patronage, and partly, perhaps, owing to a reaction in favour 
of Chinese porcelain, which was becoming more plentiful and 
better known in Europe. The manufacture, however, never 
entirely ceased, and revivals of the old style were attempted at 
the end of the 17 th century by Ferdinando Maria Campori of 
Siena, who copied Raphael's and Michelangelo's compositions, 
and by the families of Gentile and Grue at Naples and Castelli. 
The majolica of Castelli is distinguished by the lightness of the 
ware, good technique, and harmonious but pale and rather weak 
colouring; it continued into the 18th century. A coarse and 
inferior ware was made at Padua and Monte Lupo; and the 
factories of Faenza were still active, producing, among other 
kinds, a pure white ware with moulded scallops and gadroons. 
The industry continued to flourish in Venice and the north. 
Black ware with gilt decoration was a Venetian product of the 

17 th century, and at Savona 
and Genoa blue painted ware 
in imitation of Chinese blue 
and white porcelain made 
its appearance. In the 18th 
century a new departure was 
made in the introduction of 
enamel painting over the 
glaze, a method borrowed 
from porcelain; but this process was common to all the faience 
factories of Europe at the time, and though it was widely 
practised in Italy no special distinction was attained in any 
particular factory. In our own days imitations of the 16th 
century wares continue to be made in the factories of Ginori, 
Cantigalli and others, not excepting the lustred majolica of 
Gubbio and Deruta; but, compared with the old pieces, the 
modern copies are heavy to handle, stiff in drawing, suspiciously 
wanting in the quality of the colours and the purity of the final 
glaze which distinguish the work of the best period. 
Lustred Wares.— The lustred wares of Deruta have marked 



Black ware witn gut decoration vi 



Turin 

Potter's 

mark. 



Savona Potter's marks. 



characteristics, and, though differing in actual treatment from 
the Hispano-Moresque, their appearance is eloquent in favour 
of such a derivation. The most characteristic examples are 
large dishes and plateaux, thickly made and with the enamel 
on the upper face only, the back having a lead glaze. They are 
often decorated (see fig. 46) with a single figure or bust in the 
centre (with or without an inscribed ribbon), which is usually 
set against a dark blue background which covers only half the 
field, while in the other half is a formal flower, and in the borders 
are radiating panels with palmettes alternating with scale pattern, 
or some other formal design. The whole style is archaic, the 
designs being heavily outlined in blue and washed over with a 
greenish yellow lustre, with beautiful opalescent reflets recalling 
mother of pearl. The lustre varies from this madreperla tint to 
a brassy metallic yellow, and parts of the ornament are sometimes 
modelled in low relief. In spite of its archaic appearance, the 
Deruta lustred wares are scarcely older than the 16th century, 
and the style was continued as late as the second half of that 
century. Deruta pottery was not always lustred, and some of 
the pieces signed by the painter El Frate, who flourished between 




Fig. 46. — Early majolica plate, in blue and yellow lustre only, 
made at Pesaro or Deruta, c. 1500. The motto on the scroll may be 
Englished as follows: " He who steers well his ship will enter the 
harbour." (Louvre.) 

1541 and 1554, are without the lustre pigment, though showing 
the heavy blue outlines of the lustred wares. The lustred 
majolica of Gubbio owes its celebrity almost entirely to the work 
of one man, Maestro Giorgio Andreoli, who came thither from 
Pavia, with his brothers Salimbene and Giovanni, and obtained 
citizenship in 1498. His earliest efforts were in the direction 
of sculpture, and some of his reliefs in the style of della Robbia 
are still in existence; indeed the earliest dated piece of lustred 
majolica attributed to him is a plaque of 1501, with the figure 
of St Sebastian in relief, in the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
It is not known whence he learnt the secret of the beautiful 
transparent ruby lustre peculiar to Gubbio. A red or rosy 
lustre is found in both Persian and Hispano-Moresque wares, 
and no doubt the process was learnt from some Moslem potter 
and developed by Giorgio to unusual perfection. Golden, 
yellow, brown and opalescent lustres were also freely used at 
Gubbio, the ruby being only sparingly applied. Finished 
painted pieces were sent from other factories to receive the 
addition of lustre at Gubbio, but these can almost always be 
distinguished from the true Gubbio wares, in which the lustre 
is an integral part of the decoration. Apart from the lustred 
enrichment, the majolica of Gubbio has few distinctive qualities, 
for its styles were various and almost all borrowed (see fig. 47). 
The archaic taste of Deruta, the arabesques and grotesques of 



736 



CERAMICS 



[ITALIAN 



Faenza and Castel Durante, and in a lesser degree the " istoriato " 
style of Urbino, reigned in turn. Perhaps the most characteristic 
paintings of Maestro Giorgio are the central medallions of cups 
and deep dishes enclosing a single figure of a child or a cupid in 
grisaille. Giorgio's larger figure compositions) if indeed his 




Fig. 47. — Gubbio plate, with portrait in ruby lustre and blue outline. 
(Victoria and Albert Museum.) 

signature in lustre may be taken to imply that he painted the 
designs as well as lustred them, show great inequality, some rising 
to a very high standard — as the dish with " the Three Graces " 
in the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the " Bath of Nymphs " 
in the Wallace collection — 'while in others the figure drawing is 
quite inferior. The arabesques and grotesques on the Gubbio 
wares are usually of great merit. There are a few known pieces 
of unlustred Gubbio wares with figure subjects, painted chiefly 
in blue and in the style of the early Faventine artists. After 
1 5 1 7 , when we may assume that the lustre process was thoroughly 
mastered, the Gubbio wares were usually signed with the initials 
or full name of Maestro Giorgio, and a few rapidly executed 




^H^i-d? 



Gubbio Potters' marks. 



scrolls in lustre completed the decorations of the reverse of the 
plates and dishes. The master's latest signed work is dated 1541, 
and he died in 1552. It is probable that his brother Salimbene 
assisted him, and Piccolpasso names his son Vincentio as possessor 
of the lustre secret. Possibly the latter was the painter who 
signed his wares with the initial N, but this conjecture rests 
solely on the ingenious, but unsupported notion that N is a 
monogram of the first three letters of the name Vincentio. 
Other initials, M, D, R, also occur on Gubbio plates, and the 
latest dated example of the ware is signed by one " Mastro 
Prestino " in 1557, but it has little to recommend it save that it 
is enriched with the Gubbio lustres, which after this time entirely 
disappear. 

The old majolica shapes are briefly as follows : — among the earliest 
are small bowls (scodelle), often with flattened sides; jugs (boccali) 
with large lip-spouts, and mouths pinched into trefoil form ; large 
dishes with gradually shelving sides (bacili), or with flat broad rims 
and deep centres; akin to these are the plateaux with a raised flat 
disk in the centre; small dishes with broad flat rims and deep 
though narrow central walls (tondini) , suitable for handing a wine- 
glass or sweetmeats ; flat trencher-shaped plates (piatti or taglieri) ; 
saucer-shaped dishes on low feet and sometimes with moulded sides 
(tazze or fruttieri) suitable for holding fruit. Among the vase forms 
ovoid shapes with short necks and a pair of flat handles are common 
in the Tuscan wares of the 15th century; the jars for confectionery, 
drugs, or syrups were often of the cylindrical form with graceful eon- 
cave sides known as the " albarello," in shape of Eastern origin, and in 



name perhaps derived from the Persian el barani (a vase for drugs, 
&c.) ; other vase forms with spouts and handles were used for the 
same purpose; ornamental vases after classical designs (vast a 
bronzi antichi) ; and in the best Urbino period a great variety of 
fanciful forms — ewers, vases, cisterns, shells, salt-cellars, ink-pots, 
&c, with applied masks and serpentine handles, were made in the 
exuberant taste of the time. A complex piece of furniture for the 
bedside of ladies in childbirth (vaso puerperale) consisted of a bowl 
with a foot surmounted by a flat trencher on which fitted an inverted 
drinking-bowl (ongaresca) ; and above this again a salt-cellar with 
cover. Many of these shapes were suited to daily use, but the richly 
decorated majolica was designed to adorn the walls, the credenze, 
table-centres and cabinets of the rich. This alone could have been 
the destination of the large dishes (piatti di pompa) with rim pieces 
for suspension, and the smaller dishes (coppe amatorii) with portraits 
of young men and girls and lovers' symbols ; and it is inconceivable 
that the costly lustred wares of Gubbio or the fine madreperla dishes 
of Deruta were designed for anything but decorative use. The ware 
was in fact an article produced for the wealthy in the century of 
Italy's glory, and under no other conditions could such magnificent 
and expensive pieces have been made. 

Technical Methods. — This is a convenient place to give an account 
of the methods used by the early medieval potters — (1) because they 
represent what had been learnt from Roman times'to the 16th cen- 
tury, and indeed to the introduction of modern methods, (2) because, 
besides all that a potter could derive from an examination of the 
wares, we have ample written accounts of the methods and processes 
followed by the Italian majolist. Mr Colon has recently published 
an epitome of the account given in Biringuccio's La Pyrotechnica 
(Venice, 1540), and there is the memorable MS. of Piccolpasso, a 
potter of Castel Durante, now in the library of the Victoria and 
Albert Museum, which, besides giving an account of the processes, 
contains illustrations of kilns, mills, decorative motives, &C. 1 

1. The potter's clay was prepared from mixtures of various kinds 
prepared by (a) beating and picking out coarse particles, (b) mixing 
with water, (c) passing through a sieve, (d) drying again into plastic 
clay ready for the working potter. The essential point about the 
potter's clay of the best tin-enamelled wares, whether Spanish, 
Italian, French or Dutch, is that the clays are those known geo- 
logically as " marls," which contain a large percentage of carbonate 
of lime. Such clays always fire to a pinky red or buff colour, and 
give a ware that is strong and yet light in substance, and on no other 
kind of clay does the tin-enamel display its full perfection (see 
Deck's La Faience). The analyses of certain tin-enamelled wares 
are useful as showing the essential constitution of the best pottery 
bodies for such purposes. 





Delia 
Robbia. 


Majolica. 


Delft. 


French 
Faience. 


Silica .... 


49-65 


48-00 


49-07 


48-65 


Alumina . 


15-50 


17-59 


16-19 


17-05 


Lime .... 


22-40 


2012 


18-01 


19-43 


Magnesia. 


0-17 


1-17 


0-82 


0-27 


Oxide of iron 


370 


3-75 


2-82 


4-33 


Carbonic Acid, 










water, &c. . 


8-58 


9-46 


13-09 


10-27 



2. Shaping. — The vessels were either " thrown " on the potter's 
wheel (which had remained practically unaltered from Egyptian 
times), or they were formed by " pressing " thin cakes of clay into 
moulds, made of a composition of plaster (gesso), bone-ash and 
marble dust. In the latter way all shapes that were not circular 
were made, as well as those with heavy bosses or gadroons imitated 
from embossed metal forms. It is interesting, though not surprising, 
to note that for the fine later wares, the roughly thrown vases, when 
sufficiently dry, were recentred on the wheel or were placed in a 
joiner's lathe and smoothed to a clean and accurate surface. The 
Greek potters did the same, and this practice must always be followed 
where fine painting or gilding is afterwards to be applied. In the 
later florid vases of the Urbino style the piece was built up of 
thrown parts and moulded parts (handles, masks, spouts, &c), 
luted together with slip when they were dry enough to be safely 
handled, and then retouched by the modeller or vase-maker, a 
method followed to this day for elaborate pieces of pottery or 
porcelain. 

3. The Glaze. — The white enamel which formed at first both the 
glaze and the ground for painting upon — bianco, as it was called — 
was prepared in a complicated way. A clear potash glass (marzacotto) 
was made by melting together clean siliceous sand (rena) and the 
potash salt left as the lees of wine (feccia). This corresponds to 
the alkaline glaze of the Egyptians with the substitution of potash 
for soda. Such a glaze alone would have been useless to the Italian 
potter, and accordingly the bianco was made by melting together 

1 Piccolpasso, / tre libri dell' arte del Vasajo, dated 1548. It has 
been several times translated both into modern Italian and French. 
The English reader will find an excellent abstract of this interesting 
MS. in the volumes on Majolica by Drury E. Fortnum. 




CERAMICS 







Rbodha cm- Turkish; 
li'th century. 




Plate V. 



Syro- Persian; 
13th century. 




ihodian or Turkish, 
16th century. 




Khodian or Turkish; 
llith century. 





Damascus: ltilh century. 



Persian, lustre and undrrglaze colour: 13th century. 




\*J mJj Ax* is* 1**4 \w**^3 



*lt,ifi or Turkish; 
l»''th a-nuirv. 




Plate V. 



Syro- Persian; 
l.'lih ccuturv 




n or Turkish, 
lfirh renturv. 




Itjfh century. 





Djiiukus: 16th century. 



IVrsi.ii 



>i.ir: 13th ccnturv. 



FRENCH] 



CERAMICS 



737 



thirty parts of marzacotto and twelve parts of lead and tin ashes. The 
white enamel as used was therefore a mixed silicate of lead and 
potash rendered opaque with oxide of tin. . 

4. Pigments (colori) were compounded from metallic oxides or 
earths; the yeilow, from antimoniate of lead, which was mixed 
with oxide of iron to give orange; the green, from oxide of copper 
(the turquoise tint given to the Egyptian and Syrian glazes by oxide 
of copper is impossible with a glaze of lead and tin) ; and the greens 
were made by mixing oxide of copper with oxide of antimony or 
oxide of iron; blue, from oxide of cobalt, used in the form of a blue 
glass (smalto, or zaffara) ; brownish-purple, from manganese; black, 
from mixtures of the other colours; and the rare red, or reddish 
brown, of Faenza and Cafaggiolo was probably the same Armenian 
bole that was used so magnificently by the makers of the Turkish 
pottery, but on the white enamel ground this colour was most 
treacherous and uncertain. It must be remembered that many of 
these colours owe their tint to the lead used in their composition, or 
to the grounds containing oxides of lead and tin on which they were 
painted. Piccolpasso describes the preparation and composition of 
the various colours used in his day. 

5. Coperta, or transparent glaze. In the later majolica a thin 
coating of soft rich glaze was applied over the fired painting to give 
a smooth bright surface. This coperta was a soft lead glass consisting 
of silica (sand), 20 parts; oxide of lead, 17 parts; potash, 12 parts; 
and common salt, 8 parts; fused together and then finely ground 
in water. 

6. Methods of Glazing and Decorating. — In the mezza-majolica and 
the early majolica it is probable that the clay vessel was dipped in 
the white bath to give it an envelope {invetriatura) before it was fired 
at all; but it must soon have become apparent that it was much 
better to fire first the shaped vessel until it was about as hard and 
brittle as a clay tobacco-pipe, and then coat it with the white enamel, 
by dipping it into a bath or pouring the fluid material upon it. This 
was the practice described by Piccolpasso. Acoatingofwhiteenamel, 
the thickness of glove leather, having been obtained, the piece was 
carefully taken by the painter, who first etched in the outline on the 
absorbent powdery ground, and then shaded the figures, landscapes, 
&c, in blue or in a mixture of blue and yellow, adding the other 
colours as gradated washes. The vase was then fired a second 
time to a heat greater than the first, so that the enamel was melted 
on the vessel and the colours sunk into the enamel at one and the 
same operation. This method of painting on the unbaked enamel 
demanded a bold direct treatment — for alteration or retouching 
was impossible — and much of the vigour of the earlier designs is due 
to this fact. As the ware became more refined in its treatment it was 
felt that this method did not yield a sufficiently brilliant surface, and 
so the painted and fired piece was coated with a film of coperta and 
fired again at a slightly lower temperature to make it smoother and 
more glossy. Still pursued by the idea of rivalling the triumphs of 
pictorial art, the majolist carried his methods a step farther. The 
white enamel coating was fired before painting, giving a glossy 
surface on which the painter could draw or wipe out, and so could 
execute outlining, tinting, or shading of the -utmost delicacy. A film 
of coperta was then washed over the painting, and the piece was 
fired a third time in the cooler parts of the kiln. In some instances 
it is not easy even for an experienced potter to decide which method 
has been pursued, owing to the softening of the colours. Generally 
we should expect that the later and more pictorial pieces had been 
painted on a ground of fired white enamel, and we may be absolutely 
certain when delicate white patterns have been " picked out " in 
a coloured ground. 

Where lustre decoration has been added to a piece of majolica 
it indicates, as elsewhere, the use of a special process, and a final 
firing at a lower heat. The lustre pigments were the same as those 
used on the earlier lustred wares, and these were painted over an 
otherwise finished piece. To obtain the lustre effect these were 
placed in a special kiln, so contrived that when the pots were just 
visibly red the smoke of the burning fuel (rosemary or gorse) was 
allowed to play upon them long enough to drive the metallic films 
(silver or copper) into the already-fired glaze. 1 

Collections. — The Victoria and Albert Museum contains perhaps the 
most widely representative collection in the world, especially as at 
the present time the pieces of the Salting and Pierpont Morgan 
collections are on exhibition there. The British Museum collection 
is valuable, being rich in " signed " pieces of the first quality. The 
Wallace collection and the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford (Fortnum 
collection, &c.) are also valuable and contain some remarkable 
examples. The Cluny Museum, the Louvre and the museum at 
Sevres have fine collections; while noteworthy pieces are to be 
found in the Ceramic Museum at Limoges. In Germany the museum 
at Brunswick contains one of the largest collections known, but many 
inferior and doubtful examples. Berlin, Munich, Vienna and St 
Petersburg have noteworthy collections. In Italy, the Bargello at 
Florence and the museums of Venice, Milan, Turin, Faenza, Pesaro, 
Urbino, Rome and Naples all have collections, whilst interesting 
examples of local manufactures are to be found in many of the 

1 For a full account of the lustre process see Franchet, Comptes 
rendus for December 1905, and W. Burton, Society of Arts Journal, 
2846, vol. lv., 1907. 
V. 24 



smaller Italian towns. The American museums, especially those in 
New York, Boston and Philadelphia, have some fine examples. 

Literature. — F. Argnani, La Ceramiche et maioliche faentine 
(Faenza, 1880 and 1903); D. Bonghi, Intorno alle Majoliche di 
Castelh (Naples, 1856); Professor Douglas, " Siena," in the Nine- 
teenth Century, September 1900; Hensel, Essai sur la majolique 
(Paris, 1836) ; G. I. Montanari, Majoliche dipinte nella collezione del 
N.S.C. Domenico Mazza (Pesaro, 1836); L. Frati, Di un insigna 
raccolta di majoliche (Bologna, 1844); also Di un pavimenlo in 
majolica (Bologna, 1853); J. C. Robinson, Italian Sculpture of the 
Middle Ages (London, 1862); E. Darcel, Musee du Louvre: Notice 
des faiences peintes; Drury E. Fortnum, Contribution to the History 
of Pottery (London, 1868) ; Delange, Recueil de faiences italiennes 
du XV e au XVII s silcle (Paris, 1869); M.. Meurer, Italienische 
Majolika Fliesen (Berlin) ; E. Molinier, Les Majoliques italiennes en 
Italie (Paris, 1883), also La Ceramique italienne auXV" silcle (Paris, 
1888) ; C. Piccolpasso, I tre libri dell' arte del Vasajo, Castel Durante 
1548 (original MS.) and translations by C. Popelyn, Paris, 1841 and 
i860, also Italian editions of Rome and Milan; V. Lazari, Notizia 
della raccolta Correr (Venice, 1859); Drury E. Fortnum, A Descrip- 
tive Catalogue of the Majolica in the South Kensington Museum 
(London, 1873) ; Beckwith, Majolica and Faience (New York, 1877) ; 
G. Corona, La Ceramica (Milan, 1878); G. Vanzolini, Istoria delle 
fabbriche di majoliche metaurensi (Pesaro, 1879); A. Genolini, 
Majoliche italiane (Milan, 1881) ; Mely, La Ceramique italienne (Paris, 
1884); J. E. Jaccbsthal, Siid-italienische Fliesen (Berlin, 1886); 
Bertolotti, Figulini, fonditori, e scultori (Milan, 1890); H. Wallis, 
Italian Ceramic Art (1897), The Oriental Influence on the Ceramic 
Art of the Italian Renaissance (1900), The Art of the Precursors (1901), 
The Majolica Pavements of the Fifteenth Century (1902), Oak-leaf 
Jars: A Fifteenth Century Italian Ware (1903), The Albarello (1904), 
also Seventeen Plates by Nicola Fontana (1905), and Italian Ceramic 
Art: Figure Designs (1905); Tesorone, L'Antico Pavimento delle 
Logge di Raffaello in Vaticano (Naples, 1891) ; Columba, // " Quos 
Ego" di Raffaello (Palermo, 1895); Drury E. Fortnum, Majolica 
(London, 1896) ; also Fortnum Collection in the Oxford Museum 
(London, 1896); O. von Falke, Majolika (Berlin, 1896); also 
Sammlung R. Zschille: Katalog der italienischen Majoliken (Leipzig, 
1899); Antaldi Santinelli, Museo di Pesaro (Pesaro, 1897); De 
Mauri, L'Amatore di Majolica (Milan, 1898); E. Hannover, De 
Spanske-Mauriske, og de forste Italienske Fayence (Copenhagen 
1906). (R. L. H.; W. B.*) ' 

French Pottery trom the 15TH to the 19TH Century 
The pottery of medieval France needs little attention here, 
for it was, in the main, similar to that which was made generally 
in Europe— rudely shaped vessels of ordinary clay often decorated 
with modelled ornament and glazed with yellow or brown lead 
glaze, or, if coated with white slip, decorated with bright green 
glazes, and towards the end of the 15th century with greyish 
blue. The later specimens of this simple ware — pronouncedly 
Gothic in feeling — were often extremely decorative. Avignon, 
Beauvais and Savigny are the best-known centres of this truly 
national manufacture, and, as we might expect in French work 
the reliefs are often sharp and well designed. Evidence accumu- 
lates that from time to time the princes and great nobles imported 
Spanish or Italian workmen to make special tiles for the decora- 
tion of their palaces or chapels. The duke of Burgundy brought 
Jehan de Moustiers and Jehan-le-Voleur, " ouvriers en quar- 
rieaux paints et jolis," in 1391, to paint tiles for his palaces at 
Hesdin and Arras in the north, and we have already referred to 
the tile-work in the Spanish fashion made at Poitiers by John of 
Valencia, the " Saracen," in 1384 for Duke Jean de Berry. 2 
Other instances might be multiplied but that this foreign work 
left little or no traces on contemporary French pottery. Even at 
a later date, when Francis I. brought Girolamo della Robbia 
from Italy to decorate his " Petit Chateau de Madrid " in 1529, 
or when Masseot Abaquesne, about 1542, manufactured at 
Rouen the painted tile pavements for the chateau of Ecouen, the 
cathedral of Langres, and other places, nothing came of the 
imported methods; the works were executed and left no traces 
on the general pottery of the country. During the 16th century, 
however, two remarkable kinds of pottery were made in France 
of distinctive quality, and both eminently French — the Henri- 
Deux ware and the pottery of Bernard Palissy and his imitators. 
Henri-Deux, Oiron or St Porchaire ware, for all these names 
have in turn been applied to the enigmatic and wonderful pottery, 
specimens of which are now valued at more than their weight in 

2 See Magne, Le Palais de Justice de Poitiers (Paris, 1904) ; also 
Solon in Burlington Magazine (November 1907). 

11 



7? 8 



o' 



CERAMICS 



[FRENCH 



gold, was once believed to have been made by the librarian 
Bernard, and his assistant Charpentier, for their patroness 
Hclene de Hangest about 1529 at her chateau at Oiron, near 
Thouars. 1 A few years ago this theory was discarded in favour 
of one which assigned them to some unknown potter of St 
Porchaire in the same region; 2 but even of this theory there 
is insufficient proof, and we are left in doubt both as to the 
maker and the place of origin. All we know is that the ware 



dates from the reign of Henry II. 




Fig. 48. — Tazza of Oiron pottery. 
(Louvre.) 



and that it was probably made 
somewherenearOiron, 
as most of the speci- 
mens have been found 
in that district. The 
work is sui generis, 
for it had no direct 
ancestry, neither did 
it leave any mark on 
contemporary French 
pottery. Sixty-five 
pieces of the ware (see 
fig. 48) are known to 
be in museums and 
private collections; 
the Louvre and the 
Victoria and Albert 
Museum have the best 
collections of their 
kinds, but the Roth- 
schilds still hold the 
greater number of ex- 
amples. The ware is 
fashioned in a simple 
whitish pipeclay, and 




Oiron Potter's mark. 



ornamented with interlacing strap-work patterns, typical of 
the period, inlaid in yellow, buff or dark-brown clay. The 
forms are generally graceful, but some examples are over- 
elaborate and overloaded with modelled ornament. The pieces 
were designed to serve as candlesticks, salt-cellars, tazzas, ewers, 
holy-water pots and dishes. After the vessels had been 
" thrown " and " turned " to a perfect shape, metal tools, such 
as were used by the bookbinders and casemakers of that day, 
were pressed into the clay, so as to form sunk cells of ornamental 
tooling. These cells were carefully filled with finely-prepared 
slips of other clays, that would burn yellow, buff or dark-brown; 
and when the whole was dry the piece was carefully smoothed 
again, and moulded reliefs were 
attached, or touches of colour were 
applied. After being fired the ware 
was glazed, apparently with the 
ordinary lead glaze of the time care- 
fully prepared and fired again. At 
a later period the ornament was 
not inlaid in this elaborate manner, but was simply painted, 
as indeed it might all have been so far as decorative effect is 
concerned. 

Palissy Ware. — Bernard Palissy was a genius of original 
talent, but, at the hands of his literary admirers, he has gained 
a legendary rank as one of the great potters of the world which 
his pottery does not warrant. He is supposed to have spent 
sixteen years in the search for the white enamel which was being 
used all the time in Italy and Spain — probably he was searching 
for the mystery of Chinese porcelain — and when he settled down 
to make the " Palissy ware," he did nothing more than carry to 
perfection the methods of the village pot-makers of his own 
district. On a hard-fired red clay he disposed groups of moulded 
plants, shells, fish and reptiles, painted them with crude green, 
brown and yellow colours, and glazed the whole with a well- 
prepared lead glaze. His style soon had numerous imitators, 
like A. Clericy and B. de Blemont, who executed works quite as 
good as those of their master; but their works also vanished and 

1 See B. Fillon, Les Faiences d'Oiron (1862). 
- See E. Bonaffe, Les Faiences de Saint-F 'or -chair x (1 



left no permanent impression on the general trend of French 
pottery. 

Meantime Italian, and, it may be, Spanish potters strayed 
over the French border and attempted to introduce the manu- 
facture of their tin-enamelled wares; for we know of the works 
of Gambin and Tardessir of Faenza, established at Lyons about 
1556; of Sigalon at Nimes in 1548; of Jehan Ferro at Nantes 
about 1580, and other sporadic efforts. The needed impetus 
came, however, when the Mantuan duke, Louis de Gonzague, 
became duke of Nevers in 1565; and we find Italian majolists, 
working under princely patronage, planting their decadent art 
in the centre of France. The first efforts met with little success 
until, with the appearance of the Conrades from Savona, who 
were domiciled in Nevers in 1602, we get the genuine ware of 
Nevers. Naturally the first productions, whether of the Con- 
rades or their predecessors, were in the style of the debased 
majolica of Savona, but the body and glaze of the ware is harder, 
the colours are not so rich, and the execution is less spirited. 
The first departure from Italian traditions is seen in the ware 
of the so-called "Persian style" of Nevers — probably adopted 
from contemporary work in Limoges enamels on metal — where 
conventional and fanciful designs of flowers and foliage, birds, 
animals or figures were thickly raised in white enamel on a 
ground of bright, intense cobalt-blue glaze. After the middle 
of the 17th century the Italian style of design appears to have 
been entirely replaced by pseudo-oriental patterns painted in 
blue or in polychrome, but really imitated from the "Delft" 
copies of Chinese and Japanese porcelain. When Rouen and 
Moustiers became famous for their distinctive wares Nevers 
copied their designs also, and on a gradually descending scale 
the manufacture continued to the end of the 18th century, when 




Fig. 49. — Dish of Rouen enamelled pottery, painted in blues and 
deep red. 

France was flooded with the rude Faiences patriotiques from 
this centre. 

The genuine French tin-enamelled ware, freed from the traces 
of Italian influence, first developed itself at Rouen under the 
famous Poterats in the later part of the 17th century. A new 
scheme of ornamentation was gradually evolved in the daintily- 
designed scalloped and radiating patterns adapted from oriental 
fabrics, lace and needlework, and from the ornamental devices 
of contemporary printers. These designs, having been skilfully 
drawn on the pieces, were filled in with bright blue, strong yellow, 
light green, or a bright bricky-red in palpable relief, applied as 
flat washes or in fine lines; and the result was a gay and sparkling 
ware much superior in decorative value to the later Italian 
majolicas (see fig. 49). So successful was this Rouen ware that 
rival factories were quickly started at Saint Cloud, Sinceny, 



GERMANj 



CERAMICS 



739 



Quimper, Lille, and other places in the north. Saint Cloud and 

Lille made fine pottery of this class at the end of the 17th and 

in the early 18th century. It was imitated at Nevers, the 

potters' marks shown being those of J. Bourdu and H. Borne. 

_„_ ^^^ In the south of France, Pierre 

C'~B*% J 1 9 Clerissy established the industry 

| V-^ I I * I j| at Moustiers in 1686, and, though 

1 ^^ *» #* *i^ t -' le ear ly Moustiers ware bears a 

^^ C^P 1 qX ^v* strong resemblance to the debased 

•^ Italian majolica of the time, the 

Nevers Potters' marks. Moustiers painters soon left that 

behind, and on a glaze of inimitable whiteness and softness they 

deftly pencilled blue patterns based on the engravings of designs 

after Berain, Marot and Toro. At a later date Olerys, who had 

been to Alcora to introduce the French faience into Spain, 

returned to Moustiers and introduced a pale polychrome style 

very inferior to that of Rouen. These pieces are covered with 

patterns outlined in blue and filled in with yellow, pale green 

and light purple. Olerys is also said to have introduced the 

grotesque style of Moustiers, founded on the caricatures of 

Callot. Other factories were started from Moustiers, such as 

those at Apt, Ardus and Montauban, and even at Narbonne, 

Bordeaux and Clermont-Ferrand; just as the northern factories 

had sprung from Rouen. 

We have already seen at Nevers the introduction of patterns 
in the Chinese style, and the same course was increasingly 
followed at all the French factories during the 18th century. 
At Strassburg a fresh impetus was given in this direction when, 
about 1 721, Charles Hannong introduced the practice of painting 
his white tin-enamelled ware with the on-glaze colours used by 
the porcelain painters. This process enabled the French potter 
to produce many colours unobtainable by his older process, and 
moreover helped him to make his wares look more like the 
coveted porcelain, then becoming the rage all over Europe. 
This new departure marks the end of the best period of French 
faience, but so successfully did it meet the demands of the time 
that it gradually displaced the old method of decoration where 
the colours were painted on the raw glaze and fired along with 
it. Factories sprang up for the manufacture of this new ware 
in the first half of the 18th century at Niederviller, Luneville and 
Sceaux, and it was quickly adopted by the older factories at 
Rouen, Sinceny, Marseilles, &c. With its general adoption the 
old French faience, developed from the Italian stock, departed, 
to make way for a tin-enamelled imitation of famille-rose 
porcelain. But this last style was not of long life. The wealthy 
classes were no longer patrons of pottery but of porcelain, and 
when, after 1786, the newly perfected English earthenware was 
thrown upon the French market, the French faience-makers had 
to give up their works, or adopt the manufacture of this neater 
and, for domestic purposes, more suitable form of- pottery. 
This change, together with the disturbances of revolutionary 
times, brought artistic pottery in France to a standstill, and we 
shall treat of its revival during the last fortv or fifty years in a 
subsequent section. 

Collections. — -The Victoria and Albert Museum and the British 
Museum contain typical examples; but not such collections as are 
to be seen in the Cluny Museum, the Louvre, the museum at Sevres, 
or the French provincial museums at Rouen, Limoges, Marseilles, 
Lille, St Omer, &c. 

Literature. — Deck, La Faience (Paris, 1887); Gasnault and 
Gamier, French Pottery (Victoria and Albert Museum Handbooks, 
1884); Le Breton, Le Musee ceramique de Rouen (Rouen, 1883); 
Milet, (?) Historique de la faience et de la porcelaine de Rouen (Rouen, 
1898); Pottier, Histoire de la faience de Rouen (Amiens, 1870); 
L'Abbe H. Requin, Histoire de la faience artistique de Moustiers, 
tome 1" (Paris, 1903) ; M. L. Solon, The Old French Faience 
(London, 1903) — the best survey of the whole subject, with a very 
full bibliography. The various volumes of the Gazette des beaux- 
arts contain many valuable original articles. (W. B.*) 

German, Dutch and Scandinavian Pottery 
In northern Europe until the time of the Renaissance the 
making of tiles is the only branch of the potter's craft of artistic 
rank. The pavement tiles of Germany of the Gothic period, 



examples of which have been found in the valley of the Rhine 
from Constance to Cologne, often bear designs of foliage or 
grotesque animals full of character and spirit. Their decoration 
is effected either by impression with a stamp of wood or clay, or 
by " pressing " the tile in a mould to produce a design in relief. 
The surface is sometimes protected by a lead glaze — green, 
brown or yellow — but is generally left unglazed. 

Glazed tiles with relief ornament were also made as early as 
the 14th century for the construction of stoves, such as have 
continued in use in Germany to the present day. About 1 500 a 
development took place in the combination of glazes of different 
colours on a single tile. In the middle of the 16th century 
Renaissance ornament appears in place of Gothic canopies and 
tracery, and blue and white enamels begin to be used in com- 
bination with lead glaze's of other colours. Figures in the 
costume of the period, or shields of arms, in round-arched niches 
are a favourite motive alike in the stove tiles and in the wares 
of similar technique known as Hafnergefasse, which have been 
wrongly attributed to Hirsvogel of Nuremberg. These were 
made not only in that city but also in Silesia and at Salzburg, 
Steyr, and elsewhere in Upper Austria; their manufacture 
continued into the 18th century. 

Imitations of Italian majolica with polychrome painting on 
a white enamelled ground were first made in southern Germany 
about 1525, and it is with these wares that the name of Hirsvogel 
should really be associated. The same style survived for more 
than a century and a half in the stoves and pottery made by the 
Pfau family at Winterthur in Switzerland, from the end of the 
1 6th century onwards. An interesting development is exhibited 
by certain rare productions, of Silesian origin, dating from about 
1550, with decorations in coloured enamels which are prevented 
from flowing together by a strong outline incised in the clay. 

Stoneware. — The most important feature of the history of 
German pottery is the development of stoneware along the 
valley of the Rhine. This ware is of a highly refractory white 
or grey body of intense hardness, glazed by the introduction of 
salt into the kiln when the highest temperature was reached. It 
was exported in large quantities through the markets of Cologne 
and Aachen (Aix-la-Chapelle) to England, France and other parts 
of northern Europe. The frequent occurrence in its decoration 
of the arms of foreign cities and princes shows that the German 
potters were alive to the requirements of foreign customers. 

The oldest centre of this manufacture seems to have been at 
Siegburg near Coblenz, where the white stoneware peculiar to 
the neighbourhood, made from local clay, must have been made 
and exported in considerable quantities at least as early as the 
15th century; plain beer-jugs of that date with cylindrical neck 
and slightly swelling body have been unearthed in London and 
the eastern counties of England. In the 16th century an artistic 
development took place, and the potters were formed into an 
exclusive gild under stringent regulations. The manufacture 
lasted till the sack of the town by the Swedes in 1632, subsequent 
attempts to re-establish it being unsuccessful. This ware, of a 
creamy white colour, generally thinly glazed and only rarely 
coloured by staining with cobalt blue, is decorated by impression 
with small stamps or by the application of reliefs pressed from 
separate moulds. The motives include sacred and classical 
figure subjects, portraits of contemporary sovereigns, and 
armorial bearings, with accessory foliage in which a survival 
of Gothic feeling is often perceptible. Characteristic forms are 
the high tankard (Schnelle) and the ewer with long spout (Schna- 
belkrug), but the fancy of the potter also found expression in 
various quaint or extravagant forms. 

At Raeren in the duchy of Limburg this industry attained 
importance about 1550, and was continued for over seventy 
years; 1539 is the earliest date known to occur on this ware. 
The pieces were of two kinds, brown-glazed and grey; the latter 
usually decorated with blue. The favourite form is a baluster- 
shaped jug with heraldic designs or a frieze of figures round the 
middle. The subjects are from Scripture history or contemporary 
peasant life as interpreted by Hans Sebald Beham and the 
German and French " Little Masters." Examples are known 



74-o 



CERAMICS 



[DUTCH 



beaming dates and names or initials of mould-cutters, among 
them Ian Emens and Baldem Mennicken; but it must not 
always be inferred that a piece is as old as the date introduced 
in its decoration, for the same set of moulds might be used for 
many years. 

Another important centre in the 16th century was at Frechen 
near Cologne. Round-bellied jugs known as Bartmanner, from 
the bearded mask applied in front of the neck, covered with 
a brown glaze, which in later examples is often coagulated 
into thick spots, were first made here towards the end of the 
15th century, and continued to be the staple product well into 
the 17th. The jugs of this type, known as Greybeards or 
Bellarmines, which were exported in profusion to England, 
Scandinavia and the Low Countries, were mostly made here. 
At Cologne itself there were also factories, probably before 
the 16th century, the later productions of which resemble 
those of Frechen. 

During the 17th and 18th centuries the busiest stoneware 
centre was the district surrounding Hohr-Grenzhausen in Nassau 
known as the Kannebackerlandchen, where artistic ware was 
being made before 1600. Soon after that date manganese 
purple was first used in the decoration in addition to cobalt 
blue, and henceforward colour in combination with impressed 
and incised ornament tended more and more to supersede 
decoration in relief. Figure subjects gave place to rosettes, 
foliage on wavy stems, and geometrical patterns. Vessels 
of large size and fantastic shape appear beside the standard 
forms of the earlier factories. In the 18th century the forms 
of beer-vessels became stereotyped in the globular jug with 
cylindrical neck and the cylindrical tankard, while tea and 
coffee pots, inkstands and other vessels, hitherto unknown, 
began to be made. A stoneware manufacture dating back 
to the middle ages existed at Creussen in Bavaria. The 
productions of this district during the 17th and 18th centuries 
consist of tankards of squat shape, jugs and jars, of a dark red 
body, covered with a lustrous dark brown glaze, frequently 
painted after the first firing in brilliant enamel colours with 
figures of the Apostles, the electors of the Empire, or other 
oft-repeated motives. Imitations of the wares of Raeren and 
Grenzhausen were made at Bouffioulx near Charleroi; other 
minor centres of the manufacture were at Meckenheim near 
Cologne and Bunzlau in Silesia. 

As in England, so in Holland (by Ary de Milde and certain 
Delft potters) and in Germany, attempts were made with 
some success, early in the 18th century, to imitate the Chinese 
red stoneware, known as boccaros. The early efforts of Bottger, 
the discoverer of the secret of true porcelain, at Meissen, belong 
to this category. His red ware is of such hardness that it was 
cut and polished on the lapidary's wheel. For some time after 
the manufacture of red ware at Meissen had ceased, a glazed 
brown ware of less hard body with gilt or silver decoration 
was made at Bayreuth. The products of other minor factories 
of this class cannot now be identified. 

Mention may be made of the lead-glazed peasant pottery, 
such as the bowls produced at Marburg with quaint symbolical 
devices modelled in relief and applied. Slip-covered wares 
with graffiato decoration, apparently of indigenous growth 
and not inspired by foreign examples, were made well on into 
the 19th century near Crefeld and elsewhere in Germany, at 
Langnau in Switzerland, and by German emigrants in Penn- 
sylvania. In Holland a peculiar green-glazed ware was made 
in the 18th century with pierced geometrical decoration recalling 
the Dutch carved woodwork of the period. 

Delft. — One of the most remarkable phenomena in the history 
of pottery is the appearance about 1600, in a highly developed 
state, of the manufacture of a tin-enamelled earthenware at 
Delft. It was introduced in that town by Herman Pietersz 
of Haarlem, but whence he learned his art is unknown. The 
faience-makers (plateelbackers) were one of the eight crafts of 
Delft which formed the Gild of St Luke founded in 161 1. About 
1650 a great development took place, and till the latter years 
of the 18th century, when its faience was ousted by the more 



serviceable wares of the English potteries, Delft remained 
the most important centre of ceramic industry in northern 
Europe. The ware is of fine buff-coloured clay, dipped after 
the first firing in a white tin-enamel, which formed the ground 
for painted decoration; after painting, this was covered with 
a transparent lead glaze and fired a second time, so that in its 
technique it belongs to the same class as the painted Italian 
majolica and the old French faience. At its best it is rightly 
ranked among the greatest achievements of the potter's art. 

Characteristic of the first period are dishes and plaques in 
blue monochrome with somewhat overcrowded scenes of popular 
life in the style of the engravings of Goltzius. Imitations of 
the oriental porcelain imported by the Dutch East India Company 
were introduced about 1650 by Aelbregt de Keizer and con- 
tinued for some time among the finest productions. At the 
same time the earlier tradition was developed in the finely 
painted landscapes and portraits of Abraham de Kooge and 
Frederick van Frytom. Other potters of the best period were 
Lambartus van Eenhorn and Louwys Fictoor, makers of the 
large reeded vases with Chinese floral designs in polychrome, 
Augestyn Reygens, Adriaen Pynacker, and Lucas van Dale; 
to the last are attributed the pieces with yellow decoration on 
an olive-green enamel ground. The rare examples with poly- 
chrome decoration on a black ground in imitation of Chinese 
lacquer are the work of Fictoor and Pynacker. With the 18th 
century came a largely increased demand and a consequent 
deterioration in artistic quality. The rise of the German porce- 
lain factories had its effect in the introduction of overglaze 
painting fired in a muffle kiln, typified by the work of the Dextras, 
father and son. This innovation, by which the Delft potters 
attempted to compete with European porcelain, contributed 
to the ruin of their art by eliminating the skilled touch required 
for painting on the unfired enamel. The ware frequently, but 
not invariably, bears a mark derived from the sign of the factory 
(the rose, the peacock, the three bells, &c), or the name or initials 
of its proprietor. 

A small faience factory was started by Jan van Kerkhoff 
about 1755 at Arnhem; its productions were of good quality, 
chiefly in the rococo style, marked with a cock. 

The exportation of the Delft ware to Germany occasioned 
the rise of numerous factories in that country for making 
faience in imitation of the Dutch. Among these may be named 
Hanau (founded about 1670), Frankfort and Cassel. Others, 
such as Kiel and Stralsund, drew their inspiration from the 
productions of Marseilles and Strassburg (q.v.). At Nuremberg 
a factory was founded in 171 2, which was but little affected 
by extraneous influences; among its characteristic productions 
are dishes with sunk decoration in the form of a star, and jugs 
with long necks and pear-shaped bodies, often spirally fluted. 
Similar w&res were made at Bayreuth. The Dutch and French 
styles were carried by German potters into Scandinavia; fac- 
tories were established at Copenhagen in 1722, at Rorstrand 
and Marieberg near Stockholm in 1728 and 1758, and at Herreb</>e 
in Norway about 1759. 

At the close of the 18th century the influence of imported 
English earthenware was strongly felt. In Holland workshops 
were established for painting the English cream-coloured ware 
with subjects suited to the Dutch taste; and in Germany 
cream-coloured wares and sleingut in imitation of Wedgwood's 
productions were manufactured at Cassel, Proskau and else- 
where. The " Delft " ware of Holland during the 17th century 
was a beautiful decorative ware, in which the Dutch painters 
caught successfully the spirit, and often the very colour value, 
of Chinese blue and white porcelain. Its fame spread over 
the whole of Europe, and its styles were readily imitated by 
the potters of all other countries who made a similar ware. 
Even the polychrome Delft, though not nearly so beautiful as 
the " blue and white," is strongly decorative, and one sees in the 
polychrome faience of northern France and of Germany more 
than a trace of its influence. When this ware was supplanted 
by English earthenware it was a clear instance of a ware that 
was technically superior displacing a more artistic product. 



CERAMICS 



h MP VI. 




I'rbino. 1526 (?). 
A pbtr of the famous Consiga-Eatr service. 



Facnxa: early 15th century. 



CERAMICS 



Pi \ir VI. 




t'il>iiiM, 1525 (?V 
A pl.it f of the- l.imou- ( rf>ntii;.i-r>tt' Mf \ ire. 



F,tet«.<; c.trlv 15«h century. 



SPANISH] 



CERAMICS 



741 



Collections. — For German wares the German museums are natur- 
ally best, The museums at Munich and Nuremberg contain splendid 
collections of the tin-enamelled and peasant wares of South Germany. 
Cologne has a wonderful collection of the Rhenish stoneware, and 
Berlin and Hamburg have good general collections. Copenhagen 
and Stockholm are especially good for Scandinavian wares, and 
Zurich for Swiss. There are also good collections of German stone- 
ware in the Victoria and Albert and the British museums, and in the 
Cluny Museum, the Louvre, and the museum at Sevres; but there 
are no notable collections of the German tin-enamelled wares out 
of Germany. The wares of Delft may be best studied in the 
museums at the Hague and Amsterdam. There is an interesting 
collection at the factory of Thooft and Labouchere in Delft. The 
principal museums in England, France and Germany all have fair 
to good collections of this renowned ware. 

Literature. — For tiles and peasant pottery, see Forrer, Ge- 
schichte der europdischen Fliesen-Keramik (Strassburg, 1900; chapters 
on the Netherlands and Germany) ; Walcher von Molthein, Bunte 
Hafnerkeramik der Renaissance in Osterreich ob der Enns und Salzburg 
(Vienna, 1906) ; Hafner, Das Hafnerhandwerk und die alien Ofen 
in Winterthur (Winterthur, 1876-1877); Barber, Tulip-ware of the 
Pennsylvania German Potters (Philadelphia, 1903). For stoneware, 
see Solon, The Ancient Art Stoneware of the Low Countries and Ger- 
many (London, 1892); Van Bastelaer, Les Gres wallons (Mons, 
1885). For Bottger's red ware, see Berling, Das Meissner Porzellan 
(Leipzig, 1900), chap. iii. For Dutch faience, see Havard, Histoire 
de la faience de Delft (Paris, 1878), and article by same author on 
" La Faience d'Arnhem " in Gazette des beaux-arts, 2nd series, 
vol. xx. (1879). For German faience, see von Falke, Majolika 
(Berlin, 1896), and articles by Stieda, " Deutsche Fayencefabriken 
des 18. Jahrhunderts," in Keramische Monatshefte, vols. ii. and iii. 
For Scandinavian pottery, see Nyrop, Danske Fajence og Porcellains- 
maerker (Copenhagen, 1881); Strale, Rorstrand et Marieberg (Stock- 
holm, 1872); Grosch, Herrebfie-Fayencer (Christiania, 1901). Ex- 
cellent accounts of most branches of the subjects are given by 
Brinckmann, Das kamburgische Museum fur Kunst und Gewerbe 
(Hamburg, 1894). (B. Ra.) 

Later Wares of Spain and Portugal 
We shall only deal at length here with those important kinds 
of pottery that have exerted real influence on the historical 
development of the art. Offshoots from the main stem that have 
developed little or no individuality can only be briefly mentioned. 
When the characteristic Spanish-Moorish lustre wares ceased 
to be desired by the wealthy they rapidly sank into insignificance, 
though as a decorative peasant pottery their manufacture never 
really ceased and has been revived again in our day. The course 
of pottery importation was changed and the now fashion- 
able Italian majolica was brought into Spain in the 16th and 
17 th centuries, as Hispano-Moresque wares had followed the 
opposite course two centuries earlier. Besides the influence 
which these imported wares had on the Spanish potters, a number 
of wandering Italian majolists found their way into Spain, so 
that we find the use of painted colour, particularly blue, yellow, 
orange, green and purple, making its appearance at various 
centres, around Valencia, at Triana near Seville, &c, but the 
most important manufacture was at Talavera in the centre of 
the peninsula. The best of this ware recalls the late Italian 
majolica of Savona, and the influence of Chinese porcelain de- 
signs, probably filtered through to the Spanish potters by the 
then popular enamelled Delft wares, is very apparent. The 
potteries of Talavera are mentioned as early as 1560, and they 
continued at work, with varying fortunes, down to the end of 
the 1 8th century. Many and varied wares were produced, in- 
cluding tiles as well as pottery; the most common pottery 
pieces are dishes, bowls, vases, tinajas, holy-water vessels, drug- 
pots, and hanging flower vases.together with moulded and painted 
snails, owls, dogs, oranges, almonds, walnuts, and every kind 
of fruit. Apart from the poorer colour the baroque style of 
ornament also rendered the ware much inferior to that of Italy 
or of France. The popular Talavera wares were imitated else- 
where in Spain, and a number of factories existed at Toledo in 
the 17th century, but their wares are very inferior. In the 18th 
century, besides debased imitations of this ware, some coarse 
but striking pottery was made at Puente del Arzobispo near 
Toledo. 

An interesting offshoot from the Talavera potteries is to be 
found in the tin-enamelled wares made at Puebla, Mexico, from 
the early 17th century. It is said that Spanish potters were 



settled at this place by the Dominicans soon after 1600; and the 
making of a debased form of Spanish majolica continued there 
for nearly two centuries. See Barber's "Tin-Enamelled Pottery," 
Bulletin of the Philadelphia Museum, 1907. During the 18th 
century determined efforts were made by King Charles III. and 
by the famous Count Aranda to improve the Spanish pottery 
wares, as well as to introduce the manufacture of porcelain. 
The efforts of the king led to the foundation of the porcelain 
works at Buen Retiro near Madrid, which will be mentioned later, 
and considerable success also attended the revival of strong 
copper lustre, like that of the late Hispano-Moresque wares; 
but the finest tin-enamelled wares were those made at Alcora 
in the important factory founded by Count Aranda in 1726, 
which continued in operation down to the French wars. For 
his purposes the count brought from Moustiers, then one of the 
famous French pottery centres (see above), Joseph Olerys, a 
well-known pot-painter. He went to Alcora as chief draughts- 
man and designer, having charge of a number of Spanish potters 
and painters. Olerys introduced the Moustiers style of decora- 
tion, and the glaze and body of the Alcora wares of the best period 
recall the fine quality of Moustiers faience. It is only fair to add 
that Olerys in his turn learnt the use of various delicate yellow 
and green colours from the Spaniards, and when he returned to 
France in 1737, having acquitted himself most honourably, he 
introduced this new style of delicate polychrome decoration at 
Moustiers. The mixture of motives and ideas that animated the 
duke and his potters may be seen by the following list of wares 
produced about 1750. Vases of different shapes; small teapots; 
teapots and covers, Chinese fashion; teapots and covers, Dutch 
fashion; cruets, Chinese style; entree dishes; salt-cellars, Chinese 
style; escudillas (bowls) of Constantinople; barquillos (sauce- 
bowls), Chinese style; cups, plates, and saucers of different 
kinds with good painted borders in imitation of lace-work, 
and finally fruit-stands, salad-bowls and dishes, trays and 
refrigerators. Later in the century the manufacture of 
porcelain was introduced here, as well as white earthenware 
made in imitation of the productions of Wedgwood, and the 
tin-enamelled wares flickered out in Spain as they did elsewhere. 

The manufacture of a kind of debased majolica was also prac- 
tised in Portugal from the 16th century down to our own times; 
but the ware never attained to any distinction and is little known 
outside that country. The best-known specimens were made at 
Rato, near Lisbon, where a factory was founded in 1767 under 
the patronage of the court. 

Mention must be made of the unglazed native pottery of Spain 
and Portugal, for wine-jars, water-jars and bottles, cooking pots, 
and other domestic utensils are still made in these countries for 
ordinary domestic use, in traditional forms and by methods of 
the most primitive kind. Many of these vessels, especially the 
tinajas (wine-jars) and water-coolers, are based on ancient, 
classical or Arab forms, and in every country market-place it is 
still common to see groups of vessels, in unglazed pottery of fine 
shape and finish, exposed for sale- — a very different state of 
things from what obtains in France, Germany, and particularly 
in England, where the primitive methods of the peasant are being 
imitated by those who ought to know better. From the 16th to 
the 1 8th century a special kind of unglazed pottery vessels known 
as buccaros was extensively made both in Spain and Portugal. 
The body of the ware is unglazed, whitish, black or red, accord- 
ing to the special kind of clay. The curious point about this 
ware is that, if we may believe contemporary documents, the 
vessels were delicately scented, like a ware imported from Mexico ; 
and the soft vessels are said to have been eaten — a custom 
common enough in certain parts of Central and Southern America. 
(See M. L. Solon, The Noble Buccaros, 1896.) (W. B.*) 

English Pottery from the i6th to the 19TH Century 1 
The course of pottery manufacture in England followed, 
generally rather in the rear, that of France, Germany and other 
northern countries. Before the coming of the Romans much 
pottery of the late Stone age and the Bronze age was made in 
1 See examples in colour, Plate X. 



742 



CERAMICS 



[ENGLISH 



Britain. The Romans introduced their more advanced technique, 
and, besides importing Italian and Gaulish pottery, they founded 
numerous centres of pottery manufacture, as at Upchurch, 
Castor, Uriconium, &c. With the departure of the Roman 
legions their simple, yet comparatively advanced, pottery 
vanished, and Saxon and early Norman times have left us little 
but wares resembling those of the Germanic and Frankish pro- 
ductions (fig. 50). The early middle ages passed without much 
improvement, and, though rare specimens — like the ewer in 




V T«HW— •— - V 

Fig. 50. — Saxon cinerary urns; the stamped patterns are shown. 

the. form of a mounted knight in Salisbury Museum — proved 
that glazed wares were made in this country, the general run 
of our medieval pottery vessels never soared above the skill of 
the travelling brick or tile maker. 1 The monastic tile-makers, 
with their strong, Gothic tile pavements, produced artistic 
work of a very high order; but the patrons of the common 
potter remained content with his rudely made and simply 
glazed pitchers, flagons, dishes and mugs (see fig. 51). Even 
in the 16th century the excellence of English pewter probably 
acted as a barrier to the introduction of finer pottery, and it 
was only the importation of foreign wares — Italian, German, 
Dutch and French — that stirred up our native clay-wsrkers 
to the possibilities of their art. In early Tudor times there 
was some importation of Italian majolica as well as of the 
Hispano-Moresque pieces, and the religious wars as well as the 
constant intercourse with the Low Countries brought over to 

the eastern counties not 
only the stonewares of 
the Rhineland and the 
" Delft " wares of Hol- 
' land, but also emigrant 
potters from those 
countries who tried to 
practise their native 
crafts amongst us. The 
Civil War appears to 
i/mjqpBa, have been unable to 

Fig. 51— Common forms of medieval check this new spirit, for 
pottery; the upper part of the slender we have the evidence of 
jug is covered with a green vitreous lead dated examples to show 
glaze; the other is unglazed with stripes that various immigrants 

of red ochre. . . ,, . . 

went on quietly practis- 
ing their trade along the Thames side, in what were then the out- 
skirts of London, and probably in the eastern counties and Kent 
as well. It seems probable that the earliest influence was an 
Italian one, but before this was firmly domiciled it was sup- 
planted by that of the Dutch and Germans. The first wares of 
an improved kind that were made in England are so closely re- 
lated to the German stonewares and the " Delft " wares that it 
is often difficult to determine whether actual specimens are of 
English or foreign origin. The first, and in some senses the 
greatest, of English potters was John Dwight, an educated man, 

1 An excellent summary of the remains of English medieval 
pottery will be found in Hobson's " Medieval Pottery found in 
England," Archaeological Journal, vol. lix. 




who had held the office of secretary to three successive bishops 
of Chester, and who obtained a patent in 1671 for the manu- 
facture of certain improved kinds of pottery. We have no 
knowledge where Dwight acquired his skill in the potter's art, 
for when he obtained his patent he was residing at Wigan 
(Lancashire), far removed from the districts where foreign 
potters had settled. About 167 2-1673 Dwight set up a factory 
at Fulham, where he resided till his death in 1703. He was 
always an eager experimenter, and from his diaries it seems 
certain that he was searching after the, then, mysterious Chinese 
porcelain. We have no grounds for believing that he ever at- 
tained success in this search, for his known productions may 
be grouped into two main classes: (1) Hard-fired red stone- 
ware — mostly small vessels, teapots, mugs, &c, in imitation of 
the Chinese buccaros. 2 (2) Whitish, grey, or drab salt-glazed 
stoneware made in imitation of, and often not to be distinguished 
from, the wares of the Rhineland. But Dwight produced a 
considerable number of modelled portrait-busts, statuettes, 
&c, all in stoneware of various tints, which entitle him to a 
place in the very first rank of potters. The portrait-bust of 
Prince Rupert (British Museum), the statuettes of Meleager 
(British Museum), of Jupiter (Liverpool), &c, are worthy of a 
sculptor of the Italian Renaissance, while the recumbent effigy 
of Lydia Dwight (Victoria and Albert Museum) is one of the 
most beautiful works ever executed by an English potter. 

Meantime the manufacture of tin-enamelled pottery, in the style 
of " Delft," was prosecuted with increasing industry in London 
on the south side of the river, and particularly at Lambeth. 
By the end of the 17th century the same imitation " Delft " 
wares were made at Bristol and Liverpool, continuing until, in 
the closing years of the 18th century, tin-enamelled earthenware 
was abandoned in favour of the perfected English cream-colour. 
There is a strong family likeness in all this English " Delft," 
whether made at Lambeth, Bristol or Liverpool. The body of 
the ware is harder and denser than in the tin-enamelled wares 
of the continent, and is not so suitable for its special purpose, 
as it is generally deficient in lime. The decoration is usually 
painted in cobalt blue of good tone, though inferior in softness 
and richness of tint to that of the best Delft pieces; polychrome 
painting was not so common, and it differs from that of the 
Dutchmen in the greater prevalence of a pale yellow colour and 
the general absence of any good red like that found on the poly- 
chrome wares of Delft, Rouen, &c. 

German stoneware also received a well-merited share of atten- 
tion long before the time of Dwight, and it is often impossible 
to distinguish the grey and brown ale-jugs, greybeards, &c, 
presumably of English manufacture in the 17th and early 18th 
centuries, from their German prototypes. Fulham remained an 
important centre of this manufacture, and a fine brown stone- 
ware was largely made at Nottingham as early as 1700; in each 
case the manufacture continues in neighbouring districts to 
this day. 

The development of a native English pottery took place in 
North Staffordshire. A growing community of peasant potters, 
who manufactured some strongly decorative English wares 
by very simple means, was established here from the middle of 
the 17th century. Rudely fashioned dishes, jugs, bottles, &c, 
were shaped in the local red-burning brick clays, and, while the 
pieces were still soft, simple but effective decorative patterns 
were drawn upon them in diluted white clay (slip), trailed on 
through a quill or from a narrow-spouted vessel. This ancient 
and world-wide process (for it was used by the Ptolemaic 
Egyptian, the Roman and the Byzantine potters) has furnished 
the peasant potters of every European country with character- 
istic wares, but nowhere was it used with greater skill than in 
England. The English slip-decorated wares are often spoken 
of as " Toft ware," because Thomas Toft, living in what is now 
Hanley (Staffordshire) boldly signed and dated many of his 
pieces (1670, &c); but similar wares were made at Wrotham 
in Kent, in Derbyshire, Wales and elsewhere. The repute of 

2 Bottger at Meissen made a similar ware as his prelude to the 
discovery of white porcelain, but this was after Dwight's death. 



ENGLISH] 



CERAMICS 



743 



the Staffordshire district must have spread by the time of 
the Revolution, for soon after 1690 John Philip Elers, a 
Dutchman of good family, settled there and began to make a 
superior pottery to any previously made in the district. Elers 
is generally described as a great inventor who brought all kinds 
of knowledge into the district, but the only wares he is known 
to have made were singularly like those of Dwight, and, quite 
recently, records of a lawsuit in which Dwight charged Elers 
and some other Staffordshire potters with suborning his work- 
men and infringing his patents have been brought to light. It 
is certain that, from the time of Elers, the Staffordshire potters 
made great advances in the fabrication of their wares, and during 
the 18th century they evolved two distinctively English kinds of 
pottery , (i)the white and drab salt-glaze, (2)English earthenware. 

Staffordshire Salt-glaze. — It is uncertain when and how the 
Staffordshire potters learnt that a highly siliceous pottery could 
be glazed by throwing common salt into the kiln at the height 
of the firing, for the practice had originated in the Rhineland 
more than a century before. Many writers have maintained 
that the practice was introduced by Elers, but this is uncertain. 
Early in the 18th century a fine, white, thin, salt-glazed ware 
was made in Staffordshire, in many quaint and fanciful forms 
largely influenced by Chinese porcelain — still an object of wonder 
and mystery. Teapots, coffee-pots, tea-caddies, plates, dishes, 
bowls, candlesticks, mugs and bottles were made in great variety, 
and at its best the ware is a dainty and elegant one, so that a 
brisk trade was developed in the district, and, for the first time, 
a distinctively English pottery was exported to the continent 
and to the American colonies. 

English Earthenware. — The manufacture of tin-enamelled 
pottery scarcely obtained a foothold in Staffordshire, but the 
invention of the white salt-glazed ware paved the way for one 
of the greatest revolutions in the potter's art that the world 
has ever seen. This was nothing less than the' abandonment of 
the ordinary red or buff clays with a coating of white slip or of 
tin-enamel, and the substitution of a ware white throughout its 
substance, prepared by mixing selected white-burning clays 
and finely-ground flint (silica). 1 The change has generally been 
associated with Wedgwood, most famous of English potters, 
but he really only perfected, along with his contemporaries, the 
Warburtons, Turners and others, the work of half a century's 
experiment and discovery. The ware compared most favour- 
ably, from the point of view of serviceableness, neatness and 
mechanical finish, with all that had gone before it, and as the tin- 
enamelled wares had almost everywhere in Europe sunk to the 
position of domestic crockery — for the Chinese, German, French 
and English porcelains had displaced it with the wealthy — 'this 
better-fashioned and more durable English ware gave it its final 
death-blow. English earthenware in its various forms was to be 
met with all over Europe, from London to Moscow, and from 
Cadiz to Stockholm; and, aided by emigrant English potters, the 
continental nations soon began a similar manufacture for them- 
selves. Everywhere this great change was encouraged by the 
growing fondness for mechanical perfection, and it is not with- 
out a sigh that a lover of pottery can witness the gradual dis- 
appearance of the painted tin-enamelled wares — degenerate 
survivals though they were of Italian majolica, French faience 
and Dutch " Delft " — before the unconquerable advance of 
another form of pottery which in its inception was based on 
technical rather than artistic qualities, especially as nearly a 
century passed before the new material was turned to artistic 
account. 

By general consent the name of Josiah Wedgwood has been 
pre-eminently associated with this great change, and with good 
reason, for though he had many contemporaries who equalled 
or even excelled him in certain kinds of pottery, no other potter 
ever approached him in the range of his products and the varied 
applications to which he turned the exercise of his remarkable 

1 For a discussion of the stages through which this was achieved 
the reader is referred to special works, such as Prof. A. H. Church's 
English Earthenware, and W. Burton's English Earthenware and 
Stoneware. 



talents. 2 True, he soon abandoned the simple Staffordshire 
wares, coloured with mottled glazes or clay-slips, to which the 
names of Astbury or Whieldon are commonly attached, but the 
varied productions of his factory united the best work of a 
district fruitful in new kinds of pottery, with something especial 
to Wedgwood himself. Thus he adopted and improved the 
green and yellow glazes which had come down from medieval 
times (see the cauliflower ware piece, Plate X.), and gave a 
new direction to their use in his green-glazed dessert services, 
candlesticks, &c. He carried on the manufacture of hard- 
fired red-clay teapots, mugs, coffee-pots, cream-jugs, &c, 
introduced by Elers; and, along with his fellow-potters, he 
invented drab, grey, brown and other colours in similarly hard- 
fired unglazed bodies. He neither invented nor alone perfected 
the Staffordshire cream-coloured earthenware, but he made it 
so well that his " Queen's ware " was the best of its class. He 
undoubtedly invented the Jasper ware, in which on grounds of 
unglazed blue, green, black, &c, white figures and ornamental 
motives, adapted from the antique by Flaxman, Webber and 
other sculptors, were applied; and he even attempted to re- 
produce the painted vases of the Greek decadence in dry colours 
painted over a hard black body. 

Wedgwood's " Jasper ware," his most original production 
(see Plate X.), differed both in nature and composition from all 
the species of pottery that had preceded it. In an attempt to 
obtain the qualities of the finest porcelain biscuit, Wedgwood 
discovered, after years of experiment, that by mixing together 
a plastic white clay and " cawk " or barytes he could obtain a 
" body " which might be " thrown " on the wheel or " pressed " 
in moulds, and which, while it fired to a white and sub-trans- 
lucent pottery, was capable of being coloured, by the usual metallic 
oxides, to various shades of blue, green, yellow, lilac and black. 
The ware resembled " biscuit " porcelain in that.it needed no 
glaze to render it impervious to water, and it thus marked the 
culmination of those " dry " or unglazed wares that had been so 
largely made in China, Japan and Europe, where the quality 
resides in the fired clay material without any adventitious aid 
from a glaze. The general practice was to make the body of 
the vessel of a coloured material and to ornament this with 
applied figures or ornamental reliefs, in " white " of the same 
kind, " pressed " from intaglio moulds and then applied by wet- 
ting the surface and squeezing — leaving the fire to unite the 
vessel and its applied ornament into one piece. Sometimes the 
ornament was in a coloured clay applied on a white body, and 
We get in the same way black on red, buff on red or black, and 
red or black on buff and drab bodies. The variety of bodies 
produced by Wedgwood and his followers in this way is ex- 
ceedingly great, and is only to be equalled by the diversity of 
their application, for the pieces made include plaques, vases, 
plates, dishes, jardinieres, bulb-pots, teapots, cups and saucers, 
inkstands, scent-bottles, buttons, buckles, and, in a word, every 
kind of thing that could be made in clay. Many of the applied 
designs, whether of figures or ornament, were very beautiful in 
a way, being copied or adapted from Greek and Roman gems, 
vases, &c. At their best they are marvellous for the precision and 
delicacy of their execution, and it is impossible to imagine that 
anything better could have been done in this style. So per- 
fectly did they represent the taste of their period that attempts 
were made at Sevres, Meissen, Berlin and Buen Retiro to produce 
something of the same kind in porcelain; but none of these can 
be compared with the works of Wedgwood, or his great con- 
temporary Turner (see Plate X.) , in beauty of colour or perfection 
of workmanship. 

It is obvious nowadays that much of this work was inspireu 
by mistaken motives; that it was founded on an imperfect 
view of ancient art; and that it was marred by its mechanical 
ideals ; but it must be remembered that it was in perfect harmony 

2 It is amusing or annoying to find in European museums the wares 
of Wedgwood, Turner, Adams and one of the Leeds potteries, all 
lumped together as " Wedgwood," and yet one can hardly wonder 
at it, remembering how much has been written of Wedgwood and 
how little of the other English potters of the 18th century. 



744 



CERAMICS 



{CHINESE 



with the spirit of the times, and that while it emphasizes for us 
the pseudo-classic taste of the late 18th century, it marks an 
advance in the technical skill of the potter, which is simply 
astounding. The co-ordination of labour, which had gone 
further with the Greek and the Italian potter than is generally 
supposed, was now brought to a climax. Mechanical appliances 
were introduced for the performance of many portions of the 
potter's work that had hitherto been indifferently performed 
by rude and exhausting manual toil; and while the application 
of mechanism was pushed too far — so that in the first half of the 
19th century we find the most inartistic pottery the world has 
ever seen — we must regard this even more as a cyclic movement 
of human feeling than as the work of any individual, or group 
of men. The late 18th century marks the period when pottery 
was no longer produced, as Italian majolica, the Henri-Deux 
ware, the Palissy wares, the best faience of Nevers, Rouen, 
Moustiers, Delft or Nuremberg had been, for the noble or the 
wealthy, but when it was largely in demand by the poorer classes, 
anxious in their turn to have a useful ware which should imitate 
the more costly porcelain used by the great. France, Germany, 
5weden, Russia, and later the United States, all followed in the 
wake of the English potters, and the printing-press was applied 
in all countries to produce elaborate engraved patterns in blue, 
brown, green, &c, in order to get an effective-looking ware in 
harmony with the spirit of the times, and at the same time 
cheaper in price than the simple painted patterns of the 
vanquished tin-enamel. 

Collections. — The British and the Victoria and Albert Museums 
naturally contain the most representative collections of English 
pottery. The museums at Liverpool, Bristol, Burslem, Hanley and 
Nottingham, also have good collections, while Birmingham, Man- 
chester and Stoke-upon-Trent may be mentioned. The Guildhall 
Museum, London, is rich in early wares found or made in London 
and its vicinity. Continental collections of English pottery are 
meagre in the extreme and badly described, even in the ceramic 
museums at Sevres and Limoges. The collection at Dresden is 
interesting, as it was purchased from the collection made by Enoch 
Wood, a Staffordshire potter. In America, the Boston Museum 
of Fine Arts, the Metropolitan Museum of New York, and the Penn- 
sylvania Academy of Fine Arts at Philadelphia, contain interesting 
examples of wares exported to America in the late 18th and early 
19th centuries. 

Literature. — The earliest compilations, such as Jewitt's Ceramic 
Art in Great Britain (1878), and Life of Josiah Wedgwood (1865); 
Chaffers, Marks and Monograms (1863; 9th edition revised, 1900); 
Meteyard's Life of Wedgwood (1865-1866), and Shaw's History of the 
Staffordshire Potteries (1829; reissued London, 1900), must always 
be of interest as original sources of information; but the later works, 
such as Church, English Earthenware (1884; new edition, 1906); 
Josiah Wedgwood (1894, reissue 1903 and 1907) ; Solon, Art of the Old 
English Potter (1883; 2nd ed., 1885); Hobson, Catalogue of English 
Pottery in the British Museum (1903) ; Burton, English Earthenware 
and Stoneware (1904), are the best authorities. (W. B.*) 

Chinese Pottery and Porcelain 1 

In China, as in every other country where pottery-making 
has been practised for centuries, we find a natural progression 
from primitive pottery akin in shape, decoration and manu- 
facture to the pottery of other primitive races the world over. 
We find too the early use of bricks, tiles, &c, as in Egypt and 
Assyria; and then the usual succession of domestic utensils, 
funeral vases, and vessels for religious ceremonials. There is 
nothing to show that the potter's wheel made its appearance in 
China earlier than elsewhere, and the Chinese potters have used 
the simple methods of carving and " pressing " from moulds 
which preceded the use of the potter's wheel, even more than 
other nations 1 . In books of the Chow dynasty (1122-249 B.C.) 
the difference between the processes of " throwing " and of 
" pressing " from moulds is clearly described, 2 and it is instructive 
to note that many early as well as late forms of Chinese pottery 
are remarkably like their works in bronze. In the same way 
there is no definite date to which we can refer the introduction 
of glazed pottery. The earliest specimens of glazed ware known 
are referred by the Chinese to the times of the Han dynasty 

1 See examples in colour, Plates VII. and VIII. 

2 S. W. Bushell, Chinese Art (Victoria and Albert Museum Hand- 
books, ii. 5-6). 



(206 b.c.-a.d. 22b), a date much later than that of the earliest 
glazed wares of Egypt and Assyria. Remembering the inter- 
course between China and the West, at times historically remote, 
it is not impossible that the idea of coating a vessel of clay with 
a glaze was carried into China from Chaldaea or Assyria. In any 
case the Chinese developed the potter's art on their own lines, 
for we have ample evidence that from very early times they 
fired their pottery to a much higher temperature than was 
common in the west of Asia, and so discovered types of glaze 
and of pottery that remained for centuries a mystery elsewhere. 
The glazed wares of the Han dynasty already mentioned are 
quite unlike any contemporary pottery produced in Syria, 
Egypt or Europe, for the body of the ware is so hard that it can 
scarcely be scratched by a knife, and the dark-greenish glaze 
has become iridescent by age as though it contained oxide of 
lead. The easily-fired friable wares of Assyria, Egypt and Greece 
seem to have had no attraction for the Chinese, and the glazes 
on their hard-fired wares were naturally different from those 
already described. The Chinese appear to have been the first 
potters in the world to discover that at a sufficiently high tempera- 
ture pottery can be glazed with powdered felspathic rock mixed 
with lime. At first these glazes were used on any ordinary 
refractory clay which might burn red, drab or buff; but in this 
technique lay the germ of Chinese porcelain, the most advanced 
form of pottery the world has yet seen. It is necessary to con- 
sider the pottery that preceded porcelain, for not only was it 
the matrix out of which porcelain grew, but in certain districts 
of China, where the necessary materials for porcelain are not 
found, similar wares have been manufactured without inter- 
mission to the present time. Naturally, in progress of time, the 
technique of this pottery has been greatly improved, both by 
developments in the preparation and mixture of the clays, the 
shaping and modelling of the wares, the introduction of coloured 
enamels or glazes, and the like. Dr Bushell, who is our great 
authority on the Chinese arts and handicrafts, rightly seizes on 
two outstanding types of Chinese pottery other than porcelain 
which have exercised considerable influence on the doings of 
European potters. 

1. Yi-IIsing-Yao. 3 — -This is the pottery, generally of unglazed 
fawn, red or brown stoneware, made at Yi-hsing-hsien in the pro- 
vince of Kiang-su. Articles of every kind are made in these fine- 
coloured clays, but the general forms are dainty and skilfully finished 
pieces, such as small teapots, cups, saucers, dishes, trays, water- 
bottles and wine cups. This ware was largely manufactured under 
the Ming dynasty (a.d. 1368-1643) and later. 4 It was imported 
into Europe by the Portuguese, who applied to it the name boccaro, 
formerly given only to a scented terra-cotta brought from Mexico 
and Peru. 6 This pottery and Chinese porcelain were wide asunder 
as the poles in nature as well as origin, but the potters of northern 
Europe regarded every kind of pottery coming from the Far East 
as a species of porcelain, and the manufacture of red teapots, mugs, 
bowls, cups, &c, in imitation of the Yi-Hsing-Yao was widespread 
during the late 17th and early 1 8th centuries under the name of red 
porcelain. Dwight, Elers and Bottger are notable names in this 
connexion. 

2. Kuang- Yao, — The name given by the Chinese to the pottery 
made in the province of Kwang-tung. There are several centres of 
manufacture in this extensive province, but for the purposes of this 
article it is sufficient to state that the best-known of these wares are 
dense, hard-fired and glazed stonewares, which are always dark- 
coloured grey, red, brown or blackish. They are usually glazed with 
thick, variegated or opalescent glazes, grey, blue, green, yellow or 
red, but flecked, veined and streaked with other tints. The wares 
are so like the productions of the Sung dynasty (a.d. 960-1279) 
that modern pieces are often confounded with the more precious 
productions of that epoch. One of the first lessons to be learnt by 
the student of Chinese pottery is that, with great reverence for their 
own antiquities, the Chinese of every period have endeavoured to 
reproduce the famous wares of their ancestors, and often with euch 
skill as to deceive the most expert. Even when the manufacture 
of porcelain was at its highest in King-tl-chln, the potters in other 
parts of China carried on the production of glazed or unglazed 
pottery in coloured clays, and, further, the directors of the imperial 
factory from time to time strove to reproduce the most archaic wares 
that could be found in the Empire. 



3 Yao is the Chinese term equivalent of the English " pottery ' 
or " ware." 

4 See Brinkley, Japan and China, ix. 353-365. 

6 Solon, The Noble Buccaros (Stoke-upon-Trent, 1896). 



CERAMICS 



Pl,\tf. VII 




Chinese. Sang dc ficcuf. 



Chinese. Turquoise glaze "crackled." 




Purple Souffle. Coral red. 



Peach blow. 
Pigeon's blo<xl. 



Lemon yellow. Apple green. 



CERAMICS 



Plate VII 




Chinese, Sang dc Bocuf. 





Chinc&c. Flambi. 



Chinese. Turquoise glaze "crackled.' 




Purple Souffle. 



Coral red. 



Peach blow. 
Pigeon's blood. 



Lemon yellow. 



Apple green. 



CHINESE] 



CERAMICS 



745 



Porcelain. — By this word we distinguish broadly all those 
pieces of pottery in which the body of the ware is vitrified and 
translucent, and also, broadly speaking, in which the material 
is white throughout, unless minute quantities of metallic oxides 
have been definitely added to colour it. It is impossible to 
draw any hard and fast line between porcelain and stoneware, 
for both may be thoroughly vitrified and translucent in thin 
pieces — but generally the stonewares are drab, red or brown in 
the colour of the fired clay, and they seldom exhibit the precious 
quality of translucence. If the body of a piece of pottery is not 
even vitrified, however hard it may be, it is terra-cotta or earthen- 
ware. The Chinese, accustomed from a very early period to 
fire their pottery to a high temperature, produced vitrified 
stonewares before any other nation. Moreover, they glazed 
these stonewares with fusible mineral substances, and from that 
stage the natural refinements of methods must necessarily have 
produced porcelain. In regions where beds of primary clay 
were found, the body of the ware would burn whiter than 
elsewhere, and a mixture of limestone or marble with the fels- 
pathic rock would give a glaze of greater purity and brilliance 
and one that was more readily fusible and Would spread better 
over the whole piece. How many centuries were needed before 
a ware white enough and translucent enough to be now classed 
as porcelain was produced we cannot know; but the process 
was certainly one of gradual evolution. Some Chinese writers 
in their zeal for ancient things have ascribed to remote periods 
the production of wares of this class. Where authentic speci- 
mens are not to be found it is necessary to proceed with caution, 
and literary evidence alone cannot be deemed sufficient to settle 
such a difficult point. The balance of opinion at the present 
time is that something worthy of the name of porcelain was 
made during the Tang dynasty (a.d. 618-907), but we have no 
pieces earlier than the Sung dynasty (a.d. 960-1259), and the 
majority of these are perhaps more fitly described as stoneware 
than as porcelain. 

Under the Sung dynasty China enjoyed great material pro- 
sperity, and all the arts were cultivated assiduously. Pottery 
of distinguished merit was made in many districts, and much 
of it has been classified as porcelain because the body is whitish 
and vitrified, though it is much inferior in finish and in trans- 
lucence to the perfect white porcelain of later times. It is 
necessary to realize, too, that we have no record of any pottery 
with painted decoration until perhaps the very end of the 13th 
century; such ornament as was used consists entirely of designs 
incised or modelled in the clay. But the principal decoration 
is to be found in the varied coloured glazes with which the wares, 
whether stoneware or porcelain, were covered. The glaze is 
never clear and white as at later times; it is generally uneven, 
imperfectly fused and presents all the marks of an imperfect 
technique. The nearest approach to white is found in an opal- 
escent grey which shades off to greenish and bluish tints. The 
glazes of this period which are most highly valued arethe cUadons, 
a family of cool bluish or yellowish greens of indescribable depth 
and softness. Besides the cMadons which are the most uniform 
in tints of the Sung glazes, we get many shades of palish lavender, 
brownish yellow and brownish black, but these are aH subtly of 
boldly mottled, splashed, clouded or veined with strange tones 
of red, blue, purple, opalescent grey and black. The most famous 
of these now very rare Sung wares were the stonewares of Chun- 
chow, remarkable for their rich and varied glazes, the black 
variegated glazed wares of Fu-kien province, " hare's fur 
cups " and " partridge cups " of collectors, and the four principal 
wares that may be called porcelain, viz. — the Ju-Yao, made at 
Ju-chow in Honan; the Kuan-Yao {Kuan — " official " or " im- 
perial "), made first at Pien-chow and afterwards at Hang-chow; 
the Ko-Yao, made at Liu-t'ien; and the Ting-Yao, made at 
Tung-chow in Chih-li. 

This was the period when Chinese porcelain became known 
beyond its native country, for the first mention of porcelain 
outside China appears in the writings of a Mahommedan traveller, 
Sulaiman, who visited China in the 9th century and wrote: 
" They have in China a very fine clay with which they make 



vases which are as transparent as glass; water is seen through 
them "-, 1 and its first appearance in the west is always given 
as a.d. 1 171 (or 1 188), when Saladin sent a present of forty 
pieces to the sultan of Damascus. From this time onwards an 
export trade was developed, particularly in the cMadon wares oi 
Lung-chiian, a city in the south-west of the province of Cheh- 
kiang. This famous ware, the " green porcelain " of the Chinese, 
probably made as an imitation of jade, exists mostly in the form 
of thick heavy dishes, bowls and jars, bearing incised or fluted 
patterns, and coated with a remarkable thick green glaze of 
indescribable softness of tone. Though the body of the ware is 
white when it is broken through, any parts not covered by the 
glaze have a reddish-brown colour due to the unrefined paste, 
and when the ware was reproduced in later times this reddish- 
brown tint had to be imitated artificially. The ware was highly 
prized both in China and Japan, in the islands of the East Indies, 
and in all Mahommedan countries. In Persia it was largely 
used, and specimens of it have been recovered during the last 
century from the east coast of Africa and as far west as Morocco. 
" Archbishop Warham's cup " at New College, Oxford, which 
is the first specimen of Chinese porcelain to reach England that 
we can now produce, is a celadon bowl with a silver-gilt mount 
of the time of Henry VIII. 2 

The Sung dynasty was overthrown by the Tatars under Kublai 
Khan (grandson of Jenghiz Khan), and the power remained in 
Tatar hands until 1368, when the great native dynasty of the 
Mings was established. During this period (Yuan dynasty), 
roughly a century, one can say little of ceramic progress, for the 
Wares of the period are singularly like those of Sung times. But 
two important changes took place which had a marked influence 
on the subsequent development of Chinese porcelain — (1) the 
concentration of the industry at King-te-chen, which was con- 
summated in the early years of the Ming dynasty; (2) the 
introduction of painted decoration under a white transparent 
glaze, the idea of which (and perhaps the necessary cobalt 
mineral) was brought from Persia. 

King-te-chen was already a pottery centre when its factories 
were rebuilt in 1369 by Hung-Wu, the founder of the Ming 
dynasty, who made it the imperial factory, so that the best 
porcelain workers were attracted thither, and in the other old 
centres the industry was abandoned or some earlier manufacture 
was continued, as in the southern province of Kiang-su. In the 
province of Fu-kien a distinct kind of porcelain manufacture has 
also continued. We have already mentioned the black glazed 
cups, " hare's fur," &c, made in this province in Sung times, 
and, while King-te-chen was to be the scene of the develop- 
ments of the coloured and painted porcelains, Te-hwa in Fu-kien 
perfected the manufacture of the famous and beautiful white 
porcelain in bowls, dishes, cups and statuettes, best known 
under its French title of blanc de Chine. 

The earliest painted Chinese porcelains, which are referred to 
the beginning of the Ming period, though some of them may be 
older, speak strongly of ideas imported from the west of Asia. 
The pieces are massive both in form and substance, and the orna- 
ment, consisting of figures mounted or on foot, animals, bands 
of diaper or foliage, or pendant necklaces, is strongly silhouetted 
by a raised outline recalling the decorative methods of the 
Assyrian brickwork. The technical methods also recall the 
methods of western Asia, for the ware was fired before it was 
glazed, and then yellow, turquoise, green or purple glazes, 
similar in nature to the glazes of Egypt, Syria and Persia, and 
quite unlike the Chinese Sung glazes, were filled into the outlined 
spaces and melted at a lower temperature. The Grandidier 

1 M. Reinand, Relation des voyages fails par Us Arabes et les Persons 
dans I'Inde et d, la Chine dans le IX" siicle (Paris, 1845). 

2 The suggestion has been made that the celadon wares found in 
Western countries were made by Moslem potters and not by the 
Chinese, but this theory is not generally accepted. On this point 
consult Karabacek, " Zur muslimischen Keramik " in Osterreichische 
Monatsschrift fur den Orient, vol. x., 1884; A. B. Meyer, " fiber die 
Herkunft gewisser Seladon-Porzellane " under " fiber die Marta 
banis," ibid. vol. xi., 1885; Hirth, Ancient Porcelain (1888), and 
Bushell, Oriental Ceramic Art (1899). 



746 



CERAMICS 



[CHINESE 



collection in the Louvre, the Franks collection at the British 
Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, as well as all the 
great private collections of Chinese porcelain, contain samples 
of this primitive and archaic-looking ware. 

The great stream of porcelain decoration was, however, to 
take an entirely different direction. The Persian pottery with 
its brilliant painted decorations in blue, green and purple on 
a pure white ground, exercised its natural fascination over men 
as keen in colour-sense as the Chinese potters. With the con- 
centration of the industry at King-te-chen, and the rapid im- 
provement in technical skill and knowledge that followed, the 
production of a fine porcelain with a transparent white glaze 
was perfected. Of all the colours used by the Persian pot-painter 
the only one that would endure the fierce fire of the Chinese 
porcelain was the blue obtained by using the ores of cobalt, and 
with this colour, and a wonderful blood-red obtained from 
copper, the foundation of Chinese painted porcelain was laid. 
It would be idle to try and fix any specific date for this important 
development, which took more than a generation to perfect, 
but it is reasonably accurate to say that the blue and white 
painted porcelains were unknown in the 13th, century and were 
fully developed at the beginning of the 15th century. Chinese 
collectors prize most highly the blue and white of the reign of 
Suen-te (a.d. 1426-1435), of Cheng-hwa (1465-1487), and next 
of Yung-lo (1403-1424). It is interesting to note that the colour 
used during these reigns is spoken of as " Mahommedan " blue, 
so that it was evidently brought from some country to the west. 
This 15th-century blue and white porcelain is admittedly the 
finest of its class, and though the Chinese never abandon an old 
method and have continued to make blue and white porcelain, 
often of very good quality, the later wares, fine as they may be, 
rarely equal these. 

The under-glaze red, an invention of the Chinese, has already 
been mentioned, and this most difficult of all ceramic colours 
was largely used during the same period. At first it appears as 
a general ground colour for the outside of bowls and cups, then 
vessels were made in special forms (persimmon fruit, &c.) to 
display its qualities, finally it was used either alone or in con- 
junction with blue in painted designs under a white glaze of 
exceptional quality. A Chinese connoisseur of the 15th century 
describes one of his pieces as being decorated with " three red 
fishes on a white ground, pure as driven snow; the fish boldly 
outlined and red as fresh blood, all with colour so brilliant as 
to dazzle the eye." 

Other characteristic wares which made their appearance in 
Ming times are the marvellous " eggshell " porcelains, called 
by the Chinese " bodyless " from their extreme thinness. As 
early as the reign of Yung-lo (1403-1424) these delicate wares 
were in high repute, and their manufacture has been continued 
ever since with varying skill and success. In spite of their 
extreme thinness the specimens have designs of dragons in the 
midst of clouds and waves, inscriptions, &c, engraved in the 
paste before firing. In the fine white specimens the design is 
so delicate that it is barely visible until the vessel is filled with 
liquid or held to the light. Others were covered with a coloured 
glaze which serves to accentuate the design, and the most prized 
of these are the yellow pieces made during the reign of Hung-Chi 
(1488-1505) and Cheng-te (1506-1521). 

Another wonderful variety of Chinese porcelains which made 
its appearance at this period is the well-known perforated ware, 
commonly spoken of, from the shape of the perforations, as 
" grain of rice " porcelain, though the Chinese have exhibited 
consummate skill in the manufacture of perforated pieces of all 
kinds. Sometimes the perforations are left clear, but in the 
rice-grain pattern the incisions are generally filled up with the 
melted glaze so that they become like so many windows in the 
walls of the piece. We have already seen that the Persian 
potters used a similar method of decoration in the 16th century, 
but we are unable to say at present whether the device originated 
in China orin Persia. Its usein both countries is only an additional 
proof of the intercourse between eastern and western Asia. 

It is only toward the end of the 16th century that we find 



the first examples of porcelain decorated with colours fired 
over the glaze. It seems probable that the practice grew out of 
the use of enamels on metal, which had spread from Byzantium 
to China, and which the Chinese developed with remarkable 
skill. It is important to remember that the very nature of the 
glaze of Chinese porcelain, necessitating such a high temperature 
to melt it, severely restricted the under-glaze palette to cobalt- 
blue and the glorious but uncertain copper-red. To obtain the 
rich polychromatic schemes of the potters of the West some 
other means must be found, and so the device was adopted of 
taking a finished piece of blue and white and decorating it 
further by very fusible colours painted over the fired glaze and 
then attached to it by retiring at a lower temperature equal 
only to that used by the enameller on metals. At first the 
on-glaze or enamel colours were applied as thin washes, as in the 
Ming (San ts' ai) three-colour decoration of green, purple, and 
yellow. Then we get the Ming (Wan-li Wu ts' ai) five-colour 
scheme, in which the same three colours are combined with an 
over-glaze red and all are painted over a skeleton pattern in 
under-glaze blue. This development, as its name implies, only 
took place in the reign of Wan-li (1573-1620). 

At this time King-te-chen must have produced a very large 
quantity of porcelain. The requirements of the court were 
enormous, for in 1583 one of the supervising censors, remon- 
strating with the emperor, declared that one year's demands 
comprised over 96,000 pieces; and Dr Bushell writes: "The 
colossal production of the reign of Wan-li is shown by the abund- 
ance of porcelain of this time to be found in Pekin at the present 
day, where a garden of any pretensions must have a large col- 
lection of bowls or cisterns for goldfish, and street-hawkers may 
be seen with sweetmeats upheld by dishes a yard in diameter, 
or ladling syrup out of large bowls, and there is hardly a butcher's 
shop without a cracked Wan-li jar standing on the counter to 
hold scraps of meat." 

Such profuse orders may be accountable for the fact that the 
wares of this reign are inferior both in material and workmanship 
to the wares of the preceding and also of later periods, but the 
influence of the growing export trade doubtless told in the same 
direction. For several centuries the native Chinese porcelain 
had been exported to all the neighbouring countries, and through 
Persia and Cairo to the West. No long time elapsed before 
the Chinese adopted forms, colours and decorations for these 
export wares, not in accordance with Chinese usage, but pre- 
sumably more suited to the tastes of the foreigner. Hence the 
Persian and Syrian style of the painted blue decoration of the 
15th and 16th century wares found in other Asiatic countries. 
Now, for the first time, there came a direct European demand, 
and cargoes of ware were brought to Europe by the Portuguese 
and afterwards by the Dutch, which were increasingly decorated 
in fashions foreign to Chinese taste. The production of these 
export wares slowly modified the taste of the Chinese themselves 
and paved the way for the new styles of the late 17 th and early 
1 8th centuries. 

The political troubles which marked the downfall of the Ming 
dynasty definitely separated the first great period of Chinese 
porcelain from its second and culminating period. The works 
at King-te-chen were destroyed more than once in the 17th 
century, but in spite of these difficulties the potters must have 
remained, for the reigns of K'ang-hi (1662-1722), Yung-cheng 
(1722-1735), and K'ien-lung (1736-1795) covered a century 
and a half, within which the high- water mark of artistic pro- 
duction was reached and passed. It is only possible here to 
sketch in broadest outline the course of this Renaissance, which 
has formed the subject of many learned works. 

It is characteristic of the Chinese mind that during this period, 
when a spirit of eager experiment was abroad, the productions 
of their ancient kilns should receive no less attention than the 
new methods of decoration in on-glaze colours, while at the 
same time many of the discoveries of the later Ming days were 
carried on to perfection. The first remarkable productions of 
the reign of K'ang-hi, the famous green and blood-red Lang-yao 
glazes, were made in the attempt to produce glazes like those 



CHINESE] 



CERAMICS 



747 



of old times. With the more carefully prepared body and glaze 
the results are strikingly different and, as we think, superior, 
for it is difficult to believe that any example of the " sacrificial " 
red of the reign of Suen-te can have been as glorious as the red 
Lang-Yao, the crown of all that group of glazes known from 
their general colour as sang de bceuf (see example, Plate VII.). 
In the same way the traditional blue and white of the Ming 
period was continued with the greatest skill, and, if the blue 
pigment be not so pure as that of the 15th century, the decorative 
effect of the blue and white of the reign of K'ang-hi (see example, 
Plate VIII.) has never been equalled in Europe. The subjects of 
the blue and white pieces of this period are very varied, including 
religious, ceremonial, battle and hunting subjects, homely 
scenes such as ladies and children amusing themselves in gardens, 
or animals, birds, dragons and other fabulous monsters dis- 
porting themselves in clouds or waves. The so-called " hawthorn 
ginger jars " form a class by themselves in the opinion of modern 
collectors (see the plum-blossom jar, Plate VIII.), a specimen 
being sold at the Louis Huth sale (1906) for £5000. The fertility 
of the painters was remarkable, and a collection of the blue and 
white of this reign offers a fine feast of ceramic colour from the 
harmonious relation between the tones of the white and the blue, 
especially when it is seen en masse, as in the famous Dresden 
collection. 1 

The practice of painting the ground of a piece in blue so that 
the pattern was reserved in white (even artfully heightened 
by the use of slip) dates from Ming times, but the grounds of 
powder-blue aooear to have originated at this time. The cobalt- 
pigmer>t was not applied by a brush, but was blown on through 
8 tube, one end of which was covered with fine muslin, in a rain 
of minute drops. This ground was either carried over the whole 
piece so as to give the effect of a vibrating blue glaze — in which 
case it was generally covered with conventional designs pencilled 
in ground-up gold-leaf over the glaze — or panels were reserved 
in white on which floral designs were afterwards painted in 
on-glaze colours. 

In the same way the decoration in underglaze red was revived 
or re-introduced, and probably the finest pieces of this ware, as 
of so many others in our great European collections, date only 
from the beginning of the 18th century. Eggshell wares and 
pierced or reticulated pieces were made to great perfection, and 
the coloured glazes in light green, turquoise, purple and black 
(see Plate VII.) reached their height. The early glazes of this 
type appeared in Sung times (see above) , but on the finely prepared 
K'ang-hi wares much more striking and brilliant colour effects 
were obtained. As in old times, for the production of some of 
these glazes a departure was made from the general Chinese 
methods. The vessels were first fired to the " biscuit " state, 
and then soft alkaline glazes coloured with copper or manganese 
were fired over them at a much lower temperature so as to give 
the " peacock-blue," " kingfisher-green " and " aubergine- 
purple " glazes. Many varieties of single-coloured glazes were 
made by covering a white glazed piece with on-glaze colour, and 
in this way new shades of coloured glaze, such as the coral-reds 
(Plate VII.) ,wereobtained. The various brown or bronze-coloured 
grounds, so well known in the so-called " Batavian " porcelain, 
were obtained by coating the piece with a slip of some ochreous 
clay under the usual white glaze. Even these methods do not 
exhaust the fertile resources of the potters of this period, for they 
carried on concurrently the style of decoration in overglaze 
colours, first in the schemes characterized by the predominance 
of a vivid green enamel (jamitte verte; see Plate VIII.), and finally, 
in the 18th century, in the schemes in which rose, pink and 
purple colours predominate (Jamille rose; see Plate VIII.). It 
is probable that these latter colours, which owe their tint to gold, 
were introduced into China from Europe, but the Chinese em- 
ployed them whole-heartedly, until in fact they largely ousted 
all the earlier types of colour decoration. 

During the reign of Yung-Cheng (1723-1735) the diverse 

1 It is of interest to note that the " Delft " of Holland, also a 
product of the 17th and early 1 8th centuries, makes the nearest 
approach in quality to the blue and white porcelain of the Chinese. 



styles seem to have been finally struggling for mastery. Yung- 
Cheng was an ardent collector of ancient Chinese porcelains, 
and he sent to King-te-chen specimens of the most ancient 
wares, whether of pottery or porcelain, to be reproduced, while 
at the same time he and his court patronized the wares in foreign 
styles and colours (Japanese and European.) 

The struggle continued practically to the end of the 18th 
century, but in spite of certain brilliant inventions, such as the 
" iron-rust " and " tea-dust " glazes of the reign of K'ien-lung 
in harmony with old Chinese effects, what we must regard as 
the inferior decorative style triumphed, and we see the gradual 
disappearance of the ancient methods in favour of (1) wares of 
a beautiful white body decorated only with on-glaze colours, 
principally those of the jamille rose, and (2) a very large produc- 
tion of inferior wares, made in European shapes and decorated 
with on-glaze painting and gilding to suit the European taste 
of the 1 8th century. 

This " armorial " china, so much of which was once foolishly 
ascribed to Lowestoft, has little to commend it. The material 
is seldom of the best quality, and the Chinese rendering of 
European arms and crests, or stiff copies of European engravings 
surrounded by quasi-oriental borders of diaper, &c, does nothing 
to recommend it. A great deal of this ware, though manu- 
factured at King-te-chen, was decorated at Canton, and the 
school of pottery decorators founded there by reason of this 
export trade also produced a certain number of pieces in pure 
Chinese taste, especially some of the ruby-backed plates and 
dishes and the small cups and saucers decorated with deftly- 
painted designs of cocks, peonies, &c. 

It must be pointed out that the great change implied in the 
replacement of patterns painted in blue under the glaze by 
those painted in colours over the glaze profoundly influenced 
the style of painting. In the earlier wares the treatment is 
bold and vigorous as becomes true pottery colour, and the 
softening of the colour by the melting glaze adds to the artistic 
charm of the result. Painting on a fired glaze is like painting 
on glass — fine lines, delicate drawing, and skilful stippling or 
cross-hatching are just as natural in this method as they are 
impossible or uncertain in the other. Naturalism of rendering 
takes the place of conventional decorative treatment, and elabo- 
rate minuteness of finish supplants the broad freedom of direct 
brushwork. During the 18th century the same leaven was at 
work on the porcelains of China and of Europe, the East in- 
fluenced the West, and the West in its turn bore down the East. 
If Chinese porcelain remained superior to its European counter- 
feits, it was because the Chinaman was still the better potter 
and had a longer tradition of decorative art behind him. 

There is little to be said of Chinese porcelain during the 19th 
century. The European demand was practically killed by the 
growth of porcelain works at home, and the imperial patronage, 
so great a factor in the production of artistic wares, was fitful 
and uncertain. Tao-Kwang (1821-1850) gave some attention 
to porcelain, and the pieces made for him and marked " Shen- 
te-t'ang " are valued by collectors. The so-called Peking bowls 
of his reign (made of course at King-te-chen) are also of repute. 
But the political difficulties of China left little leisure for the 
cultivation of the arts; the successive wars with France and 
England served only to scatter the splendid wares of the past 
(see the Musee Chinoise at Fontainebleau) , and during the reign 
of the next emperor Hien-feng (1851-1861) the T'aipings over- 
ran the province of Kiang-si and destroyed King-te-chen and 
its factories. Since then the town has been rebuilt and is once 
again producing Chinese porcelain. Tempted doubtless by the 
high prices now paid in Europe and America for examples of the 
Chinese porcelains of the 18th century, modern copies of the 
single-coloured, sang de bceuf, flamM and other glazes are being 
made, while the highly prized " hawthorn " jars and black-ground 
vases are receiving the same undesirable attention. 

Materials and Manufacture of Chinese Porcelain. — For many 
centuries after its first appearance Chinese porcelain differed from 
every other known species of pottery both in its material and its 
manufacture. While the pottery of all other countries was generally 



74 8 



CERAMICS 



[EUROPEAN PORCELAIN 



made of coloured clays mixed only with sand or broken " shards " 
and fired at a comparatively low temperature, Chinese porcelain 
was compounded from the purest white clays, sand and fusible 
rock ; it was glazed with fusible rock, and it was so hard fired that 
the entire mass became vitrified and translucent. The germ of the 
manufacture lay in the discovery of large masses of primary clay 
(kaolin) mixed with finely-ground felspathic rock (petuntse), both of 
which were carefully washed, levigated and purified. The body of 
Chinese porcelain varied from time to time within wide limits, but, 
broadly speaking, it always consists of purified kaolin, petuntse and 
quartz (sand), mixed in various proportions, sometimes with addi- 
tional ingredients, according to the quality of ware desired. For the 
glaze the purest and cleanest portionsof the felspathic rock (petuntse) 
were selected and mixed with lime — all being ground to fine powder. 
The lime causes the glaze to melt at a lower temperature than would 
be necessary for petuntse alone. The lime also gives the Chinese 
glazes their luscious softness of aspect and the faint greenish or 
bluish tone, while it enabled them to receive the later decorations in 
piled-up enamels, impossible on the harder European porcelain 
glazes of the 18th century. The finely-prepared glaze was applied 
to the clay vessels, before they had been fired, either by dipping, 
by painting, or by insufflation; and then glaze and body were 
fired together at a very high temperature. For certain glazes — 
turquoise, purple, &c. — which were not of the felspathic type, the 
vessels were first fired to the " biscuit " state, and the glazes were 
then applied and fired at a much lower temperature — the usual 
practice of the potters of other countries. When painted wares in 
blue and red were first introduced, the necessary pigments were 
painted on the pieces before firing, the glaze was applied over them, 
and then all was finished at one and the same firing. With the later 
enamel colours the piece was first fired as above described, and the 
fusible colours were then painted on the glaze, which was of course 
like glass. A second firing at a lower temperature fused these on- 
glaze colours to the ware. For information on Chinese materials 
and methods the reader is referred to the letters of Pere d'Entrecolles 
in the collection of Jesuit letters known a.sLettres6difiantes etcurieuses . 
The English reader will find reliable translations of the essential parts 
in Bushell's Oriental Ceramic Art, Dillon's Porcelain, and Burton's 
History of Porcelain. Later information will be found in Brongniart's 
Traiti des arts ciramiques, especially in the 3rd edition, 1877; and 
in an article by G. Vogt, Bulletin de la Societe d' encouragement pour 
Vindustrie nationale, April 1900, pp_. 530-6I2. 

Collections. — The Franks collection in the British Museum; the 
Victoria and Albert Museum, where the famous collection of Mr 
George Salting has for years been displayed, together with the collec- 
tions belonging to the museum. Paris, the Grandidier collection at 
the Louvre; the collection at the Musee Guimet; the Sevres 
Museum. Fontainebleau, the Musee Chinoise. Dresden, the Porce- 
lain Collection — the oldest in Europe. Boston, the Museum of 
Fine Arts. New York, the Metropolitan Museum containing the 
Garland and other collections. Washington, the Hippisley collec- 
tion; as well as magnificent private collections, at the head of which 
is that of the late W. T. Walters of Baltimore. 

Literature. — The older European works on Chinese porcelain 
have been superseded by the later books. The following list contains 
the best recent books: — S. W. Bushell, Oriental Ceramic Art (New 
York, 1897; text separately 1899); Chinese Porcelain before the 
present Dynasty (Pekin, 1886) ; Chinese Art, vol. ii. ; Victoria and 
Albert Museum Handbooks (1906) ; Brongniart, Traite des arts 
ceramiques (3rd edition, with valuable supplements by Salvetat, 
1877); Dillon, Porcelain (1900); Sir A. W. Franks, Catalogue of 
Oriental Pottery and Porcelain (1878); Grandidier, La Ctramique 
chinoise (1894); Griggs, Examples of Armorial China (1887); 
Hippisley, Ceramic Arts in China (Smithsonian Institute, Washing- 
ton, 1890); Hirth, Ancient Chinese Porcelain (Leipzig, 1888); 
Julien, Histoire et fabrication de la porcelaine chinoise (Pans, 1856); 
Meyer, Lung-chiian Yao, oder alter Seladon Porzellan (Berlin, 1889) ; 
Monkhouse, History of Chinese Porcelain (1901); O. du Sartel, La 
Porcelaine de Chine (Paris, 1881) ; Burton, Porcelain (1906) ; Bushell 
and Laffan, The Garland Collection in the Metropolitan Museum of 
New York (1907). (W. B.*) 

European Porcelain to the end of the i8th Century 
Europe can claim no share in the discovery of porcelain, the 
white and translucent pottery par excellence, for when the first 
specimens of Chinese porcelain were brought to Europe, perhaps 
as early as the nth or 12th century, they excited the greatest 
wonder and admiration. Cairo was at this time the great mart 
for the exchange of the products of East and West, and from this 
centre porcelains were sent into Europe. Nasir i Khosrau, 
the Persian traveller, who visited Old Cairo in a.d. 1035-1042, 
was evidently acquainted with Chinese porcelain, and he also 
speaks of a translucent ware made at Fostat (Old Cairo) which 
may well have been the progenitor of the glassy porcelains of 
Persia, as well as of those made in Italy during the 15th and 16th 
centuries. In a.d. 1171 the famous Saladin sent from Cairo a 



present of forty pieces of Chinese porcelain to the sultan of 
Babylon; and from that time onwards we have frequent records 
of pieces of this exotic pottery finding their way into the treasuries 
of European princes. With the renewed attention paid to the 
potter's art in Europe after the 14th century, it was but natural 
that efforts should be made to imitate a material so mysterious 
and beautiful. But knowledge of Chinese materials and methods 
was nil, and for a further two centuries all that Europe manu- 
factured in the shape of translucent pottery was the artificial 
porcelain made with glass, which can only be looked upon as a 
substitute for true porcelain. In Italy during the 16th century, 
and in France during the century from 1670 to 1770 roughly, 
this artificial porcelain was made and developed. At Meissen in 
Saxony the famous Bottger made a true porcelain from materials 
analogous to the Chinese about 1710-1712, and this manufacture 
was pursued in Germany, Austria and elsewhere in Europe 
(even in France; the home of the artificial glassy porcelain, after 
1770), so that by the end of the 18th century, when Chinese 
porcelain had reached and passed its zenith, the manufacture of a 
similar material was well established in Europe, and the glassy 
porcelains had been generally abandoned. The only country 
which offered any departure from this general rule was England. 
The earliest English porcelains were derived from the French, 
and, like them, owed their translucence to the use of glass. Efforts 
were made at Plymouth and at Bristol (1758-1781) to introduce 
the manufacture of porcelain, like the Chinese and its German 
counterparts, but these failed and the English potters finally 
invented a third kind of porcelain, in which calcined ox-bones 
were added to the clay and ground rock to give a white trans- 
lucent porcelain capable of receiving any form of decoration. 
This distinctively English porcelain, perfected about 1800, is not 
only the principal kind made in England in our own times, but 
its manufacture has been adopted, to some extent in France, 
Germany and Sweden, as well as in the United States. 

It is impossible to describe these various efforts of European 
potters without a certain amount of overlapping, for during the 
1 8th century all the three kinds of European porcelain weie 
struggling for supremacy. It is advisable, therefore, to keep 
clearly in mind which kind of porcelain is in question, for many 
problems of manufacture and decoration are absolutely deter- 
mined by the nature of the materials. 

If we could trust to documentary evidence alone, the earliest 
European porcelains were made at Venice in 1470, and again 
in 1519; while we also read of its manufacture at Ferrara in 
1561. 1 Unfortunately, documentary evidence alone is not 
conclusive,. and the first European porcelain, known from actual 
specimens as well as by documentary evidence, was that made 
at Florence in the laboratory of Francesco de' Medici, between 
1575 and 1585. Specimens of this rare porcelain are to be found 
only in great museums and private collections, where they rank 
among our chief ceramic treasures. They show clearly that the 
Florentine potters never fully mastered their difficult material, 
for the ware is always imperfect and compares indifferently in 
whiteness and translucence with fine porcelain, while the glaze 
is neither smoothly melted nor free from defects. Obviously 
the effect of Chinese blue and white porcelain was aimed at, the 
decorations, reminiscent of the style of the Persian 
pot-painters, being executed in cobalt blue alone. 
These rare and interesting pieces bear distinctive 
marks; for at their period the use of painters' 
marks or monograms had become fairly general 
on artistic pottery in Europe. One of the best 
known marks is the " palle " or balls of the 
arms of the Medici family, bearing the letters 
"FMMED II." for " Franciscus Medici Magnus 
Etruriae Dux II."; while other pieces have a Florentine 
rude representation of the Great Dome of Florence Potter'smark. 
and the letter " F." 

Fortunately, too, besides the few specimens of Florentine 
porcelain that have survived to our day a manuscript has been 

1 See Drake, Sir W., Venetian Ceramics; and Davillier, Baron Ch., 
Les Origines de la porcelaine en Europe. 




CERAMICS 



Plate VIIL 






Chinese. K'ang-hsi period. 



Chinese. Black ground. K'ang-hsi period. 



Chinese {Famiilc Verte). 
K'ang-hsi period. 





Chinese {Famiilc Rose). Ch'ien-lung period. 



Chinese. Plum-blossom jar. K'ang-hsi period. 



CERAMICS 



Plate VI IL 






Chinese. K'ang-hsi period. 



Chinese. Black ground. K'ang-hsi period. 



Chinese (Famiile Verte). 
K'ang-hsi period. 




tffgsMw 



Chinese (Famillc Host). Ch'ien-lung period. 




Chinese. Plum-blossom jar. K'ang-hsi period. 



GERMAN PORCELAIN] 



CERAMICS 



749 



found in the Magliabechian Library at Florence which states 
that the paste was composed of 24 parts of sand, 16 of a glass 
(powdered rock crystal 10 and soda 8), and 12 parts white earth 
of Faenza. To 12 parts of this mixture 3 parts of the kaolinic 
clay of Vicenza were to be added, and the pieces glazed with 
a lead glaze, or sometimes with the tin-enamel of the Italian 
faience maker. We are in the presence, therefore, of a material 
unlike Chinese porcelain in every respect, the Florentine porce- 
lain being the first of a long line of European porcelains the 
artistic qualities of which were obtained by mixing a large 
quantity of glass with a small quantity of clay, so that they 
may almost be regarded as a species of glazed and painted glass. 
The technical methods used in their manufacture and decoration, 
however, were those of the potter and not of the glass maker. 

With the death of Francesco de' Medici in 1587 it seems prob- 
able that this wonderful innovation came to an untimely end, 
and we hear no more of porcelain in Italy for more than a century. 
During this century (1587-1687) there can be no doubt that 
efforts were made all over Europe to discover the secret of 
porcelain manufacture; but the first reliable date we can point 
to is 1673, when Louis Poterat, a faience maker of Rouen, 
obtained a privilege from the French king for the manufacture 
of porcelain in that town. The Rouen porcelain in turn ceased 
with the death of Poterat in 1696. Authentic specimens are 
extant in the shape of salt-cellars, mustard pots and some few 
vases, the latter of considerable size. The pieces are usually 
decorated in blue with patterns in the Rouen style and were 
evidently painted by an expert faience painter. In composi- 
tion, the porcelain of Rouen, like that of Florence, was of the 
artificial or glassy type, and shortly afterwards a similar ware 
. made its appearance at the faience 

"7x* works of St Cloud near Paris, and at 
, */\ « /^ various works in the city of Paris. 

/I J fS*\ -J f"^ Well-known pieces, bearing the marks' 
JtX^te V here shown, formerly supposed to be 

Paris Potters' marks. the earliest specimens of French 
porcelain and the work of Poterat at 
Rouen, are probably experimental pieces made in Paris after 
the date of Poterat's discovery, as they differ in important 
particulars from his ware. 

Once firmly established in France, this manufacture, under 
the patronage of the French court or of some great French 
noble, rapidly assumed a position of importance. The works 
at St Cloud received letters-patent from Louis XIV. in 1696, 
and the manufacture was continued there down to 1773. The 
appearance of the St Cloud porcelain is very characteristic, for 
though the paste has a yellowish tinge it is of fine 
quality with a clear and brilliant glaze. The first 
efforts appear to have consisted in frank imitations 
of the much-prized Oriental wares, and white pieces 
decorated only with branches of flowering plum 
c ^! j m relief, or pieces modelled with imbricated or 
Potters sca l e pattern or with delicate flutings, were made, 
mark. The earliest colour decoration was naturally in 
under-glaze blue, and while quasi-oriental designs 
were largely used, the commonest feature is the prevalence 
of painted borders like those used on the faience of Rouen 
and St Cloud. At a later date decoration in over-glaze colours 
and gilding was also employed, and though the ware never 
reached to such a pitch of excellence as that of the Royal Manu- 
factory at Sevres, the St Cloud porcelain is one of the most 
distinctive French porcelains of the 18th century. 

German Porcelains. — While the glassy porcelains of France 
were being developed at St Cloud, success of a more permanent 
order was reached in Germany. Augustus the Strong, elector 
of Saxony (1670-1733), had formed an extensive collection of 
Chinese and Japanese porcelains, still to be seen in the Dresden 
Museum, and he had established experimental pottery works, 
bringing skilled potters from Holland and elsewhere. His chief 
investigators appear to have been Tschirnhaus and, Bbttger, 
both alchemists, and it was the glory of the latter to be the first 
European to produce a porcelain like the Chinese, both in the 



$*c 



nature of its materials, and in the appearance of its paste and 
glaze. It may be surmised that Bbttger was guided toward 
this momentous discovery by information brought from China, 
though such an idea is always stoutly denied by German 
authorities, who, with pardonable pride, claim that Bbttger at 
the age of twenty-four succeeded where all other European 
experimenters had failed. He was certainly working at the 
problems offered by the exotic wares of China, for his first pro- 
duction was an extremely hard redstone-ware — often erroneously 
called "Bbttger's red porcelain" — resembling the Chinese 
" boccaros " or red teapots of the Yi-hsing potteries. He had 
been anticipated in this direction by Dwight of Fulham, but 
the red pottery of Bbttger was so intensely fired that it became 
dense enough to be cut and polished by the lapidary as if it were 
a piece of jasper or carnelian. It was first offered for sale at the 
Leipzig fair of 17 10, and for many years it enjoyed great popu- 
larity, as well as the undesirable honour of wide imitation. At 
the same time (1710) Bbttger exhibited a few crude specimens 
of greyish-white porcelain. Imperfect pieces were on sale in 
1713, and by 1716 its manufacture was definitely established, 
though the pieces were still far from perfect. Bbttger died in 
1719, having had the rare fortune, in his short and eventful life, 
to establish in Europe the manufacture of true porcelain. 

The life of Bbttger reads like a page of romance, and the 
story of the subsequent development of porcelain manufacture 
throughout the German empire is hardly less romantic. When 
the importance of Bbttger's discovery was recognized, he and 
his workmen were removed from Dresden to the Albrechtsburg, 
a fortress situated at Meissen some 16 m. away, so that the 
manufacture could be conducted with the greatest secrecy. All 
concerned were practically state prisoners, and this extreme 
rigour doubtless defeated the end in view, for workmen escaped 
from time to time, and professing, more or less truthfully, a 
knowledge of the manufacture, found patrons among the German 
princes all eager to gain reputation as experimenters in the new 
art of porcelain. Some of these wandering " Arcanists," like 
Ringler and Hunger, and the men who learnt from them, travelled 
all over the empire, and the following list of dates will show 
how porcelain factories sprang up from the parent factory at 
Meissen : — 

Meissen 
Vienna 
Ansbach . 
Bayreuth . 

Meissen. — Although the factory which was founded at Meissen 
as a result of Bbttger's discovery remained on its old site until 
1863, the porcelain made there has been commonly known as 
Dresden porcelain; probably because Dresden was the seat of 
the Saxon court, and the enterprise was conducted at the ex- 
pense of the electors of Saxony. So jealously were the secrets 
of this factory guarded that when Napoleon, the master of 
Europe, sent Brongniart to investigate the methods in use at 
Meissen in 181 2, the elector of Saxony had to release Steinauer, 
the director, from his oath of secrecy before he would explain 
the processes. Meissen porcelain, therefore, affords us the best 
example by which we may follow the changes of fashion and 
taste that governed the styles of porcelain decoration in Europe 
during the 18th century. The early Meissen porcelain was made 
from the kaolin found at Aue, near Schneeberg, and while there 
is no mention of any other material, we may be sure that clay 
and felspathic rock, analogous to the Chinese kao-lin and pe- 
tun-tse, were obtained from the same quarries, and were used 
together. Until after the death of Bbttger in 17 19 it cannot 
be said that the venture was more than a succes d'eslime. The 
specimens preserved in the Dresden Museum show that the 
pieces were generally thick in substance and clumsy in shape, 
being often made from the moulds that had been designed foi 
Bbttger's red-stoneware. Naturally enough these early examples 
were inspired by Chinese models, both in shape and decoration. 
As at St Cloud, white pieces with modelled decoration were 
common. Unlike the contemporary French glassy porcelains, 
the decorations in under-glaze blue were very imperfect, the 



1710 


St Petersburg 


• 1744 


1718 


Berlin 


■ 1750 


1718 


Nymphenburg 


• 1758 


1720 


Ludwigsburg 


• 1758 



750 



CERAMICS 



[MEISSEN 



blue colour being much run and blistered; and when attempts 
were made at decoration in enamel colours (i.e. colours fired on 
the finished glaze) the result was unsatisfactory, as, owing to 
the refractory nature of the hard felspathic material, these colours 
frequently scaled off. The later success of the Meissen factory 
must be attributed to Herold or Horoldt (who joined the staff 
in 1 7 20 as a colour maker and painter) , and to Kandler, a sculptor, 
who came to the works in 173 1. In the hands of these two men 
the forms and decorations, still largely based on Chinese and 
Japanese models, assumed a definitely European style, while 
the composition of the body and the glaze, and the application 
of colours and gold, were brought to perfection. Herold was 
appointed director of the works a few years after 1720, and 
retained that post until 1765, while Kandler was chief modeller 
from 1731 to 1775. The years from 1730 (when the work de- 
finitely emerged from its experimental stage) to 1775 (when 
Kandler died) mark the most distinctive period of the Meissen 
porcelain. In the estimation of collectors also the Meissen 
porcelain of this period is the most valuable, and genuine ex- 
amples of Alt-Meissen command high prices in the sale rooms, 
especially in Germany. This appreciation was quite as apparent 
in the 18th century, for by 1740 Meissen porcelain had won the 
greatest renown in Europe, and was actually exported by way 
of Constantinople over the Mahommedan countries of the Nearer 
East. It is frequently described by contemporary writers as 
being far superior to the porcelain of China, and so great was 
its vogue between 1740 and 1750 that as many as 700 workmen — 
a large number for those days — were employed, and the industry 
brought large profits as well as great reputation to the Saxon 
court. Each year saw some fresh departure from the original 
inspiration of the work, some fresh innovation of European 
style in design. After 1730 the rude reproductions of Chinese 
forms and decorations in white or blue and white were replaced 
by imitations of the Imari porcelains, especially those decorated 
in the style of Kakiemon. Here Meissen was running a race 
with Chantilly in setting the fashion for the dainty decorations 
in red and green and gold which" spread in time to all the porcelain 
factories of Europe. Gradually European motifs became pre- 
dominant. The simple oriental forms were replaced by dis- 
tinctively European shapes with architectural mouldings, 
handles and feet. Instead of the dainty Japanese patterns, 
we perceive the gradual introduction of " Rococo " scroll-work 
(as interpreted by the Germans) to form a framework or border 
for miniature-like paintings of landscapes, ruins, figure-subjects, 
hunting scenes, &c, executed in the limited palette of on-glaze 
colours then available. Further evidence of the departure from 
oriental influence is to be found in the numerous " armorial " 
services produced between 1730 and 1740; and at the same 
period we find the first appearance of a style of decoration that 
has persisted to our own times, as a means of passing off pieces 
with small flaws in body or glaze, by hiding them among sprays 
of naturalistic flowers, with an occasional fly or some other 
winged creature thrown with seeming artlessness over the surface 
of the piece. This idea, though it seems to have been first used 
at Meissen, was so useful to the potter that it became general, 
and a device originally adopted to cover faults of manufacture 
was elevated into a distinct style of decoration by later European 
factories (e.g. Strassburg, Niederviller, &c). 

The talents of Kandler were applied in ambitious but un- 
satisfactory attempts to produce life-sized figures of the twelve 
apostles, an equestrian statue of Augustus the Strong of heroic 
proportions, and many models of animals intended for the 
decoration of the Japanese palace at Dresden. Many of these 
latter are to be seen in the Dresden Museum, and create an 
unfavourable impression of the taste of their period. The fame 
of Kandler is better perpetuated (see example, Folate IX.) by the 
little statuettes and groups of figures and anirflals that flowed 
in a steady stream from his facile hand; for though these figures 
have prettiness rather than grace, and flair rather than style, 
they are instinct with the spirit of the middle 18th century, and 
were eagerly imitated or boldly copied at every factory in Europe. 
Only in the biscuit porcelain figures of Sevres, and in some few 



of the portrait figures of Derby, do we find anything artistically 
superior. These Meissen statuettes look their best when they 
are simply in white; many are grotesque and ugly, and the colour 
decorations are usually in very poor taste, the harsh, shining 
colours contrasting unpleasantly with the pronounced white of 
the porcelain. 

Mention must be made of the use of modelled flowers at 
Meissen. Originating in the simple application of modelled 
branches of prunus, &c. in imitation of the white porcelains of 
Fu-kien, the method developed until we get not only the 
characteristic " May-flower " decoration (see example, Plate IX.), 
but also independent sprays and bouquets modelled in porcelain 
and coloured with the utmost mechanical precision. It is not 
quite clear whether this production of porcelain flowers was 
first perfected at Meissen or at Vincennes, 1 but it was largely 
practised at both places. 

Toward the end of this period, vases, candelabra, mirror- frames 
and clock cases were modelled in the most outri rococo forms 
with applied scrolls, shells and flowers. These pieces had their 
modelled details picked out in gold and colours, while the success 
of the French styles of decoration is still further shown by the 
copies of Watteau figures and groups on the more important 
vases, dishes and plates. Frederick the Great made sad havoc 
with the prosperity of Meissen during the Seven Yeans' War. 
He looted the factory both in 1759 and 1761, and is said on the 
latter occasion to have carried away to Berlin both models, 
working moulds and many workmen. This misfortune marks 
the end of the most distinctive Meissen porcelain, for after this 
time Sevres became the most important porcelain factory in 
Europe, and the later productions of Meissen were, for the most 
part, German versions of the styles initiated at the French royal 
factory. From 1764 to 1774 Dietrich, a painter, was at the head 
of affairs, while a Frenchman named Acier succeeded Kandler. 
They introduced the neo-classical style, which was spreading like 
a blight all over Europe, and this departure was perfected under 
the directorship of Count Marcolini (1774-1814), when Meissen, 
fallen from its high estate, was content to follow the lead of 
Sevres. 

After the Marcolini period there is nothing to be said of 
Meissen. The old productions of the factory had become valuable, 
and the custom of reproducing them, marks included, was adopted. 
Such a practice was not likely to lead to further progress, and, 
though the factory was removed from its old site in the 
Albrechtsburg in 1863, it cannot be said to have added anything 
to the progress of European porcelain during 
the 19th century. 



&7&K 



_ During the initiatory period the " Dresden " 
pieces bore the monogram " A. R." interlaced 
(Augustus Rex), and between 1712 and 1716 

pieces intended for sale and not for the use « Dresden - p ot ter*s 
ot the court were marked with the sign of mark 

Aesculapius (a snake twining round a staff). 

From about 1720 two crossed swords, painted in blue under the glaze, 
with or without accompanying stars, crosses, &c, formed the general 
mark, but the mark has been so often used on other porcelains that, 
in itself, it is of slight value as a means of identification. 

Vienna. — The first mention of the manufacture of porcelain in 
Vienna occurs in 17 18, when a Dutchman, Claude du Paquier, 
was granted a patent. He had secured two runaways from 
Meissen, Stolzel and Hunger, yet little progress was made until 
after 1744, when the factory was bought by the empress Maria 
Theresa. At first the traditional styles of Meissen were continued, 
but the characteristic Viennese porcelain was produced after 
1785. In this ware figure-painting, rich ground colours and 
elaborate gilding are associated in an unmistakeable manner. 
Leithner, who was chemist and colour maker at this period, 
succeeded in producing a more extensive and brilliant palette 
of colours than was in use at any other European porcelain 
factory in the last quarter of the 18th century; and the gilding 

1 A perfect tour de force in this inartistic style of work, preserved 
in the Dresden Museum and formerly attributed to Meissen, has 
been shown to be the work of Vincennes. See Gaz. des beaux-arts, 
September 1904. 



EUROPEAN PORCELAIN] 



CERAMICS 



75 1 



was rich and elaborate. Apart from its technical merits the ware 
has nothing to recommend it, for the styles of decoration showed 
pronounced neo-classical influence, and lacked the saving merits 
of the French work in the same style. The works was closed in 
1864, on account of the heavy expenses, and collectors should 
be reminded that many spurious imitations, the product of small 
Viennese factories, are to be found on the market. 

Berlin. — The first Berlin porcelain was made by W. Casper 
Wegeli, aided by workmen from other German factories, as 

W early as 1750. This business was unsuccessful and 
came to an end in 1757, but its productions are 
. highly prized on account of their rarity. Success 
Weeeli's onl y came when Frederick the Great brought 
mark. workmen, moulds and materials from Meissen 
in 1 761, and, becoming proprietor of the works 
in 1763, founded the Royal Berlin Porcelain Manufactory. 
Though Meissen workmen and methods had been imported, and 
the Meissen style governed the earliest productions, Frederick's 
well-known penchant for French art was doubtless respon- 
sible for the fact that the rococo style of decoration was more 
determinedly followed here than elsewhere in Germany. The 
colour schemes of this ware are unusually simple, pieces being 
seldom decorated in more than three colours, while a rose- 
coloured enamel, a favourite colour with the great Frederick, 
is quite characteristic. The Royal Berlin Factory passed under 
a cloud in the troubled condition of the Prussian monarchy 
during the early years of the 19th century, and down to 1870 
it was content to follow in the wake of Sevres like most of 
the other European factories. Since about the year 1880, 
however, it has developed into the most scientific of European 
porcelain works, and it was here that Seger manufactured his 
special porcelain, made to reproduce the qualities of .the finest 
Japanese wares. In spite of this scientific success it must be 
remarked that the late Berlin porcelain is artistically disappoint- 
ing, being too exuberant for our taste and recalling anything 
rather than porcelain in its treatment. 

Minor German Factories. — It is unnecessary to describe the pro- 
ductions of all the German porcelain works of the 18th century, for 
not only is there a strong family likeness, but all the works aimed at 
producing pieces comparable with those of Meissen, Vienna or Berlin. 
In every case the industry was established under the patronage or 
at the direct charge of princes or great nobles, anxious to emulate 
the success of the elector of Saxony or the king of Prussia, and 
generally the enterprise came to an end with the death of a patron 
or from his unwillingness to sustain the continued drains upon his 
purse. 

The factory at Hochst was started about 1720 by wanderers from 
Meissen, but it was only carried to a successful issue through the 
patronage of the archbishop-elector of Mainz after 1746. The 
general style of Hochst is a palpable imitation of the contemporary 
wares of Meissen, but this factory was noted for its excellent figures 
and groups, especially those modelled by Melchior (1770-1780). 
He modelled, at Hochst, more than three hundred figures, as well as 
many portrait medallions. The works came to an untimely end 
during the French invasion of 1794. 

Frankenthal had a porcelain factory (founded by the Hannongs 
of Strassburg) in 1756, and patronized by Karl Theodor, elector 
palatine from 1762 to 1795, when the French invasion put an end 
to its activities. Melchior, the sculptor, came here from Hochst 
after 1780, and elaborate pieces in the current styles of Sevres and 
Dresden were made. 

Nymphenburg.jnear Munich, had a factory which was made a royal 
factory in 1758 by Max Joseph III. of 'Bavaria. The ware was of 
fine quality, but without special distinction. Melchior came on here 
about 1800, remaining till his death in 1825; his Nymphenburg 
figures are as highly esteemed as those he modelled at Hochst and 
Frankenthal. In the early years of the 19th century elaborate 
painting became the rule here, as at the other royal factories, and 
copies were made on porcelain of some of the famous paintings in the 
Munich galleries. The works is still in existence, in the hands of a 
private company, who unfortunately sell many reproductions of the 
18th-century wares. 
• Ludwigsburg, some 9 m. from Stuttgart, had a porcelain factory 
from 1758 to 1824, liberally subsidized by the dukes of Wurttemberg. 
Highly-finished painting was the rule at this factory, and because 
the ware bore a crown as one of its marks, it has rather foolishly been 
called " Kronenberg " porcelain. 

Fiirstenbergwas the factory patronized by the dukes of Brunswick. 
Experiments were made as early as 1746, but little ware was pro- 
duced before 1770. Fiirstenberg set itself to imitate all the best- 



known styles of the day, and its only distinctive productions are its 
" biscuit " statuettes and medallions. The factory remained in 
operation until 1888, but as the moulds were then sold by auction, 
imitations of the old pieces are now common. 

Other 18th-century German factories were those of Fulda, Bay 
reuth, Cassel, Ansbach, Kloster-Veilsdorf, Wallendorf and Limbach. 

Mention must also be made of the work of certain famous 
decorators, like Bottengruber and Preussler, who decorated both 
German and oriental pieces; while Busch, the canon of Hildesheim, 
produced effects like fine engraving by etching the glaze with a 
diamond and rubbing black colour into the lines. 

While France and Germany were each developing their own 
particular type of porcelain, it was only natural that the 
kings and princes of other countries should strive to emulate 
them in the manufacture of this still rare and highly esteemed 
form of pottery. Naturally, perhaps, the countries to the north 
and east seem to have been influenced most by German methods, 
whilst those to the south and west followed the French example. 

Holland. — The earliest Dutch factories were started as early as 
1704, first at Weesp near Amsterdam, and afterwards at Oude 
Loosdrecht. The mark of this factory occurs as M : O.L., or M. o. L. 
After 1782 the works was removed to Nieuwe Amstel, but the 
" Amstel " porcelain came to an end with the French invasion. The 
ware resembled the German both in material and decoration. The 
best porcelain made in Holland was produced at a factory at the 
Hague, founded some time after 1775. There is a choice collection 
of this ware in the Gemeente Museum at the Hague. No porcelain 
appears to have been made in Holland after about 1810 until 1890 
or later. 

Denmark. — It has been stated that porcelain of the German type 
was made in Copenhagen as early as 1731, but there is no definite 
record of the production of true porcelain until about 1772, when 
potters, modellers and painters from some of the German works 
founded the enterprise which was taken over by King Christian VII. 
in 1779 and converted into a royal factory. Fostered by the king's 
patronage, fine porcelain of pronouncedly German style was largely 
made down to the end of the 18th century. The collection in the 
castle of Rosenburg contains many examples of the work of this 
period. In the early years of the 19th century the Empire style of 
decoration was adopted, and the artistic influence of Sevres became 
paramount. Large sums of money were continually required from 
the crown to maintain the establishment until, in 1867, it was sold 
into private hands to get rid of an encumbrance. The subsequent 
new-birth of the existing royal Copenhagen porcelain works must 
be noted in the next section. 

Sweden. — The history of Swedish porcelain in the 18th century is 
connected with the factories at Rorstrand and Marieberg, both in the 
environs of Stockholm. Tentative experiments were made at both 
these places before 1760, but these came to an end by the close of the 
1 8th century, though the Rorstrand works was reopened some fifty 
years ago and will be subsequently referred to. The Swedish porce- 
lains were of two kinds, one a true felspathic porcelain like the 
German, and the other a glassy porcelain resembling that made at 
Mennecy in France. It is interesting to note that the decorative 
styles in both cases are distinctly French in character. 

Russia. — Peter the Great is said to have projected a porcelain 
factory at the suggestion of his ally Augustus the Third of Saxony, 
but the scheme was not carried into execution until the days of the 
empress Elizabeth. Catherine II. subsidized the work in prodigal 
fashion, but although she brought over French artists, the Russian 
porcelain more closely resembles its German than its French proto- 
type. In the early years of the 19th century the imperial Russian 
factory followed the example of Sevres in producing costly dinner 
services and extravagant vases of large dimensions. 

Small independent factories were started in the neighbourhood of 
Moscow: one by an Englishman named Gardner about 1780, and 
another by A. Popoff. Besides producing ordinary table ware these 
Moscow factories sent forth a considerable number of statuettes, 
the most interesting being those representing Russian peasant types. 

Hungary. — The one Hungarian porcelain factory of note is that at 
Herend, which was founded about 1830 by Moritz Fischer. At this 
factory copies of oriental porcelain were made that have deceived 
many collectors, though the pieces are usually impressed with the 
word " Herend " in the paste. 

Switzerland. — Little porcelain has been produced in Switzerland, 
and considering the geographical position of the country it seems 
natural that porcelain of the German type should have been made at 
Zurich and of the French type at Nyon on the lake of Geneva, but 
these productions are of no particular importance. 

French Porcelains. — The beginnings of French porcelain at 
Rouen and St Cloud have already been mentioned, as they 
preceded Bottger's discovery of true porcelain; but as nothing 
was known in France of the methods and materials used by the 
German porcelain makers, the artificial or glassy porcelain held 
sway in France through the greater part of the 18th century. 



752 



CERAMICS 



[FRENCH PORCELAIN 



il tne Japanese xm; 



The next important factory after St Cloud was that founded 
at Chantilly about 1725 under the patronage of the Prince 
de Conde, an enthusiastic collector of Chinese and Japanese 
porcelains. One distinctive feature of the Chantilly porcelain 
is its imitation of the Japanese Imari wares of the 17th century, 

, especially those bearing deli- 
cate patterns in the Kakiemon 
I style. This imitation was not 
confined to the decoration 
— alone, but great efforts were 
Lille and Chantilly Potters' marks. made t0 rep roduce the de- 
licious tender whiteness of the original ware, by covering the 
body of the soft porcelain with a coating of the tin-enamel 
used by the French faience makers. Similar imitation of the 
Kakiemon style of decoration became the rage all over Europe, 
and was largely followed at Meissen and in England as well as 
in France; but no European imitations equalled those of the 
famous Chantilly ware. 

Other porcelain factories were started at Mennecy-Villeroy 
and at Lille, but the most important French factory was that 
founded at Vincennes about 1740, not only because of the many 
beautiful pieces produced there, but also because the works 
was taken under the direct patronage of the king in 1753 and was 
transferred to Sevres in 1756, becoming ultimately the most 
important porcelain factory in Europe. 

Fortunately we have documentary information of the exact 
composition of the artificial porcelain (p&te tendre) of Sevres, and a 
brief account of its manufacture will serve to explain how all the 
glassy porcelains of Europe were made. The potter commenced by 
preparing a glass or frit, melting together pure sand, alum, sea-salt, 
gypsum, soda and nitre. The clear portions of this frit were powdered 
and washed with boiling water, and the working clay was compounded 
by adding to such powdered frit a small quantity of chalky clay or 
marl and sometimes pure chalk as well. This mixture was ground in 
water until the fluid was as fine as cream, and it was then boiled 
to a thick paste which was so little plastic in itself that black soap 
or parchment size was added to it to give it enough plasticity for 
the workman to be able to shape it. Vases and other pieces were 
made from this paste by pressing cakes of it in plaster moulds of 
considerable thickness. After pressing, the pieces were dried and 
were then either turned on a lathe or rubbed down with sand-paper 
to reduce them to sufficient thinness ; while handles, spouts or other 
ornaments in relief were applied with a lute of slip, as is customary 
with every other species of pottery. The fragile objects were then 
fired into what is known as the " biscuit " condition; the most 
difficult part of the whole process. During this firing the pieces 
frequently went out of shape because of the excessive shrinkage of 
the material and its tendency to soften as it approachedthe melting 
point of the frit. Consequently an elaborate system of " propping " 
the pieces had to be resorted to, and even then a very large proportion 
became deformed. When the porcelain was drawn from the oven 
after the first firing, the supports were removed and the pieces were 
rubbed with sand to clean the surface, and were then coated with 
glaze by sprinkling with a brush ; the glaze being a fusible glass very 
rich in lead. The glaze coat was melted by retiring the piece at a 
lower temperature ; and it was frequently necessary to repeat this 
process several times in order to get a perfectly even and brilliant 
result. The difficulties of such a process were enormous, and it 
was only by the financial support of wealthy patrons, or of the state, 
that such a method of manufacture was ever carried on for any length 
of time. At its best the material is an exceedingly beautiful one, 
lending itself especially to decoration in on-glaze colours, and the 
pieces produced at Vincennes and at Sevres, between 1745 and 1770 
or thereabouts, form a distinct class by themselves. Skilful chemists 
like Hellot and Macquer were employed to direct the operations, 
and many beautiful ground colours, such as the famous gros-bleu, 
bleu de roi, rose Pompadour, pea-green and apple-green were invented. 

Sevres Porcelains. — The forms of the Sevres porcelain are ex- 
ceedingly varied. Many of the older shapes were designed by 
Duplessis, the king's silversmith, and, as is perhaps natural, are 
more proper to metal than to pottery; but the French glassy 
porcelain is such an artificial material in every respect that such 
a point should not be strained too far. Owing to the want of 
plasticity in the paste the pieces were always made in moulds 
of plaster of Paris, while in many cases they were moulded in 
separate parts and these united together with metal screws or 
mounted in bands of chased ormolu. Table services made for 
actual use were usually painted on a plain white ground with 
the full palette of on-glaze colours (or enamels) and much rich 




Fig. 52. — Sevres vase, pate 
tendre; green body and gilt 

fig^e-subjects, are extraordinarily Sfc^£* ■ ^^ 



gilding. The decorative pieces such as vases, candelabra, jar- 
dinieres, &c, were decorated in a much more sumptuous fashion 
by covering the greater part of the piece with a ground of one 
of the rich enamel colours previously mentioned, reserving only 
panels in white on which delicate miniature-like decorations of 
the most varied kind were subsequently painted and fired (see 
fig. 52; and examples of Sevres, Plate IX.). Such collections as 
the Wallace at Hertford House, or 
the Jones Bequest in the Victoria 
and Albert Museum, show at once 
the variety and perfection to which 
the work attained. 

This Sevres porcelain is entirely 
devoid of the broad decorative 
treatment and rich full colour of 
any of the great kinds of fine 
pottery or porcelain. Artistically 
considered, it has no place beside 
the triumphs of the Chinese or 
Persian potters, or of the Italian 
majolists. Its shapes are too 
formal, and are not sufficiently 
imbued with a sense of the quali- 
ties of the material. The ground 
colours defy every natural ten- 
dency of pottery colour for they 
are even, flawless and mechanical, 
with none of the palpitating rich- 
ness that comes so naturally from 
the potter's processes. The paint- 
ings, whether of flowers, birds or 

^-subjects are extraordinarily and Albert Museum) 
skilful regarded as miniatures, but 
as examples of pottery decoration they cannot be compared to 
the swift, apparently careless, brushwork of the great masters 
of earlier times. So pronounced was the demand of the period 
for smooth even finish that such ground colours as gros-bleu and 
bleu de roi, where the colour naturally came varied and uneven, 
were subsequently decorated with small diapers or lines of gold 
in the form of o£l de perdrix or vermicelle, so as to produce a more 
regular and even effect. The most elaborate and costly of all 
the varieties of old Sevres is what is known as " jewelled Sevres," 
which is richly sown with imitation jewels, such as turquoises, 
pearls and rubies, closely resembling the real stones. These 
imitation jewels were in every case set in beautifully chased 
mountings of gold, and in the museum at Sevres are to be found 
examples of the punches and other tools used in making these 
mounts. On account of the enormous expense involved in the 
production of such costly triumphs of skill, examples of jewelled 
Sevres are rare even in the best collections, but the English 
student is fortunate in the fact that the Wallace collection 
contains a considerable number of them. 

Many reasons — the prestige attaching to a Royal Manufactory, 
the knowledge that the porcelain was produced regardless of 
cost, the mechanical perfection of its colours, gilding and decora- 
tion, as well as the fact that the 
glassy porcelain was abandoned 
as too costly and risky after 
about 1780 — have all conspired 
to raise the prices which modern 
collectors are prepared to pay 
for fine examples of vieux 
Sevres. It is doubtful whether 
even the prices paid for paint- 
ings by old masters have advanced so rapidly as those paid 
for Sevres porcelain of the best period. In the 'seventies 
of the 19th century it was deemed worthy of remark that 
a sum of £10,000 should have been paid at public auction 
for three old Sevres vases; thirty years later one such piece 
would probably fetch the same price. It should be added that 
the extravagant prices now paid for Sevres porcelain, which is 
much more a triumph of technical than of artistic skill, have led 




Sevres Potters' marks, 
1753 and 1772. 



SEVRES, &c] 



CERAMICS 



753 



to an extensive system of " faking " and even forging specimens 
which are purchased at high prices by amateurs. 

Beautiful as the old Sevres porcelain was, those who were 
responsible for its manufacture could not fail to recognize that 
the porcelain made at Meissen and other German factories was 
both harder and whiter in substance, more truly resembling 
the oriental porcelain in every respect. It was also known that 
these German porcelains were not so difficult, and therefore so 
costly to manufacture as the French, and all these causes com- 
bined to make the directorate of Sevres unremitting in their 
efforts to discover in France natural materials analogous to 
those used by the German and Chinese potters. Pere d'Entre- 
colles, the famous Jesuit missionary, had forwarded to France 
long before an account of the methods used by the Chinese, as 
well as samples of the materials they employed; and after many 
years' research Millot and Macquer discovered the precious 
materials at St Yrieix near Limoges (see Auscher, History of 
French Porcelain, pp. 77-81). The first experimental pieces of 
this French porcelain, similar in material to the German and 
Chinese, appear to have been made about 1769; but it was 
some years after this before the manufacture of the new product 
was firmly established, and then to the end of the 18th century 
more and more of the hard porcelain and less of the glassy porce.- 
lain was made at Sevres. Speaking broadly, we might say that 
after 1789. comparatively little of the original French porcelain 
was made in France; and from that time to this practically all 
French porcelain has been of the same type as the German porce- 
lain, viz. made with china clay and felspathic rock. This 
technical change in the nature of the materials had a profound 
influence on the artistic qualities of French porcelain, and the 
change was doubtless accentuated by the neo-classical rage 
which followed on the discovery of Herculaneum and Pompeii. 
The influence of antique vase shapes and of modern renderings 
of Greek motives in design spread over Europe like a plague, 
and whether in France, Germany or England the last quarter 
of the 18th and the first quarter of the 19th century mark a 
definite period in pottery design and decoration. The intro- 
duction of hard-paste porcelain rendered the manufacture of 
large vases and other pieces possible; and after 1780 we find 
the manufactory at Sevres engaged in the production of enormous 
vases 5 or 6 ft. in height, a manufacture which has been continued 
there to this day. About the same time, too, we find the first 
production of large plaques or slabs of porcelain on which copies 
of well-known pictures were painted in enamel colours. The 
earliest of these slabs were in soft-paste porcelain, but in this 
material it was only possible to make them of quite modest 
dimensions; with the introduction of hard-paste porcelain very 
large slabs were manufactured, and a series of these are to be seen 
in the museum at Sevres. 

The most artistic of all the productions of Sevres are un- 
doubtedly the " biscuit " figures and groups. These were 
modelled with great skill by many of the best French sculptors 
of the day, such as Pajou, Pigalle, Clodion, La Rue, Caffieri, 
Falconet, Boizot, Julien, Le Riche, &c. The best of these Sevres 
" biscuits " have a real artistic value which places them in a 
class quite apart from the German porcelain figures made at 
Meissen, Frankenthal and Hochst. 

Paris. — Although during the reign of Louis XV. many privileges 
and prerogatives had been given to the Sevres manufactory, such 
as the exclusive right to gild or paint in colours on porcelain, the 
breakdown of the monarchical reVune, which was rapidly accelerated 
after the accession of Louis XVI. , led to the establishment in Paris 
and its environs of a number, of factories for the production of 
hard-paste porcelains' more or less in open rivalry with the royal 
manufactory of Sevres. In order that the royal edicts might be 
more easily evaded, most of these factories were placed under the 
patronage of one of the French princes of the blood or even of Queen 
Marie Antoinette. There is little need to dwell on the doings of 
these Parisian factories, but the productions of the best of them, 
such as those of Clignancourt (patronized by Monsieur, the king's 
eldest brother) ; Rue Thiroux (patronized by Queen Marie Antoin- 
ette) ; Rue de Bondy (patronized by the due d'AngoulSme), compare 
not unfavourably with those of Sevres itself. 

It is impossible to do more than mention the other important 
French factories at ^Mennecy, Sceaux, Bourg-la-Reine, Strassburg, 



Niederviller, Marseilles, Limoges and Caen. In the disastrous years 
of the French revolution (between 1789 and 1800), such of these 
factories as had survived came to an untimely end, even the royal 
factory at Sevres passing through a kind of lingering death between 
1792 and 1801, and it was not until Napoleon decided to revive the 
glories of Sevres that modern French porcelain really came into being. 

Just as the manufacture of German porcelain spread into 
Holland, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, &c, we find the manufacture 
of a glassy porcelain analogous to the early French arising in 
Belgium, Italy, Spain and England. The materials and methods 
were so like those used in France that it would be ridiculous to 
claim for them an independent origin, even were we unable to 
prove by documentary evidence that workmen trained in the 
French factories had migrated into those countries. 

Italy. — In Italy we have the factories at Le Nove near Bassano 
(1 762-1 825) ; Doccia near Florence (founded in 1735 by the marcliese 
Carlo Ginori, and still carried on by the same family) ; and Capo-di- 
Monte near Naples (1736-1820); with 

minor factories like those at Vinovo, \^±A.Ast yt 

Treviso, and the Volpato factory at _ I \prYYJ QK 



Br 



Capo-di-Monte Potters' 
marks; 1736, 1759, 1780. 



^3d 



Rome. The most important of these 
were the factories at Doccia and Capo- 
di-Monte. The porcelain made at 
Doccia was famous for its soft trans- 
lucent texture, so that it lent itself 
beautifully to the production of white 
glazed porcelain figures resembling in quality the white pieces of 
Fu-kien. 

The factory at Capo-di-Monte was under the direct patronage of 
Charles III., king of Naples. The earliest and best of its productions 
are in pure white, probably made in imitation of Chinese white pieces, 
though modelled in the form of natural shells supported by corals and 
seaweed. Figure-modelling was also largely practised, and besides 
groups of statuettes and figures in conjunction with vases, we have 
the typical Capo-di-Monte examples in which vases, cups, saucers, 
plates, &c, are covered with groups of figures modelled in high 
relief on a minute scale. This trivial style of work is greatly admired 
because of the minuteness of its execution. At a later period 
the works was removed to Portici and ultimately to Naples, but 
after about 1770 the classic style was adopted for the shapes and 
decorations. The factory came to an end as late as 1820. 

Spain. — Charles III. of Naples ascended the throne of Spain in 
1759 and took with him to Madrid many of the workmen from the 
Capo-di-Monte factory, as well as the best moulds and models. 
He established a new china factory in the gardens of Buen Retiro, a 
palace outside Madrid. As long as Charles III. lived immense sums 
were lavished on this factory, and the ware was not allowed to be 
sold, but was either used for the decoration of the royal palaces or for 
presentation to other European sovereigns. Enormous vases were 

made, following the example of SeVres, 

and these were often filled with j^j 
bouquets of flowers modelled in porce- /© 
lain. The most famous productions __ 

of this factory, however, were the r> D 4 . „ t , , ™"^ 
plaques and slabs of porcelain used Buen Retiro Potters marks - 
for lining the walls of certain rooms in the royal palaces. Two of 
these rooms still remain, and are frightful examples of the Spanish 
rococo style. The factory was entirely destroyed in 18 12 during the 
French war, and since that date no porcelain of any importance has 
been made in Spain. , 

English Porcelains of the i8lh century.- — There can be no doubt 
that whatever experimental work may have been conducted 
by our early English potters, such as the famous John Dwight 
of Fulham, nothing like an established manufacture of porcelain 
existed in this country prior to about 1 740-1 745. There are 
records of many tentative experiments before this date, but no 
real history. Between 1745 and 1755 important porcelain 
works were established at Chelsea, Bow, Worcester and Derby, 
and when we examine the productions of these factories it is 
impossible to avoid the conclusion that the processes had been 
imported from France. The early English porcelains, like all the 
French porcelains of that date, were composed of artificial or 
glassy mixtures. 

We may take the early productions of Bow and Chelsea as 
typical of the earliest English porcelain of which there is any 
definite record. The material was a mixture of pipe-clay, sand 
from Alum Bay in the Isle of Wight, and glass, while the glaze 
was a fusible English flint-glass rich in lead. It is obvious, 
therefore, that we are dealing with substances very similar to 
those used in the glassy French porcelain (see above), and such 
mixtures were very difficult of fabrication, being subject to 
great loss in the process of firing. In the other European countries 



754 



CERAMICS 



[CHELSEA AND BOW 



the manufacture oi porcelain was almost invariably carried on 
at the expense of some royal or princely patron; in England, 
however, the manufacture was not subsidized in this way, and 
it is probably for this reason that at a very early date we find the 
English porcelain-makers experimenting with other materials 
than glass and clay in order to make their processes more certain. 
In a patent taken out in 1749 by Thomas Frye of the Bow works 
we find mention of the use of bone-ash — the material that was 
to make English porcelain a distinct species by itself. From 
1750 onwards there can be little doubt that, though a large 
proportion of glass was still used in the composition of the 
English porcelains, bone-ash was more and more introduced 
into the paste in order to obtain a more refractory material; 
yet it was not until about 1800 that Josiah Spode of Stoke-upon- 
Trent abandoned entirely the use of glass and composed his 
porcelain of china clay, bone-ash and felspathic rock for the body, 
glazing it with a rich lead glaze, and so laid the foundation of 
distinctively English porcelain. The material has many merits 
both from the useful and artistic points of view; it is much more 
easily fabricated than the old glassy porcelains, it endures better 
for ordinary table use than any other kind of porcelain, and it 
permits the fullest range of decoration. 

Before entering upon a detailed notice of the important English 
factories of the 18th century, something should be said of the 
various influences that were at work in determining what the 
porcelain-maker should do, both in the way of shape and decora- 
tion. The eyes of all men were, of course, turned first to the 
porcelain brought from the far East; and in the early efforts of 
the English factories, as of those of France and Germany, we 
notice a predominance of white pieces or of pieces decorated 
with paintings in under-glaze blue alone, obviously inspired by 
the current importations from China. Bow and Chelsea pro- 
duced large quantities of ware of this class, and in the early 
days of the Worcester factory little else was made there than 
white, or blue and white pieces closely simulating the Chinese. 
Another oriental influence was to be found in the Imari patterns 
of Japan, particularly those in the style of Kakiemon. It has 
been noted that Meissen, Chantilly and other continental factories 
had already created a vogue for these reproductions of Japanese 
decorations, and in our own country Bow, Chelsea and Worcester 
followed suit. The later Imari patterns, heavily decorated with 
blue and red and gold for the use of " the foreigner," furnished 
another popular style for Worcester and Derby, and the vogue 
of these English " Japan " patterns, in the last quarter of the 
1 8th century and the first half of the 19th century, was so great 
that they represent a large proportion of the output of our 
English porcelain works during that period. The productions 
of the German and French factories also exerted a profound 
influence on English potters; so that throughout the 18th 
century English porcelains largely consisted of imitations of 
the foreign wares brought into the country by the wealthy. 

We can only point to one method of porcelain decoration 
which undoubtedly arose in England. This is the method of 
transfer-printing, whereby patterns printed on paper from 
engraved copper plates are transferred to porcelain or pottery 
and subsequently fired, either under or on the glaze. At the best 
these printed patterns are in no way superior to the stencilled 
work of modern oriental porcelain, while, at the worst, European 
and American printed patterns have been perhaps the most in- 
appropriate decoration ever applied to porcelain in the world. 
It has been generally urged on behalf of transfer-printing that it 
enables elaborate effects to be produced at" a small cost and so 
brings decorated pottery within the reach of the humblest. The 
truer view is, that the simplest brushwork patterns, or even no 
pattern at all, would be preferable to the tawdry results that the 
cheapest forms of transfer-printing have rendered possible. 

Chelsea. — Between 1750 and 1770 the Chelsea factory was 
the most important of all the English porcelain works, and fine 
specimens of this period command high prices in the saleroom 
to-day. We know little of the origin of this important factory, 
though it is believed to have been in existence from some time 
after 1740 to 1784, when it was finally demolished and some of 



the workmen and part of the plant were removed to the then 
important works at Derby. The first manager was one Charles 
Gouyn, who was followed by a Mr Sprimont before 1750. 
Sprimont retained possession of the works until 1769, and died 
in 1 77 1. It was during his management, from 1750 to 1770, 
that the finest and most characteristic pieces of Chelsea porcelain 
were made. 

Although the styles in vogue at Chelsea are extremely 
varied, little was produced there that was really English in 
character. The earliest pieces appear to have been either in 
pure white or in white decorated with paintings in under-glaze 
blue. The goat-and-bee cream jugs, crawfish salt cellars, the 
shell and rockwork salt cellars, jugs, sauce boats, small cups and 
saucers of this type are fairly plentiful. Then came the decora- 
tions, mainly in red and gold, of the Kakiemon style, followed 
by reproductions of the brocade patterns of Imari porcelain. 
Afterwards we find the appearance of table wares modelled in 
imitation of leaves, animals, fruits, birds and fishes, apparently 
adopted from current French and German practice. 

In another direction the influence of Meissen was also shown 
by the production of statuettes (see in Chelsea figure, Plate X.),' 
and of the small" modelled trinkets, scent-bottles and toys of 
which there is such a fine collection in the British Museum. In 
the latter days of the factory (say after 1758) we find Chelsea 
following in the wake of Sevres in the production of large and 
elaborate rococo vases, with pierced necks and covers, scroll- 
work bases and interlacing handles such as are to be seen in the 
Jones Bequest in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Pieces of 
this elaborate kind are overlaid with rich grounds of Mazarine 
blue, turquoise, pea-green, or the famous Chelsea claret-colour, 
while white panels are reserved framed with gilt scrolls and 
painted in enamel colours with flowers, birds or figure-subjects 
in absolute rivalry with the pieces manufactured at Sevres. 

The Chelsea works appears to have come to an end through the 
ill-health of Sprimont, and it was sold in 1769-1770 to Duesbury, 
the proprietor of the Derby works. He carried on the establish- 
ment from 1770 to 1784, but in this period a great change is 
noticeable in the product of the factory. The " rococo " forms and 
decorations of the true Chelsea porcelain were replaced by works 
in the neo-classical style already rendered popular by the success 
of Josiah Wedgwood, and the Derby-Chelsea porcelain is quite 
a distinct production from the early works of Chelsea. The most 
distinctive mark of the Chelsea 
porcelain is an anchor — either em- 
bossed in the paste or painted in 
gold or colour. Often the anchors 
occur in pairs, and it is frequently 
associated with other marks such 
as a dagger or a cross. Some of 
the Derby- Chelsea pieces are marked with a conjoined D and 
an anchor. 

Bow. — The date of the establishment of the factory at Stratford- 
le-Bow, in what is now the East End of London, is quite uncertain, 
but in 1744 Edward Heylyn and Thomas Frye, who were con- 
nected with this factory, took out a patent for the manufacture 
of porcelain. The materials mentioned in this patent are not 
such as would produce porcelain at all, and it appears likely 
that the specification was made purposely defective. In 1748 
a further patent was applied for in which we get the first mention 
of bone-ash, so that from the technical point of view the wares 
made at the Bow factory are of the utmost importance as in- 
dicating the' experimental beginnings of our English porcelain 
in which bone-ash plays such an important part. In 1750 the 
works at Bow belonged to Messrs Weatherby & Crowther, and 
was then known as " New Canton," and as 300 workpeople were 
employed, the operations must have been conducted on a large 
scale; but ultimately, from causes that can only be surmised, the 
partnership was dissolved and the business failed, so that in 1775 
the works was bought for a very small sum by the William 
Duesbury already mentioned, who transferred part of the 
plant and moulds to his more prosperous works at Derby. It 
would appear from what we know of the factory and its 



Chelsea Potters' marks. 



WORCESTER AND DERBY] 



CERAMICS 



755 



productions that the business was conducted on simpler lines than 
at the Chelsea works. We have, for instance, no elaborate vases 
in imitation of Sevres, and no important groups of figures which 
might challenge rivalry with Meissen. We find, as is common 
with all the early porcelain factories of Europe, first the pro- 
duction of white pieces with modelled reliefs, or of pieces painted 
with under-glaze blue in imitation of Chinese porcelain. Then 
followed the well-known " Quail," or "Partridge," and " Wheat- 
sheaf " patterns in red and green and gold in imitation of the 
Japanese patterns; and the manufacture of table ware decorated 
with these simple yet bright and pleasant devices seems to have 
formed the greater part of the work at the factory. Many figures 
and statuettes were also produced at Bow, but they are fewer in 
number and less cleverly made and decorated than the con- 
temporary productions of the Chelsea factory. We may surmise 
that there was considerable rivalry between these two works 

. situated on the outskirts of 

JL i J^ j. the metropolis, for we find the 

I ^ \jL. •§■" " ancnor " mar k, which is the 

I X^l^ ' I * I best recognized mark of Chelsea 

f\ . ^J I V^ Jb_L^ porcelain, often occurring on 

^^ ^*^ specimens that from internal 

Bow Potters marks. ev i de nce or from the piece 

itself we should rather attribute to Bow. The Bow marks are 

not very certain, but some of the likeliest are here given. 

Worcester. — The third of the early English factories, and 
ultimately the most important of all, was that founded at 
Worcester in 1751 by Dr Wall, a man of unusual attainments, 
and a number of his friends. How Dr Wall came to learn the 
secret of porcelain making is absolutely unknown, but even 
assuming that he acquired some information from wandering 
workmen it is certain that the Worcester porcelain was soon 
developed on original lines. The nature of the paste and the 
glaze of the early Worcester productions, as well as the sobriety 
of their decorations, stamp this factory as the first where English- 
men really developed a native porcelain. Between 1751 and 
1770, the first period of Worcester porcelain, the prevalent 
influence was that of Chinese blue-and-white, and the pieces of 
that period are rightly esteemed by collectors for their artistic 
quality. Probably nowhere in Europe, certainly nowhere in 
England, was oriental blue-and-white more carefully studied, 
and a collection of this blue-and-white Worcester is most satis- 
factory from the aesthetic point of view. The productions at 
this time were tea and coffee services, bowls, dishes, mugs and 
plates. The cups were usually made without handles in imitation 
of the oriental practice, but large, two-handled covered cups 
for caudle, broth and chocolate were also made during the early 
period. Many of these larger cups bore an embossed pattern 
resembling a pine-cone, possibly imitated from a shape produced 
at St Cloud; while openwork dishes, plates and fruit baskets 
were also made in imitation of a popular Meissen fashion. 

The method of decorating porcelain with transfer prints was 
introduced at Worcester as early as 1756, when Robert Hancock, 
an engraver, came from York House, Battersea, where the process 
was first employed for the decoration of the Battersea enamels. 
The early Worcester prints comprised portraits of celebrities of 
the time (the Frederick the Great mug), or adaptations of the 
works of great artists such as Gainsborough and Watteau, or 
copies of current engravings or sporting prints. The first print- 
ing was done in black or purple, and transferred on to the fired 
glaze, and it was not until about 1770 that the process of printing 
in blue under the glaze was perfected. It is interesting to note 
that for many years this process of transfer printing was 
developed side by side with the older method of porcelain painting, 
and until the end of the 18th century the processes appear to 
have been used at Worcester quite independently. The closing 
of the Chelsea factory in 1770 led to the migration of some of 
the Chelsea painters to Worcester, and from about that date a 
considerable amount of Worcester porcelain was decorated on 
the glaze with enamel colours and gilding after the styles that 
had been rendered popular at Chelsea and Bow. It is only fair 
to remark, however, that the Worcester patterns are always 



CIX 

MA 

Early Worcester Potters' 
marks. 



distinguished by a certain English character both in the style 
and the workmanship (see example, Plate X.). The first and 
most artistic period of Worcester porcelain came to an end before 

1783, when, after the death of Dr Wall, the works passed under 
the control of Thomas Flight and his two sons, who had been 
jewellers. The Flight influence was 
soon noticeable from the fact that the 
new shapes were more and more based 
on those of Sevres and Meissen, while 
the decoration became more mechanical 
and precise as befitted the work of 
jewellers rather than potters. King 
George III. and Queen Charlotte visited 
the works in 1788 and bestowed upon 
the firm the privilege of styling themselves " China Manu- 
facturers to Their Majesties," since when the works has always 
been known as the Worcester Royal Porcelain Works. In 1793 
Martin Barr was taken into partnership; the " Flight & Barr " 
period, so well known to collectors, lasted until 1807. 

Another Worcester porcelain works was in existence after 

1784, viz. the Chamberlain factory, which was working in 
rivalry with the original establishment; but its productions 
are of no particular artistic merit, and in 1840 the two firms 
became amalgamated, and so gave rise to the present Worcester 
Royal Porcelain Co. The most noteworthy feature of the pro- 
ductions of both the Worcester works at the end of the 18th 
century were the " Armorial " services made for various royal 
and noble families, and those adaptations of Imari patterns 
known as " Old Japan." 

Derby. — -Experiments in the manufacture of porcelain appear 
to have been made at Derby as early as 1750 by a French refugee, 
Andrew Planch6; but the business, which was afterwards to 
attain such a great development, was only founded in 1756 with 
William Duesbury as its manager. Duesbury was originally a 
decorator of china figures in London, and his career proves that 
he was a man of great industry and energy, for within twenty- 
five years he not only built up a large business at Derby, but he 
absorbed the decadent works at Bow and Chelsea, so that in 
the last quarter of the 18th century Derby was the most import- 
ant china manufactory in England. As is so often the case, a 
commercial success like this implied the absence of any distinct 
artistic impulse. The porcelain produced at Derby is for the 
most part only an echo of the successes of Meissen, Sevres, or 
the earlier English factories. It is only fair to remark that a very 
deep and rich under-glaze blue was attained at the Derby works, 




CD^ 4, 




Derby Potters' marks. 

and that this was associated with very mechanical painting of 
birds and flowers and with gilding of exceptional quality. At 
this factory, too, the old Japan patterns were imitated with 
exceptional vigour, until " Crown-Derby Japan " became a 
standard trade name for this clobbered oriental style. 

Mention has already been made of the " biscuit " porcelain 
figures made at Derby, which are superior in style to anything 
else made in- Europe in the 18th century except the " biscuit " 
porcelains of Sevres. The Derby " biscuits " of the best type 
range from 1 790 to 1810, and the finest specimens have a " waxy " 
surface, though there is little or no sheen and every detail remains 
as crisp as when the figure left the hand of its maker. The most 
famous of these figures are the portrait medallions and statuettes 
of British generals and admirals which were modelled by an artist 
named Stephan. Spengler, a Swiss, modelled numerous groups 
adapted from the drawings of Angelica Kaufmann, while a 
workman named Coffee seems to have modelled only rustic 
figures and animals. 

Plymouth and Bristol. — The porcelain factories at Plymouth 



756 



CERAMICS 



[MODERN 



and Bristol are mainly noteworthy because they were the only 
English factories in which a true porcelain strictly analogous 
to the Chinese was ever manufactured. William Cookworthy, a 
Quaker druggist of Plymouth, was greatly interested in attempt- 
ing to discover in Cornwall and Devonshire minerals similar to 
those which were described in the letters of Pere d'Entrecolles 
as forming the basis of Chinese porcelain. After many years of 
travel and research he ascertained the nature of the Cornish stone 
and Cornish clay, and in 1768 he founded a works at Plymouth 
for the production of a porcelain similar to the Chinese from these 
native materials. Readers interested in this abortive enterprise, 
from which such great results were afterwards to come, can only 
be referred to the general histories of English porcelain, for the 
factory was removed to Bristol in 1770 and was shortly after- 
wards transferred to Richard Champion, a Bristol merchant, 
who had already been dabbling in the fashionable pursuit of 
porcelain making. Champion's Bristol factory lasted from 1773 
to 1781, when the business had to be sold to a number of Stafford- 
shire potters owing to the serious losses it had entailed. The 
Bristol porcelain, like that of Plymouth, was always a true fels- 
pathic porcelain resembling the Chinese, but made from the 
china clay and china stone of Cornwall. It is, therefore, harder 
and whiter than the other English porcelains, and its cold, harsh, 
glittering glaze marks it off at once from the wares of Bow, 
Chelsea, Worcester or Derby. 

The Bristol porcelain resembled that of Meissen quite as much 
in its style of decoration as in the nature of its materials. One 
can point to nothing distinctly English about it, and if specimens 
now command very high prices in the salerooms it is on account 
of their rarity rather than of any intrinsic quality or beauty that 
they possess. 

Table ware of various kinds formed the greater part of the 
production of the Bristol works, but a considerable number of 
figures are known, in many cases obviously copied from those of 
Meissen, and a few large hexagonal vases similar in style to 
specimens produced at Chelsea and at Worcester. The most 
distinctive pieces made at the Bristol factory are certain small 
plaques or slabs in " biscuit " porcelain, usually bearing in the 
centre a portrait medallion or armorial bearings surrounded by 
a wreath of skilfully modelled flowers. Good examples of these 
choice productions are to be seen in the British Museum. 

The Plymouth factory is supposed to have adopted as its 
general mark the alchemical symbol for tin. This mark was 
also used to a limited extent at the Bristol factory, though the 

general Bristol mark was 
a cross or a copy of the 
crossed swords of Meissen. 
The Staffordshire potters 
who bought the rights of 
— L ^jf the Bristol porcelain factory 

I ^^* from Champion established 

Plymouth, Bristol, Champion and a works at Shelton, near 
Swansea marks. Stoke-upon-Trent, in Staf- 

fordshire, under the name of New Hall Porcelain Co., but they 
never manufactured anything of artistic account. 

Minor English Factories. — A number of other porcelain factories 
were founded in England in the latter half of the 1 8th century, but 
none of these produced ware of any particular merit. The porcelain 
made at Longton Hall by William Littler (1752-1758), always clumsy 
and ugly in form, is interesting for a splendid blue colour character- 
istic of the factory. This small venture was ultimately absorbed by 
William Duesbury. 

The colony of potters established in Liverpool also made a certain 
amount of porcelain, as well as " Delft " and other earthenwares, 
and the Liverpool Museum contains some good examples of their 
productions. 

A little factory at work at Lowestoft in the last quarter of the 1 8th 
century has attracted much more attention than it deserves, because 
certain writers foolishly attributed to it large quantities of " Ar- 
morial " porcelain which had, undoubtedly, been made in China. 
Recent excavations have established the fact that this factory was 
only of minor importance, and was mainly occupied in producing 
cheap wares in rivalry with, and even in imitation of, those of the 
more important English factories. 

Towards the end of the 18th century the manufacture of English 
porcelain spread into the Staffordshire potteries, and the firms of 



¥^».r 



Spode, Davenport and Minton became the most important English 
factories of the early 19th century. For notices of the minor English 
factories of the late 18th century and early 19th century, such as 
Caughley, Coalport, Swansea and Nantgarw, the student is referred 
to the special works dealing with the history of English porcelain. 

Collections. — The British Museum and the Victoria and Albert 
Museum contain the best general collections of English porcelain. 
The museums at Bristol and Liverpool contain examples of the local 
wares; while the museum at the Worcester Royal Porcelain works 
has an admirable collection of the wares of that factory. Many 
noteworthy private collections are in existence, of which we may 
mention those of Mr Dyson Perrins, Mr Cockshutt and Mr Trapnell. 

Literature. — Alex. Brongniart, Traite des arts ceramiques 
(1844); Jacquemart, Histoire de la ceramique (Eng. ed. 1873); 
Janmcke, Grundriss der Keramik (1879); Dr Brinkmann, Handbook 
of European Porcelains in the Hamburg Museum ; Marry at, History 
of Pottery and Porcelain (1857) ; Jewitt, Ceramic Art of Great Britain 
(1878); Auscher, A History and Description of French Porcelain 
U905); Burton, A History and Description of English Porcelain 
(1902); Dillon, Porcelain (1904); Solon, Old English Porcelain 
(1903); Burton, Porcelain (1906); R. Almstrom, Lervarorna och 
deras Tilherkning (1903). (W. B.*) 

Pottery and Porcelain during the 19TH Century 
The development of the manufacture of pottery and porcelain 
in Europe and America throughout the 19th century need not 
be treated in such detail as the history of its growth up to that 
period, for modern means of communication and the general 
diffusion of knowledge have tended to destroy the individual 
character which was so marked a feature of the pottery of 
different countries in previous centuries. The 19th century was 
distinctly the century of machinery, and, for the most part, it 
witnessed the displacement by mechanical processes of those 
methods of handicraft which made the older pottery individual 
and interesting even in its simplest forms. Collectors are pre- 
pared to pay very large sums for choice examples of the potter's 
art of bygone centuries, but it is doubtful if much of the pottery 
of the 19th century will ever be collected for its intrinsic merits, 
though it may be preserved as an illustration of the spirit of 
the age. 

In preceding sections of this article the development of the 
brightly painted tin-enamelled wares and the gaily decorated 
porcelains of various European countries have been traced down 
to the end of the 18th century, because that date marks, quite 
distinctly, the period when the old handicraft of the potter was 
for various reasons displaced by organized manufacture. The 
disturbed economic condition of Europe in the last quarter of the 
18th century and the Napoleonic Wars of the early 19th century 
proved disastrous to most of the pottery and porcelain works 
where artistic wares were made, and the disturbance of traditional 
methods was completed by the superior mechanical perfection and 
cheapness of the English earthenware introduced by Wedgwood 
and his contemporaries. The English pottery was neater, more 
perfectly finished and more durable than the painted tin-enamelled 
pottery of the continent. It vied in finish with the expensive 
continental porcelains, and for nearly half a century it carried 
all before it, not only in England, but throughout the world. 
An intelligent observer, M. Faujas de Saint Fond, writing in the 
beginning of the 19th century, remarks of English pottery that 
" Its excellent workmanship, its solidity, the advantage which 
it possesses of sustaining the action of fire, its fine glaze im- 
penetrable to acids, the beauty and convenience of its form, and 
the cheapness of its price, have given rise to a commerce so active 
and so universal, that in travelling from Paris to Petersburg, 
from Amsterdam to the farthest parts of Sweden, and from 
Dunkirk to the extremity of the south of France one is served at 
every inn upon English ware. Spain, Portugal and Italy are 
supplied with it; and vessels are loaded with it for the East 
Indies, the West Indies, and the continent of America." 1 It 
was calculated that at this time three-fourths of the pottery 
manufactured in England was sent abroad. Such a state of things 
was not likely to continue, and in most of the European countries, 
after the settlement of 1815, such of the older factories as had 
survived, or new factories specially created for the purpose, 
adopted English methods of manufacture. In many cases 

1 Travels in England and Scotland (Eng. trans.), vol. i. p. 97. 



CERAMICS 



Plate IX. 





Meissen. Mayflower vase mounted in ormolu. Pate-dure. 



Sevres Pite-tcndre, c. 1757, painted by Falot and Morin. 



AH 



&: 



P I 



('/*- 








1 


(-* 


^f 










\ 






Meissen. Crinoline figure (Kandlcr), PAtc-dure, 



Sevres. PAtc-tcndrc, e. 1750. 



CERAMICS 



Plate IX. 





Meissen. May-flower vase mounted in ormolu. Pate.dure, 



Sevres Pite-tcndre, C. 1757, painted by Falot and Morin. 




Meissen. Crinoline figure (Kandlcr), Pute-dure, 




Sevres. Pite-tendre, e. 1756. 



MODERN] 



CERAMICS 



757 



experienced Staffordshire potters were procured to direct these 
works, and so far as ordinary domestic pottery was concerned, 
the first half of the 19th century witnessed the establishment in 
every country of Europe and in the United States of America 
of pottery works managed by Englishmen, where earthenwares 
were made after the English fashion. We shall refer presently to 
the survival or revival of the older styles of pottery and porcelain, 
but the English influence was undoubtedly paramount, with one 
or two notable exceptions, down to 1 8 50, or even later. England 
itself witnessed a notable development of its pottery manufacture, 
which became more and more aggregated in that district of North 
Staffordshire designated emphatically " The Potteries," where, 
in spite of later developments, from two-thirds to three-quarters 
of all the pottery and porcelain made in the British Isles is still 
produced. This concentration of the industry in England has 
resulted in a race of pottery workers not to be matched elsewhere 
in the world, and while it was the supply of cheap coal and coarse 
clay which first gave Staffordshire its pre-eminence, that pre- 
eminence is now retained as much by the traditional skill of the 
workmen of the district as by the enterprise of its manufacturers. 

While we must admire, from the economic point of view, the 
methods of manufacture which have placed England in the first 
rank as a pottery-producing country, inasmuch as they have 
brought within the reach of the humblest domestic utensils of 
high finish and great durability, it is impossible to say much for 
the taste or art associated with them. Neatness, serviceableness 
and durability, English domestic wares undoubtedly possess in 
a degree unknown to any earlier type of pottery, but the general 
use of transfer-printing as the principal method of decoration, and 
the absence of any distinctive style of ornament, must cause them 
to take a low rank in comparison with the wares of past centuries, 
when mechanical perfection was impossible and rich colour 
and truly decorative painting were the chief distinctions of the 
pottery of every country. The London International Exhibition 
of 1851 is generally supposed to indicate the low- water mark of 
art as applied to industry; it should rather be regarded as 
marking the period when many of the old handicrafts had been 
extinguished by the use of mechanical appliances and the growth 
of the factory system, and when the delight of men in these 
current developments was so great that they were regarded as 
triumphs in themselves, when they were only " means to an end." 

Since that period the development of pottery and porcelain 
has followed two main directions: (1) an attempt on the part of 
manufacturers to produce the most artistic results possible with 
modern processes and methods, and (2) the interesting and valu- 
able efforts of those individual potters in every country with whom 
art was the first consideration and commercial production was 
disregarded. 

Though the English pottery factories were of such paramount 
importance in the first half of the 10th century, it must be re- 
membered that some of the oldest factories in Europe were still 
alive and active. The royal factories in Sevres, Meissen, Berlin, 
Vienna, St Petersburg and elsewhere, surviving the wreck of the 
Napoleonic Wars, continued at the expense of their respective 
states, to produce porcelains which were the legitimate develop- 
ment of their work during the 18th century. 

Meissen and Berlin. — At Meissen, efforts were made to improve 
the technical process in use, but, unfortunately, the old Meissen 
wares had already become valuable, and they were reproduced, 
marks included, until all initiative was destroyed, and the 
factory continued to live, mainly, on its old reputation. 

At Berlin, the financial troubles of the Prussian monarchy 
throughout the early years of the 19th century were severely 
felt, so that a cheaper class of porcelain was manufactured. 
The only innovations that can be ascribed to the factory during 
this period, though highly esteemed at the time, form striking 
examples of the artistic decadence of the period. Such was the 
lace-work decoration made by dipping lace in porcelain slip so 
that on firing the thread burned away, leaving a porcelain fac- 
simile; another was the production of slabs of porcelain modelled 
in such a way that on viewing the piece by transmitted light it 
appeared like a picture painted en grisaille. 



From the artistic point of view there is little to be said for the 
majority of productions of the Berlin factory, but nowhere in 
the world has greater attention been paid to the technical and 
scientific problems of porcelain manufacture, and this establish- 
ment has rendered the greatest service in the development of the 
important chemical and electrical industries of Germany by the 
splendid appliances it has invented for scientific use. 

Since 1870 the works, removed to Charlottenburg, have been 
conducted with very great enterprise. It was here that Seger 
perfected his soft porcelain based on the glazes and bodies of the 
best Japanese porcelains, and here also he developed the manu- 
facture of copper-red glazes in imitation of the old sang-de-bmuj 
and flambe glazes of the Chinese, at the same time establishing 
some of the scientific principles underlying their production. At 
Berlin, too, all the modern methods of decoration, whether in 
coloured glazes, raised enamels, pdte sur pdte, trie elaborate 
paintings of flowers, birds or figures, or the use of crystalline 
glazes, have been followed with great success; but the factory 
has never yet given any special impetus or new direction to the 
decorative side of porcelain. 

Vienna.— Few European factories were so little affected by the 
general trend of affairs as the royal factory at Vienna. We have 
already referred to the elaborate paintings and rich gilding 
which became the distinguishing feature of its wares towards the 
end of the 18th century, and this style, once perfected, seems to 
have been continued with little change. It has been stated by 
a renowned German authority, that the Viennese porcelain was 
at its best between 1785 and 1815. During this period the plan 
of painting copies of pictures on porcelain was developed to its 
utmost, and this, in combination with the richest gilding, marks 
the apotheosis of Viennese porcelain. The factory came to an end 
in 1864, but collectors should be warned that a flood of cheap 
porcelains, decorated in modern Viennese workshops, and there- 
fore styled " Viennese porcelain," has during the last twenty years 
overwhelmed the English and American markets. 

Sevres. — The important part played by the Royal French 
manufactory at Sevres has already been sketched. During the 
troublous years of the French Revolution the works practically 
came to a standstill, and under the Directory it was a question 
whether this manufactory, along with certain other state estab- 
lishments in France, should be closed. Napoleon, however, 
decided that for the glory of France and as a means of encourag- 
ing its porcelain industry, seriously threatened by the English 
potters, the establishment at Sevres should be conducted as a 
national factory. By a splendid coincidence Alexander Brong- 
niart, a man of great natural ability, and a noted scientist, was 
appointed director, and retained that post under the successive 
governments of France until his death in 1847. In the hands of 
Brongniart the establishment at Sevres became at once a school 
of research and a centre of practical accomplishment— the 
influence of which was felt throughout Europe. Its products 
were obviously inspired by the demands of successive French 
monarchs and their courts. It ministered to the grandiose 
ideas of Napoleon, who demanded pieces that were to speak of 
his victories, and after every campaign a fresh table service or 
new suite of vases was produced to commemorate the emperor's 
successes. The most striking piece of this kind was the vase 
made to commemorate the marriage of Napoleon and Marie 
Louisein 1810. It was designed by Isabey and was modelled with 
figures in bas-relief. The principal group contains not less than 
115 such figures, while the subsidiary group, representing the 
acclaiming populace, contains between 2000 and 3000 figures. 
This vase was three years in making, and is said to have cost 
something like £1250. Unfortunately this was not a solitary 
example of the productions of Sevres, for under every successive 
government of the 19th century the factory has been called to 
produce enormous vases which are to be found in the rooms 
or corridors of every palace and museum in France, and while 
these pieces represent wonderful technical skill, both in their 
manufacture and the decorations with which they are covered, 
very few of them possess either spontaneity or charm. They 
are correct frigid, cold, and compare most unfavourably from 



758 



CERAMICS 



[MODERN 



the artistic point of view with the masterpieces of oriental 
pottery. 

Everything was carried out on the grand scale, and once again 
the influence of Sevres became paramount in Europe, and its 
styles of painting and decoration were eagerly followed from 1830 
to 1870 by all those European potters who were attempting to 
make anything beyond useful domestic wares. As an instance of 
its aims in the period between 1830 and 1850, large sums were 
spent in the production of great slabs of porcelain many feet in 
area; on which were painted copies of some of the famous portraits 
and other pictorial masterpieces in the galleries of the Louvre. A 
number of these are preserved in the museum at Sevres, and must 
always excite admiration and even wonder at their technical 
accomplishment. 

The most noticeable invention of Sevres in the middle part of 
the 19th century was the pdte sur pdte decoration in which 
porcelain clays of various colours are used as the artist's medium. 
The idea appears to have been adopted from an old Chinese vase 
by Robert, the chief painter, and at the London International 
Exhibition of 1862 some small cups decorated in this method, by 
Gely, were first shown. The most successful work in this style 
was, however, that produced by M. Solon, who worked at Sevres 
until 1870. In that year he came to England and was employed 
at Minton's, where for about thirty-five years he continued this 
method of work, one of the few artistic and beautiful styles of 
pottery decoration of the 19th century. As practised by M. 
Solon the pdte sur pdte decoration took the form of paintings 
of figure subjects or dainty ornamental designs in white slip on 
a coloured porcelain ground of green, blue, dark-grey or black. 
On such grounds a thin wash of the slip gives a translucent film, 
so that by washing on or building up successive layers of slip, 
sharpening the drawing with modelling tools, or softening or 
rounding the figure with a wet brush, the most delicate grada- 
tions of tint can be obtained, from the brilliant white of the slip 
to the full depth of the ground. This method was rapidly 
adopted by all the principal European factories, though nowhere 
was it carried to such perfection as at Sevres and at Minton's. 
M. Taxile Doat has executed many extraordinary pieces in this 
style of decoration at Sevres, and in the British Museum there is 
a large vase of his, presented by the French government at the 
beginning of the present century. One great feature of French 
porcelain manufacture during the 19th century was the develop- 
ment of the industry at Limoges and the neighbouring district 
of central France. Limoges was a small centre of porcelain 
production in the period between 1780 and 1850, but after the 
latter date it rapidly developed into a pottery centre second only 
in importance to that of the Potteries district in England. We 
can do no more than mention this fact, because, for the most 
partj the activities of Limoges have been devoted to the pro- 
duction of pottery commercially, rather than pottery as an art. 
, The Franco-German War proved a disaster for Sevres, and all 
work came to a standstill for a time. The existing manufactory, 
which was almost completed before the outbreak of the war, was 
opened by Marshal MacMahon in 1876, but for many years the 
work was continued under great discouragement. Between 1879 
and 1889 attention was paid to the study and imitation of old 
Chinese methods, and this resulted in the reproduction of many 
of those Chinese glazes which had hitherto been the despair of 
European potters. 

At the Paris Exhibition of 1900 the display made by Sevres 
was perhaps the most notable feature of the magnificent collec- 
tion of ceramics gathered there. The collection included many 
varieties of porcelain, both hard and soft paste, decorated in all 
the current styles of the period; under-glaze painting, on-glaze 
painting, flambe glazes and crystalline glazes, but most beautiful 
of all were the magnificent groups of " biscuit " figures designed 
as table garnitures by sonie of the best French sculptors of the 
time. 

English Progress. — The demand for elaborate specimens of 
painted porcelain was at its height throughout Europe between 
1851 and 1880, and this demand was undoubtedly fostered by 
the series of international exhibitions held during that period, 



when every European pottery works of note produced large and 
costly specimens of porcelain or earthenware, smothered with 
painting and gilding. Every famous manufactory produced 
something beyond the ordinary, but undoubtedly the first of 
European factories during this period was that of Messrs Minton 
at Stoke-upon-Trent. M. Leon Arnoux, a descendant of the 
Arnoux's of Apt, an old family of French potters, was at this 
time the technical and artistic director of Messrs Minton's 
works, and he was the only pottery director during the 19th 
century who could in any sense be compared with M. Brongniart 
of Sevres. M. Arnoux combined in a remarkable degree artistic 
with technical skill, and under his management the works of 
Messrs Minton became the greatest centre of ceramic art in 
Europe. Skilful modellers, like Jeannest, Carriere-Belleuse, 
and Protat, and pottery painters such as A. Boullemier, Moussill, 
E. Lessore and L. Solon were engaged at this factory and pro- 
duced many of the most characteristic European decorations of 
the middle of the 19th century. 

To this period, too, we must refer another English invention, 
that of a special porcelain known as " Parian." This in its 
finest expression was a "biscuit" porcelain used for the production 
of statuettes and groups rivalling the finest 18th century " biscuit " 
figures of Sevres and Derby. It seems probable that this Parian 
was first made at the works of Copeland and Garratt, at Stoke- 
upon-Trent; but it was immediately adopted at Minton's, 
Wedgwood's, and at Worcester; and each of these firms used it 
in a distinctive way. Glazed Parian was also manufactured at 
the Belleek Porcelain Works in Ireland (the only Irish porcelain 
works of any note), and later its manufacture was developed by 
the Worcester Royal Porcelain Company, Moore Brothers of 
Longton, and other English manufacturers until it became an 
important branch of the English porcelain made in the period 
under review. 

Japanese Influence. — At the Paris Exhibition of 1867 the great 
collection of the applied arts of Japan took Europe by storm, 
and there was an immediate outbreak of adaptations of Japanese 
art in Europe once more; not as in the 18th century, when the 
old Japanese patterns were copied or frankly imitated, but a 
European- Japanese style arose, based on the methods and ideas 
of the great Japanese painters and draughtsmen, the workers in 
metal, in iron, in lacquer and in silk. In England the Worcester 
Royal Porcelain Company produced a series of elaborate and 
skilful pieces inspired from this source, which for perfect and 
minute execution must be ranked before all other European 
works of their kind. 

The most admirable result of this revived interest in Japanese 
art was, however, developed at the Royal Copenhagen works, 
the productions of which are not only famous all over the world, 
but have set a new style in porcelain decoration which is being 
followed at most of the continental factories. By the use of the 
pure Swedish felspar and quartz and the finest china clays from 
Germany or Cornwall a material of excellent quality is prepared, 
and on this naturalistic paintings of birds, fishes, animals and 
water or northern landscapes and figure subjects are painted in 
delicate under-glaze blues, greys and greens. The Royal Copen- 
hagen works has also produced a profusion of skilfully modelled 
animals, birds and fishes, either in pure white, or delicately 
tinted after nature, with the same under-glaze colours. 

Not only have Berlin, Sevres and other European factories 
adopted the modern Copenhagen style of decoration, but the 
Japanese are now imitating these skilful productions which were 
originally inspired by their own early work. 

Stonewares. — Mention must be made of the revival of the 
manufacture of artistic stonewares by Doultons of Lambeth, and 
Villeroy and Boch, the great German potters. Doultons, besides 
reviving the older forms of English stoneware, made some 
entirely new departures, and their pieces with designs etched in 
the clay are admirable examples of the right use of a refractory 
material. Villeroy and Boch reproduced the old Rhenish stone- 
wares, and many interesting new departures in addition, but 
mostly in German forms that have not commended the wares 
to other nations. 



CERAMICS 



Plate X. 



fee v 










% 



A.tiM 



i» .'■• v; 






h 



ST 







Chelsea porcelain; 1715-1770. 
Figure after Wattcan. 




Whicldon and Wedgwood, 
cauliflower ware; c. 1750-17GO. 




Worcester porcelain; e. 17C0-1770. 



Turner's jasper; C. 178D. 



Wedgwood's jasper; c. 178(1. 



CERAMICS 



Plate X. 




Chelsea porcelain; 1715-1770. 
Figure after Watteau. 





Whicldon and Wedgwood, 
cauliflower ware; c. 1750-17CO, 




Worcester porcelain; c. 17G0-1770. 



\\Ml 




Turner's jasper; C. 1780. 



Wedgwood's jasper; c. 17811. 



MODERN] 



CERAMICS 



759 



Artistic Results. — While the great potteries of Europe have been 
employed in improving their methods of manufacture and in 
consolidating their knowledge on the technical and scientific 
side, so that they are able to produce pottery more perfect 
in shape, with a higher degree of finish and greater certainty of 
result than was ever known before, it cannot be said that the 
artistic results have been commensurate with the labour ex- 
pended. Fortunately, however, the success of these important 
industrial concerns in stereotyping modern production has incited 
a considerable number of clever men, either potters or artists, 
to become artist-potters and producers of individual wares, 
often recalling the works of the great schools of bygone centuries. 
This movement, which to-day has its exponents in every European 
country as well as in the United States of America, originated in 
France between 1840 and 1850, when the formation of the earliest 
ceramic museums and the new-born interest in the old French 
faience led to various attempts at pottery-making by the old 
methods of handwork and rule of thumb. Avisseau of Tours 
(1845), Pull of Paris (1855), and Barbizet (1859) began to make 
pieces in the style of Palissy, and Ulysse of Blois (1863) revived 
painted faience in imitation of that of Nevers. Slowly a demand 
for painted pottery was created among collectors and amateurs, 
and in France and other countries artists began to dabble in the 
painting of pottery. In some cases the artist retained his free- 
dom, painting pieces obtained from some pottery manufacturer, 
which he sold on his own account after they had been decorated 
and fired; or he became attached to a particular factory and his 
productions were sold by the potter; or the artist became an 
amateur potter, and either worked alone or encouraged other 
artists to co-operate with him. 

It is impossible to do more than mention a few of the prominent 
men in each class, whose works were not only esteemed in their 
own day, but are also likely to be regarded always as among 
the distinguished productions of the 19th century. Emile 
Lessore and Chapelet were both painters who were attracted by 
the technique of the potter. For some time they bought speci- 
mens of pottery from a small manufacturer named Laurin at 
Bourg-la-Reine, and after a time they definitely forsook pictorial 
art for that of the potter. Lessore painted in underglaze colours 
in a delicate sketchy style figure-subjects, mostly adapted from 
old engravings. He worked for a short time at Sevres, and then, 
like so many other French pottery artists of this period, he 
came to Minton's in England, and finally entered into an en- 
gagement with the old firm of Josiah Wedgwood & Sons which 
continued almost to his death (1860-1876). On their fine cream- 
coloured earthenware he sketched many thousands of fanciful 
designs which had a great vogue in the 'seventies and 'eighties of 
the last century. Chapelet pursued a very different course. His 
first innovation was a method known as " Barbotine " or slip- 
painting, in which coloured clays were used " impasto," often in 
considerable thickness, so that after the work had been fired and 
glazed it bore some resemblance to an oil painting. For a few 
years this style of decoration became the rage all over Europe, 
but it fell into contempt almost as rapidly as it had found favour, 
and is now only used for the decoration of common wares. 
Ultimately, Chapelet gave up painting and applied himself to the 
discovery of technical novelties. He was apparentiy the first 
European potter to produce flambe glazes after the manner of 
the Chinese, and a fine collection of these productions of his is 
preserved in the museum at Sevres. 

The greatest of all the French innovators was, however, 
Theodore Deck, who had been trained as a working potter and 
was led to forsake the management of an ordinary tile and pottery 
business in Paris to experiment on his own account. He started 
a little workshop in the Boulevard Montparnasse in Paris and 
rapidly gathered round him a number of young painters all eager 
to experiment in the magnificent colours which Deck with his 
passionate love of Persian and other oriental pottery could place 
at their disposal. Within a few years this venture was so success- 
ful that Deck was known all over the civilized world as a great 
potter, and his original creations, painted by men like Ranvier, 
Collin, Ehrmann, Anker and other artists, were readily purchased 



by the lovers of ceramic art in every country. The crown of 
his career came in 1887, when he was appointed director of the 
National Manufactory at Sevres, for he was the only practical 
potter who had ever occupied that position; but he died in 1890 
before he had been able to impress his personality on the work of 
Sevres. 

The same movement that was active in France found its ex- 
ponents in other countries as well. In Italy and the south of 
France the last quarter of the 19th century witnessed a revival 
of Italian majolica and of lustre decoration. Prominent in this 
direction were the productions of Cantegalli of Florence and of 
the Massiers of Golf e- Juan near Cannes; while in England 
William de Morgan created an artistic sensation by his tiles 
and vases decorated with lustres, or with painted colours recalling 
those of the Persian and Syrian potters of the middle ages. This 
departure in England was, however, followed up by many 
manufacturers who were keenly alive to the possibilities of 
pottery colour, and Mr Bernard Moore, of Longton, Maw & 
Company of Jackfield, and Minton's of Stoke-upon-Trent, pro- 
duced much excellent work, in tiles and vases inspired from the 
same oriental sources. 

Meantime, in America there had been growing up a manufacture 
of pottery after the approved methods, in Trenton, New Jersey; 
East Liverpool, Zanesville and Cincinnati (Ohio). To all these 
centres English workmen had been attracted, and earthenware 
after the current English styles was manufactured; but, as 
was the case in Europe, individual efforts were made to produce 
artistic pottery. The first and best known of these artistic de- 
partures was that of the Rookwood Pottery at Cincinnati, and 
again it was an amateur, Mrs Bellamy Storer, who founded an 
enterprise which has since produced some very original work. 
From 1880 to r889 the work was mainly carried on at the 
expense of this lady, but since that date the enterprise has been 
self-supporting, and the Rookwood pottery has become known 
throughout the world. 

The latter half of the 19th century also witnessed the develop- 
ment of new branches of pottery manufacture for sanitary pur- 
poses — and it is not too much to say that much of the improved 
sanitation of modern dwellings and towns has been rendered 
possible by the special appliances invented by potters for these 
purposes. In this direction the English potters undoubtedly 
led the way, and not only have their methods been imitated 
abroad, but English manufacturers have also established large 
works in Germany, France and the United States of America. 
Varieties, too, of hard-fired pottery, comprising earthenwares, 
stonewares and porcelains, have been invented for use in the 
chemical and electrical industries. But these belong to the great 
modern branch of pottery manufacture, not to pottery art. In 
the same way, the revived attention paid to the various forms of 
pottery for the interior and exterior of buildings belongs rather 
to the question of mural decoration than of pottery. 

At the beginning of the 20th century we find England and 
Germany the leading pottery manufacturing countries; Germany 
excelling in the amount of its output, and England in the fineness 
and finish of its productions. France, in addition to the National 
Manufactory at Sevres, as much as ever divorced from commerce, 
has its porcelain industry at Limoges and large manufactories 
of tiles and earthenware in many departments; while there are 
also a number of artist potters like Lachenal, Dalpayrat, Dela- 
herche and Taxile Doat who make purely artistic pottery in 
hard-fired stonewares (gres) and porcelain, while the production 
of decorative stonewares for building purposes has been developed 
by such firms as Bigot, Boulanger and E. Miiller. A great 
development has also taken place in the production of decorative 
pottery and tiles in Holland. The famous Delft works, besides 
producing quantities of painted blue and white earthenware 
(made in the English and not in the old Dutch fashion), has 
been experimenting largely in the development of crystalline 
and opalescent glazes and in lustres, while the Rozenburg factory 
at the Hague and a factory at Puramerende, near Amsterdam, 
havemadesome distinctive but rather bizarre painted pottery and 
porcelain. The success of the Royal Copenhagen factory has 



7 6o 



CERARGYRITE—,CERES 



already been mentioned, and this success led to the foundation of 
Bing & Grondhal of Copenhagen, who largely follow the styles 
of decoration initiated at the Royal works. In Sweden there 
are two important factories at Rorstrand and Gustafsberg. 
Under the accomplished director of the Rtfrstrand factory, Mr 
Robert Almstrom, a great variety of products have been success- 
fully manufactured, including hard-paste porcelain, English 
bone china, earthenware, majolica and stoves. Italy, Spain and 
Belgium have also important modern pottery works. 

In the United States of America there are large establishments 
for the manufacture of earthenware, bone china and tiles, all 
after the English fashion, while in addition there are a number 
of experimental kilns at work producing artistic pottery. The 
Rookwood factory has already been mentioned, but the wares 
produced at the Grueby factory and by Mrs Robineau and T. 
Brouwer are also worthy of note. (See " Report on American 
Art Pottery," pp. 922-935 of Special Reports of the U.S. Census 
Office, Manufactures, pt. iii., 1905.) 

Technical Pottery Works.— It is only possible to give a selection of 
the best of the modern standard works dealing with the technical 
side of pottery production. Brongniart, TraitS des arts ceramiques 
(3rd ed., Paris, 1877), with notes and additions by Salvetat; E. 
Bourry, TraitS des industries ceramiques (Paris, 1897); Theodore 
Deck, La Faience (Paris, 1 887) ; A. Granger, La Ceramique industrielle 
(Paris, 1905) ; E. S. Auscher, La Ceramique cuisant d haute tempera^ 
lure (Paris, 1899); Technologie de la ceramique (Paris, 1901); Les 
Industries ceramiques (Paris, 1901); Seger, Gesammelte Schriften 
(Berlin, 1896; Eng. trans., Easton, Pa., U.S.A., 1902); Langenbeck, 
The Chemistry of Pottery (Easton, Pa., U.S.A., 1895); William 
Burton, Porcelain (London, 1906). (W. B.*) 

CERARGYRITE, a mineral species consisting of silver chloride; 
an important ore of silver. The name cerargyrite is a Greek form 
(from /teptts, horn, and apyvpos, silver) of the older name 
hornsilver, which was used by K. Gesner as far back as 1565. 
The chloro-bromide and bromide of silver were also included 
under this term until they were distinguished chemically in 
1 84 1 and 1842, and described under the names emboli te and 
bromargyrite (or bromyrite) respectively; the! chloride then 
came to be distinguished as chlorargyrite, though the name 
cerargyrite is often now applied to this alone. Chloro-bromo- 
iodide of silver has also been recognized as a mineral and called 
iodembolite. All these are strikingly alike in appearance and 
general characters, differing essentially only in chemical composi- 
tion, and it would seem better to reserve the name cerargyrite 
for the whole group, using the names chlorargyrite (AgCl), 
embolite (Ag(Cl, Bl)), bromargyrite (AgBr) and iodembolite 
(Ag(Cl, Br, I)) for the different isomorphous members of the 
group. They are cubic in crystallization, with the cube and the 
octahedron as prominent forms, but crystals are small and 
usually indistinct; there is no cleavage. They are soft (H = 2^) 
and sectile to a high degree, being readily cut with a knife 
like horn. With their resinous to adamantine lustre and their 
translucency they also present somewhat the appearance of horn; 
hence the name hornsilver. The colour varies somewhat with the 
chemical composition, being grey or colourless in chlorargyrite, 
greenish-grey in embolite and bromargyrite, and greenish-yellow 
to orange-yellow in iodembolite. On exposure to light the 
colour quickly darkens. The specific gravity also varies with the 
composition: for the pure chloride it is 5-55, and the highest 
recorded for an iodembolite is 6-3. 

The hornsilvers all occur under similar conditions and are often 
associated together; they are found in metalliferous veins with 
native silver and ores of silver, and are usually confined to the 
upper oxidized parts of the lodes. They are important ores of 
silver (the pure chloride contains 75-3 % of silver), and have been 
extensively mined at several places in Chile, also in Mexico, and 
at Broken Hill in New South Wales. The chloride and chloro- 
bromide have been found in several Cornish mines, but never 
in very large amounts. (L. J. S.) 

CERBERUS, in Greek mythology, the dog who guarded the 
entrance to the lower world. He allowed all to enter, but 
seized those who attempted to escape. According to Hesiod 
(Theog. 311), he was a fifty-headed monster with a fearful bark, 
the offspring of Typhon and Echidna. He was variously 



represented with one, two or (usually) three heads, often with 
the tail of a snake or with snakes growing from his head or twiaed 
round his body. One of the tasks imposed upon Heracles was to 
fetch Cerberus from below to the upper world, a favourite subject 
of ancient vase-paintings. , 

CERDIC (d. 534), founder of the West Saxon kingdom, is 
described as an ealdorman who in 495 landed with his son Cynric 
in Hampshire, where he was attacked at once by the Britons. 
Nothing more is heard of him until 508, when he defeated the 
Britons with great slaughter. Strengthened by fresh arrivals 
of Saxons, he gained another victory in 519 at Certicesford, a 
spot which has been identified with the modern Charford, and in 
this year took the title of king. Turning westward, Cerdic appears 
to have been defeated by the Britons in 520 at Badbury or Mount 
Badon, in Dorset, and in 527 yet another fight with the Britons 
is recorded. His last work was the conquest of the Isle of Wight, 
probably in the interest of some Jutish allies. All the sovereigns 
of England, except Canute, Hardicanute, the two Harolds and 
William the Conqueror, are said to be descended from Cerdic. 

See Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, edited by C. Plummer (Oxford, 1892- 
1899); Gildas, De exctdio Britanniae, edited by Th. Mommsen 
(Berlin, 1898) ; Nennius, Historia Brittonum, edited by Th. Mommsen 
(Berlin, 1898) ; Bede, Historiae ecclesiasticae gentis Anglorum Ubri v., 
ed. C. Plummer (Oxford, 1896) ; E. Guest, Origines Celticae (London, 
1883); J. R. Green, The Making of England (London, 1897). 

CERDONIANS, a Gnostic sect, founded by Cerdo, a Syrian, 
who came to Rome about 137, but concerning whose history 
little is known. They held that there are two first causes — the 
perfectly good and the perfectly evil. The latter is also the 
creator of the world, the god of the Jews, and the author of the 
Old Testament. Jesus Christ is the son of the good deity; he 
was sent into the world to oppose the evil; but his incarnation, 
and therefore his sufferings, were a mere appearance. Regarding 
the body as the work of the evil deity, the Cerdonians formed a 
moral system of great severity, prohibiting marriage, wine and 
the eating of flesh, and advocating fasting and other austerities. 
Most of what the Fathers narrate of Cerdo's tenets has probably 
been transferred to him from his famous pupil Marcion, like 
whom he is said to have rejected the Old Testament and the 
New, except part of Luke's Gospel and of Paul's Epistles. (See 
Marcion, and Gnosticism.) 

CEREALIS (Cerialis), PETILLIUS (1st century a.d.), Roman 
general, a near relative of the emperor Vespasian. He is first 
heard of during the reign of Nero in Britain, where he was com- 
pletely defeated (a.d. 61) by Boadicea. Eight years later 
he played an important part in the capture of Rome by the 
supporters of Vespasian. In 70 he put down the revolt of 
Civilis (q.v.). In 71, as governor of Britain, where he had as 
a subordinate the famous Agricola, he inflicted severe defeats 
upon the Brigantes, the most powerful of the' tribes of Britain. 
Tacitus says that he was a bold soldier rather than a careful 
general, and preferred to stake everything on the issue of a 
single engagement. He possessed natural eloquence of a kind 
that readily appealed to his soldiers. His loyalty towards his 
superiors was unshakable. 

Tacitus, Annals, xiv. 32; Histories, iii. 59, 78, iv. 71, 75, 86, v. 21 ; 
Agricola, 8, 17. 

CERES, an old Italian goddess of agriculture. The name 
probably means the "creator" or "created," connected with 
crescere and creare. But when Greek deities were introduced 
into Rome on the advice of the Sibylline books (in 495 B.C., 
on the occasion of a severe drought), Demeter, the Greek goddess 
of seed and harvest, whose worship was already common in 
Sicily and Lower Italy, usurped the place of Ceres in Rome, 
or rather, to Ceres were added the religious rites which the Greeks 
paid to Demeter, and the mythological incidents which originated 
with her. At the same time the cult of Dionysus and Persephone 
(see Liber and Libera) was introduced. The rites of Ceres were 
Greek in language and form. Her priestesses were Italian Greeks 
and her temple was Greek in its architecture and built by Greek 
artists. She was worshipped almost exclusively by plebeians, 
and her temple near the Circus Maximus was under the care of 
the plebeian aediles, one of whose duties was the superintendence 



CERIGNOLA— CERIUM 



761 



of the corn-market. Her chief festivals were the ludi Ceteris 
or Cerealia (more correctly, Cerialia), games held annually from 
April 12-19 (Ovid, Fasti, iv. 392 ff.); a second festival, 
in August, to celebrate the reunion of Ceres and Proserpine, 
in which women, dressed in white, after a fast of nine days 
offered the goddess the first-fruits of the harvest (Livy xxii. 56) ; 
and the Jejunium Ceteris, a fast also introduced (191 B.C.) by 
command of the Sibylline books (Livy xxvi. 37), at first held 
only every four years, then annually on the 4th of October. In 
later times Ceres was confused with Tellus. (See also Demeter.) 

CERIGNOLA, a town of Apulia, Italy, in the province of 
Foggia, 26 m. S.E. by rail from the town of Foggia. Pop. (1901) 
34,195. It was rebuilt after a great earthquake in 1731, and has 
a considerable agricultural trade. In 1503 the Spaniards under 
Gonzalo de Cordoba defeated the French under the due de 
Nemours below the town — a victory which made the kingdom 
of Naples into a Spanish province in Italy. Cerignola occupies 
the site of Furfane, a station on the Via Traiana between 
Canusium and Herdoniae. 

CERIGOT^TO, called locally Lius (anc. Aegilia or Ogylos; mod. 
Gr. officially Antikythera) , an island of Greece, belonging to the 
Ionian group, and situated between Cythera (Cerigo) and Crete, 
about 20 m. from each. Some raised beaches testify to an 
upheaval in comparatively recent times. With an area of about 
10 sq. m. it supports a population of about 30x3, who are mainly 
Cretan refugees, and in favourable seasons exports a quantity of 
good wheat. It was long a favourite resort of Greek pirates. It is 
famous for the discovery in 1900, close to its coast, of the wreck 
of an ancient ship with a cargo of bronze and marble statues. 

CERINTHUS (c. a.d. 100), an early Christian heretic, con- 
temporary with the closing years of the apostle John, who, 
according to the well-known story of Polycarp, reported by 
Irenaeus (iii. 3) and twice recorded in Eusebius {Hist. Eccl. 
hi. 28, iv. 14), made a hasty exit from a bath in Ephesus on 
learning that Cerinthus was within. Other early accounts agree 
in making the province of Asia the scene of his activity, and 
Hippolytus (Haer. vii. 33) credits him with an Egyptian training. 
There can be no truth in the notice given by Epiphanius (Haer. 
xxviii. 4) that Cerinthus had in earlier days at Jerusalem led 
the judaizing opposition against Paul. 

The difficulty of defining Cerinthus's theological position is 
due not only to the paucity of our sources but to the fact that the 
witness of the two principal authorities, Irenaeus (1. 26, iii. n) 
and Hippolytus (Syntagma), does not agree. Further, Irenaeus 
himself in one passage fails to distinguish between Cerinthian 
and Valentinian doctrines. It would appear, however, that 
Cerinthus laid stress on the rite of circumcision and on the 
observance of the Sabbath. He taught that the world had been 
made by angels, from one of whom, the god of the Jews, the 
people of Israel had received their Law, which was not perfect. 
The only New Testament writing which he accepted was a 
mutilated Gospel of Matthew. Jesus was the offspring of Joseph 
and Mary, and on him at the baptism descended the Christ, 1 
revealing the hitherto unknown Father, and endowing him with 
miraculous power. This Christ left Jesus again before the Passion, 
and the resurrection of Jesus was still in the future. Together 
with these somewhat gnostic ideas, Cerinthus, if we may trust 
the notices of Gaius the Roman presbyter (c. 290) and Dionysius 
of Alexandria (c. 340), held a violent and crude form of chiliasm. 
But the chief significance of the man is his " combination of zeal 
for legal observances with bold criticism of the Law itself as a 
whole and of its origin," which reminds us of the Clementine 
Recognitions. Cerinthus is a blend of judaizing christian and 
gnostic. 

CERIUM (symbol Ce, atomic weight 140-25), a metallic 
chemical element which occurs with the rare earths in the minerals 
cerite, samarskite, euxenite, monazite, parisite and many 
yttrium minerals. The particular earth containing cerium was 
discovered by M. H. Klaproth in 1803, whilst J. Berzelius at 
about the same time also examined it and came to the conclusion 

1 So Irenaeus. According to Hippolytus and Epiphanius it was 
the Holy Ghost that thus descended. 



that it was the oxide of a new metal, which he termed cerium. 
The crude oxide of the metal is obtained from cerite, by evaporat- 
ing the mineral with strong sulphuric acid, removing excess of 
acid and dissolving the residue in ice-cold water; sulphuretted 
hydrogen is passed through the solution, which is then filtered, 
acidified with hydrochloric acid, and precipitated as oxalate 
by oxalic acid; the oxalate is then converted into oxide by 
ignition. From the crude oxide so obtained (which contains 
lanthanum and didymium oxides) the cerium may be separated 
by conversion into its double sulphate on the addition of potas- 
sium sulphate, the sulphates of the cerium group being insoluble 
in a saturated solution of potassium sulphate. The sulphate 
is subsequently boiled with water, when a basic sulphate is 
precipitated. For the preparation of pure cerium compounds 
see Auer v. Welsbach, Monatshefte, 1884, v. 508. 

The metal was first obtained, in an impure state, by C. G. 
Mosander, by fusing its chloride with sodium. W. F. Hillebrand 
and T. Norton have prepared it by the electrolysis of the melted 
chloride (Pogg. Ann., 1875, 156, p. 466) ; and C. Winkler (Berichte, 
1 89 1, xxiv. 884) obtained it by heating the dioxide with mag- 
nesium powder. The metal has somewhat the appearance of 
iron, and has a specific gravity of 6-628, which, after melting, 
is increased to 6-728. Its specific heat is 0-04479 (W. F. Hille- 
brand). It is permanent in dry air, but tarnishes in moist air; 
it can be hammered and rolled; it melts at 623 C. It burns 
readily on heating, with a brilliant flame; and it also combines 
with chlorine,bromine, iodine, sulphur, phosphorus and cyanogen. 
In the case of the two former elements the combination is 
accompanied by combustion of the metal. With water it is 
slowly converted into the dioxide. Cold concentrated nitric 
and sulphuric acids are without action on the metal, but it 
reacts rapidly with dilute nitric and hydrochloric acids. The 
dioxide is used in incandescent gas mantles (see Lighting). 

Three oxides of cerium are known. The sesquioxide, Ce 2 3 , is 
obtained by heating the carbonate in a current of hydrogen. It is a 
bluish-green powder, which on exposure rapidly combines with the 
oxygen of the air. By the addition of caustic soda to cerous salts, a 
white precipitate of cerous hydroxide is formed. Cerium dioxide, 
Ce0 2 , is produced when cerium carbonate, nitrate, sulphate or 
oxalate is heated in air. It is a white or pale yellow compound, 
which becomes reddish on heating. Its specific gravity is 6-739, 
and its specific heat 0-0877. It is not reduced to the metallic condi- 
tion on heating with carbon. Concentrated sulphuric acid dissolves 
this oxide, forming a yellowish solution and ozone. By suspending 
the precipitated cerous hydroxide in water and passing chlorine 
through the solution, a hydrated form of the dioxide, 2Ce0 2 -3H 2 0, is 
obtained, which is readily soluble in nitric and sulphuric acids, 
forming eerie salts, and in hydrochloric acid, where it forms cerous 
chloride, with liberation of chlorine. A higher hydrated oxide, 
Ce0 3 -xH 2 0, is formed by the interaction of cerous sulphate with 
sodium acetate and hydrogen peroxide (Lecoq de Boisbaudran, 
Comptes rendus, 1885, 100, p. 605). 

Cerous chloride, CeCls, is obtained when the metal is burned in 
chlorine; when a mixture of cerous oxide and carbon is heated in 
chlorine; or by rapid heating of the dioxide in a stream of carbon 
monoxide and chlorine. It is a colourless substance, which is easily 
fusible. A hydrated chloride of composition 2CeCl 3 -15H 2 is also 
known, and is obtained when a solution of cerous oxide in hydro- 
chloric acid is evaporated over sulphuric acid. Double salts of 
cerous chloride with stannic chloride, mercuric chloride, and platinic 
chloride are also known. Cerous bromide, 2CeBr 3 -3H 2 0, and iodide, 
CeI 3 -9H 2 0, are known. Cerous sulphide, Ce 2 S 3 , results on heating 
cerium with sulphur or cerium oxide in carbon bisulphide vapour. 
It is a red infusible mass of specific gravity 5-1, and is slowly 
decomposed by warm water. The sulphate, Ce 2 (S0 4 )s, is formed on 
dissolving the carbonate in sulphuric acid, or on dissolving the basic 
sulphate in sulphuric acid, in the presence of sulphur dioxide, 
evaporating the solution, and drying the product obtained, at high 
temperature (B. Brauner, Monatshefte, 1885, vi. 793). It is a white 
powder of specific gravity 3-912, easily soluble in cold water. Many 
hydrated forms of the sulphate are known, as are also double salts 
of the sulphate with potassium, sodium, ammonium, thallium and 
cadmium sulphates. Ceric fluoride, CeF<-H 2 0, is obtained when the 
hydrated dioxide is dissolved in hydrofluoric acid and the solu- 
tion evaporated on the water bath (B. Brauner). The sulphate, 
Ce(S0 4 ) 2 -4H 2 0, is formed when the basic sulphate is dissolved 
in sulphuric acid ; or when the dioxide is dissolved in dilute sul- 
phuric acid, and evaporated in vacuo over sulphuric acid. It 
forms yellow crystals soluble in water; the aqueous solution on 
standing gradually depositing a basic salt. Double sulphates of 
comp6sition2Ce(S0 4 ) 2 -2K 2 S0 4 -2H 2 0,Ce(S0 4 ) 2 -3(NH 1 ) 2 S04-4H 2 Oare 



762 



CERNUSCHI— CERUTTI 



known. Nitrates of cerium have been described, as have alsp phos- 
phates, carbonates and a carbide. 

Cerium compounds may be recognized by the red precipitate of 
eerie hydroxide, which is formed when sodium hypochlorite is added 
to a colourless cerous salt. For the quantitative determination of 
the metal, the salts are precipitated by caustic potash, the precipitate 
washed, dried and heated, and finally weighed as the dioxide. 

The atomic weight of cerium has been determined by B. Brauner 
(Chem. News, 1895, lxxi. 283) from the analysis of the oxalate; the 
values obtained varying from 140-07 to 140-35. 

CERNUSCHI, HENRI (1821-1896), Italian politician and 
economist, was born of wealthy parents at Milan in 182 1, and 
was destined for the legal profession. During his studies he 
became involved in the revolutionary movement. He played a 
conspicuous part in the insurrection at Milan in 1848, and also 
at Rome in 1849, where he had a seat in the National Assembly. 
On the collapse of the revolutionary government he was arrested 
(1850), but managed to escape to France, where he engaged 
in commerce and banking, became naturalized, and acquired 
a large fortune. He took a prominent part in opposing the 
Socialist movement, and in April 1870, having subscribed a 
large sum to the funds of a committee formed to combat the 
Napoleonic plebiscite, had to leave the country. In September 
the formation of the Third Republic enabled him to return, but he 
soon left Paris to travel in the East, whence he returned with a 
fine art collection, particularly of Japanese objects. Cernuschi 
is best known for his publications on financial questions, more 
especially bimetallism. Of the latter he was an ardent champion, 
and the word itself is commonly supposed to have originated 
with him — at least in its English form it is first found in his 
Silver Vindicated (1876). Among his other works may be 
mentioned: Mecanique de Vichange (1861); Illusion des societes 
cooperatives (1886); Le B.imetallisme en Angleterre (1879); Le 
Grand Proces de VUnion latine (1884). He died at Mentone 
on the 1 2th of May 1896. 

CEROGRAPHY (from the" Gr. Kijpos, wax, and ypafaiv, to 
write), the art of painting in wax. (See Encaustic Painting.) 

CERRO DE PASCO, or Pasco, a mining town of Peru, capital 
of the department of Junin, 107 m. (221 m. by rail, via Oroya) 
N.E. of Lima. Pop. (1907 est.) 10,000. It is situated on the 
plateau of Bombon, 14,280 ft. above sea-level, and in the midst 
of one of the oldest and richest silver-mining districts of Peru. 
There were 342 silver mines in this district in 1890, and at the 
end of the 19th century the average annual output since the 
discovery of the mines in 1630 was estimated at 1,600,000 oz. 
A decline in the silver production having set in, the American 
company which had become owners of three-fourths of the 
mining properties in the district turned its attention to the 
extensive copper deposits there, built a railway to Oroya 83 m. 
distant, another, 25 m. long, to the coal-fields of Gollarisquisga, 
north of Pasco, and then erected large smelting works (in which 
2500 men were regularly employed in 1907) 8 m. out of town and 
4 m. from limestone beds. The railway to Oroya was completed 
in 1903, the coal mine branch and smelter later on, and in 1907 
the copper output was 20,152,000 lb. The town of Pasco is 
badly built and unattractive, and is inhabited chiefly by mining 
labourers and their families. Its population is increased 50% in 
times of great mining activity. The name Cerro de Pasco is 
that of a " knot " of mountains uniting the two great ranges 
of the Andes at this point. 

CERTALDO, a town of Tuscany, Italy, in the province of 
Florence, 35 m. S.S.W. by rail and 18 m. direct from the town 
of Florence. Pop. (1901) town, 4552; commune, 9120. It was 
the home of the family of Giovanni Boccaccio, who died and was 
buried here in 1375. His house (of red brick, like the other old 
houses of the town) was restored in 1823 and fitted up with old 
furniture. A statue of him was erected in the principal square in 
1875. The Palazzo Pretorio, or Vicariale, the residence of the 
Florentine governors, recently restored to its original condition, 
has a picturesque facade and court adorned with coats of arms, 
and in the interior are various frescoes dating from the 13th to 
the 16th century. The town as a whole is picturesque, and lies 
on a hill 426 ft. above sea-level. 

See R. Pantini, 5. Cimignano e Certaido (Bergamo, 1904), p. 101 seq. 




Fig. 1. 

conchoidal 
containing 



CERUSSITE, a mineral consisting of lead carbonate (PbC0 3 ), 
and an important ore of lead. The name (sometimes erroneously 
spelt cerusite) is from the Lat. cerussa, " white lead." " Cerussa 
nativa " was mentioned by K. Gesner in 1565, and in 1832 
F. S. Beudant applied the name ceruse to the mineral, whilst the 
present form, cerussite, is due to W. Haidinger (1845). Popular 
names in early use were lead-spar and white-lead-ore. 

Cerussite crystallizes in the orthorhombic system and is 
isomorphous with aragonite. Like aragonite it is very fre- 
quently twinned, the compound crystals being 
pseudo-hexagonal in form. Three crystals are 
usually twinned together on two faces of the prism 
m { 1 10} , producing six-rayed stellate groups (figs. 1 
and 2) with the individual crystals intercrossing 
at angles of nearly 60°. Twinning on the faces of 
the prism r{i$o},the angles of which are also 
nearly 6o°, produces a similar kind of grouping, 
but is much less common. Crystals are of frequent 
occurrence, and they usually have very bright 
and smooth faces. The mineral also occurs in 
compact granular masses, and sometimes in 
fibrous forms. It is usually colourless or white, 
sometimes grey or greenish in tint; it varies 
from transparent to translucent, and has an 
adamantine lustre. It is very brittle, and has a 
fracture. Hardness 3-35; sp. gr. 6-5. A variety 
7 % of zinc carbonate, replacing lead carbonate, is known as 
iglesiasite, from Iglesias in Sardinia, where it is found. 

The mineral may be readily recognized by its characteristic 
twinning, in conjunction with the adamantine lustre and high 
specific gravity. It dissolves with effervescence in dilute nitric 
acid. Before the blow- 



pipe it fuses very readily, 

and gives reactions for 

lead. Cerussite occurs 

in metalliferous veins in 

association with galena, 

and has been formed by 

the action of carbonated 

waters on the galena: it 

is therefore found in the 

upper parts of the lodes Fig. 2. 

together with other secondary minerals, such as limonite. Finely 

crystallized specimens have been obtained from the Friedrichs- 

segen mine near Ems in Nassau, Johanngeorgenstadt in Saxony, 

Mies in Bohemia, Phenixville in Pennsylvania, Broken Hill in 

New South Wales, and several other localities. Delicate acicular 

crystals of considerable length were found long ago in the Pentire 

Glaze mine near St Minver in Cornwall. It is often found 

in considerable quantities, and contains as much as 775% of 

lead. (L. J. S.) 

CERUTTI, GIUSEPPE ANTONIO GIACHIMO (1 738-1 792), 
French author and politician, was born at Turin on the 13th of 
June 1 738. He joined the Society of Jesus and became professor 
at the Jesuit college at Lyons. In 1762, in reply to the attacks 
on his order, he published an Apologie generate de I'institut et de 
la doctrine des Jtsuites, which won him much fame and some 
exalted patronage; notably that of the ex-king Stanislaus of 
Poland and of his grandson" the dauphin. During the agitations 
that preceded the Revolution Cerutti took the popular side, and 
in 1788 published a pamphlet, Memoire pour le peuple franQais, 
in which in a clear and trenchant style he advocated the claims 
of the tiers etat. In May 1789 he presided over the electors of 
Paris, by whom in January 1791 he was chosen member of the 
administration of the department and afterwards deputy to 
the Legislative Assembly. He was a friend of Mirabeau, whose 
policy he supported and whose funeral oration he pronounced. 
He himself died on the 3rd of February 1792. Of Cerutti's 
literary enterprises the most interesting, and probably the most 
influential, was the popular newspaper founded by him, on the 
30th of September 1790, in collaboration with Rabaut Saint- 
Etienne and Philippe Antoine Grouvelle. Its character and 




CERVANTES 



7(>3 



objects are explained by its title: La Feuille villageoise, 
adressSe chaque semaine a tons les villages de France pour les 
instruire des lots, des evSnements, des decouvertes qui interessent 
tout bon citoyen, &c. It was continued by Grouvelle after Cerutti's 
death, the last number appearing on the 2nd of August 1795. 

Cerutti's works were published in 1793 in 3 volumes. On the 
Memoire pour le peuple francais, see F. A. Aulard in La Revolution 
francaise, torn. xv. (1888). 

CERVANTES SAAVEDRA, MIGUEL DE (1547-1616), Spanish 
novelist, playwright and poet, was born at Alcala de Henares 
in 1547. The attempts of biographers to provide him with an 
illustrious genealogy are unsuccessful. The family history begins 
with the author's grandfather, Juan de Cervantes (b. 1490), a 
lawyer who at one time (1545-6) administered the estates of 
the duke de Osuna, and resided later at Cordova, where he died 
about 1555. Cervantes' father was Rodrigo de Cervantes, an 
apothecary-surgeon, who married Leonor de Cortinas in 1540 or 
1541. The children of this marriage were Andres (b. 1543), 
Andrea (b. 1544), Luisa (b. 1546), Miguel, Rodrigo (b. 1550), 
Magdalena (b. 1554) and Juan (of whom nothing is known 
beyond the mention of him in his father's will). 

The exact date of Cervantes' birth is not recorded: he was 
baptized on the 9th of October 1547, in the church of Santa 
Maria la Mayor at Alcala. There are indications that Rodrigo 
de Cervantes resided at Valladolid in 1554, at Madrid in 1 561, at 
Seville in 1 564-1 565, and at Madrid from 1566 onwards. It 
may be assumed that his family accompanied him, and it seems 
likely that either at Valladolid or at Madrid Cervantes saw the 
famous actor-manager and dramatist, Lope de Rueda, of whose 
performances he speaks enthusiastically in the preface to his 
plays. In 1569 a Madrid schoolmaster, Juan Lopez de Hoyos, 
issued a work commemorative of Philip II. 's third wife, Isabel 
de Valois, who had died on the 3rd of October 1568. This 
volume, entitled Historia y relacidn verdadera de la enfermedad, 
felicisimo trdnsito y sumptuosas exequias funebres de la Serenisima 
Reyna de Espana Dona Isabel de Valoys, contains six contribu- 
tions by Cervantes: a sonnet, four redondillas, and an elegy. 
Lopez de Hoyos introduces Cervantes as "our dear and beloved 
pupil," and the elegy is dedicated to Cardinal Espinosa " in the 
name of the whole school." It has been inferred that Cervantes 
was educated by Lopez de Hoyos, but this conclusion is untenable, 
for Lopez de Hoyos' school was not opened till 1567. On the 
13th of October 1568, Giulio Acquaviva reached Madrid chargecj 
with a special mission to Philip II. ; he left for Rome on the 2nd 
of December, and Cervantes is supposed to have accompanied 
him. This conjecture is based solely on a passage in the dedica- 
tion of the Galatea, where the writer speaks of having been 
" camarero to Cardinal Acquaviva at Rome." There is, however, 
no reason to think that Cervantes met Acquaviva in Madrid; 
the probability is that he enlisted as a supernumerary towards 
the end of 1568, that he served in Italy, and there entered the 
household of Acquaviva, who had been raised to the cardinalate 
on the 17th of May 1570. There exists a warrant (dated 
September 15, 1569) for the arrest of one Miguel de Cervantes, 
who had wounded Antonio de Sigura, and had been condemned 
in absence to have his right hand cut off and to be exiled from 
the capital for ten years; and it has been sought to identify 
the offender with the future author of Don Quixote. No evidence 
is available. All that is known with certainty is that Cervantes 
was in Rome at the end of 1569, for on the 22nd of December 
of that year the fact was recorded in an official information lodged 
by Rodrigo de Cervantes with a view to proving his son's 
legitimacy and untainted Christian descent. 

If it is difficult to say precisely when Cervantes was in 
Acquaviva's service, it is no less difficult to say when he left it 
to join the regular army. There is evidence, more or less satis- 
factory, that his enlistment took place in 1570; in 1571 he was 
serving as a private in the company commanded by Captain 
Diego de Urbina which formed part of Miguel de Moncada's 
famous regiment, and on the 16th of September he sailed from 
Messina on board the " Marquesa," which formed part of the 
armada under Don John of Austria. At the battle of Lepanto 



(October 7, 1571) the " Marquesa " was in the thickest of the 
conflict. As the fleet came into action Cervantes lay below, ill 
with fever; but, despite the remonstrances of his comrades, 
be vehemently insisted on rising to take his share in the fighting, 
and was posted with twelve men under him in a boat by the 
galley's side. He received three gunshot wounds, two in the 
chest, and one which permanently maimed his right hand — " for 
the greater glory of the right," in his own phrase. On the 30th 
of October the fleet returned to Messina, where Cervantes went 
into hospital, and during his convalescence received grants-in- 
aid amounting to eighty-two ducats. On the 29th of April 1572 
he was transferred to Captain Manuel Ponce de Le6n's company 
in Lope de Figueroa's regiment; he shared in the indecisive 
naval engagement off Navarino on the 7th of October 1572, in 
the capture of Tunis on the 10th of October 1573, and in the 
unsuccessful expedition to relieve the Goletta in the autumn of 
1574. The rest of his military service was spent in garrison at 
Palermo and Naples, and shortly after the arrival of Don John 
at Naples on the 18th of June 1575, Cervantes was granted leave 
to return to Spain; he received a recommendatory letter from 
Don John to Philip II., and a similar testimonial from the duke 
de Sessa, viceroy of Sicily. Armed with these credentials, 
Cervantes embarked on the " Sol " to push his claim for pro- 
motion in Spain. 

On the 26th of September 1575, near Les Trois Maries off the 
coast of Marseilles, the " Sol " and its companion ships the 
"Mendoza" and the "Higuera" encountered a squadron of 
Barbary corsairs under Arnaut Mami; Cervantes, his brother 
Rodrigo and other Spaniards were captured, and were taken as 
prisoners to Algiers. Cervantes became the slave of a Greek 
renegade named Dali Mami, and, as the letters found on him 
were taken to prove that he was a man of importance in a 
position to pay a high ransom, he was put under special sur- 
veillance. With undaunted courage and persistence he organized 
plans of escape. In 1576 he induced a Moor to guide him and 
other Christian captives to Oran; the Moor deserted them on the 
road, the baffled fugitives returned to Algiers, and Cervantes 
was treated with additional severity. In the spring of 1577 
two priests of the Order of Mercy arrived in Algiers with a sum 
of three hundred crowns entrusted to them by Cervantes' 
parents; the amount was insufficient to free him, and was 
spent in ransoming his brother Rodrigo. Cervantes made 
another attempt to escape in September 1577, but was betrayed 
by the renegade whose services he had enlisted. On being 
brought before Hassan Pasha, the viceroy of Algiers, he took 
the blame on himself, and was threatened with death; struck, 
however, by the heroic bearing of the prisoner, Hassan remitted 
the sentence, and bought Cervantes from Dali Mami for five 
hundred crowns. In 1577 the captive addressed to the Spanish 
secretary of state, Mateo Vazquez, a versified letter suggesting 
that an expedition should be fitted out to seize Algiers; the 
project, though practicable, was not entertained. In 1578 
Cervantes was sentenced to two thousand strokes for sending 
a letter begging help from Martin de Cordoba, governor of Oran; 
the punishment was not, however, inflicted on him. Meanwhile 
his family were not idle. In March 1578 his father presented 
a petition to the king setting forth Cervantes' services; the duke 
de Sessa repeated his testimony to the captive's merits; in the 
spring of 1579 Cervantes' mother applied for leave to export 
two thousand ducats' worth of goods from Valencia to Algiers, 
and on the 31st of July 1579 she gave the Trinitarian monks, 
Juan Gil and Ant6n de la Bella, a sum of two hundred and fifty 
ducats to be applied to her son's ransom. On his side Cervantes 
was indefatigable, and towards the end of 1579 he arranged to 
secure a frigate; but the plot was revealed to Hassan by Juan 
Blanco de Paz, a Dominican monk, who appears to have con- 
ceived an unaccountable hatred of Cervantes. Once more the 
conspirator's life was spared by Hassan who, it is recorded, 
declared that " so long as he had the maimed Spaniard in safe 
keeping, his Christians, ships and city were secure." On the 
29th of May 1 580 the two Trinitarians arrived in Algiers : they 
were barely in time, for Hassan's term of office was drawing 



7 6 4 



CERVANTES 



to a close, and the arrangement of any ransom was a slow process, 
involving much patient bargaining. Hassan refused to accept 
less than five hundred gold ducats for his slave; the available 
funds fell short of this amount, and the balance was collected 
from the Christian traders of Algiers. Cervantes was already 
embarked for Constantinople when the money was paid on the 
19th of September 1580. The first use that he made of his 
liberty was to cause affidavits of his proceedings at Algiers to be 
drawn up; he sailed for Spain towards the end of October, 
landed at Denia in November, and made his way to Madrid. 
He signed an information before a notary in that city on the 
1 8th of December 1580. 

These dates prove that he cannot, as is often alleged, have 
served under Alva in the Portuguese campaign of 1580: that 
campaign ended with the battle of Alcantara on the 25th of 
August 1 580. It seems certain, however, that he visited Portugal 
soon after his return from Algiers, and in May 1581 he was sent 
from Thomar on a mission to Oran. Construed literally, a 
formal statement of his services, signed by Cervantes on the 
2 1 st of May 1590, makes it appear that he served in the Azores 
campaigns of 1582-83; but the wording of the document is 
involved, the claims of Cervantes are confused with those of his 
brother Rodrigo (who was promoted ensign at the Azores), 
and on the whole it is doubtful if he took part in either of the 
expeditions under Santa Cruz. In any case, the stories of his 
residence in Portugal, and of his love affairs with a noble Portu- 
guese lady who bore him a daughter, are simple inventions. 
From 1582-3 to 1587 Cervantes seems to have written copiously 
for the stage, and in the Adjunta al Parnaso he mentions several 
of his plays as "worthy of praise"; these were Los Tratos de 
Argel, La Numancia, La Gran Turquesa, La Batalla naval, La 
Jerusalem, La Amaranta 6 la de Mayo, El Bosque amoroso, La 
Unica y Bizarra Arsinda — " and many others which I do not 
remember, but that which I most prize and pique myself on was, 
and is, one called La Confusa which, with all respect to as many 
sword-and-cloak plays as have been staged up to the present, 
may take a prominent place as being good among the best." 
Of these only Los Tratos de Argel (or El Trato de Argel) and 
La Numancia have survived, and, though La Numancia contains 
many fine rhetorical passages, both plays go to prove that the 
author's genius was not essentially dramatic. In February 
1584 he obtained a licence to print a pastoral novel entitled 
Primera parte de la Galatea, the copyright of which he sold on 
the 14th of June to Bias de Robles, a bookseller at Alcala de 
Henares, for 1336 -reales. On the 12th of December he married 
Catalina de Palacios Salazar y Vozmediano of Esquivias,eighteen 
years his junior. The Galatea was published in the spring of 
1585, and is frequently said to relate the story of Cervantes' 
courtship, and to introduce various distinguished writers under 
pastoral names. These assertions must be received with great 
reserve. The birth of an illegitimate daughter, borne to Cervantes 
by a certain Ana Francisca de Rojas, is referred to 1584, and 
earlier in that same year the Galatea had passed the censor; 
with few exceptions, the identifications of the characters in the 
book with personages in real life are purely conjectural. These 
circumstances, together with the internal evidence of the work, 
point to the conclusion that the Galatea was begun and completed 
before 1583. It was only twice reprinted — once at Lisbon 
(1590), and once at Paris (1611) — during the author's lifetime; 
but it won him a measure of repute, it was his favourite among 
his books, and during the thirty years that remained to him he 
repeatedly announced the second part which is promised con- 
ditionally in the text. However, it is not greatly to be regretted 
that the continuation was never published; though the Galatea 
is interesting as the first deliberate bid for fame on the part of a 
great genius, it is an exercise in the pseudo-classic literature 
introduced into Italy by Sannazaro, and transplanted to Spain 
by the Portuguese Montemor; and, ingenious or eloquent as 
the Renaissance prose-pastoral may be, its innate artificiality 
stifles Cervantes' rich and glowing realism. He himself recog- 
nized its defects; with all his weakness for the Galatea, he 
ruefully allows that " it proposes something and concludes 



nothing." Its comparative failure was a serious matter for 
Cervantes who had no other resource but his pen; his plays 
were probably less successful than his account of them would 
imply, and at any rate play-writing was not at this time a 
lucrative occupation in Spain. No doubt the death of his 
father on the 13th of June 1585 increased the burden of Cervantes' 
responsibilities; and the dowry of his wife, as appears from a 
document dated the 9th of August 1586, consisted of nothing 
more valuable than five vines, an orchard, some household 
furniture, four beehives, forty-five hens and chickens, one cock 
and a crucible. 

It had become evident that Cervantes could not gain his 
bread by literature, and in 1587 he went to Seville to seek 
employment in connexion with the provisioning of the Invincible 
Armada. He was placed under the orders of Antonio de Guevara, 
and before the 24th of February was excommunicated for 
excessive zeal in collecting wheat at Ecija. During the next 
few months he was engaged in gathering stores at Seville and 
the adjacent district, and after the defeat of the Armada he was 
retained as commissary to the galleys. Tired of the drudgery, 
and without any prospect of advancement, on the 21st of May 
1590 Cervantes drew up a petition to the king, recording his 
services arid applying for one of four posts then vacant in the 
American colonies: a place in the department of public accounts 
in New Granada, the governorship of Soconusco in Guatemala, 
the position of auditor to the galleys at Cartagena, or that of 
corregidor in the city of La Paz. The petition was referred to 
the Council of the Indies, and was annotated with the words: — 
" Let him look for something nearer home." Cervantes perforce 
remained at his post; the work was hard, uncongenial and 
ill-paid, and the salary was in constant arrears. In November 
1590 he was in such straits that he borrowed money to buy 
himself a suit of clothes, and in August 1592 his sureties were 
called upon to make good a deficiency of 795 reales in his accounts. 
His thoughts turned to literature once more, and on the 5 th of 
September 1592, he signed a contract with Rodrigo Osorio 
undertaking to write six plays at fifty ducats each, no payment 
to be made unless Osorio considered that each of these pieces 
was " one of the best ever produced in Spain." Nothing came 
of this agreement, and it appears that, between the date of 
signing it and the 19th of September, Cervantes was imprisoned 
(for reasons unknown to us) at Castro del Rio. He was speedily 
Released, and continued to perquisition as before in Andalusia; 
but his literary ambitions were not dead, and in May 1595 he 
won the first prize — three silver spoons — at a poetical tourney 
held in honour of St Hyacinth at Saragossa. Shortly afterwards 
Cervantes found himself in difficulties with the exchequer 
officials. He entrusted a sum of 7400 reales to a merchant 
named Simon Freire de Lima with instructions to pay the 
amount into the treasury at Madrid; the agent became bankrupt 
and absconded, leaving Cervantes responsible for the deficit. 
By some means the money was raised, and the debt was liqui- 
dated on the 21st of January 1 597. But Cervantes' position was 
shaken, and his unbusinesslike habits lent themselves to mis- 
interpretation. On the 6th of September 1597 he was ordered 
to find sureties that he would present himself at Madrid within 
twenty days, and there submit to thet exchequer vouchers for 
all official moneys collected by him in Grahada and elsewhere. 
No such sureties being available, he was committed to Seville 
jail, but was released on the 1st of December on condition that 
tie complied with the original order of the court within thirty 
days. He was apparently unable to find bail, was dismissed 
from the public service, and sank into extreme poverty. During 
a momentary absence from Seville in February 1599, he was 
again summoned to Madrid by the treasury, but does not appear 
to have obeyed: it is only too likely that he had not the money 
to pay for the journey. There is some reason to think that he 
was imprisoned at Seville in 1602, but nothing positive is known 
of his existence between 1600 and the 8th of February 1603: 
at the latter date he seems to have been at Valladolid, to which 
city Philip III. had removed the court in 1601. 

Since the publication of the Galatea in 1585 Cervantes' 



CERVANTES 



765 



contributions to literature had been limited to occasional poems. 
In 1591 he published a ballad in Andres de Villalta's Flor de 
varios y nuevos romances; in 1595 he composed a paem, already 
mentioned, to celebrate the canonization of St Hyacinth; in 
1596 he wrote a sonnet ridiculing Medina Sidonia's tardy entry 
into Cadiz after the English invaders had retired, and in the 
same year his sonnet lauding Santa Cruz was printed in Cristobal. 
Mosquera de Figueroa's Comentario en breve compendio de 
disciplina militar; to 1597 is assigned a sonnet (the authenticity 
of which is disputed) commemorative of the poet Herrera; in 
1598 he wrote two sonnets and a copy of quintUlas on the death 
of Philip II.; and in 1602 a complimentary sonnet from his pen 
appeared in the second edition of Lope de Vega's Dragontea. 
Curiously enough, it is by Lope de Vega that Don Quixote is 
first mentioned. Writing to an unknown correspondent (appar- 
ently a physician) on the 14th of August 1604, Lope de Vega 
says that " no poet is as bad as Cervantes, nor so foolish as to 
praise Don Quixote," and he goes on to speak of his own plays 
as being odious to Cervantes, It is obvious that the two men 
had quarrelled since 1602, and that Lope de Vega smarted under 
the satire of himself and his works in Cervantes' forthcoming 
book; Don Quixote may have been circulated in manuscript, 
or may even have been printed before the official licence was 
granted on the 26th of September 1604. It was published early 
in 1605, and was dedicated to the seventh duke de B6jar in 
phrases largely borrowed from the dedication in Herrera's 
edition (1580) of Garcilaso de la Vega, and from Francisco de 
Medina's preface to that work. 

The mention of Bernardo de la Vega's Pastor de Iberia shows 
that the sixth chapter of Don Quixote cannot have been written 
before 1591. In the prologue Cervantes describes his master- 
piece as being " just what might be begotten in a jail "; on the 
strength of this passage, it has been thought that he conceived 
the story, and perhaps began writing it, during one of his terms 
of imprisonment at Seville between 1597 and 1602. Within a 
few weeks of its publication at Madrid, three pirated editions 
of Don Quixote were issued at Lisbon; a second authorized 
edition, imperfectly revised, was hurried out at Madrid; and 
another reprint appeared at Valencia with an aprobacidn dated 
18th July 1605. With the exception of Aleman's Guzmdn de 
Alfarache, no Spanish book of the period was more successful. 
Modern criticism is prone to regard Don Quixote as a symbolic, 
didactic or controversial work intended to bring about radical 
reforms in church and state. Such interpretations did not occur 
to Cervantes' contemporaries, nor to Cervantes himself. There 
is no reason for rejecting his plain statement that his main object 
was to ridicule the romances of chivalry, which in their latest 
developments had become a tissue of tiresome absurdities. It 
seems clear that his first intention was merely to parody these 
extravagances in a short story; but as he proceeded the 
immense possibilities of the subject became more evident to 
him, and he ended by expanding his work into a brilliant 
panorama of Spanish society as it existed during the 16th century. 
Nobles, knights, poets, courtly gentlemen, priests, traders, 
farmers, barbers, muleteers, scullions and convicts; accomplished 
ladies, impassioned damsels, Moorish beauties, simple-hearted 
country-girls and kindly kitchen-wenches of questionable morals 
— all these are presented with the genial fidelity which comes of 
sympathetic insight. The immediate vogue of Don Quixote was 
due chiefly to its variety of incident, to its wealth of comedy 
bordering on farce, and perhaps also to its keen thrusts at eminent 
contemporaries; its reticent pathos, its large humanity, and 
its penetrating criticism of life were less speedily appreciated. 

Meanwhile, on the 12th of April 1605, Cervantes authorized 
his publisher to proceed against the Lisbon booksellers who 
threatened to introduce their piratical reprints into Castile. By 
June the citizens of Valladolid already regarded Don Quixote 
and Sancho Panza as proverbial types. Less gratifying ex- 
periences awaited the popular author. On the 27 th of June 
1605 Gaspar de Ezpeleta, a Navarrese gentleman of dissolute 
life, was wounded outside the lodging-house in which Cervantes 
and his family lived; he was taken indoors, was nursed by 



Cervantes' sister Magdalena, and died on the 39th of June. That 
same day Cervantes, his natural daughter (Isabel de Saavedra), 
his sister Andrea and her daughter were lodged in jail on suspicion 
of being indirectly concerned in Ezpeleta's death; one of the 
witnesses made damaging charges against Cervantes' daughter, 
but no substantial evidence was produced, and the prisoners 
were released. Little is known of Cervantes' life between 1605 
and 1608. A Relacidn of the festivities held to celebrate the 
birth of Philip IV., and a certain Carta d don Diego Astudillo 
Carrillo have been erroneously ascribed to him; during these 
three years he apparently wrote nothing beyond three sonnets, 
and one of these is of doubtful authenticity. The depositions 
of the Valladolid enquiry show that he was living in poverty five 
months after the appearance of Don Quixote, and the fact that 
he borrowed 450 reales from his publisher before "November 1607 
would convey the idea that his position improved slowly, if at 
all. But it is difficult to reconcile this view of his circumstances 
with the details concerning his illegitimate daughter revealed 
in documents recently discovered. Isabel de Saavedra was 
stated to be a spinster when arrested at Valladolid in June 1605; 
the settlement of her marriage with Luis de Molina in 1608 
describes her as the widow of Diego Sanz, as the mother of a 
daughter eight months old, and as owning house-property of 
some value. These particulars are perplexing, and the situation 
is further complicated by the publication of a deed in which 
Cervantes declares that he himself is the real owner of this house- 
property, and that his daughter has merely a life-interest in it. 
This claim may be regarded as a legal fiction; it cannot easily 
be reconciled with Cervantes' statement towards the end of his 
life, that he was dependent on the bounty of the count de Lemos 
and of Bernardo de -Sandoval, cardinal-archbishop of Toledo. 
In 1609 he joined the newly founded confraternity of the Slaves 
of the Most Blessed Sacrament; in 1610 Lemos was appointed 
viceroy of Naples, and Cervantes was keenly disappointed at 
not being chosen to accompany his patron. In 161 1 he lost his 
sister Magdalena, who was buried by the charity of the Tertiaries 
of Saint Francis; in 161 2 he joined the Academia Selvaje, and 
there appears to have renewed his former friendly relations with 
Lope de Vega; in 16 13 he dedicated his Novelas exemplares to 
the count de Lemos, and disposed of his rights for 1600 reales 
and twenty-four copies of the book. The twelve tales in this 
volume, some of them written very much later than others, are 
of unequal merit, but they contain some of the writer's best work, 
and the two picaresque stories — Rinconete y Cortaditto and the 
Coloquio de los perros — are superb examples of their kind, and 
would alone entitle Cervantes to take rank with the greatest 
roasters of Spanish prose. In 1614 he published the Viage del 
Parnaso, a burlesque poem suggested by the Viaggio in Parnaso 
(1582) of the Perugian poet Cesare Caporali. It contains some 
interesting autobiographical passages, much flattery of con- 
temporary poetasters, and a few happy satirical touches; but, 
though it is Cervantes' most serious bid for fame as a poet, it has 
seldom been reprinted, and would probably have been forgotten 
but for an admirably humorous postscript in prose which is 
worthy of the author at his best. In the preface to his Ocho 
comedias y ocho entremeses nuevos (161 5) he good-humoUredly 
admits that his dramatic works found no favour with managers, 
and, when this collection was first reprinted (1749), the editor 
advanced the fantastic theory that the comedias were deliberate 
exercises in absurdity, intended to parody the popular dramas 
of the day. This view cannot be maintained, but a sharp dis- 
tinction must be drawn between the eight set plays and the eight 
interludes; with one or two exceptions, the comedias or set plays 
are unsuccessful experiments in Lope de Vega's manner, while 
the entremeses or interludes, particularly those in prose, are models 
of spontaneous gaiety and ingenious wit. 

In the preface to the Novelas exemplares Cervantes had 
announced the speedy appearance of the sequel to Don Quixote 
which he had vaguely promised at the end of the first part. He 
was at work on the fifty-ninth chapter of his continuation when 
he learned that he had been anticipated by Alonso Fernandez 
de Avellaneda of Tordesillas ( whose Segunde tomo del ingenioso 



766 



CERVERA 



hidalgo don Quixote de la Mancha was published at Tarragona 
in 1614. On the assumption that Fernandez de Avellaneda 
is a pseudonym, this spurious sequel has been ascribed to the 
king's confessor, Luis de Aliaga, to Cervantes' old enemy, 
Blanco de Paz, to his old friend, Bartolome Leonardo de Argen- 
sola, to the three great dramatists, Lope de Vega, Tirso de 
Molina and Ruiz de Alarc6n, to Alonso Fernandez, to Juan Jose 
Marti, to Alfonso Lamberto, to Luis de Granada, and probably 
to others. Some of these attributions are manifestly absurd — 
for example, Luis de Granada died seventeen years before the 
first part of Don Quixote was published — and all of them are 
improbable conjectures; if Avellaneda be not the real name 
of the author, his identity is still undiscovered. His book is 
not devoid of literary talent and robust humour, and possibly 
he began it under the impression that Cervantes was no more 
likely to finish Don Quixote than to finish the Galatea. He 
should, however, have abandoned his project on reading the 
announcement in the preface to the Novelas exemplares; what 
he actually did was to disgrace himself by writing an insolent 
preface taunting Cervantes with his physical defects, his moral 
infirmities, his age, loneliness and experiences in jail. He was 
too intelligent to imagine that his continuation could hold its 
own against the authentic sequel, and malignantly avowed his 
intention of being first in the field and so spoiling Cervantes' 
market. It is quite possible that Don Quixote might have been 
left incomplete but for this insulting intrusion; Cervantes was 
a leisurely writer and was, as he states, engaged on El Engano 
& los ojos, Las Semanas del Jardin and' El Famoso Bernardo, none 
of which have been preserved. Avellaneda forced him to 
concentrate his attention on his masterpiece, and the authentic 
second part of Don Quixote appeared towards the end of 161 5. 
No book more signally contradicts the maxim, quoted by the 
Bachelor Carrasco, that " no second part was ever good." It 
is true that the last fourteen chapters are damaged by undignified 
denunciations of Avellaneda; but, apart from this, the second 
part of Don Quixote is an improvement on the first. The humour 
is more subtle and mature; the style is of more even excellence; 
and the characters of the bachelor and of the physician, Pedro 
Recio de AgUero, are presented with a more vivid effect than 
any of the secondary characters in the first part. Cervantes had 
clearly profited by the criticism of those who objected to " the 
countless cudgellings inflicted on Sefior Don Quixote," and to 
the irrelevant interpolation of extraneous stories in the text. 
Don Quixote moves through the second part with unruffled 
dignity; Sancho Panza loses something of his rustic cunning, 
but he gains in wit, sense and manners. The original conception 
is unchanged in essentials, but it is more logically developed, 
and there is a notable progress in construction. Cervantes 
had grown to love his knight and squire, and he understood his 
own creations better than at the outset; more completely 
master of his craft, he wrote his sequel with the unfaltering 
confidence of a renowned artist bent on sustaining his reputation. 
The first part of Don Quixote had been reprinted at Madrid in 
1608; it had been produced at Brussels in 1607 and 1611, and 
at Milan in 1610; it had been translated into English in 161 2 
and into French in 1614, Cervantes was celebrated in and out 
of Spain, but his celebrity had not brought him wealth. The 
members of the French special embassy, sent to Madrid in 
February 1615, under the Commandeur de Sillery, heard with 
amazement that the author of the Galatea, the Novelas exemplares 
and Don Quixote was " old, a soldier, a gentleman and poor." 
But his trials were almost at an end. Though failing in health, 
he worked assiduously at Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, 
which, as he had jocosely prophesied in the preface to the second 
part of Don Quixote, would be " either the worst or the best 
book ever written in our tongue." It is the most carefully 
written of his prose works, and the least animated or attractive 
of them; signs of fatigue and of waning powers are unmistakably 
visible. Cervantes was not destined to see it in print. He was 
attacked by dropsy, and, on the 18th of April 1616, received the 
sacrament of extreme unction; next day he wrote the dedication 
of Persiles y Sigismunda to the count de Lemos — the most 



moving and gallant of farewells. He died at Madrid in the Calk 
del Le6n on the 23rd of April; he was borne from his house 
" with his face uncovered," according to the rule of the Tertiaries 
of St Francis, and on the 24th of April was buried in the church 
attached to the convent of the Trinitarian nuns in the Calle de 
Cantarranas. There he rests — the story of his remains being 
removed in 1633 to the Calle del Humilladero has no foundation 
in fact — but the exact position of his grave is unknown. Early 
in 1 61 7 Persiles y Sigismunda was published, and passed through 
eight editions within two years; but the interest in it soon died 
away, and it was not reprinted between 1625 and 1719. 
Cervantes' wife died without issue on the 31st of October 1626; 
his natural daughter, who survived both the child of her first 
marriage and her second husband, died on the 20th of September 
1652. Cervantes is represented solely by his works. The 
Novelas exemplares alone would give him the foremost place 
among Spanish novelists; Don Quixote entitles him to rank 
with the greatest writers of all time: " children turn its leaves, 
young people read it, grown men understand it, old folk praise 
it." It has outlived all changes of literary taste, and is even 
more popular to-day than it was three centuries ago. 

Bibliography. — Leopold Rius, Bibliografia critica de las obras de 
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Madrid, 1 895-1905, 3 vols.); Obras 
completas (Madrid, 1863-1864, 12 vols.), edited by Juan Eugenio 
Hartzenbusch ; Complete Works (Glasgow, '1901-1906, 8 vols, in 
progress), edited by James Fitzmaurice- Kelly ; Don Quijote (Madrid, 
1833-1839, 6 vols.), edited by Diego Clemenciu; Don Quixote 
(London, 1899-1900, 2 vols.), edited by James Fitzmaurice-Kelly 
and John Ormsby; Don Quijote (Madrid, I 905-1906, 2 vols, in 
progress), edited by Clemente Cortejon; Rinconete y Cortadillo 
(Sevilla, 1905), edited by Francisco Rodriguez Marin; Epistolad 
Mateo Vazquez (Madrid, ' 1905), edited by E[milio] Qotarelo] ; 
Julian Apraiz, Estudio historico-critico sobre las Novelas ejemplares de 
Cervantes (Madrid, 1901); Francisco A. de Icaza, Las Novelas 
ejemplares de Cervantes (Madrid, 1901) ; Francisco Rodriguez Marin, 
El Loaysa de " El Celoso Extremeno" (Sevilla, 1901); Narciso Diaz 
de Escovar, Apuntes escenicos cervantinos (Madrid, 1905) ; Manuel 
Jose Garcia, Estudio critico acerca del entremes " El Vizcaino fingido " 
(Madrid, 1905) ; Alfred Morel-Fatio, L'Espagne de Don Quichotte in 
Etudes sur I'Espagne (Paris, 1895, 2 me serie) ; Julio Puyol y Alonso, 
Estado social que refleja "El Quijote" (Madrid, 1905); James 
Fitzmaurice-Kelly,^ Cervantes in England (London, 1905); Raymond 
Foulche-Delbose, Etude sur "La tiafingida," in the Revue hispanique 
(Paris, 1899), vol. vi. pp. 256-306 ; Benedetto Croce, Due illustrazioni 
al " Yiage del Parnaso," in the Homenaje a Menendez y Pelayo 
(Madrid, 1899), vo '- i\ PP- 161-193; Paul Groussac, Vne ILnigme 
littiraire: le Don Quichotte d 'Avellaneda (Paris, 1903); Alonso 
Fernandez de Avellaneda, El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quixote de la 
Mancha (Barcelona, [1905]), edited by Marcelino Menendez y 
Pelayo; Julio Cejador y Franca, La Lengua de Cervantes (Madrid, 
1905, &c.) ; Martin Fernandez de Navarrete, Vida de Miguel de 
Cervantes Saavedra (Madrid, 1819); Cristobal Perez Pastor, Docu- 
ments Cervantinos hasta ahora ineditos (Madrid, 1 897-1902, 2 vols.) ; 
Emilio Cotardo y Mori, Efemerides Cervantinos (Madrid, 1905) 
Francisco Rodriguez Marin, Cervantes estudio en Sevilla, 1564-1565 
(Seville, 1905). (J. F.-K.) 

CERVERA, PASCUAL CERVERA Y TOPETE (1839-1909), 
Spanish admiral, was born at Medina Sidonia on the 18th of 
February 1839. He showed an early inclination for the sea, and 
his family sent him to the naval cadet school at the age of twelve. 
As a sub-lieutenant he took part in the naval operations on the 
coast of Morocco during the campaign of 1859-60. Then he was 
for some time engaged in operations in the Sulu Islands and the 
Philippines. Afterwards he was on the West Indian station 
during the early part of the first Cuban War (1868-78), returning 
to Spain in 1873 to serve on the Basque coast against the Carlists. 
He distinguished himself in defending the Carraca arsenal near 
Cadiz against the Federals in 1873. He won each step in his 
promotion up to flag-rank through his steadiness and brilliant 
conduct in action, and was awarded the crosses of the Orders of 
Military and Naval Merit, Isabella the Catholic, and St Hermen- 
gilde, besides several medals. Cervera had a great reputation 
for decision, unbending temper and honesty, before he was 
placed at the head of the Bilbao building-yards. This post he 
resigned after a few months in order to become minister of 
marine in 1892, in a cabinet presided over by Sagasta. He with- 
drew from the cabinet when he found that his colleagues, from 
political motives, declined to support him in making reforms and, 



CESAREVICH-— CESNOLA 



767 



on the other hand, unwisely cut down the naval estimates. When 
in 1898 the Spanish- American War (q.v.) broke out, he was chosen 
to command a squadron composed of four first-class cruisers, 
the "Maria Theresa," his flagship, " Oquendo," " Vizcaya," 
and "Columbus," and several destroyers. This ill-fated squadron 
only started upon its reckless cruise across the ocean after its 
gallant commander had repeatedly warned both the minister of 
marine and the prime minister, Sagasta, in despatches from Cadiz 
and from the Canary and Cape Verde Islands, that the ships 
were insufficiently provided with coal and ammunition. Some 
of them, indeed, even lacked proper guns. In compliance with 
the instructions of the government, Admiral Cervera made for 
the landlocked harbour of Santiago de Cuba, where he co-operated 
in the defence, landing some guns and a naval brigade. In spite 
of his energetic representations, Cervera received an order from 
Madrid, dictated by political considerations, to sally forth. It 
meant certain destruction. The gallant squadron met forces 
trebly superior to it, and was totally destroyed. The admiral, 
three of his captains, and 1800 sailors and marines were taken 
by the victors to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, U.S.A. After 
the war, Cervera and his captains were tried before the supreme 
naval and military court of the realm, which honourably 
acquitted them all. In 1901 he became vice-admiral, in 1902 
was appointed chief of staff of the Spanish navy, and in 1903 
was made life senator. He died at Puerto Real on the 3rd of 
April 1909. 

CESAREVICH, or more properly Tsesarevich, the title of 
the heir-apparent to the Russian throne. The full official title 
is Nasliednik Tsesarevich, i.e. " heir of Caesar," and in Russia 
the heir to the throne is commonly called simply Nasliednik, the 
word Tsesarevich never being used alone. Tsarevich, a form now 
much used in England, means simply any " king's son "; it is an 
antiquated term now out of use in Russia, and was last borne 
as heir to the throne by the unfortunate Alexius, son of Peter 
the Great. The style of the wife of the tsesarevich is Tsesarevna. 
The Cesarewitch handicap race at Newmarket, founded in 1839, 
was named after the prince who was afterwards Alexander II. 
of Russia, who paid a state visit to England that year. 

CESARI, GIUSEPPE, called II Cavaliere d' Arpino (born in 
or about 1568 and created a " Cavaliere di Cristo " by Pope 
Clement VIII.), also named II Giuseppino, an Italian painter, 
much encouraged at Rome and munificently rewarded. His 
father had been a native of Arpino, but Giuseppe himself was 
born in Rome. Cesari is stigmatized by Lanzi as not less the 
corrupter of taste in painting than Marino was in poetry; indeed, 
another of the nicknames of Cesari is " II Marino de' Pittori " 
(the pictorial Marino). There was spirit in Cesari's heads of 
men and horses, and his frescoes in the Capitol (story of Romulus 
and Remus, &c), which occupied him at intervals during forty 
years, are well coloured; but he drew the human form ill. His 
perspective is faulty, his extremities monotonous, and his 
chiaroscuro defective. He died in 1640, at the age of seventy- 
two, or perhaps of eighty, at Rome. Cesari ranks as the head of 
the " Idealists " of his period, as opposed to the " Naturalists," 
of whom Michelangelo da Caravaggio was the leading champion, 
— the so-called " idealism " consisting more in reckless facility, 
and disregard of the common facts and common-sense of nature, 
than in anything to which so lofty a name could be properly 
accorded. He was a man of touchy and irascible character, and 
rose from penury to the height of opulence. His brother 
Bernardino assisted in many of his works. 

' CESAROTTI, MELCHIORE (1 730-1 808), Italian poet, was 
born at Padua in 1730, of a noble but impoverished family. At 
the university of his native place his literary progress procured 
for him at a very early age the chair of rhetoric, and in 1768 the 
professorship of Greek and Hebrew. On the invasion of Italy 
by the French, he gave his pen to their cause, received a pension, 
and was made knight of the iron crown by Napoleon I., to whom, 
in consequence, he addressed a bombastic and extravagantly 
nattering poem called Pronea. Cesarotti is best known as the 
translator of Homer and Ossian. Much praise cannot be given 
to his version of the Iliad, for he has not scrupled to add, omit 



and modernize. Ossian, which he held to be the finest of poems, 
he has, on the other hand, considerably improved in translation; 
and the appearance of his version attracted much attention in 
Italy and France, and raised up many imitators of the Ossianic 
style. Cesarotti also produced a number of works in prose, 
including a Course of Greek Literature, and essays On the Origin 
and Progress of the Poetic Art, On the Sources of the Pleasure 
derived from Tragedy, On the Philosophy of Language and On 
the Philosophy of Taste, the last being a defence of his own 
great eccentricities in criticism. His weakness was a straining 
after novelty. His style is forcible, but full of Gallicisms. 

A complete edition of his works, in 42 vols. 8vo, began to appear at 
Pisa in 1800, and was completed in 1813, after his death. See 
Memoirs, by Barbieri (Padua, 1810), and Un Filosofo delle lettere, by 
Alemanni (Turin, 1894). 

CESENA (anc. Caesena), a town and episcopal see of Emilia, 
Italy, in the province of Forli, 12 m. S.E. by rail from the town 
of Forli, on the line between Bologna and Rimini, 144 ft. above 
sea-level. Pop. (1905) 12,245 (town); 43,468 (commune). The 
town is picturesquely situated at the foot of the slopes of the 
Apennines, and is crowned by a medieval fortress (Rocca), 
begun by the emperor Frederick I. (Barbarossa) probably, but 
altered and added to later. The cathedral has two fine marble 
altars by the Lombardi of Venice (or their school) . The library, 
built for Domenico Malatesta in 1452 by Matteo Nuzio, is a fine 
early Renaissance building, and its internal arrangements, with 
the original desks to which the books are still chained, are 
especially well preserved (see J. W. Clark, The Care of Books, 
Cambridge, 1901, p. 199). In it are valuable MSS., many of which 
were used by Aldus Manutius. It also contains a picture gallery 
with a good " Presentation in the Temple " by Francesco 
Francia. There are some fine palaces in the town. Three- 
quarters of a mile south-east on the hill, stands the handsome 
church of S. Maria del Monte, after the style of Bramante, with 
carved stalls of the 16th century. Wine, hemp and silk are the 
main articles of trade. About the ancient Caesena little is said 
in classical authors: it is mentioned as a station on the Via 
Aemilia and as a fortress in the wars of Theodoric and Narses. 
During the middle ages it was at first independent. In 1357 
it was unsuccessfully defended by the wife of Francesco Ordelaffi, 
lord of Forli, against the papal troops under Albornoz. In 1377 
it was sacked by Cardinal Robert of Geneva (afterwards Clement 
VII., antipope). It was then held by the Malatesta of Rimini 
until 1465, when it came under the dominion of the church. 
Both Pius VI. (17 1 7) and Pius VII. (1742) were born at 
Cesena. (T. As.) 

CESNOLA, LUIGI PALMA DI (1832-1904), Italian-American 
soldier and archaeologist, was born near Turin on the 29th of 
July 1832. Having served in the Austrian and Crimean Wars, 
in i860 he went to New York, where he taught Italian and 
French and founded a military school for officers. He took 
part in the American Civil War as colonel of a cavalry regiment, 
and at Aldie (June 1863) was wounded and taken prisoner. 
He was released from Libby prison early in 1864, served in the 
Wilderness and Petersburg campaigns (1864-65) as a brigadier 
of cavalry, and at the close of the war was breveted brigadier- 
general. He was then appointed United States consul at 
Larnaca in Cyprus (1865-1877). During his stay in the island 
he carried on excavations, which resulted in the discovery of a 
large number of antiquities. The collection was purchased by 
the Metropolitan Museum of New York, and Cesnola became 
director in 1879. Doubt having been thrown by Gaston L. 
Feuerdant, in an article in the New York Herald (August 1880), 
upon the genuineness of his restorations, the matter was referred 
to a special committee, which pronounced in his favour. 1 He is 
the author of Cyprus, its ancient Cities, Tombs and Temples 
(1877), an interesting book of travel and of considerable service 
to the practical antiquary; and of a Descriptive Atlas of the 
Cesnola Collection of Cypriote Antiquities (3 vols., 1884-6). He 
died in New York on the 21st of November 1904. He was a 

'For the Cesnola controversy see C. D. Cobham's Attempt at a 
Bibliography of Cyprus (4th ed., 1900). See also article Cyprus. 



768 



CESPEDES— CETACEA 



member of several learned societies in Europe and America, and 
in 1897 he received a Congressional medal of honour for con- 
spicuous military services. 

His brother, Alessandro Palma di Cesnola, born in 1839, 
conducted excavations at Paphos (where he was U.S. vice-consul) 
and Salamis on behalf of the British government. The results 
of these are described in Salaminia (1882). 

CESPEDES (in Ital. Cedaspe), PABLO DE (1538-1608), 
Spanish poet, painter, sculptor and architect, was born at 
Cordova, and was educated at Alcala de Henares, where he 
studied theology and Oriental languages. On leaving the 
university, he went to Rome, where he became the pupil and 
friend of Federigo Zuccaro, under whose direction he studied 
particularly the works of Raphael and of Michelangelo. In 1 560, 
while yet in Rome, proceedings were taken against him by the 
Inquisition at Valladolid on account of a letter which, found 
among the papers of the archbishop of Toledo, had been written 
by Cespedes during the preceding year, and in which he had 
spoken with great freedom against the holy office and the in- 
quisitor-general, Fernando de Valdes. Cespedes remained in 
Rome at this critical moment, and he appears rightly to have 
treated the prosecution with derision. It is not known how he 
contrived to bring the proceedings to an end; he returned, 
however, to Spain a little before 1577, and in that year was 
installed in a prebend of the cathedral at Cordova, where he 
resided till his death. Pablo de Cespedes has been called the 
most savant of Spanish artists. According to his friend Francisco 
Pacheco, to whom posterity is indebted for the preservation of 
all of Cespedes's verse that is extant, the school of Seville owes 
to him its introduction to the practice of chiaroscuro. He was 
a bold and correct draughtsman, a skilful anatomist, a master 
of colour and composition; and the influence he exerted to the 
advantage of early Spanish art was considerable. Cristobal de 
Vera, Juan de Penalosa and Zambrano were among his pupils. 
His best picture is a Last Supper at Cordova, but there are good 
examples of his work at Seville and at Madrid. Cespedes was 
author of several opuscules in prose on subjects connected with 
his profession. Of his poem on The Art of Painting enough was 
preserved by Pacheco to enable us to form an opinion of the 
whole. It is esteemed the best didactic verse in Spanish; and 
it has been compared, not disadvantageously, with the Georgia. 
It is written in strong and sonorous octaves, in the majestic 
declamatory vein of Fernando Herrera, and is not altogether 
so dull and lifeless as is most didactic verse. It contains a glow- 
ing eulogy of Michelangelo, and some excellent advice to young 
painters, insisting particularly on hard work and on the study 
of nature. The few fragments yet remaining, amounting in all 
to some six hundred lines, were first printed by Pacheco in his 
treatise Del arte de la pintura, in 1649. 

CESPEDES Y MENESES, GONZALO DE (1585 ?-i638), 
Spanish novelist, was born at Madrid about 1585. Nothing 
positive is known of him before the publication of his celebrated 
romance, the Poema trdgico del Espanol Gerardo, y desengano 
id amor lascivo (1615-1617); there is evidence that he had 
been sentenced to eight years at the galleys previous to the 1st 
of January 1620, and that the penalty had been remitted; but 
the nature of his offence is not stated. His treatment of political 
questions in the Historia apologilica en los sucesos del reyno de 
Arag&n, y su ciudad de Zaragoza, anos de gi y Q2 (1622), having 
led to the confiscation of the book, Cespedes took up his residence 
at Saragossa and Lisbon. While in exile he issued a collection 
of short stories entitled Historias peregrinas y exemplar es (1623), 
the unfinished romance Varia fortuna del soldado Pindaro (1626), 
and the first part of his Historia de Felipe IV. (163 1), a fulsome 
eulogy which was rewarded by the author's appointment as 
official historiographer to the Spanish king. Cespedes died on 
the 27th of January 1638. His novels, though written in a 
ponderous, affected style, display considerable imagination and 
insight into character. The Poema trdgico has been utilized by 
Fletcher in The Spanish Curate and in The Maid of the Mill. 

The Historias peregrinas has been reprinted (1906) with a valuable 
introduction by Sr. Cotarelo y Mori. 



, CESS (a shortened form of " assess "; the spelling is due to 
a mistaken connexion with " census "), a tax; a term formerly 
more particularly applied to local taxation, in which sense it 
still is used in Ireland; otherwise it has been superseded by 
" rate." In India it is applied, with the qualifying word prefixed, 
to any taxation, such as " irrigation-cess " and the like, and in 
Scotland to the land-tax. 

CESSIO BONORUM (Latin for a " surrender of goods "), in 
Roman law, a voluntary surrender of goods by a debtor to his 
creditors. It did not amount to a discharge unless the property 
ceded was sufficient for the purpose, but it secured the debtor 
from personal arrest. The creditors sold the goods in satisfaction, 
pro tanto, of their claims. The procedure of cessio bonorum 
avoided infamy, and the debtor, though his after-acquired 
property might be proceeded against, could not be deprived of 
the bare necessaries of life. The main features of the Roman 
law of cessio bonorum were adopted in Scots law, and also in the 
French legal system. (See further Bankruptcy.) 

CESTI, MARC ANTONIO (1620 ?-i66 9 ?), Italian musical 
composer, was born at Florence about 1620. He was a pupil 
of Carissimi, and after holding a post somewhere in Florence as 
maestro di cappella entered the papal chapel in 1660. In 1666 he 
became Vice-Kapellmeister at Vienna, and died at Venice in 1669. 
Cesti is known principally as a composer of operas, the most 
celebrated of which were La Dori (Venice, 1663) and // Porno 
d' oro (Vienna, 1668). He was also a composer of chamber- 
cantatas, and his operas are notable for the pure and delicate 
style of their airs, more suited to the chamber than to the 
stage. 

CESTIUS, LUCIUS, surnamed Pius, Latin rhetorician, 
flourished during the reign of Augustus. He was a native of 
Smyrna, a Greek by birth. According to Jerome, he was 
teaching Latin at Rome in the year 13 b. c. He must have been 
living after a.d. 9, since we are told that he taunted the son of 
Quintilius Varus with his father's defeat in the Teutoburgian 
forest (Seneca, Controv. i. 3, 10). Cestius was a man of 
great ability, but vain, quarrelsome and sarcastic. Before he 
left Asia, he was invited to dinner by Cicero's son, then governor 
of the province. His host, being uncertain as to his identity, 
asked a slave who Cestius was; and on receiving the answer, 
" he is the man who said your father was illiterate," ordered 
him to be flogged (Seneca, Suasoriae, vii. 13). As an orator 
in the schools Cestius enjoyed a great reputation, and was 
worshipped by his youthful pupils, one of whom imitated him 
so slavishly that he was nicknamed " my monkey " by his 
teacher (Seneca, Controv. ix. 3, 12). As a public orator, on the 
other hand, he was a failure. Although a Greek, he always 
used Latin in his declamations, and, although he was sometimes 
at a loss for Latin words, he never suffered from lack of ideas. 
Numerous specimens of his declamations will be found in the 
works of Seneca the rhetorician. 

See the monograph De Lucio Cestio Pio, by F. G. Lindner (1858) ; 
J. Brzoska in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencydopddie, iii. 2 (1899) ; 
Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Lit. (Eng. tr.), § 268, 6; M. Schanz, 
Geschichte der romischen Litteratur, ii. 

CESTUI, CESTUY, an Anglo-French word, meaning " that 
person," which appears in the legal phrases cestui que trust, use, 
or vie. It is usually pronounced as " cetty." Cestui que trust 
means literally "the person for whose benefit the trust " is 
created. The cestui que trust is the person entitled to the equit- 
able, as opposed to the legal, estate. Thus, if land be granted 
unto, and to the use of A. in trust for B., B. is cestui que trust, 
and A. trustee. The term, principally owing to its cumbersome- 
ness, is being gradually superseded in modern law by that of 
" beneficiary." Cestui que use (sometimes cestui d que use) 
means " the person for whose benefit a use " is created (see 
Trust). Cestui que vie is " the person for whose life'' lands are 
held by another (see Remainder). 

CETACEA (from the Gr. k*tos, a whale), the name of the 
mammalian order represented by whales, dolphins, porpoises, &c. 
From their fish-like form, which is manifestly merely an adapta- 
tion to their purely aquatic life, these creatures are often regarded 



CETAGEA 



769 



as fishes, although they are true mammals, with warm blood, 
and suckle their young. 

The general form is essentially fish-like, the spindle-shaped 
body passing anteriorly into the head without any distinct neck, 
and posteriorly tapering gradually towards the extremity of the 
tail, which is provided with a pair of lateral, pointed expansions 
of skin supported by fibrous tissue, called " flukes," forming 
a horizontal triangular propelling organ, notched behind in the 
middle line. The head is generally large, in some cases attaining 
more than one-third the entire length; and the mouth is wide, 
and bounded by stiff, immobile lips. The fore-limbs are reduced 
to flattened paddles, encased in a continuous skin, showing no 
external sign of division, and without trace of nails. There are 
no signs of hind-limbs visible externally. The surface of the 
skin is smooth and glistening, and devoid of hair, although in 
many species there are a few bristles in the neighbourhood of 
the mouth which may persist through life or be present only 
in the young state. Immediately beneath the skin is a thick 
layer of fat, held together by a mesh of tissue, constituting 
the "blubber," which retains the heat of the body. In nearly 
all species a compressed dorsal fin is present. The eye is 
small, and not provided with a true lacrymal apparatus. The 
external ear is a minute aperture in the skin situated at a 
short distance behind the eye. The nostrils open separately or 
by a single crescentic aperture, near the vertex of the head. 

The bones generally are spongy in texture, the cavities being 
filled with oil. In the vertebral column, the cervical region is short 
and immobile, and the vertebrae, always seven in number, are in 
many species more or less fused together into a solid mass. The 
odontoid process of the second cervical vertebra, when that bone 
is free, is usually very obtuse, or even obsolete. In a paper on 
the form and function of the cervical vertebrae published in the 
Jenaische Zeilschrift for 1905, Dr O. Reche points out that the 
shortening and soldering is most pronounced in species which, like 
the right-whales, live entirely on minute organisms, to capture 
which there is no necessity to turn the head at all. Accordingly 
we find that in these whales the whole seven cervical vertebrae are 
fused into an immovable solid mass, of which the compound 
elements, with the exception of the first and second, are but little 
thicker than plates. On the other hand, in the finner-whales, 
several of which live exclusively on fish, and thus require a certain 
amount of mobility in the head and neck, we find all the cervical 
vertebrae much thicker and entirely separate from one another. 
Among the dolphin group the narwhal and the white whale, or 
beluga, are distinguished from all other cetaceans by the great com- 
parative length of their cervical vertebrae, all of which are com- 
pletely free. In the case of the narwhal such an abnormal structure 
is easily accounted for, seeing that to use effectively the long tusk 
with which the male is armed a considerable amount of mobility in 
the neck is absolutely essential. The beluga, too, which is believed 
to feed on large and active fishes, would likewise seem to require 
mobility in the same region in order to effect their capture. On 
the other hand, the porpoise preys on herrings, pilchards and 
mackerel, which in their densely packed shoals must apparently 
fall an easy prey with but little exertion on the part of their 
captor, and we accordingly find all the neck-vertebrae very short, 
and at least six out of the seven coalesced into a solid immov- 
able mass. None of the vertebrae are united to form a sacrum. 
The lumbar and caudal vertebrae are numerous and large, and, 
as their arches are not connected by articular processes (zygapo- 
physes), they are capable of free motion in all directions. The caps, 
or epiphyses, at the end of the vertebral bodies are flattened 
disks, not uniting until after the animal has attained its full dimen- 
sions. There are largely developed chevron-bones on the under side 
of the tail, the presence of which indicates the distinction between 
caudal and lumbar vertebrae. 

In the skull, the brain-case is short, broad and high, almost 
spherical, in fact (fig. 1). The supra-occipital bone rises upwards 
and forwards from the foramen magnum, to meet the frontals at the 
vertex, completely excluding the parietals from the upper region; 
and the frontals are expanded laterally to form the roof of the orbits. 
The nasal aperture opens upwards, and has in front of it a more or 
less horizontally prolonged beak, formed of the maxillae, premaxillae, 
vomer, and mesethmoid cartilage, extending forwards to form the 
upper jaw or roof of the mouth. 

There are no clavicles. The humerus is freely movable on the 
scapula at the shoulder-joint, but beyond this the articulations of 
the limb are imperfect; the flattened ends of the bones coming in 
contact, with fibrous tissue interposed, allowing of scarcely any 
motion. The radius and ulna are distinct, and about equally de- 
veloped, and much flattened, as are all the bones of the flippers. 
There are four, or more commonly five, digits, and the number of 
the phalanges of the second and third always exceeds the normal 

v. 25 



number in mammals, sometimes considerably; they present the 
exceptional character of having epiphyses at both ends. The pelvis 
is represented by a pair of small rod-like bones placed longitudinally, 
suspended below and at some distance from the vertebral column 
at the commencement of the tail. In some species, to the outer 
surface of these are fixed other small bones or cartilages, the rudiments 
of the hind-limb. 

Teeth are generally present, but exceedingly variable in number. 
In existing species, they are of simple, uniform character, with 
conical or compressed crowns and single roots, and are never pre- 
ceded by milk-teeth. In the whalebone whaies teeth are absent 
(except in the foetal condition), and the palate is provided with 
numerous transversely placed horny plates, forming the " whale- 
bone." Salivary glands are rudimentary or absent. The stomach 
is complex, and the intestine simple, and only in some species 
provided with a small caecum. The liver is little fissured, and 
there is no gall-bladder. The blood-vascular system is complicated 
by net-like expansions of both arteries and veins, or retia mirabilia. 
The larynx is of peculiar shape, the arytenoid cartilages and the 
epiglottis being elongated, and forming a tubular prolongation, 



IP 




£r0 



jBO 



Fig. i.— A Section of the Skull of a Black-Fish (Globicephalus melas). 



PMx, Premaxilla. AS, 

Mx, Maxilla. PS, 
ME, Ossified portion of the mes- Ft, 

ethmoid. pn, 

an, Nostrils. PI, 

Na, Nasal. Vo, 

IP, Inter-parietal. s, 

Fr, Frontal. id, 

Pa, Parietal. cp, 

SO, Supra-occipital. cd, 

ExO, Ex-occipital. a, 

BO, Basi-occipital. sh, 

Sq, Squamosal. bh, 

Per, Periotic. th, 



Alisphenoid. 

Presphenoid. 

Pterygoid. 

Posterior nares. 

Palatine. 

Vomer. 

Symphysis of lower jaw. 

Inferior dental canal. 

Coronoid process of lower jaw. 

Condyle. 

Angle. 

Stylo-hyal. 

Basi-hyal. 

Thyro-hyal. 



which projects into the posterior nares, and when embraced by the 
soft palate forms a continuous passage between the nostrils and the 
trachea, or wind-pipe, in a more perfect manner. The brain is 
relatively large, round in form, with its surface divided into numerous 
and complex convolutions. The kidneys are deeply lobulated ; the 
testes are abdominal; and there are no vesiculae seminales nor an 
os penis. The uterus is bicorriuate ; the placenta non-deciduate and 
diffuse. The two teats are placed in depressions on each side of the 
genital aperture. The ducts of the milk-glands are dilated during 
suckling into large reservoirs, into which the milk collects, and from 
which it is injected by the action of a muscle into the mouth of the 
young animal, so that sucking under water is greatly facilitated. 

Whales and porpoises are found in all seas, and some dolphins 
and porpoises are inhabitants of the larger rivers of South America 
and Asia. Their organization necessitates their passing their 
life entirely in the water, as on land they are absolutely helpless. 
They have, however, to rise very frequently to the surface for 
the purpose of respiration; and, in relation to the upward and 
downward movement in the water thus necessitated, the principal 
instrument of motion, the tail, is expanded horizontally. The 
position of the nostril on the highest part of the head is important 
for this mode of life, as it is the only part of the body the exposure 



77Q 



CETACEA 



of which above the surface is absolutely necessary. Of numerous 
erroneous ideas connected with natural history, few are so 
widespread as that whales spout through their blow-holes water 
taken in at the mouth. But the " spouting," or " blowing," of 
whales is nothing more than the ordinary act of expiration, 
which, taking place at longer intervals than land-animals, is 
performed with a greater emphasis. The moment the animal 
rises to the surface it forcibly expels from its lungs the air taken 
in at the last inspiration, which is charged with vapour in con- 
sequence of the respiratory changes. This rapidly condensing in 
the cold atmosphere in which the phenomenon is often observed, 
forms a column of steam or spray, which has been taken for 
water. It happens, however, especially when the surface of the 
ocean is agitated into waves, that the animal commences its 
expiratory puff before the orifice has cleared the top of the water, 
some of which may thus be driven upwards with the blast, tending 
to complete the illusion. From photographs of spouting rorquals, 
it appears that the height and volume of the " spout " of all the 
species is much less than was supposed to be the case by the older 
observers; even that of the huge " sulphur-bottom " (Balaeno- 
plera sibbaldi) averaging only about 14 ft. in height, although it 
may occasionally reach 20 ft. 

As regards their powers of hearing, the capacity of cetaceans 
for receiving (and acting upon) sound-waves is demonstrated by 
the practice of shouting on the part of the fishermen when engaged 
in driving a shoal of porpoises or black-fish into shallow water, for 
the purpose of frightening their intended victims. As regards the 
possession of a voice by cetaceans, it is stated that one species, 
the " buckelwal " of the Germans, utters during the breeding- 
season a prolonged scream, comparable to the scream of a steam- 
siren, and embracing the whole musical scale, from base to treble. 
In respect of anatomical considerations, it is true that the external 
ear is much reduced, the " pinna " being absent, and the tube 
or " meatus " of very small calibre. On the other hand, the 
internal auditory organs are developed on the plan of those of 
ordinary mammals, but display certain peculiar modifications 
(notably the remarkable shell-like form of the tympanic bone) 
for intensifying and strengthening the sound-waves as they are 
received from the water. It seems, therefore, perfectly evident 
that whales must hear when in the water. This inference is 
confirmed by the comparatively small development of the other 
sense-organs. The eye, for instance, is very small, and can be 
of little use even at the comparatively small depths to which 
whales are now believed to descend. Again, the sense of smell, 
judging from the rudimentary condition of the olfactory organs, 
must be in abeyance; and whales have no sense-organs com- 
parable to the lateral-line-system of fishes. Consequently, 
it would seem that when below the surface of the water they must 
depend chiefly upon the sense of hearing. Probably this sense 
is so highly developed as to enable the animals, in the midst of 
the vibrations made by the screw-like movements of the tail, or 
flukes, to distinguish the sound (or the vibrations) made by the 
impact of water against rocks, even in a dead calm, and, in the 
case of piscivorous species, to recognize by the pulse in the water 
the presence of a shoal of fish. Failing this explanation, it is 
difficult to imagine how whales can find their way about in the 
semi-darkness, and avoid collisions with rocks and rock-bound 
coasts. 

In the Christiania Nyt Magazin for Nalurvidenskaberne, vol. 
xxxviii., Dr G. Guldberg has published some observations on the 
body-temperature of the Cetacea, in which he shows how extremely 
imperfect is our knowledge of this subject. As he remarks, it is a 
matter of extreme difficulty to obtain the temperature of living 
cetaceans, although this has been taken in the case of a white-whale 
and a dolphin, which some years ago were kept in confinement in a 
pond in the United States. With the larger whales such a mode of 
procedure is, however, obviously quite impracticable, and we have, 
accordingly, to rely on post-mortem observations. The layer of 
blubber by which all cetaceans are protected from cold renders the 
post-mortem refrigeration of the blood a much slower process than 
in most mammals, so that such observations have a much higher 
value than might at first be supposed to be the case. Indeed, the 
blood-temperature of a specimen of Sibbald's rorqual three days 
after death still stood at 34° C. The various observations that 
have been taken have afforded the following results in individual 



cases: Sperm-whale, 40° C. ; Greenland right-whale, 38-8° C.; 
porpoise, 35-6° C. ; liver of a second individual, 37-8 C.; common 
rorqual, 35-4° C. ; dolphin, 35-6° C. The average blood-temperature 
of man is 37 C, and that of other mammals 39 C. ; while that of 
birds is 42 s C. The record of 40 C. in the case of the sperm-whale 
seems to indicate that at least some cetaceans have a relatively 
high temperature. 

With the possible exception of one West African dolphin, all 
the Cetacea are predaceous, subsisting on living animal food of 
some kind. One kind alone (Orca) eats other warm-blooded 
animals, as seals, and even members of its own order, both large 
and small. Many feed on fish, others on small floating crusta- 
ceans, pteropods and jelly-fishes, while the principal staple of 
the food of many is constituted by cuttle-fishes and squids. In 
size cetaceans vary much, some of the smaller dolphins scarcely 
exceeding 4 ft. in length, while whales are the most colossal of 
all animals. It is true that many statements of their bulk are 
exaggerated, but the actual dimensions of the larger species 
exceed those of all other animals, not even excluding the extinct 
dinosaurian reptiles. With some exceptions, cetaceans are 
generally timid, inoffensive animals, active in their movements 
and affectionate in their disposition towards one another, 
especially the mother towards the young, of which there is 
usually but one, or at most two at a time. They are generally 
gregarious, swimming in herds or " schools," sometimes amount- 
ing to many thousands in number; though some species are 
met with either singly or in pairs. 

Commercially these animals are of importance on account 
of the oil yielded by the blubber of all of them; while whalebone, 
spermaceti and ambergris are still more valuable products 
yielded by certain species. Within the last few years whalebone 
has been sold in America for £2900 per ton, while it is also asserted 
that £3000 per ton has been paid for two and a quarter tons at 
Aberdeen, although there teems to be some degree of doubt 
attaching to the statement. Soon after the middle of the last 
century, the price of this commodity was as low as £150 per ton, 
but, according to Mr Frank Buckland, it suddenly leapt up to 
£620 with the introduction of " crinoline " into ladies' costume, 
and it has apparently been on the rise ever since. Ambergris, 
which is very largely used in perfumery, is solely a product of 
the sperm-whale, and appears to be a kind of biliary calculus. 
It generally contains a number of the horny beaks of the cuttle- 
fishes and squids upon which these whales chiefly feed. Its 
market-price is subject to considerable variation, but from £3 to 
£4 per oz. is the usual average for samples of good quality. In 
1898 a merchant in Mincing Lane was the owner of a lump of 
ambergris weighing 270 lb, which was sold in Paris for about 
85s. per oz., or £18,360. 

Whalebone Whales. — Existing Cetacea are divisible into two 
sections, or suborders, the relationships of which are by no means 
clearly apparent. The first section is that of the whalebone whales, 
or Mystacoceti, in which no functional teeth are developed, although 
there are tooth-germs during foetal life. The palate is furnished 
with plates of baleen or whalebone; the skull is symmetrical; and 
the nasal bones form a roof to the nasal passages, which are directed 
upwards and forwards. The maxilla is produced in front of, but not 
over, the orbital process of the frontal. The lacrymal is small and 
distinct from the jugal. The tympanic is welded with the periotic, 
which is attached to the base of the skull by two strong diverging 
processes. The olfactory organ is distinctly developed. The two 
halves of the lower jaw are arched outwards, their anterior ends 
meeting at an angle, and connected by fibrous tissue without any 
symphysis. All the ribs at their upper extremity articulate only 
with the transverse processes of the vertebrae; their capitular 
processes when present not articulating directly with the bodies of 
the vertebrae. The sternum is composed of a single piece, and 
articulates only with a single pair of ribs ; and there are no ossified 
sternal ribs. External openings of nostrils distinct from each other, 
longitudinal. A short conical caecum. 

When in the foetal state these whales have numerous minute 
teeth lying in the dental groove of both upper and lower jaws. 
They are best developed about the middle of foetal life, after which 
they are absorbed, and no trace of them remains at the time of birth. 
The whalebone does not make its appearance until after birth; 
and consists of a series of flattened horny plates, between three and 
four hundred in number, on each side of the palate, with a bare 
interval along the middle line. The plates are placed transversely 
to the long axis of the palate, with short intervals between them. 
Each plate or blade is somewhat triangular in form, with the base 



CETACEA 



771 



attached to the palate and the apex hanging downwards. The outer 
edge of the blade is hard and smooth, but the inner edge and apex 
fray out into long bristly fibres, so that the roof of the whale s mouth 
looks as if covered with hair, as described by Aristotle. At the inner 
edge of each principal blade are two or three much smaller or sub- 
sidiary blades. The principal blades are longest near the middle of 
the series and gradually diminish towards the front and back ot the 
mouth. The horny plates grow from a fibrous and vascular matrix, 
which covers the palatal surface of the maxillae, and sends out plate- 
like processes, one of which penetrates the base of each blade. 
Moreover, the free edges of these processes are covered with long 
vascular thread-like papillae, one of which forms the central axis ot 
each of the hair-like fibres mainly composing the blade. A transverse 
section of fresh whalebone shows that it is made up of numbers 01 
these soft vascular papillae, circular in outline, and surrounded by 
concentrically arranged epidermic cells, the whole bound together 
by other epidermic cells, that constitute the smooth (so-called 
"enamel ") surface of the blade, which, disintegrating at the tree 
edge, allows the individual fibres to become loose and assume a 
hair-like appearance. 

Whalebone really consists of modified papillae of the mucous 
membrane of the mouth, with an excessive and horny epithelial 
development. The blades are supported and bound together for a 
certain distance from their base, by a mass of less hardened epi- 
thelium, secreted by the surface of the palatal membrane or matrix 
of the whalebone in the intervals of the plate-like processes, this is 
the " gum " of the whalers. Whalebone varies much in colour in 
different species; in some it is almost jet black, in others slate colour, 
horn colour, yellow, or even creamy-white. In some descriptions 
the blades are variegated with longitudinal stripes of different hues. 
It differs also greatly in other respects, being short, thick, coarse, 
and stiff in some cases, and greatly elongated and highly elastic in 
those species in which it has attained its fullest development. Its 
function is to strain the water from the small marine molluscs, 
crustaceans, or fish upon which the whales subsist. In feeding, whales 
fill the immense mouth with water containing shoals of these small 
creatures, and then, on closing the jaws and raising the tongue, so 
as to diminish the cavity of the mouth, the water streams out through 
the narrow intervals between the hairy fringe of the whalebone 
blades, and escapes through the lips, leaving the living prey to be 

Although sometimes divided into two families, Balaenidae and 
Balaenopteridae, whalebone-whales are best included in a single 
family group under the former name. The typical members of this 
family are the so-called right-whales, forming the genus Balaena, 
in which there are no folds on the throat and chest, and no back-nn; 
while the cervical vertebrae are fused into a single mass. The flippers 
are short and broad, with five digits; the head is very large and the 
whalebone very long and narrow, highly elastic and black; while 
the scapula is high, with a distinct coracoid and coronoid process. 
This genus contains the well-known Greenland right-whale (3. 
mysticetus) of the Arctic seas, the whalebone and oil of which are so 
much valued in commerce, and also other whales, distinguished bv 
having the head somewhat smaller in proportion to the body, with 
shorter whalebone and a larger number of vertebrae. These inhabit 
the temperate seas of both northern and southern hemispheres, and 
have been divided into species in accordance with their geographical 
distribution, such as B. biscayensis of the North Atlantic, B.japonica 
of the North Pacific, B. australis of the South Atlantic, and B. 
antipodarum and novae-zelandiae of the South Pacific; but the 
differences between them are so small that they may probably be 
regarded as races of a single species, the black whale (B australis). 
On the head these whales carry a peculiar structure which is known 
to whalers as the " bonnet." This is a large horny excrescence, 
worn into hollows like a much-denuded piece of limestone rock, 
growing probably in the neighbourhood of the blow-hole. More 
than one theory has been suggested to account for its presence. 
One suggestion is that it indicates the descent of whales from rhino- 
ceros-like mammals; another that this species of whale is in the 
habit of rubbing against rocks in order to free itself from barnacles, 
and thus produces a kind of corn— although why on the nose alone 
is not stated Dr W. G. Ridewood, however, considers that the 
structure is due to the fact that the horny layers which are produced 
all over the skin are not shed on this particular spot. 

The pigmy whale (NVbbalaena marginata) represents a genus 
agreeing with the right-whales in the absence of throat-nutings 
and with the rorquals in the presence of a dorsal fin. I he cervical 
vertebrae are united, and there are only 43 vertebrae altogether. 
The flippers are small, narrow, and with only four digits. 1 he ribs 
remarkably expanded and flattened; the scapula low and broad, 
with completely developed acromion and coracoid processes. 1 he 
whalebone is long, slender, elastic and white. The species which 
inhabits the South American, Australian and New Zealand seas is 
the smallest of the whalebone-whales, being not more than 20 ft. in 
lcnsfth 

In contrast to the preceding is the great grey whale {RacHanectes 
glaucus) of the North Pacific, which combines the relatively small 
head, elongated shape, and narrow flippers of the fin-whales, with 
the smooth throat and absence of a back-fin distinctiveof the right- 
whales. The whalebone is shorter and coarser than in any other 



species. In the skeleton the cervical vertebrae are free, and the first 
two ribs on each side expanded and united to form a large bony 
shield. In the humpback-whale (Megaptera longimana or loops) 
the head is of moderate size, the whalebone-plates are short and 
wide, and the cervical vertebrae free. The skin of the throat is 
fluted so as to form an expansible pouch ; there is a low back-fin ; 
and the flippers, which have four digits each, are extremely long, 
equalling about one-fourth the total length of the animal. The 
acromion and coracoid processes of the scapula are rudimentary. 
See Humpback-Whale. . 

The right-whales are built for cruising slowly about m search ot 
the shoals of small floating invertebrates which form their food, and 
are consequently broad in beam, with a float-shaped body and im- 
movable neck. The humpback is of somewhat similar build, but 
with a smaller head, and probably attains considerable speed owing 
to the length of its flippers. The finners, or rorquals (Balaenoptera) , 
which prey largely on fish, are built entirely for speed, and are the 
ocean greyhounds of the group. Their bodies are consequently long 
and attenuated, and their necks are partially mobile; while they are 
furnished with capacious pouches for storing their food. They 
chiefly differ from the humpback by the smaller head, long and 
slender build, small, narrow, and pointed flippers, each containing 
four digits, and the large acromion and coracoid processes to the low 
and broad scapula. Rorquals are found in almost every sea. Among 
them are the most gigantic of all animals, B. sibbaldi, which attains 
the length of 80 ft., and the small B. rostrata, which does not exceed 
30. There are certainly four distinct modifications of this genus, 
represented by the two just mentioned, and by B. musculus and 
B. borealis, all inhabitants of British seas, but the question whether 
almost identical forms found in the Indian, Southern and Pacific 
Oceans are to be regarded as specifically identical or as distinct 
awaits future researches, although some of these have already 
received distinct names. See Rorqual. 

In the report on the zoology of the Discovery expedition, 
published in 1907 by the British Museum, E. A. Wilson describes a 
whale frequenting the fringe of the Antarctic ice which indicates 
a new generic type. Mainly black in colour, these whales measure 
about 20 or 30 ft. in length, and have a tall dorsal fin like that of a 
killer. . , 

Toothed Whales.— -The second suborder is represented by the 
toothed whales, or Odontoceti, in which there is no whalebone, and 
teeth, generally numerous, though sometimes reduced to a single 
pair, and occasionally wanting, are normally developed. Unlike 
that of the whalebone-whales, the upper surface of the skull is more 
or less unsymmetrical. The nasal bones are in the form of nodules or 
flattened plates, applied closely to the frontals, and not forming 
any part of the roof to the nasal passage, which is directed upwards 
and backwards. The olfactory organ is rudimentary or absent. 
Hinder end of the maxilla expanded and covering the greater part of 
the orbital plate of the frontal bone. Lacrymal bone either in- 
separable from the jugal, or, if distinct, large, and forming part of the 
roof of the orbit. Tympanic bone not welded with the penotic, 
which is usually only attached to the rest of the skull by ligament. 
Two halves of the lower jaw nearly straight, expanded in height 
posteriorly, with a wide funnel-shaped aperture to the dental canal, 
and coming in contact in front by a flat surface of variable length 
but constituting a symphysis. Several of the anterior ribs with 
well-developed capitular processes, which articulate with the bodies 
of the vertebrae. Sternum almost always composed of several pieces, 
placed one behind the other, with which several pairs of ribs are 
connected by well-developed cartilaginous or ossified sternal ribs. 
External respiratory aperture single, the two nostrils uniting before 
they reach the surface, usually in the form of a transverse sub- 
crescentic valvular aperture, situated on the top of the head. 
Flippers with five digits, though the first and fifth are usually little 
developed. No caecum, except in Platanista. 

The first family, Physeteridae, is typified by the sperm-whale, 
and characterized by the absence of functional teeth in the upper 
jaw; the lower teeth being various, and often much reduced in 
number. Bones of the skull raised so as to form an elevated promin- 
ence or crest behind the nostrils. Pterygoid bones thick, produced 
backwards, meeting in the middle line, and not involuted to form 
the outer wall of the post-palatine air-sinuses, but simply hollowed 
on their outer side. Transverse processes of the arches of the dorsal 
vertebrae, to which the tubercles of the ribs are attached, ceasing 
abruptly near the end of the series, and replaced by processes on the 
body at a lower level, and serially homologous anteriorly with the 
heads of the ribs, and posteriorly with the transverse processes of 
the lumbar vertebrae. Costal cartilages not ossified. ... ., 

The first group, or Physeterinae, includes the sperm-whale ltseli, 
and is characterized by the presence of a full series of lower teeth, 
which are set in a groove in place of sockets, the groove being im- 
perfectly divided by partial septa, and the teeth held in place by the 
strong fibrous gum. No distinct lacrymal bone. Skull strikingly 
asymmetrical in the region of the nasal apertures, in consequence 
of the left opening greatly exceeding the right in size. 

In the sperm-whale ((Physeter macrocephalus) the upper teeth 
are apparently of uncertain number, rudimentary and functicnless, 
being embedded in the gum. Lower jaw with from 20 to 25 
teeth on each side, stout, conical, recurved and pointed at the apejc 



772 



CETACEA 



until they are worn, without enamel. Upper surface of the skull 
concave ; its posterior and lateral edges raised into a very high and 
greatly compressed semicircular crest or wall (fig. 2). Zygomatic 
processes of jugal bones thick and massive. Muzzle greatly elon- 
gated, broad at the base, and gradually tapering to the apex. Lower 




Fig. 2. — Skull of Sperm-Whale {Physeter macrocephalus). 

jaw exceedingly long and narrow, the symphysis being more than 
half the length. Vertebrae: C 7, D 11, L 8, Ca 24; total 50. Atlas, 
or first vertebra, free; all the other cervical vertebrae united 
by their bodies and spines into a single mass. Eleventh pair of 
ribs rudimentary. Head about one-third the length of the body; 
very massive, high and truncated, and rather compressed in front; 
owing its huge size and form mainly to the accumulation of a mass 
of fatty tissue filling the large hollow on the upper surface of the 
skull and overlying the long muzzle. The single blow-hole is longi- 
tudinal, slightly S-shaped, and placed at the upper and 
anterior extremity of the head to the left side of the middle 
line. The opening of the mouth is on the under side of the 
head, considerably behind the end of the snout. Flippers 
short, broad and truncated. Dorsal fin represented by a low 
protuberance. See Sperm-Whale. 

In the lesser or pigmy sperm-whale (Cogia breviceps) 
there may be a pair of rudimentary teeth in the upper jaw, 
while on each side of the lower jaw there are from 9 to 12 
rather long, slender, pointed and curved teeth, with a coat- 
ing of enamel. Upper surface of the skull concave, with 
thick, raised, posterior and lateral margins, massive and rounded 
at their anterior terminations above the orbits. Muzzle not longer 
than the cranial position of the skull, broad at the base, and rapidly 
tapering to the apex. Zygomatic process of the jugal rod-like. 
Lower jaw with symphysis less than half its length. Vertebrae: 
C 7, D 13 or 14, L and Ca 30; total 50 or 51. All the cervical ver- 
tebrae united by their bodies and arches. The head is about one- 
sixth of the length of the body, and obtusely pointed in front; the 
mouth small and placed far below the apex of the snout ; the blow-hole 



in the middle line and in front; their outer edges, especially that of 
the right, expanded over the front of the inner border of the maxilla. 
Very high longitudinal crests on the maxillae at the base of the beak, 
extending backwards almost to the nostrils, approaching each other 
in the middle line above; sometimes compressed and sometimes so 
massive that their inner edges come almost in contact. Preorbital 
notch distinct, and mesethmoid cartilage slightly ossified. Verte- 
brae: C 7, D 9, L 10, Ca 19; total 45. All the cervical vertebrae 
united. Upper surface of the head in front of the blowhole very 
prominent and rounded, rising abruptly from above the small, 
distinct snout. Two species are known. See Bottle-nose Whale. 

The typical representative of the beaked whales is Ziphius cuvieri, 
in which there is a single conical tooth of moderate size on each side 
close to the anterior extremity of the lower jaw, directed forwards 
and upwards. Skull with the premaxillae immediately in front and 
at the sides of the nostrils expanded, hollowed, with elevated lateral 
margins, the posterior ends rising to the vertex and curving forwards, 
the right being considerably more developed than the left. The 
conjoint nasals form a pronounced symmetrical eminence at the top of 
the skull, projecting forwards over the nostrils, fiat above, prominent 
and rounded in the middle line in front, and separated by a notch 
on each side from the premaxillae. Preorbital notch not distinct. 
Rostrum (seen from above) triangular, tapering from the base to the 
apex; upper and outer edges of maxillae at base of rostrum raised 
into low roughened tuberosities. Mesethmoid cartilage densely 
ossified in adult age, and coalescing with the surrounding bones of 
the rostrum. Vertebrae: C 7, D 10, L 10, Ca 22; total 49. The 
three anterior cervical vertebrae united, the rest free. 

In the numerous species of the allied genus Mesoplodon there is a 
much-compressed and pointed tooth in each half of the lower jaw, 




Fig. 4. — Sowerby's Beaked Whale {Mesoplodon bidens). 




Fig. 3. — Bottle-nose (Hyperobdon rostratus) 



the coast of Scotland, 1882. 

crescentic, and placed obliquely on the crown of the head in advance 
of the eyes and to the left of the middle line ; while the flippers are 
bluntly sickle-shaped, and the back-fin triangular. This species 
attains a length of from 9 to 13 ft. 

A second subfamily is represented by the bottle-noses and beaked 
whales, and known as the Ziphiinae. In this group the lower teeth 
are rudimentary and concealed in the gum, except one, or rarely 
two, pairs which may be largely developed, especially in the male. 
There is a distinct lacrymal bone. Externally the mouth is produced 
into a slender rostrum or beak, from above which the rounded 
eminence formed by a cushion of fat resting on the cranium in front 
of the blow-hole rises somewhat abruptly. The blow-hole is single, 
crescentic and median, as in the Delphinidae. Flippers small, ovate, 
with five digits moderately well developed. A small obtuse dorsal 
fin situated considerably behind the middle of the back. Longi- 
tudinal grooves on each side of the skin of the throat, diverging 
posteriorly, and nearly meeting in front. In external characters 
and habits the whales of this group closely resemble each other. 
They appear to be almost exclusively feeders on cuttle-fishes, and 
occur either singly, in pairs, or in small herds. By their dental and 
osteological characters they are easily separated into four genera. 

In the first of these, Hyperobdon, or bottle-nose, there is a small 
conical pointed tooth at the apex of each half of the lower jaw, 
concealed by the gum during life. Skull with the upper ends of the 
premaxillae rising suddenly behind the nostrils to the vertex and 
expanded laterally, their outer edges curving backwards and their 
anterior surfaces arching forwards and overhanging the nostrils; 
the right larger than the left. Nasal bones lying in the hollow 
between the upper extremities of the premaxillae, strongly concave 



variously situated, but generally at some distance behind the apex; 
its point directed upwards, and often somewhat backwards, occasion- 
ally developed to a great size. In the skull the region round the 
nostrils is as in Hyperobdon, except that the nasals are narrow and 
more sunk between the upper ends of the premaxillae ; like those of 
Hyperobdon, they are concave in the middle line in front and above. 
No maxillary tuberosities. Preorbital notch not very distinct. 
Rostrum long and narrow. Mesethmoid in the adult ossified in its 
entire length, and coalescing with the surrounding bones. Verte- 
brae : C 7, D 10, L 10 or 1 1, Ca 19 or 20 ; total 46 to 48. Two 
or three anterior cervicals united, the rest usually free. 

Though varying in form, the lower teeth of the different 
members of this genus agree in their essential structure, 
having a small and pointed enamel-covered crown, com- 
posed of dentine, which, instead of surmounting a root of 
the ordinary character, is raised upon a solid mass of osteo- 
dentine, the continuous growth of which greatly alters the 
From a specimen taken off form and general appearance of the tooth as age advances, 



as in the case of M. layardi, where the long, narrow, flat, strap- 
like teeth, curving inwards at their extremities, meet over 
the rostrum, and interfere with the movements of the jaw. In one 
species (M.grayi) a row of minute, conical, pointed teeth, like 
those of ordinary Dolphins, 17 to 19 in number, is present even in 
the adults, on each side of the middle part of the upper jaw, but 
embedded by their roots only in the gum, and not in bony sockets. 
This, with the frequent presence of rudimentary teeth in other 
species of this genus, indicates that the beaked whales are derived 




Fig. 5. — Skull of a Beaked Whale (Mesoplodon densirostris). 

from ancestral forms with teeth of normal character in both jaws. 
The species are distributed in both northern and southern hemi- 
spheres, but most'frequent in the latter. Among them are M . bidens, 
M. europaeus, M. densirostris, M. layardi, M. grayi and M. hectori; 
but there is still much to be learned with regard to their characters 



CETACEA 



773 



and distribution. This group was abundant in the Pliocene age, as 
attested by the frequency with which the imperishable long, cylin- 
drical rostrum of the skull, of more than ivory denseness, is found 
among the rolled and waterworn animal remains which compose 
the " bone-bed " at the base of the Red Crag of Suffolk. 

Finally, in Arnoux's beaked whale (Berardtus arnouxi), of New 
Zealand, which grows to a length of 30 ft., there are two moderate- 
sized, compressed, pointed teeth, on each side of the symphysis 
of the lower jaw, with their summits directed forwards, the anterior 
being the larger of the two and close to the front of the jaw. Upper 
ends of the premaxillae nearly symmetrical, moderately elevated, 
slightly expanded, and not curved forward over the nostrils. Nasals 
broad, massive and rounded, of nearly equal size, forming the vertex 
of the skull, flattened in front, most prominent in the middle line. 
Preorbital notch distinct. Rostrum long and narrow. Mesethmoid 
partially ossified. Small rough eminences on the outer edge of the 
upper surface of the maxillae at base of rostrum. Vertebrae: 




Fig. 6. — The Susu, or Ganges Dolphin {Platanista gangetica). 



C 7, D 10, L 12, Ca 19; total 48. The three anterior cervicals 
welded, the rest free and well developed. Apparently this whale 
has the power of thrusting its teeth up and down, exposing them to 
view when attacked. 

In a family by themselves— the Platinishdae — are placed three 
cetaceans which differ from the members of the preceding and the 
following groups in the mode of articulation of the ribs with the 
vertebrae, as the tubercular and capitular articulations, distinct at 
the commencement of the series, gradually blend together, as in 
most mammals. The cervical vertebrae are all free. The lacrymal 
bone is not distinct from the jugal. The jaws are long and narrow, 
with numerous teeth in both; the symphysis of the lower one 
exceeding half its length. Externally the head is divided from the 
body by a slightly constricted neck. Pectoral limbs broad and 
truncated. Dorsal fin small or obsolete. In habits these dolphins are 
fluviatile or estuarine. In the Indian susu, or Ganges dolphin 
(Platanisla gangetica), the teeth number about f? on each side, are 
set near together, are rather large, cylindrical, and sharp-pointed 
in the young, but in old animals acquire a large laterally com- 
pressed base, which in the posterior part of the series becomes 
irregularly divided into roots. As the conical enamel-covered crown 
wears away, the teeth of the young and old animals have a totally 
different appearance. The beak and tooth-bearing portion of the 
lower jaw are so narrow that the teeth of the two sides are almost 
in contact. Maxillae supporting large, incurved, compressed bony 
crests, which overarch the nostrils and base of the rostrum, and 
almost meet in the middle line above. Orbits very small and eyes 
rudimentary, without crystalline lens. Blow-hole longitudinal, 
linear. Vertebrae: C 7, D 1 1, L 8, Ca 25; total 51. A small caecum. 
No pelvic bones. Dorsal fin represented by a low ridge. . 

The second genus is represented by Inia geoffroyi, of the 
Amazon, in which the teeth vary from 26 to 33 pairs in each 




Fig. 7. — River Plate Dolphin (Slenodelphis blainvilki). 

jaw; those at the posterior part with a distinct tubercle at the inner 
side of the base of the crown. Vertebrae: C 7, D 13, L 3, Ca 18; 
total 41. Transverse processes of lumbar vertebrae very broad. 
Sternum short and broad, and consisting of a single segment only. 
Dorsal fin a mere ridge. The long cylindrical rostrum externally 
furnished with scattered, stout and crisp hairs. The third type is 
Stenodelphis blainvilki, the River Plate dolphin, a small brown 
species (fig. 7), with from 50 to 60 pairs of teeth in each jaw, 
furnished with a cingulum at the base of the crown. Jaws very long 
and slender. Vertebrae: C 7, D 10, L 5, Ca 19; total 41. Trans- 
verse processes of the lumbar vertebrae extremely broad. Sternum 
elongated, composed of two segments, with four sternal ribs attached. 
Dorsal fin rather small, triangular, pointed. Blow-hole transverse. 
In several respects this species connects the two preceding ones 
with the Delphinidae (see Dolphin). 

The last family of existing cetaceans is the above-mentioned 
Delphinidae, which includes the true dolphins, porpoises, grampuses 
and their relatives. As a rule there are numerous teeth in both jaws ; 
and the pterygoid bones of the skull are short, thin and involuted 
to form with a process of the palate bone the outer wall of the post- 



palatine air-sinus. Symphysis of lower jaw short, or moderate, never 
exceeding one-third the length of the jaw. Lacrymal bone not 
distinct from the jugal. Transverse processes of the dorsal verte- 
brae gradually transferred from the arches to the bodies of the 
vertebrae without any sudden break, and becoming posteriorly 
continuous serially with the transverse processes of the lumbar 
vertebrae. Anterior ribs attached to the * 

transverse process by the tubercle, and to 
the body of the vertebra by the head; the 
latter attachment lost in the posterior ribs. 
Sternal ribs ossified. The blow-hole is trans- 
verse, crescentic, with the horns of the 
crescent pointing forwards. 

First on the long list is the narwhal, 
Monodon monoceros, in which, apart from 
some irregular rudimentary teeth, the denti- 
tion is reduced to a single pair of teeth which 
lie horizontally in the maxilla, and in the 
female remain permanently concealed within 
the socket, so that this sex is practically 
toothless, while in the male (fig. 8), the 
right tooth usually remains similarly con- 
cealed while the left is immensely developed, 
attaining a length equal to more than half 
that of the entire animal, projecting hori- 
zontally from the head in the form of a 
cylindrical, or slightly tapering, pointed 
tusk, without enamel, and with the surface 
marked by spiral grooves and ridges, running 
in a sinistral direction. Vertebrae: C 7, 
D II, L 6, Ca 26; total 50. Cervical region 
comparatively long, and all the vertebrae 
distinct, or with irregular unions towards 
the middle of the series, the atlas and axis 
being usually free. Flipper small, short 
and broad, with the second and third digits 
nearly equal, the fourth slightly shorter. 
No dorsal fin. See Narwhal. 

Closely allied is the beluga or white-whale 
(Delphinapterus leucas), of the Arctic seas, 
in which, however, there are from eight to 
ten pairs of teeth in each jaw, occupying 
the anterior three-fourths of the rostrum and 
corresponding portion of the lower jaw, 
rather small, conical, and pointed when 
unworn, but usually become obliquely trun- 
cated, separated by intervals considerably 
wider than the diameter of the tooth, and 
implanted obliquely, the crowns inclining 
forwards especially in the upper jaw. Skull 
rather narrow and elongated, depressed. Pre- 
maxillae convex in front of the nostrils. 
Rostrum about equal in length to the cranial 
portion of the skull, triangular, broad at the 
base, and gradually contracting towards the 
apex, where it is somewhat curved down- 
wards. Vertebrae: C 7, D II, L 9, Ca 23; 
total 50. Cervical vertebrae free. Flippers 
broad, short and rounded, all the digits being 
tolerably well developed, except the first. 
Anterior part of head rounded ; no distinct 
snout. No dorsal fin, but a low ridge in its 
place. See Beluga. 

In all the remaining genera of Delphinidae 
the cervical region of the vertebral column is 
very short, and the first two, and usually 
more, of the vertebrae are firmly united. 
The common porpoise (Phocaena communis, 
or P. phocaena) is the typical representa- 
tive of the first genus, in which the teeth 
vary from jf to ff, are small, and occupy 
nearly the whole length of the rostrum, with 

compressed, spade-shaped crowns, separated male Narwhal (Mono- 
from the root by a constricted neck, don monoceros), with 
Rostrum rather shorter than the cranium the whole of both 
proper, broad at the base and tapering to- teeth exposed by re- 
wards the apex. Premaxillae raised into moval of the upper 
tuberosities in front of the nostrils. The wall of their alveolar 
frontalbonesformasomewhatsquareelevated cavities, 
protuberance in the middle line of the * 
skull behind the nostrils, rising above the flattened nasals. Sym- 
physis of lower jaw very short. Vertebrae: C 7, D 13, L 14, Ca 30; 
total 64. First to sixth cervical vertebrae and sometimes the seventh 
also, coalesced. Flippers of moderate size, oval, slightly sickle- 
shaped, with the second and third digits nearly equal in length, and 
the fourth and fifth well developed, but shorter. Head short, 
moderately rounded in front of the blow-hole. Dorsal fin near the 
middle of the back, triangular; its height considerably less than 
the length of the base; its anterior edge frequently furnished With 
one or more rows of conical horny tubercles. 



[A- 



m 



Fig, 8. — Upper sur- 
face of the Skull of 



774 



CETACEA 



The porpoise, which is so common in British waters and the 
Atlantic, seldom enters the Mediterranean, and apparently never 
resides there. There is, however, a porpoise in the Black Sea, which, 
according to Dr O. Abel, is entitled to rank as a distinct species, with 
the name of Phocaena relicla. This Black Sea porpoise is readily 
distinguished from the Atlantic species by the contour of the profile 
of the head, which, in place of forming a continuous curve from the 
muzzle to what represents the neck, has a marked prominence above 
the angle of the mouth, followed by an equally marked depression. 
The teeth are also different in form and number. The absence of 
porpoises from the Mediterranean is explained by Dr Abel on account 
of the greater saltness of that sea as compared with the ocean in 
general ; his idea being that these cetaceans are near akin to fresh- 
water members of the group, and therefore unsuited to withstand 
an excessively saline medium. From the Taman Peninsula, on the 




Fig. 9. — Beluga or White-Whale [Delphinapterus leucas). ' From a specimen 
taken in the river St Lawrence and exhibited in London, 1877. 

north shore of the Black Sea, the same writer has described an extinct 
type of ancestral porpoise, under the name of Palaeophocaena andrus- 
sowi. Another species is the wholly black P. spinipennis, typically 
from South America. Black is also the hue of the Indian porpoise 
(Neophocaena phocaenoides) , which wants a dorsal fin, and has 
eighteen pairs of teeth rather larger than those of the ordinary 
porpoise. (See Porpoise.) 

Next comes the Indo-Malay genus Orcella, in which the \l to \%, 
small, conical teeth are pointed, rather closely set, and occupy 
nearly the whole length of the rostrum. Skull sub-globular, high. 
Rostrum nearly equal in length to the cranial portion of the skull, 
tapering. Flippers of moderate size, not elongated, but somewhat 
pointed, with all the bones of the digits broader than long, except 
the first phalanges of the index and third fingers. Head globular 
in front. Dorsal fin rather small, placed behind the middle of the 
body. Two species, both of small size — 0. breviroslris, from the 
Bay of Bengal, and O. fluminalis, from the Irrawaddy river, from 
300 to 900 m. from the sea. 

In the grampus, or killer, Orca gladiator (or 0. orca) the teeth form 
about twenty pairs, above and below, occupying nearly the whole 
length of the rostrum, very large and stout, with conical recurved 
crowns and large roots, expanded laterally and flattened, or rather 
hollowed, on the anterior and posterior surfaces. Rostrum about 
equal in length to the cranial part of the skull, broad and flattened 
above, rounded in front; premaxillae broad and rather concave in 
front of the nostrils, contracted at the middle of the rostrum, and 
expanding again towards the apex. Vertebrae: C 7, D 11-12, 
L 10, Ca 23; total 51 or 52; bodies of the first and second and 
sometimes the third cervical vertebrae united; the rest free. 




Fig. 10. — The Grampus or Killer (Orca gladiator] 



Flippers very large, ovate, nearly as broad as long, with all the 

Ehalanges and metacarpals broader than long. General form of 
ody robust. Face short and rounded. Dorsal fin near the middle 
of the back, very high and pointed. See Grampus. 

The lesser killer or black killer, Pseudorca crassidens, has its g^j-j 

teeth confined to the anterior half of the rostrum and corresponding 
part of the lower jaw; they are small, conical, curved and sharp- 
pointed when unworn, but sometimes deciduous in old age. Skull 
broad and depressed ; with the rostrum and cranial portions about 
equal in length. Upper surface of rostrum broad and flat. Pre- 
maxillae concave in front of the nostrils, as wide at the middle of 
the rostrum as at the base, and nearly or completely concealing the 
maxillae in the anterior half of tjiis region. Vertebrae: C 7, D II, 
L 12-14, Ca 28-29; total 58 or 59. Bodies of the anterior five or 
six cervical vertebrae united. Length of the bodies of the lumbar 
and anterior caudal vertebrae about equal to their width. Flippers 
very long and narrow, with the second digit the longest, and having 
as many as 12 or 13 phalanges, the third shorter (with 
9 phalanges), the first, fourth and fifth very short. Fore part 
of the head round, in consequence of the great development of a 



cushion of fat, placed on the rostrum of the skull in front of the 
blow-hole. Dorsal fin low and triangular, the length of its base 
considerably exceeding its vertical height. 

Next comes the ca'ing whale, or black-fish (Globicephalus melas), 
with about ten pairs of upper and lower teeth. Cranial and dental 
characters generally like those of Orca, except that the roots of the 
teeth are cylindrical. Vertebrae: C 7, D 10, L 9, Ca 24; total 50; 
first to sixth or seventh cervical vertebrae united; bodies of the 
lumbar vertebrae distinguished from those of the preceding genera 
by being more elongated, the length being to the width as 3 to 2. 
Flippers of moderate size, narrow and pointed. Dorsal fin situated 
near the middle of the back, of moderate size, and sickle-shaped. 
Head in front of the blow-hole high, and compressed anteriorly, the 
snout truncated. See Ca'ing Whale. 

Risso's dolphin, Grampus griseus, represents another genus, 
characterized by the absence of teeth in the upper and the small 
number of these in the lower jaw (3 to 7 on each side, 
and confined to the region of the symphysis). Vertebrae: C 7, 
D 12, L 19, Ca 30; total 68. General external characters much 
as in Globicephalus, but the fore part of the head less rounded, 
and the flippers less elongated. G. griseus is about 13 ft. long, 
and remarkable for its great variability of colour. It has been 
found, though rarely, in the North Atlantic and Mediterranean. 
The common dolphin (Delphinus delphis) is the typical repre- 
sentative of a large group of relatively small species, some of 
which are wholly marine, while others are more or less completely 
fluviatile. They are divided into a number of genera, such as Prodel- 
phinus, Steno, Lagenorhynchus, Cephalorhynchus, Tursiops, &c, best 
distinguished from one another by the number and size of the teeth, 
the form and relations of the bones on the hinder part of the palate, 
the length of the beak and of the union of the two halves of the lower 
jaw, and the number of vertebrae. For the distinctive characters 
of these genera the reader may refer to one of the works mentioned 
below; and it must suffice to state that, collectively, all these 
dolphins are characterized by the following features. The teeth 
are numerous in both jaws, and more than -§§ in number, occupying 
nearly the whole length of the rostrum, and small, close-set, conical, 
pointed and slightly curved. Rostrum more or less elongated, and 
pointed in front, usually considerably longer than the cranial portion 
of the skull. Vertebrae: C 7, D 12-14, L and Ca variable; total 
51 to 90. Flippers of moderate size, narrow, pointed, somewhat 
sickle-shaped, with the first digit rudimentary, the second longest, 
third nearly equal, and the fourth and fifth extremely short. Ex- 
ternally the head shows a distinct beak or pointed snout, marked 
off from the antenasal fatty elevation by a V-shaped groove. Dorsal 
fin rather large, triangular or sickle-shaped, rarely wanting. A 
curiously marked brown and white species, perhaps referable to 
Lagenorhynchus is found on the fringe of the Antarctic ice (see 
report on the zoology of the " Discovery," published in 1907 by the 
British Museum). See Dolphin. 

Extinct Cetacea. 
At present we are totally in the dark as to the origin of the whale- 
bone-whales, not being even assured that they are derived from the 
same stock as the toothed whales. It is noteworthy, 
however, that some of the fossil representatives of the 
latter have nasal bones of a type recalling those of the 
former. Such fossil whalebone-whales as are known occur 
in Pliocene, and Miocene formations are either referable to 
existing genera, or to more or less nearly related extinct ones, 
such as Plesiocetus, Herpetocetus and Cetotherium. 

The toothed whales, on the other hand, are very largely 
represented in a fossil state, reaching as low in the geological 
series as the upper Cretaceous. Many of these present much 
more generalized characters than their modern represen- 
tatives, while others indicate apparently a transition towards 
the still more primitive zeuglodonts, which, as will be 
shown later, are themselves derived from the creodont 
Carnivora. In the Pliocene deposits of Belgium and Eng- 
land are preserved the teeth and other remains of a number of 
cetaceans, such as Physodon, Encetus, Dinoziphius, Hoplocetus, 
Balaenodon and Scaldicetus, more or less nearly related to the sperm- 
whale, but presenting several primitive characters. A complete 
skull of a member of this group from the Tertiary deposits of Pata- 
gonia, at first referred to Physodon, but subsequently to Scaldicetus, 
has a full series of enamelled teeth in the upper jaw; and it is prob- 
able that the same was the case in other forms. This entails either 
a modification of the definition of the Physeteridae as given above, 
or the creation of a separate family for these primitive sperm-whales. 
In other cases, however, as in the Miocene Prophyseter and Placozi- 
phius, the anterior portion or the whole of the upper jaw had 
already become toothless; and these forms are regarded as indicat- 
ing the descent of the sperm-whales from the under-mentioned 
Squalodon. The beaked whales, again, are believed to be inde- 
pendently descended from the latter type, Berardius being traced 
into the Miocene Mioziphius, Anoplonassa and Palaeoziphius, the 
last of which shows signs in its dentition of approximating to the 
complicated tooth-structure of the squalodonts. 

Another line of descent from the latter, apparently culmin- 
ating in the modern Platanistidae, is represented by the family 



CETHEGUS— CETTE 



775 



Eurhinodelphidae, typified by the European Miocene Eurhtnodelphts, 
but also including the contemporary Patagonian Argyrocetus and the 
nearly allied European Cyrtodelphis. All these were very long-beaked 
dolphins; and in Argyrocetus, at all events, the occipital condyles, 
instead of being closely pressed to the skull, are as prominent as 
in ordinary mammals, while the nasal bones, instead of forming 
mere rudimentary nodules, were squared and roofed over the hind 
part of the nasal chamber. 

In the Miocene Squalodon, representing the family Squalodon- 
tidae, the dentition is differentiated into incisors, canines and cheek- 
teeth, the hinder ones of the latter series having double roots and 
compressed crowns carrying serrations on the hinder edge ; generally 
the dental formula has been given as i. jj, c. {, p. %, m.i, the single- 
rooted cheek-teeth being regarded as premolars and those with 
double roots as molars. Dr Abel is, however, of opinion that the 

formula is better represented as i. \, c. i, p. -^- 9 , «• 1". the teeth 

reckoned as molars corresponding to those of the creodont Carnivora. 
The single-rooted cheek-teeth are regarded as due, not to the division 
of double-rooted ones, but to the fusion of the two roots of teeth 
of the latter type. In Squalodon the nasal bones were of the modern 
nodular type, but in the Miocene Patagonian Prosqualodon they 
partially covered the nasal chamber. 

At present there is a gap between the most primitive squalodonts 
and the Eocene zeuglodonts (Zeuglodontidae), which are regarded by 
Messrs Max Weber, O. Abel and C. W. Andrews as the direct 
forerunners of the modern-toothed whales, forming the sub- 
order Archaeoceti. It is, however, right to mention that some 
authorities refuse to admit the relation of the Archaeoceti to the 
whales. 

In the typical zeuglodonts the long and flat skull has large temporal 
fossae, a strong sagittal crest, a long beak formed mainly by the 
premaxillae (in place of the maxillae, as in modern whales), and long 
nasal bones covering over the nasal chamber, so that the nostrils 
opened about half-way down the beak. All the cervical vertebrae 
were free. Normally the dentition in the typical genus Zeuglodon 
(which is common to the Eocene of North America and Egypt) 
is i. |, c. |, p. i, m. | ; the cheek-teeth being two-rooted, with com- 
pressed pointed crowns, of which the fore-and-aft edges are coarsely 
serrated. In the Egyptian Zeuglodon osiris the number of the molars 
is, however, reduced to f , while some of the earlier cheek-teeth have 
become single-rooted, as in the squalodonts. The probable tran- 
sitional form between the latter and the zeuglodonts is the small 
Microzeuglodon caucasicus described by the present writer, from the 
Caucasus. As regards the origin of the zeuglodonts themselves, 
remains discovered in the Eocene formations of Egypt indicate a 
practically complete transition, so far at least as dental characters 
are concerned, from these whale-like creatures to the creodont 
Carnivora. In the earliest type, Protocetus, the skull is practically 
that of a zeuglodont, the snout being in fact more elongated than 
in some of the earliest representatives of the latter, although the 
nostrils are placed nearer the tip. The incisors are unknown, but 
the cheek-teeth are essentially those of a creodont, none of them 
having acquired the serrated edges distinctive of the typical zeuglo- 
donts; and the hinder premolars and molars retaining the three 
roots of the creodonts. In the somewhat later Prozeuglodon the 
skull is likewise essentially of the zeuglodont type, although the 
nostrils have shifted a little more backwards; as regards the cheek- 
teeth, which have acquired serrated crowns, the premolars at any 
rate retain the inner buttress supported by a distinct third root, so 
that they are precisely intermediate between Protocetus and Zeuglo- 
don. Yet another connecting form is Eocetus, a very large animal 
from nearly the same horizon as Prozeuglodon ; its skull approaching 
that of Zeuglodon as regards the backward position of the nostrils, 
although the cheek-teeth are of the creodont type, having inner, or 
third, roots. It is noteworthy that Zeuglodon apparently occurs in 
the same beds as these intermediate types. 

It follows from the foregoing that if zeuglodonts are the ancestors 
of the true Cetacea — and the probability that they are so is very 
great — the latter are derived from primitive Carnivora, and not, as 
has been suggested, from herbivorous Ungulata. The idea that the 
zeuglodonts were provided with a bony armour does not appear 
to be supported by recent discoveries. 

Authorities. — The above article is based on that by Sir W. H. 
Flower in the 9th edition of this work. See also W. H. Flower, 
" On the Characters and Divisions of the Family Delphinidae," 
Proc. Zool. Soc. (London, 1883) ; F. VV. True, " Review of the 
Family Delphinidae," Proc. U. S. Museum, No. 36 (1889) ; R. Ly- 
dekker, " Cetacean Skulls from Patagonia," Palaeontol. Argentina, 
vol. ii : An. Mus. La Plata (1893); W. Dames, " fiber Zeuglodonten 
aus Agypten," Paldontol. Abhandlungen, vol. i. (1894); F. E. 
Beddard, A Book of Whales (London, 1900) ; O. Abel, " Unter- 
suchungen iiber die fossilen Platanistiden des Wiener Beckens," 
Denks. k. Akad. Wiss. Wien., vol. lxviii. (1899); " Les Dauphins 
longirostres du Bolerien," Mem. musee d'hist. nat. belgique (1901 
and 1902) ; " Die phylogenetische Entwickelung des Cetaceengebisses 
und die systematische Stellung der Physeteriden," Verhandl. 
deutsch. zool. Gesellschaft (1905) ; E. Fraas, " Neue Zeuglodonten 
aus dem unteren Mittelocean vom Mokattam bei Cairo," Geol. 



und paldontol. Abhandl. ser. 2, vol. vi. (1904); C. W. Andrews, 
" Descriptive Catalogue of the Tertiary Vertebrata of the Fayum 
(British Museum, 1906). (R. L.*) 

CETHEGUS, the name of a Roman patrician family of 
the Cornelian gens. Like the younger Cato its members 
kept up the old Roman fashion of dispensing with the 
tunic and leaving the arms bare (Horace, Ars Poetica, 50; 
Lucan, Pharsalia, ii. 543). Two individuals are of some 
importance: — 

(1) Marcus Cornelius Cethegus, pontifex maximus and 
curule aedile, 213 B.C. In 211, as praetor, he had charge of 
Apulia; later, he was sent to Sicily, where he proved a successful 
administrator. ' In 209 he was censor, and in 204 consul. In 
203 he was proconsul in Upper Italy, where, in conjunction with 
the praetor P. Quintilius Varus, he gained a hard-won victory 
over Mago, Hannibal's brother, in Insubrian territory, and 
obliged him to leave Italy. He died in 196. He had a great 
reputation as an orator, and is characterized by Ennius as " the 
quintessence of persuasiveness " (suadae medulla). Horace (Ars 
Poet. 50; Epistles, ii. 2. 117) calls him an authority on the use 
of Latin words. 

Livy xxv. 2, 41, xxvii. 11, xxix. 11, xxx. 18. 

(2) Gaius Cornelius Cethegus, the boldest and most 
dangerous of Catiline's associates. Like many other youthful 
profligates, he joined the conspiracy in the hope of getting his 
debts cancelled. When Catiline left Rome in 63 B.C., after 
Cicero's first speech, Cethegus remained behind as leader of the 
conspirators with P. Lentulus Sura. He himself undertook to 
murder Cicero and other prominent men, but was hampered 
by the dilatoriness of Sura, whose age and rank entitled 
him to the chief consideration. The discovery of arms in 
Cethegus's house, and of the letter which he had given to the 
ambassadors of the Allobroges, who had been invited to co- 
operate, led to his arrest. He was condemned to death, and 
executed, with Sura and others, on the night of the 5th of 
December. 

Sallust, Catilina, 46-55; Cicero, In Cat. iii. 5-7; Appian, Bell. 
Civ. ii. 2-5 ; see Catiline. 

CFTINA, GUTIERRE DE (i5i8?-i572?), Spanish poet and 
soldier, was born at Seville shortly before 1520. He served 
under Charles V. in Italy and Germany, but retired from the 
army in 1545 to settle in Seville. Soon afterwards, however, 
he sailed for Mexico, where he resided for some ten years; he 
appears to have visited Seville in 1557, and to have returned 
to Mexico, where he died at some date previous to 1575. A 
follower of Boscan and Garcilaso de la Vega, a friend of Jeronimo 
de Urrea and Baltavar del Alcazar, Cetina adopted the doctrines 
of the Italian school and, under the name of Vandalio, wrote 
an extensive series of poems in the newly introduced metres; 
his sonnets are remarkable for elegance of form and sincerity of 
sentiment, his other productions being in great part adaptations 
from Petrarch, Ariosto and Ludovico Dolce. His patrons were 
Antonio de Leyva, prince of Ascoli, Hurtado de Mendoza, and 
Alva's grandson, the duke de Sessa, but he seems to have profited 
little by their protection. His works have been well edited by 
Joaquin Hazanas y la Rua in two volumes published at Seville 

(1895)- 

CETTE, a seaport of southern France in the department of 
Herault, 18 m. S.W. of Montpellier by the Southern railway. 
Pop. (1906) 32,659. After Marseilles it is the principal com- 
mercial port on the south coast of France. The older part of 
Cette occupies the foot and slope of the Mont St Clair (the 
ancient Mons Setius), a hill 590 ft. in height, situated on a 
tongue of land that lies between the Mediterranean and the 
lagoon of Thau. This quarter with its wide streets and lofty 
stone buildings is bounded on the east by the Canal de Cette, 
which leads from the lagoon of Thau to the Old Basin and the 
outer harbour. Across the canal lie the newer quarters, which 
chiefly occupy two islands separated from each other by a wet 
dock and limited on the east by the Canal Maritime, parallel to 
the Canal de Cette. A lateral canal unites the northern ends 
of the two main canals. A breakwater running W.S.W. and 



776 



CETTIGNE— CETYWAYO 



E.N.E. protects the entrance to the harbour, which is one of 
the safest in France. The outer port and the Old Basin are 
enclosed by a mole to the south and by a jetty to the east. 
Behind the outer port lies an inner and more recent basin which 
communicates with the Canal Maritime. The entire area of the 
harbour, including the canals, is in acres with a quayage 
length of over 8000 yds. The public institutions of Cette 
include tribunals of commerce and of maritime commerce, 
councils of arbitration in commercial and fishing affairs, an 
exchange and chamber of commerce, a branch of the Bank of 
France and a large hospital. There are also a communal college, 
a naval school, and schools of music, commerce and industry, 
and navigation. Cette is much resorted to for sea-bathing. The 
town is connected with Lyons by the canal from the Rhone to 
Cette, and with Bordeaux by the Canal du Midi, and is a 
junction of the Southern and Paris-Lyon railways. The shipping 
trade is carried on with South America, the chief ports of the 
Mediterranean, and especially with Spain. The chief exports 
are wines and brandy, chemical products, skins and soap; the 
chief imports are wine, cereals, coal, timber, petroleum, sulphur, 
tar and chemical substances. In the five years 1901-1905 the 
average annual value of imports was £3,720,000 (£4,980,000 in 
years 1896-1900), of exports £1,427,000 (£1,237,000 in 1896-1900). 
More than 400 small craft are employed in the sardine, tunny, 
cod and other fisheries. Large quantities of shell-fish are 
obtained from the lagoon of Thau. There are factories for the 
pickling of sardines, for the manufacture of liqueurs and casks, 
and for the treatment of sulphur, phosphates, and nitrate of 
soda. The Schneider Company of Creusot also have metallur- 
gical works at Cette, and the establishments for making wine 
give employment to thousands. The port of Cette was created 
in 1666 by the agency of Colbert, minister of Louis XIV., and 
according to the plans of Vauban; toward the end of the 17th 
century its development was aided by the opening of the Canal 
du Midi. 

CETTIGNE (Servian, Tsetinye; also written Cettinje, Tzetinje, 
and Tsettinye), the capital of Montenegro; in a narrow plain 
deeply sunk in the heart of the limestone mountains, at a height 
of 2093 ft. above the sea. Pop. (1900) about 3200. The sur- 
rounding country is bare and stony, with carefully cultivated 
patches of rich red soil among the crevices of the rock. In 
winter it is often so deeply covered with snow as to be well-nigh 
inaccessible, while in spring and autumn it is frequently flooded 
by the waters of a small brook which becomes a torrent after 
rain or a thaw. Cettigne itself is little more than a walled 
village, consisting of a cluster of whitewashed cottages and 
some unadorned public buildings. These include a church; 
a fortified monastery* which was founded in 1478, but so often 
burned and rebuilt as to seem quite modern, and which is 
visited by pilgrims to the tomb of Peter I. (1782-1830); resi- 
dences for the archimandrite and the vladika or metropolitan 
of Cettigne; a palace built in 1863, which accommodates the 
ministries; the court of appeal, and a school modelled on the 
gymnasia of Germany and Austria; the newer palaces of the 
prince and his heir; foreign legations; barracks; a seminary 
for priests and teachers, established by the tsar Alexander II. 
(1855-1881), with a very successful girls' school founded and 
endowed by the tsaritsa Marie; a library and reading-room; 
a theatre, a museum and a hospital. In an open space near 
the old palace stood the celebrated plane tree, beneath which 
Prince Nicholas gave audience to his subjects, and administered 
justice until the closing years of the 19th century. A zigzag 
highway, regarded as a triumph of engineering, winds through 
the mountain passes between Cettigne and the Austrian seaport 
of Cattaro; and other good roads give access to the richest 
parts of the interior. There is, however, little trade, though 
mineral waters are manufactured. 

Cettigne owes its origin to Ivan the Black, who was 
forced, towards the end of the 15th century, to withdraw from 
Zhabliak, his former capital. It has often been taken and 
sacked by the Turks, but has seldom been occupied by them 
for long. 



CETUS (" The Whale "), in astronomy, a constellation of the 
southern hemisphere, mentioned by Eudoxus (4th century B.C.) 
and Aratus (3rd century B.C.), and fabled by the Greeks to be 
the monster sent by Neptune to devour Andromeda, but which 
was slain by Perseus. Ptolemy catalogued 22 stars in this 
constellation; Tycho Brahe, 21; and Hevelius, 45. The most 
remarkable star of this constellation is o-(Mira) Ceti, a long- 
period variable, discovered by the German astronomer Fabricius; 
its magnitude varies between about 3 to 9, and its period is ^i 1 
days. r-Celi is an irregular variable, its extreme magnitudes 
being 5 and 7; y-Ctti is a beautiful double star, consisting of a 
yellow star of magnitude 3 and a blue of magnitude 6-8; v-Ceti 
is also a double star. 

CETYWAYO ( ?-i88 4 ), king of the Zulus, was the eldest 
son of King Umpande or Panda, and a nephew of the two 
previous kings, Dingaan and Chaka. Cetywayo was a young 
man when in 1840 his father was placed on the throne by the 
aid of the Natal Boers; and three years later Natal became 
a British colony. Cetywayo had inherited much of the military 
talent of his uncle Chaka, the organizer of the Zulu military 
system, and chafed under his father's peaceful policy towards 
his British and Boer neighbours. Suspecting Panda of favouring 
a younger son, Umbulazi, as his successor, Cetywayo made 
war on his brother, whom he defeated and slew at a great battle 
on the banks of the Tugela in December 1856. In the following 
year, at an assembly of the Zulus, it was resolved that Panda 
should retire from the mangement of the affairs of the nation, 
which were entrusted to Cetywayo, though the old chief kept 
the title of king. Cetywayo was, however, suspicious of the 
Natal government, which afforded protection to two of his 
brothers. The feeling of distrust was removed in 1861 by a 
visit from Mr (afterwards Sir) Theophilus Shepstone, secretary 
for native affairs in Natal, who induced Panda to proclaim 
Cetywayo publicly as the future king. Friendly relations were 
then maintained between the Zulus and Natal for many years. 
In 1872 Panda died, and Cetywayo was declared king, August 
1873, in the presence of Shepstone, to whom he made solemn 
promises to live at peace with his neighbours and to govern his 
people more humanely. These promises were not kept. Not 
only were numbers of his own people wantonly slain (Cetywayo 
returning defiant messages to the governor of Natal when 
remonstrated with), and the military system of Chaka and 
Dingaan strengthened, but he had a feud with the Transvaal 
Boers as to the possession of the territory between the Buffalo 
and Pongola rivers, and encouraged the chief Sikukuni (Secocoeni) 
in his struggle against the Boers. This feud with the Boers was 
inherited by the British government on the annexation of the 
Transvaal in 1877. Cetywayo's attitude became menacing; he 
allowed a minor chief to make raids into the Transvaal, and 
seized natives within the Natal border. 

Sir Bartle Frere, who became high commissioner of South 
Africa in March 1877, found evidence which convinced him that 
the Kaffir revolt of that year on the eastern border of Cape 
Colony was part of a design or desire " for a general and simul- 
taneous rising of Kaffirdom against white civilization"; and 
the Kaffirs undoubtedly looked to Cetywayo and the Zulus as 
the most redoubtable of their champions. In December 1878 
Frere sent the Zulu king an ultimatum, which, while awarding 
him the territory he claimed from the Boers, required him to 
make reparation for the outrages committed within the British 
borders, to receive a British resident, to disband his regiments, 
and to allow his young men to marry without the necessity 
of having first " washed their spears." Cetywayo, who had 
found a defender in Bishop Colenso, vouchsafed no reply, and 
Lord Chelmsford entered Zululand, at the head of 13,000 troops, 
on the nth of January 1879 to enforce the British demands. 
The disaster of Isandhlwana and the defence of Rorke's Drift 
signalized the commencement of the campaign, but on the 4th 
of July the Zulus were utterly routed at Ulundi. Cetywayo 
became a fugitive, but was captured on the 28th of August. His 
kingdom was divided among thirteen chiefs and he himself 
taken to Cape Town, whence he was brought to London in 



CEUTA— CEVENNES 



777 



August 1882. He remained in England less than a month, 
during which time the government (the second Gladstone 
administration) announced that they had decided upon his 
restoration. To his great disappointment, however, restoration 
proved to refer only to a portion of his old kingdom. Even 
there one of his kinsmen and chief enemies, Usibepu, was allowed 
to retain the territory allotted to him in 1879. Cetywayo was 
reinstalled on the 29th of January 1883 by Shepstone, but his 
enemies, headed by Usibepu, attacked him within a week, and 
after a struggle of nearly a year's duration he was defeated and 
his kraal destroyed. He then took refuge in the Native Reserve, 
where he died on the 8th of February 1884. For a quarter of a 
century he had been the most conspicuous native figure in South 
Africa, and had been the cause of long and bitter political 
controversy in Great Britain. 

His son Dinizulu afterwards attempted to become king, was 
exiled (1889) to St Helena, permitted to return (1898), and 
granted the position of a chief. In December 1907 Dinizulu 
was imprisoned at Maritzburg, being suspected of complicity 
in the revolt which had occurred in Zululand the previous 
year. He was kept many months waiting trial, there being 
considerable friction between the colonial government and the 
British government over the incident. He was eventually 
brought to trial in November 1908 before a special court, his 
defence (to the cost of which the British government contributed 
£2006} being undertaken by Mr W. P. Schreiner. The trial was 
not concluded until March 1909. The charge of high treason 
was not proved, but Dinizulu was convicted of harbouring rebels 
and was sentenced to four years' imprisonment. 

The Life of Sir Bartle Frere, by John Martineau, vol. ii. chaps. 18 
to 2 1 , contains much information concerning Cetywayo. 

CEUTA (Arabic Sebta), a Spanish military and convict station 
and seaport on the north coast of Morocco, in 35° 54' N., 5° 18' 
W. Pop. about 13,000. It is situated on a promontory con- 
nected with the mainland by a narrow isthmus. This pro- 
montory marks the south-eastern end of the straits of Gibraltar, 
which between Ceuta and Gibraltar have a width of 14 m. 
The promontory terminates in a bold headland, the Montagne 
des Singes, with seven distinct peaks. Of these the highest 
is the Monte del Hacko, the ancient Abyla, one of the " Pillars 
of Hercules," which faces Gibraltar and rises 636 ft. above the 
sea. On the westernmost point — Almina, 476 ft. high—is a 
lighthouse with a light visible for 23 m. Ceuta consists of two 
quarters, the old town, covering the low ground of the isthmus, 
and the modern town, built on the hills forming the north and 
west faces of the peninsula. Between the old and new quarters 
and on the north side of the isthmus lies the port. The public 
buildings in the town, thoroughly Spanish in its character, are 
not striking: they include the cathedral (formerly a mosque), 
the governor's palace, the town hall, barracks, and the convict 
prison in the old convent of San Francisco. Ceuta has been 
fortified seaward, the works being furnished with modern ar- 
tillery intended to command the entrance to the Mediterranean. 
Landward are three lines of defence, the inner line stretching 
completely across the isthmus. These fortifications, which date 
from the time of the Portuguese occupation, have been partly 
modernized. The citadel, El Hacho, built on the neck of the 
isthmus, dates from the 15th century. The garrison consists of 
between 3000 and 4000 men, inclusive of a disciplinary corps 
of military convicts. Of the rest of the population about 2000 
are civilian convicts; and there are colonies of Jews, negroes 
and Moors, the last including descendants of Moors transferred 
to Ceuta from Oran when Spain abandoned that city in 1796. 

Ceuta occupies in part the site of a Carthaginian colony, 
which was succeeded by a Roman colony said to have been 
called Ad Septem Fratres and also Exilissa or Lissa Civitas. 
From the Romans the town passed to the Vandals and afterwards 
to Byzantium, the emperor Justinian restoring its fortifications 
in 535. In 618 the town, then known as Septon, fell into the 
hands of the Visigoths. It was the last stronghold in North 
Africa which held out against the Arabs. At that date (a.d. 
711) the governor of the town was the Count Julian who, in 



revenge for the betrayal of his daughter by King Roderick of 
Toledo, invited the Arabs to cross the straits under Tarik and 
conquer Spain for Islam. By the Arabs the town was called 
Cibta or Sebta, hence the Spanish form Ceuta. From the date 
of its occupation by the Arabs the town had a stormy history, 
being repeatedly captured by rival Berber and Spanish-Moorish 
dynasties. It became nevertheless an important commercial 
and industrial city, being noted for its brass ware, its trade in 
ivory, gold and slaves. It is said to have been the first place 
in the West where a paper manufactory was established. In 
1415 the town was captured by the Portuguese under John I.,' 
among those taking part in the attack being Prince Henry 
" the Navigator " and two of his brothers, who were knighted 
on the day following in the mosque (hastily dedicated as a 
Christian church). Ceuta passed to Spain in 1580 on the sub- 
jugation of Portugal by Philip II., and was definitely assigned 
to the Spanish crown by the treaty of Lisbon in 1688. The town 
has been several times unsuccessfully besieged by the Moors — 
one siege, under Mulai Ismail, lasting twenty-six years (1694- 
1720). In 1810, with the consent of Spain, it was occupied by 
British troops under General Sir J. F. Fraser. The town was 
restored to Spain by the British at the close of the Napoleonic 
Wars. As the result of the war between Spain and Morocco in 
i860 the area of Spanish territory around the town was increased. 
The military governor of the town also commands the troops in 
the other Spanish stations on the coast of Morocco. For civil 
purposes Ceuta is attached to the province of Cadiz. It is a 
free port, but does little trade. 

See de Prado, Recuerdos de Africa; historic de la plaza de Ceuta 
(Madrid, 1850-1860) ; Budgett Meakin, The Land of the Moors 
(London, 1901), chap, xix., where many works dealing with Spanish 
Morocco are cited. 

CEVA, a town of Piedmont, Italy, in the province of Cuneo, 
33 m. E. by rail from the town of Cuneo, 1270 ft. above sea-level. 
Pop. (1901) 2703. In the middle ages it was a strong fortress 
defending the confines of Piedmont towards Liguria, but the 
fortifications on the rock above the town were demolished in 
1800 by the French, to whom it had been ceded in 1796. Its 
cheese (caseus cebanus) was famous in Roman times, but it does 
not seem ever to have been a Roman town. It lay on the road 
between Augusta Taurinorum and Vada Sabatia. A branch 
railway runs from Ceva through Garessio, with its marble 
quarries, to Ormea (2398 ft.), 22 m. to the south through the 
upper valley of the Tanaro, which in Roman times was under 
Albingaunum (Th. Mommsen in Corp. Inscr. Lat. v. (Berlin, 
1877), p. 898). From Ormea a road runs south to (31 m.) Oneglia 
on the Ligurian coast. 

CEVENNES (Lat. Cebenna or Gebenna), a mountain range 
of southern France, forming the southern and eastern fringe of 
the central plateau and part of the watershed between the 
Atlantic and Mediterranean basins. It consists of a narrow 
ridge some 320 m. long, with numerous lofty plateaus and 
secondary ranges branching from it. The northern division of 
the range, which nowhere exceeds 3320 ft. in height, extends, 
under the name of the mountains of Charolais, Beaujolais and 
Lyonnais, from the Col de Longpendu (west of Chalon-sur-Sa6ne) 
in a southerly direction to the Col de Gier. The central Cevennes, 
comprising the volcanic chain of Vivarais, incline south-east 
and extend as far as the Lozere group. The northern portion of 
this chain forms the Boutieres range. Farther south it includes 
the Gerbier des Jones (5089 ft.), the Mont de Mezenc (5755 ft.), 
the culminating point of the entire range, and the Tanargue 
group. South of the Mont Lozere, where the Pic Finiels reaches 
5584 ft., lies that portion of the range.to which the name Cevennes 
is most strictly applied. This region, now embraced in the 
departments of Lozere and Gard, stretches south to include the 
Aigoual and Esp6rou groups. Under various local names (the 
Garrigues, the mountains of Espinouse and Lacaune) and with 
numerous offshoots the range extends south-east and then east 
to the Montagne Noire, which runs parallel to the Canal du 
Midi and comes to an end some 25 m. east of Toulouse. In the 
south the Cevennes separate the cold and barren tablelands 



77 8 



CEYLON 



known as the Causses from the sunny region of Languedoc, 
where the olive, vine and mulberry flourish. Northwards the 
contrast between the two slopes is less striking. 

The Cevennes proper are formed by a folded belt of Palaeozoic 
rocks which lies along the south-east border of the central 
plateau of France. Concealed in part by later deposits, this 
ancient mountain chain extends from Castelnaudary to the 
neighbourhood of Valence, where it sinks suddenly beneath the 
Tertiary and recent deposits of the valley of the Rhone. It is 
in the Montagne Noire rather than in the Cevennes proper that 
the structure of the chain has been most fully investigated. All 
the geological systems from the Cambrian to the Carboniferous 
are included in the folded belt, and J. Bergeron has shown that 
the gneiss and schist which form so much of the chain consist, 
in part at least, of metamorphosed Cambrian beds. The direction 
of the folds is about N. 6o° E., and the structure is complicated 
by overthrusting on an extensive scale. The overthrust came 
from the south-east, and the Palaeozoic beds were crushed and 
crumpled against the ancient massif of the central plateau. 
The principal folding took place at the close of the Carboniferous 
period, and was contemporaneous with that of the old Hercynian 
chain of Belgium, &c. The Permian and later beds lie uncon- 
formably upon the denuded folds, and in the space between the 
Montagne Noire and the Cevennes proper the folded belt is 
buried beneath the horizontal Jurassic strata of the Causses. 
Although the chain was completed in Palaeozoic times, a second 
folding took place along its south-east margin at the close of 
the Eocene period. The Secondary and Tertiary beds of the 
Languedoc were crushed against the central plateau and were 
frequently overfolded. But by this time the ancient Palaeozoic 
chain had become a part of the unyielding massif, and the 
folding did not extend beyond its foot. 

As the division between the basins of the Loire and the 
Garonne to the west and those of the Sa6ne and Rhone to the 
east, the Cevennes send many affluents to those rivers. In the 
south the Orb, the Herault and the Vidourle are independent 
rivers flowing to the Golfe du Lion; farther north, the Gard — 
formed by the union of several streams named Gardon — the 
Ceze and the Ardeche flow to the Rhone. The Vivarais mountains 
and the northern Cevennes approach the right banks of the 
Rhone and Sa6ne clpsely, and on that side send their waters by 
way of short torrents to those rivers; on the west side the 
streams are tributaries of the Loire, which rises at the foot of 
Mont M6zenc. A short distance to the south on the same side 
are the sources of the Allier and Lot. The waters of the north- 
western slope of the southern Cevennes drain into the Tarn 
either directly or by way of the Aveyron, which rises in the 
outlying chain of the Levezou, and, in the extreme south, the 
Agout. The Tarn itself rises on the southern slope of the Mont 
Lozere. 

In the Lozere group and the southern Cevennes generally, 
good pasturage is found, and huge flocks spend the summer 
there. Silkworm-rearing and the cultivation of peaches, chest- 
nuts and other fruits are also carried on. In the Vivarais 
cattle are reared, while on the slopes of the Beaujolais excellent 
wines are grown. 

The chief historical event in the history of the Cevennes is the 
revolt of the Camisards in the early years of the 18th century 
(see Camisards). 

CEYLON, a large island and British colony in the Indian 
Ocean, separated on the N.W. from India by the Gulf of Manaar 
and Palk Strait. It lies between 5°s5'andg° 51'N. and between 
79 41' and 8i° 54' E. Its extreme length from north to south 
is 2715 m.; its greatest width is 1375 m.; and its area amounts 
to 25,481 sq. m., or about five-sixths of that of Ireland. In its 
general outline the island resembles a pear, the apex of which 
points towards the north. 

The coast is beset on the N.W. with numberless sandbanks, 

rocks and shoals, and may be said to be almost connected with 

Coa St India by the island of Rameswaram and Adam's 

Bridge, a succession of bold rocks reaching almost 

across the gulf at its narrowest point. Between the island and 



the opposite coast there exist two open channels of varying 
depth and width, beset by rocks and shoals. One of these, the 
Manaar Passage, is only navigable by very small craft. The 
other, called the Paumben Passage, lying between Rameswaram 
and the mainland, has been deepened at considerable outlay, 
and is used by large vessels in passing from the Malabar to the 
Coromandel coast, which were formerly compelled in doing so 
to make the circuit of the island. The west and south coasts, 
which -are uniformly low, are fringed their entire length by coco- 
nut trees, which grow to the water's edge in great luxuriance, 
and give the island a most picturesque appearance. Along these 
shores there are numerous inlets and backwaters of the sea, some 
of which are available as harbours for small native craft. The 
east coast from Point de Galle to Trincomalee is of an entirely 
opposite character, wanting the ample vegetation of the other, 
and being at the same time of a bold precipitous character. The 
largest ships may freely approach this side of the island, provided 
they take care to avoid a few dangerous rocks, whose localities, 
however, are well known to navigators. 

Seen from a distance at sea this " utmost Indian isle " of 
the old geographers wears a truly beautiful appearance. The 
remarkable elevation known as " Adam's Peak," the most 
prominent, though not the loftiest, of the hilly ranges of the 
interior, towers like a mountain monarch amongst an assemblage 
of picturesque hills, and is a sure landmark for the navigator 
when as yet the Colombo lighthouse is hidden from sight amid 
the green groves of palms that seem to be springing from the 
waters of the ocean. The low coast-line encircles the mountain 
zone of the interior on the east, south and west, forming a belt 
which extends inland to a varying distance of from 30 to 80 m.; 
but on the north the whole breadth of the island from Kalpitiya 
to Batticaloa is an almost unbroken plain, containing magnificent 
forests of great extent. 

The mountain zone is towards the south of the island, and 
covers an area of about 4212 sq. m. The uplifting force seems 
to have been exerted from south-west to north-east, and 
although there is much confusion in many of the inter- talas' 
secting ridges, and spurs of great size and extent are sent 
off in many directions, the lower ranges manifest a remarkable 
tendency to run in parallel ridges in a direction from south-east to 
north-west. Towards the north the offsets of the mountain system 
radiate to short distances and speedily sink to the level of the 
plain. Detached hills are rare; the most celebrated of these are 
Mihintale (anc. Missiaka), which overlooks the sacred city of 
Anuradhapura, and Sigiri. The latter is the only example in 
Ceylon of those solitary acclivities which form so remarkable a 
feature in the tableland of the Deccan — which, starting abruptly 
from the plain, with scarped and perpendicular sides, are frequently 
converted into strongholds accessible only by precipitous path- 
ways or by steps hewn in the solid rock. 

For a long period Adam's Peak was supposed to be the highest 
mountain in Ceylon, but actual survey makes it only 7353 ft. 
above sea-level. This elevation is chiefly remarkable as the 
resort of pilgrims from all parts of the East. The hollow in the 
lofty rock that crowns the summit is said by the Brahmans to 
be the footstep of Siva, by the Buddhists of Buddha, by the 
Mahommedans of Adam, whilst the Portuguese Christians were 
divided between the conflicting claims of St Thomas and the 
eunuch of Candace, queen of Ethiopia. The footstep is covered 
by a handsome roof, and is guarded by the priests of a rich 
monastery half-way up the mountain, who maintain a shrine on 
the summit of the peak. The highest mountains in Ceylon are 
Pidurutalagala, 8296 ft. in altitude; Kirigalpota, 7836 ft.; and 
Totapelakanda, 7746 ft. 

The summits of the highest ridges are clothed with verdure, 
and along their base, in the beautiful valleys which intersect 
them in every direction, the slopes were formerly covered with 
forests of gigantic and valuable trees, which, however, have 
disappeared under the axe of the planter, who felled and burnt 
the timber on all the finest slopes at an elevation of 2000 to 4500 
ft., and Converted the hillsides into highly cultivated coffee and 
afterwards tea estates. 



CEYLON 



779 



The plain of Nuwara Eliya, the sanatorium of the island, is at 
an elevation of 6200 ft., and possesses many of the attributes of 
an alpine country. The climate of the Horton plains, at an 
elevation of 7000 ft., is still finer than that of Nuwara Eliya, but 
they are difficult of access, and are but little known to Europeans. 
The town of Kandy, in the Central Province, formerly the capital 
of the native sovereigns of the interior, is situated 1727 ft. above 
sea-level. 

The island, though completely within the influence of oceanic 
evaporation, and possessing an elevated tableland of considerable 
Rivers extent, does not boast of any rivers of great volume. 
The rains which usher in each monsoon or change of 
season are indeed heavy, and during their fall swell the streams 
to torrents and impetuous rivers. But when these cease the water- 
courses fall back to their original state, and there are few of the 
rivers which cannot generally be passed on horseback. The 
largest river, the Mahaweliganga, has a course of 206 m., draining 
about one-sixth of the area of the island before it reaches the 
sea at Trincomalee on the east coast. There are twelve other 
considerable rivers, running to the west, east and south, but 
none of these exceeds 90 m. in length. The rivers are not 
favourable for navigation, except near the sea, where they 
expand into backwaters, which were used by the Dutch for the 
construction of their system of canals all round the western and 
southern coasts. Steamers ply between Colombo and Negombo 
along this narrow canal and lake. A similar service on the 
Kaluganga did not prove a success. There are no inland lakes 
except the remains of magnificent artificial lakes in the north 
and east of the island, and the backwaters on the coast. The 
lakes which add to the beauty of Colombo, Kandy, Lake Gregory, 
Nuwara Eliya and Kurunegala are artificial or partly so. Giant's 
Tank is said to have an area of 6380 acres, and Minneri and 
Kalawewa each exceed 4000 acres. 

The magnificent basin of Trincomalee, situated on the east 
coast of Ceylon, is perhaps unsurpassed in extent, security and 
beauty by any haven in the world. The admiralty had a dock- 
yard here which was closed in 1905. 

Geology. — Ceylon may be said to have been for ages slowly 
rising from the sea, as appears from the terraces abounding in 
marine shells, which occur in situations far above high-water 
mark, and at some miles distance from the sea. A great portion 
of the north of the island may be regarded as the joint production 
of the coral polyps and the currents, which for the greater part 
of the year set impetuously towards the south; coming laden 
with alluvial matter collected along the coast of Coromandel, 
and meeting with obstacles south of Point Calimere, they have 
deposited their burdens on the coral reefs round Point Pedro; 
and these, raised above the sea-level and covered deeply by sand 
drifts, have formed the peninsula of Jaffna, and the plains that 
trend westward till they unite with the narrow causeway of 
Adam's Bridge. Tertiary rocks are almost unknown. The great 
geological feature of the island is the profusion of gneiss, over- 
laid in many places in the interior by extensive beds of dolomitic 
limestone. This formation appears to be of great thickness; 
and when, as is not often the case, the under-surface of 
the gneiss series is exposed, it is invariably found resting on 
granite. Veins of pure quartz and felspar of considerable extent 
have been frequently met with in the gneiss; while in the 
elevated lands of the interior in the Galle districts may be seen 
copious deposits of disintegrated felspar, or kaolin, commonly 
known as porcelain clay. At various elevations the gneiss may 
be found intersected by veins of trap rock, upheaved whilst in a 
state of fusion subsequent to the consolidation of the former. 
In some localities on the seashore these veins assume the 
character of pitch-stone porphyry highly impregnated with 
iron. Hornblende and primitive greenstone are found in the 
vicinity of Adam's Peak and in the Pussellava district. Laterite, 
known in Ceylon as kabuk, a product of disintegrated gneiss, 
exists in vast quantities in many parts, and is quarried for 
building purposes. 

Climate. — The seasons in Ceylon differ very slightly from 
those prevailing along the coasts of the Indian peninsula. The 



two distinctive monsoons of the year are called, from the winds 
Which accompany them, the south-west and the north-east. 
The former is very regular in its approach, and may be looked 
for along the south-west coast between the 10th and 20th of 
May; the latter reaches the north-east coast between the end 
of October and the middle of November. There is a striking 
contrast in the influence which the south-west monsoon exerts 
on the one side of the island and on the other. The clouds are 
driven against the lofty mountains that overhang the western 
and southern coasts, and their condensed vapours descend there 
in copious showers. But the rains do not reach the opposite 
side of the island: while the south-west is deluged, the east and 
north are sometimes exhausted with dryness; and it not un- 
frequently happens that different sides of the same mountain 
present at the same moment the opposite extreme of droughts 
and moisture. The influence of the north-east monsoon is more 
general. The mountains which face the north-east are lower 
and more remote from the sea than those on the south-west; 
the clouds are carried farther inland, and it rains simultaneously 
on both sides of the island. 

The length of the day, owing to the proximity of the island 
to the equator, does not vary more than an hour at any season. 
The mean time of the rising of the sun's centre at Colombo on 
February 1st is 6 h 23 m a.m., and of its setting 6 h s m p.m. On 
August 1 5th its rising is at 5 h 45 m a.m., and its setting at 6 h 7 m p.m. 
It is mid-day in Colombo when it is morning in England. 
Colombo is situated in 79 50' 45" E., and the day is further 
advanced there than at Greenwich by 5 h i9 m 23 s . 

Flora. — The characteristics of the low-growing plants of Ceylon 
approach nearly to those of the coasts of southern India. The 
Rhizophoreae are numerous along the low muddy shores of salt lakes 
and stagnant pools; and the acacias are equally abundant. The 
list comprises Aegiceras fragrans, Epithinia malayana, Thespesia 
populnea, Feronia elephantum, Salvadora persica (the true mustard 
tree of Scripture), Eugenia bracteata, Elaeodendron Roxburghii, Cassia 
Fistula, Cassia Roxburghii, &c. The herbaceous plants of the low 
country belong mostly to the natural orders Compositae,Leguminosae, 
Rubiaceae, Scrophulariaceae and Euphorbiaceae. 

Leaving the plains of the maritime country and ascending a 
height of 4000 ft. in the central districts, we find both herbage and 
trees assume an altered character. The foliage of the latter is larger 
and deeper coloured, and they attain a height unknown in the hot 
low country. The herbaceous vegetation is there made up of ferns, 
Cyrtandreae, Compositae, Scitamineae and Urticaceae. The dense 
masses of lofty forest at that altitude are interspersed with large 
open tracts of coarse wiry grass, called by the natives patanas, and 
of value to them as affording pasturage for their cattle. 

Between the altitudes of 4000 and 8000 ft., many plants are to 
be met with partaking of European forms, yet blended with tropical 
characteristics. The guelder rose, St John's wort, the Nepenthes 
distillatoria or pitcher plant, violets, geraniums, buttercups, sun- 
dews, ladies' mantles and campanulas thrive by the side of Magno- 
liaceae, Ranunculaceae, Elaeocarpeae, &c. The most beautiful 
flowering shrub of this truly alpine region is the rhododendron, which 
in many instances grows to the height of 70 ft. It is met with in 
great abundance in the moist plains of the elevated land above 
Nuwara Eliya, flowering abundantly in June and July. There are 
two distinct varieties, one similar to the Nilgiri plant, having its 
leaves broad and cordate, and of a rusty colour on the under side; 
the other, peculiar to Ceylon, is found only in forests at the loftiest 
elevations; it has narrow rounded leaves, silvery on the under side, 
and grows to enormous heights, frequently measuring 3 ft. round the 
stem. At these altitudes English flowers, herbs and vegetables have 
been cultivated with perfect success, as also wheat, oats and barley. 
English fruit-trees grow, but rarely bear. Grapes are grown success- 
fully in the north of the island. The vines were introduced by the 
Dutch, who overcame the difficulty of perpetual summer by exposing 
the roots, and thus giving the plants an artificial winter. 

The timber trees indigenous to Ceylon are met with at every 
altitude from the sea-beach to the loftiest mountain peak. They 
vary much in their hardiness and durability, from the common 
cashew-nut tree, which when felled decays in a month, to the ebony 
and satinwood, which for many years resist the attacks of insects 
and climate. Many of the woods are valuable for furniture, and 
house and shipbuilding, and are capable of standing long exposure 
to weather. The most beautiful woods adapted to furniture work 
are the calamander, ebony, flowered satinwood, tamarind, nedun, 
dell, kadomberiya, kitul, coco-nut, &c. ; the sack-yielding tree 
(Antiaris saccidora), for a long time confounded with the far-famed 
upas tree of Java {Antiaris toxicaria), grows in the Kurunegala 
district of the island. The Cocos nucifera, or coco-nut palm, is a 
native of the island, and may justly be considered the most valuable 



780 



CEYLON 



of its trees. It grows in vast abundance along the entire sea-coast 
of the west and south sides of the island, and furnishes almost all 
that a Sinhalese villager requires. Its fruit, when green, supplies food 
and drink; when ripe, it yields oil. The juice of the unopened 
flower gives him toddy and arrack. The fibrous casing of the fruit 
when woven makes him ropes, nets, matting. The nut-shells form 
drinking-vessels, spoons, &c. The plaited leaves serve as plates and 
dishes, and as thatch for his cottage. The dried leaves are used as 
torches, the large leaf -stalks as garden fences. The trunk of the tree 
sawn up is employed for every possible purpose, from knife-handles 
to door-posts; hollowed out it forms a canoe or a coffin. There are 
four kinds of this palm — the common, the king, the dwarf and the 
Maldive. The Palmyra and Areca palms grow luxuriantly and 
abundantly, the former in the northern, the latter in the western 
and central districts. The one is valuable chiefly for its timber, of 
which large quantities are exported to the Indian coasts; the other 
supplies the betel-nut in common use amongst natives of the eastern 
tropics as a masticatory. The export trade in the latter to India and 
eastern ports is very considerable. Next in importance to the coco- 
nut palm among the indigenous products of Ceylon is the cinnamon 
plant, yielding the well-known spice of that name. 

Fauna. — Foremost among the animals of Ceylon is the elephant, 
which, though far inferior to those of Africa and the Indian continent, 
is nevertheless of considerable value when tamed, on account of its 
strength, sagacity and docility. They are to be met with in greater 
or less numbers throughout most unfrequented parts of the interior. 
Occasionally they make inroads in herds upon the cultivated grounds 
and plantations, committing great damage. In order to protect 
these lands, and at the same time keep up the government stud of 
draught elephants, " kraals " or traps on a large scale are erected 
in the forests, into which the wild herds are driven; and once secured 
they are soon tamed and fit for service. The oxen are of small size, 
but hardy, and capable of drawing heavy loads. Buffaloes exist in 
great numbers throughout the interior, where they are employed 
in a half-tame state for ploughing rice-fields and treading out the 
corn. They feed upon any coarse grass, and can therefore be main- 
tained on the village pasture-lands where oxen would not find 
support. Of deer, Ceylon possesses the spotted kind {Axis maculata), 
the muntjac (Stylocerus muntjac), a red deer (the Sambur of India), 
popularly called the Ceylon elk (Musa Aristotelis) , and the small 
musk (Moschus minima). There are five species of monkeys, one 
the small rilawa (Macacus pileatus), and four known in Ceylon by 
the name of " wandaru " (Presbytes ur sinus, P. Ther sites, P. cephalo- 
pterus, P. Priamus), and the small quadrumanous animal, the loris 
(Loris gracilis), known as the " Ceylon sloth." Of the Cheiroptera 
sixteen species have been identified; amongst them is the rousette 
or flying fox (Pteropus Edwardsii). Of the Carnivora the only one 
dangerous to man is the small black bear (Prochilus labiatus). The 
tiger is not known in Ceylon, but the true panther (Felis pardus) is 
common, as is the jackal (Canis aureus) and the mongoose or ich- 
neumon (Herpestes vitticollis). Rats are numerous, as are the 
squirrel and the porcupine, and the pig-rat or bandicoot (Mus bandi- 
cota), while the scaly ant-eater (Mams pentedactyla) , locally known 
by the Malay name of pangolin, is occasionally found. The dugong 
(Halicore dugong) is frequently seen on various points of the coast. 
A game preservation society and the judicious action of government 
have done much to prevent the wanton destruction of Ceylon deer, 
elephants, &c, by establishing a close season. It is estimated that 
there must be 5000 wild elephants in the Ceylon forests. A licence 
to shoot or capture and an export royalty are now levied by govern- 
ment. 

Captain V. Legge includes' 371 species of birds in Ceylon, and many 
of them have splendid plumage, but in this respect they are surpassed 
by the birds of South America and Northern India. The eagles are 
small and rare, but hawks and owls are numerous; among the latter 
is a remarkable brown species, the cry of which has earned for it 
the name of the " devil-bird." The esculent swift, which furnishes 
in its edible nest the celebrated Chinese dainty, builds in caves in 
Ceylon. Crows of various species are numerous, and in the wilder 
parts pea-fowl are abundant. There are also to be mentioned king- 
fishers, sun-birds, several beautiful fly-catchers and snatchers, the 
golden oriole, parroquets and numerous pigeons, of which there are 
at least a dozen species. The Ceylon jungle-fowl (Gallus Lafayetti) 
is distinct from the Indian species. Ceylon is singularly rich in 
wading and water birds— ibises, storks, egrets, spoonbills and herons 
being frequently seen on the wet sands, while flamingoes line the 
beach in long files, and on the deeper waters inland are found teal 
and a countless variety of ducks and smaller fowl. Of the birds 
familiar to European sportsmen there are partridge, quail and snipe 
in abundance, and the woodcock has been seen. 

The poisonous snakes of Ceylon are not numerous. Four species 
have been enumerated — the ticpolonga (Daboia elegans), the cobra 
di capello (Naja tripudians), the carawilla (Trigonocephaly hypnale), 
and the Trigonocephaly nigromarginatus, which is so rare that it ha9 
no popular name. The largest snake in Ceylon is the " boa," or 
"anaconda" of Eastern story (Python reticulatus) ; it is from 
20_to 30 ft. in length, and -preys on hog-deer and other smaller 
animals. Crocodiles infest the rivers and estuaries, and the large 
fresh-water reservoirs which supply the rice-fields; there are two 
species (C. biporcatns and C. palustris). Of lizards the most note- 



worthy are the iguana, several bloodsuckers, the diameleon and the 
familiar geckoes, which are furnished with pads to each toe, by 
which they are enabled to ascend perpendicular walls and adhere to 
glass and ceilings. 

Insects exist m great numbers. The leaf and stick insects are of 
great variety and beauty. Ceylon has four species of the ant-lion, 
renowned for the predaceous ingenuity of its larvae; and the white 
ants or termites, the ravages of which are most destructive, aTe at 
once ubiquitous and innumerable in every place where the climate 
is not too chilly or the soil too sandy for them to construct their 
domed dwellings. They make their way through walls and floors, 
and in a few hours destroy every vegetable substance within their 
reach. Of all the insect pests that beset an unseasoned European 
the most annoying are the mosquitoes. Ticks are also an intolerable 
nuisance; they are exceedingly minute, and burrow under the skin. 
In the lower ranges of the hill country land leeches are found in 
tormenting profusion. But insects and reptiles do not trouble Euro- 
pean residents so much as in early years — at any rate in the towns, 
while in the higher planting districts there is almost complete 
exemption from their unwelcome attentions. Bungalows are more 
carefully built to resist white ants, drainage and cleanliness prevent 
mosquitoes and ticks from multiplying, while snakes and leeches 
avoid cultivated, occupied ground. 

Of the fish in ordinary use for the table the finest is the seir, a 
species of scomber (Cybium guttatum). Mackerel, dories, carp, 
whitings, mullet (red and striped), soles and sardines are abundant. 
Sharks appear on all parts of the coast, and the huge saw fish (Pristis 
antiquorum) infests the eastern coast of the island, where it attains 
a length of 12 to 15 ft. There are also several fishes remarkable for 
the brilliancy of their colouring ; e.g. the Red Sea perch (Holocentrunt 
rubrum), of the deepest scarlet, and the great fire fish (Scorpaena 
miles), of a brilliant red. Some are)purple, others yellow, and numbers 
with scales of a lustrous green are called " parrots " by the natives; 
of these one (Sparus Hardwichii) is called the " flower parrot," from 
its exquisite colouring — irregular bands of blue, crimson and purple, 
green, yellow and grey, crossed by perpendicular stripes of black. 
The pearl fishery, as indicated below, is of great importance. 

Population. — The total population of Ceylon in 1901, inclusive 
of military, shipping and 4914 prisoners of war, was 3,578,333, 
showing an increase of i8-8% in the decade. The population of 
Colombo was 158,228. 

The population and area of the nine provinces was as follows : — 



District. 



Western Province 
Central Province . 
Northern Province . 
Southern Province 
Eastern Province 
North- Western Province 
North Central Province . 
Province of Uva ... 
Province of Sabaragamuwa 



Population. 



925-342 
623,011 
341.985 
566,925 

174,288 

353.845 

79,110 

192,072 

32L755 



3.578,333 



Area in sq. m. 



1.432 

2.299! 

3.363i 

2,1461 

4.036! 

2.996J 

4,oo2t 

3-i54i 
1,9015 



25,332 



The table of nationality gives the principal groups as follows : — 

Europeans 9,509 

Burghers and Eurasians 23,539 

Low-country Sinhalese 1,458,320 

Kandyan Sinhalese 872,487 

Tamils 953,535 

Moors (Mahommedan) 228,706 

Malays 11,963 

Veddahs (Aborigines) . 3,97i 

Altogether there are representatives of some seventy races in Ceylon. 
The /veddahs, who run wild in the woods, are the aborigines of the 
island. 

Language. — The language of nearly 70% of the population is 
Sinhalese, which is nearly allied to Pali (q.v.) ; of the remaining 
30%, with the exception of Europeans, the language is Tamil. A 
corrupt form of Portuguese is spoken by some natives of European 
descent. The Veddahs, a small forest tribe, speak a distinct language, 
and the Rodiyas, an outcast tribe, possess a large vocabulary of their 
own. The Sinhalese possess several original poems of some merit, 
and an extensive and most interesting series of native chronicles, but 
their most valuable literature is written in Pali, though the greater 
portion of it has been translated into Sinhalese, and is best known 
to the people through these Sinhalese translations. 

Religion. — The principal religions may be distributed as follows: — 
Christians, 349,239; Buddhists, 2,141,404; Hindus, 826,826; 
Mahommedans, 246,118. Of the Christians, 287,419 are Roman 
Catholics, and 61,820 are Protestants of various denominations; 
and of these Christians 319,001 are natives, and 30,238 Europeans. 
The Mahommedans are the descendants of Arabs (locally termed 
Moormen) and the Malays. The Tamils, both the inhabitants of the 
island and the immigrants from India, are Hindus, with the exception 
of 93,000 Christians. The Sinhalese, numbering 70% of the whole 



GEYLON 



781 



population, are, with the exception of 180,000 Christians, Buddhists. 
Ceylon may properly be called a Buddhist country, and it is here that 
Buddhism is found almost in its pristine purity. Ceylon was con- 
verted to Buddhism in the 3rd century B.C. by the great Augustine 
of Buddhism, Mahinda, son of the Indian king Asoka ; and the ex- 
tensive ruins throughout Ceylon, especially in the ancient cities of 
Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa, bear witness to the sacrifices 
which kings and people joined in making to create lasting monu- 
ments of their faith. The Buddhist temples in the Kandyan country 
possess valuable lands, the greater portion of which is held by 
hereditary tenants on the tenure of service. These lands were given 
out with much care to provide for all that was necessary to maintain 
the temple and its connected monastery. Some tenants had to do 
the blacksmiths' work, others the carpenters', while another set of 
tenants had to cultivate the land reserved for supplying the monas- 
tery; others again had to attend at the festivals, and prepare 
decorations, and carry lamps and banners. In course of time 
difficulties arose ; the English courts were averse to a system under 
which the rent of lands was paid by hereditary service, and a com- 
mission was issued by Sir Hercules Robinson (afterwards Lord 
Rosmead) when governor, to deal with the whole question, to define 
the services and to enable the tenants to commute these for a money 
payment. The result of the inquiry was to show that the services, 
except in a few instances, were not onerous, and that almost without 
an exception the tenants were willing to continue the system. The 
anomaly of an ecclesiastical establishment of Anglican and Presby- 
terian chaplains with a bishop of Colombo paid out of the general 
revenues has now been abolished in Ceylon, and only the bishop and 
two or three incumbents remain on the list for life, or till they retire 
on pension. 

Education. — There has been a great advance in public instruction 
since 1875, through the multiplication of vernacular, Anglo-ver- 
nacular and English schools by government, by the different 
Christian missions and by the Buddhists and Hindus who have 
come forward to claim the government grant. The government has 
also started a technical college, and an agricultural school has been 
reorganized. An agricultural department, recommended by a 
commission, should profit by the services of the entomologist, 
mycologist and chemical analyst added by the governor to the staff 
of the royal botanic gardens at Peradeniya. There are industrial 
and reformatory schools, which are partially supported by govern- 
ment. In spite of the great advance that has been made, however, 
at the census of 1901 no fewer than 2,790,235 of the total population 
were entered as unable to read or write their own tongue. Of this 
number 1,553,078 were females, showing a very unsatisfactory state 
of things. 

A griculture. — The natural soils of Ceylon are composed of quartzose 
gravel, felspathic clay and sand often of a pure white, blended with 
_ ., or overlaid by brown and red loams, resulting from the 

' decay of vegetable matter, or the disintegration of the 

gneiss and hornblende formations. The whole of the great northern 
extremity of the island consists of a sandy and calcareous admixture, 
made to yield productive crops of grain, tobacco, cotton and vege- 
tables by the careful industry of the Tamil population, who spare 
no pains in irrigating and manuring their lands. Between the 
northern districts and the elevated mountain ranges which overlook 
the Bintenne and Uva countries are extensive plains of alluvial soil 
washed down from the table-lands above, where once a teeming popu- 
lation produced large quantities of grain. The remains of ancient 
works of irrigation bear testimony to the bygone agriculture of these 
extensive regions now covered by swamps or dense jungle. 

The general character of the soil in the maritime provinces to the 
east, south and west is sandy. Large tracts of quartzose sand spread 
along the whole line of sea-coast, some of which, of a pure white, and 
very deficient in vegetable matter, is admirably adapted to the 
growth of the cinnamon plant. In the light sandy districts where 
the soil is perfectly free, and contains a portion of vegetable and 
mineral loam, the coco-nut palm flourishes in great luxuriance. 
This is the case along the entire coast line from Kalpitiya to Point 
de Galle, and farther eastward and northward to Matara, stretching 
to a distance inland varying from 100 yds. to 3 m. From this light 
sandy belt as far as the mountain-zone of the Kandyan country the 
land is mainly composed of low hilly undulations of sandstone and 
ferruginous clay, incapable of almost any cultivation, but intersected 
in every direction with extensive valleys and wide plains of a more 
generous soil, not highly fertile, but still capable, with a little 
industry, of yielding ample crops of rice.. 

The soil of the central province, although frequently containing 
great quantities of quartzose sand and ferruginous clay, is in many 
of the more elevated districts of a fine loamy character. Sand 
sufficiently vegetable and light for rice culture may be seen at all 
elevations in the hill districts; but the fine chocolate and brown 
loams overlying gneiss or limestone formations, so admirably adapted 
for coffee cultivation, are only to be found on the steep sides or along 
the base of mountain ranges at an elevation varying from 2000 to 
4000 ft. Such land, well-timbered, contains in its elements the decom- 
posed particles of the rocks above, blended with the decayed vegetable 
matter of forests that have for centuries scattered beneath them 
the germs of fertility. The quantity of really rich coffee land in these 
districts is but small as compared with the extent of country — vast 



tracts of open valleys consisting of an indifferent yellow tenacious 
soil interspersed with many low ranges of quartz rock, but tea is a 
much hardier plant than coffee, and grows on poorer soil. 

Irrigation. — The native rulers covered the whole face of the 
country with a network of irrigation reservoirs, by which Ceylon 
was enabled in ancient times to be the great granary of southern 
Asia. Wars, and the want of a strong hand to guide the agriculture 
of the country, led to the decay of these ancient works, and large 
tracts of land, which were formerly highly productive, became 
swampy wastes or dense forests. The remains of some of the larger 
irrigation works are amongst the most interesting of the memorials 
of Ceylon's former greatness. Some of the artificial lakes were of 
great size. Minneri, formed by damming across the valleys between 
the low hills which surround it with an embankment 60 ft. wide at 
the top, is at this day 20 m. in circumference. It has recently been 
restored by government, and is capable of irrigating 15,000 acres; 
while the Giant's Tank, which has also been restored, irrigates 
20,000 acres. Another lake, with an embankment several miles in 
length, the Kalawewa, was formed by damming back the waters of 
the Kalaoya, but they have forced their way through the embank- 
ment, and in the ancient bed of the lake, or tank, are now many small 
villages. In connexion with these large tanks were numerous canals 
and channels for supplying smaller tanks, or for irrigating large 
tracts of fields. Throughout the district of Nuwarakalawiya every 
village has its tank. The embankments have been formed with great 
skill, and advantage has been taken to the utmost of the slightest 
fall in the land ; but they in common with the larger works had been 
allowed to fall into decay, and were being brought to destruction 
by the evil practice of cutting them every year to irrigate the fields. 
The work of restoring these embankments was undertaken by the 
government, and 100 village tanks were repaired every year, besides 
eighteen larger works. In 1900 a sum of five million rupees was set 
apart for these larger undertakings. 

Cultivation and Products. — The area of uncultivated land is little 
over 3§ million acres, whereas fully four times that amount is capable 
of cultivation. A great deal is waste, besides lagoons, tanks, backr 
waters, &c. Thick forest land does not cover more than 5000 sq. m. 
Scrub, or chena, and patana grass cover a very great area. Tea, 
cacao, cardamoms, cinchona, coffee and indiarubber are the products 
cultivated by European and an increasing number of native planters 
in the hill country and part of the low country of Ceylon. A great 
change has been effected in the appearance of the country by the 
introduction of the tea plant in place of the coffee plant, after the 
total failure of the latter owing to disease. For some time coffee 
had been the most important crop. In the old days it grew wild like 
cinnamon, and was exported so far back as the time of the Portu- 
guese, but was lightly esteemed as an article of European commerce, 
as the berry was gathered unripe, was imperfectly cured and had 
little flavour. In 1824 the governor, Sir E. Barnes, introduced coffee 
cultivation on the West Indian plan; in 1834 the falling off of other 
sources of supply drew general attention to Ceylon, and by 1841 
the Ceylon output had become considerable, and grew steadily (with 
an interval in 1847 due to a commercial crisis) till 1877 when 272,000 
acres were under coffee cultivation, the total export amounting to 
103,000,000 lb. Then owing to disease came a crisis, and a rapid 
decline, and now only a few thousand acres are left. On the failure 
of the coffee crops planters began extensively to grow the tea plant, 
which had already been known in the island for several years. By 
1882 over 20,000 acres had been planted with tea, but the export 
that year was under 700,000 lb. Five years later the area planted 
was 170,000 acres, while the export had risen to nearly 14,000,000 lb. 
By 1892 there were 262,000 acres covered with tea, and 71,000,000 lb 
were that year exported. In 1897, 350,000 acres were planted, and 
the export was 1 1 6,000,000 lb. By the beginning of the 20th century, 
the total area cultivated with tea was not under 390,000 acres, while 
the estimate of shipments was put at 146,000,000 lb annually. 
Nearly every plantation has its factory, with the machinery necessary 
to prepare the leaf as brought in from the bushes until it becomes 
the tea of commerce. The total amount of capital now invested in 
the tea industry in Ceylon cannot be less than £10,000,000. The 
tea-planting industry more than anything else has raised Ceylon 
from the depressed state to which it fell in 1882. 

Before tea was proved a success, however, cinchona cultivation 
was found a useful bridge from coffee to the Ceylon planter, who, 
however, grew it so freely that in one year 15,000,000 lb bark was 
shipped, bringing the price of quinine down from 16s. to is. 6d. an 
ounce. 

In a few places, where the rainfall is abundant, rice cultivation 
is allowed to depend on the natural supply of water, but in most 
parts the cultivation is not attempted unless there is secured before- 
hand a certain and sufficient supply, by means of canals or reservoirs. 
In the hill country every valley and open plain capable of tillage is 
made to yield its crops of grain, and the steep sides of the hills are 
cut into terraces, on which are seen waving patches of green rice 
watered by mountain streams, which are conducted by means of 
channels ingeniously carried round the spurs of the hills and along 
the face of acclivities, by earthen water-courses and bamboo aque- 
ducts, so as to fertilize the fields below. These works bear witness to 
the patience, industry and skill of the Kandyan villagers. In the 
low country, to the north and east and north-west of the hills, 



782 



CEYLON 



irrigation works of a more expensive kind are necessary. In January 
1892, the immemorial rent or tax on fields of paddy (rice in the husk) 
was removed, but not the customs duty on imported rice. But even 
with the advantage of protection to the extent of 10% in the local 
markets, there has been no extension of paddy cultivation; on the 
contrary, the import of grain from India has grown larger year by 
year. Through the multiplication of irrigation works and the 
northern railway, rice culture may be sufficiently extended to save 
some of the large imports (8,000,000 to 9,000,000 bushels annually) 
now required from India. 

Tobacco is extensively cultivated in various parts of the island, 
and the growth of particular places, such as Dumbara and Uva, 
is much prized for local consumption. The tobacco of export is 
grown in the peninsula of Jaffna. The exports of this article in 1850 
were 22,176 cwts., valued at £20,698. The cultivation of the plant 
has not greatly increased of recent years, and is almost entirely in 
the hands of natives in the northern and parts of the central Province. 

Ceylon has been celebrated since the middle of the 14th century 
for its cinnamon, and during the period of the Dutch occupation this 
spice was the principal article of commerce; under their rule and 
up to 1832 its cultivation was a government monopoly. With the 
abolition of the monopoly the quantity exported increased, but the 
value declined. 

Unlike the coffee plant, the hardy tea plant grows from sea-level 
to 7000 ft. altitude; but crown forest-lands above 5000 ft. are no 
longer sold, so that a very large area on the highest mountain ranges 
and plateaus is still under forest. Moreover, on the tea plantations 
arboriculture is attended to in a way unknown in 1875; the Aus- 
tralian eucalypts, acacias and grevilleas, Indian and Japanese 
conifers, and other trees of different lands, are now freely planted for 
ornament, for protection from wind, for firewood or for timber. 
A great advance has been made at Hakgalla and Nuwara Eliya, in 
Upper Uva, and other high districts, in naturalizing English fruits' 
and vegetables. The calamander tree is nearly extinct, and ebony 
and other fine cabinet woods are getting scarce; but the conser- 
vation of forests after the Indian system has been taken in hand 
under a director and trained officers, and much good has been done. 
The cinnamon tree (wild in the jungles, cultivated as a shrub in 
plantations) is almost the only one yielding a trade product which is 
indigenous to the island. The coco-nut and nearly all other palms 
have been introduced. 

Among other agricultural products mention must be made of 
cacao, the growth and export of which have steadily extended since 
coffee failed. Important also is the spice or aromatic product of 
cardamoms. 

The culture of indiarubber was begun on low-country plantations, 
and Ceylon rubber is of the best quality in the market. The area 
of cultivation of the coco-nut palm has been greatly extended 
since 1875 by natives as well as by Europeans. The products of this 
palm that are exported, apart from those so extensively used in the 
island itself, exceed in a good year £1,000,000 sterling in value. 
Viticulture and cotton cultivation, as well as tobacco growing, are 
being developed along the course of the new northern railway. 

Taking the trade in the products mentioned as a whole, no country 
can compete with the United Kingdom as a customer of Ceylon. 
But there is a considerable trade in nearly all products with Germany 
and America; in cardamoms with India; in cinnamon with Spain, 
Italy, Belgium, Australia, Austria and France ; and in one or other 
of the products of the coco-nut palm (coco-nuts, coco-nut oil; 
copra, desiccated coco-nut, poonac, coir) with Belgium, Russia, 
France, Austria, Australia and Holland. 

Pearl Fishery.— Pearl oysters are found in the Tambalagam bay, 
near Trincomalee, but the great banks on which these oysters are 
usually found lie near Arippu, off the northern part of the west coast 
of Ceylon, at a distance of from 16 to 20 m. from the shore. They 
extend for many miles north and south, varying considerably in their 
size and productiveness. It is generally believed that the oyster 
arrives at maturity in its seventh year, that the pearl is then of full 
size and perfect lustre, and that if the oyster be not then secured it 
will shortly die, and the pearl be lost. It is certain that from some 
unexplained cause the oysters disappear from their known beds for 
years together. The Dutch had no fishery from 1732 to 1746, and 
it failed them again for twenty-seven years from 1768 to 1796. 
The fishery was again interrupted between 1820 and 1828, also from 
1833 to 1854, from 1864 to 1873, and again from 1892 to 1900. The 
fishery of 1903 was the first since 1891, and produced a revenue of 
Rs.829,348, being the third largest on record. In 1797 and 1798 
the government sold the privilege of fishing the oyster-beds for 
£123,982 and £142,780 respectively. From that time the fishery 
was conducted by the government itself until 1906, when it was 
leased to the Ceylon Pearl Fisheries Company for twenty years at 
a rent of £20,000 a year. Professor Herdman, F.R.S., was appointed 
to inquire and report on the conservation and cultivation of the 
Ceylon pearl-oyster, and visited Ceylon in January 1902. In 
consequence of his report, a marine laboratory for the culture of the 
pearl oysters was established in Galle harbour under the care of 
Mr Hornell. 

Mineral Industries. — Commercially there are two established 
mineral industries: — (1) that of digging for precious stones; and 
(2) the much more important industry of digging for plumbago or 



graphite, the one mineral of commercial importance found. Further 
developments may result in the shipment of the exceptionally pure 
iron ore found in different parts of Ceylon, though still no coal has 
been found to be utilized with it. Several places, too — Ruanwella, 
Rangalla, Rangbodde, &c. — indicate where gold was found in the 
time of the Kandyan kings; and geologists might possibly indicate 
a paying quartz reef, as in Mysore. Owing to the greatly increased 
demand in Europe and America, plumbago in 1 899 more than doubled 
in price, rising from £40 to £80, and even £100 a ton for the 
finest. Latterly there has been a considerable fall, but the permanent 
demand is likely to continue keen in consequence mainly of the Ceylon 
kind being the best for making crucibles. The trade with Great 
Britain and the United States has slightly decreased, but there has 
been a rapid expansion in the exports to Belgium and Holland, 
Russia, Japan and Victoria; and the industry seems to be estab- 
lished on a sound basis. One consequence of its development has been 
to bring European and Americaa capitalists and Cornish and Italian 
miners into a field hitherto almost entirely worked by Sinhalese. 
Though some of the mines were carried to a depth of 1000 ft., the 
work was generally very primitive in character, and Western 
methods of working are sure to lead to greater safety and economy. 
Besides a royalty or customs duty of 5 rupees (about 6s. 8d.) per 
ton on all plumbago exported, the government issue licenses at 
moderate rates for the digging of plumbago on crown lands, a certain 
share of the resulting mineral also going to government. The plum- 
bago industry, in all its departments of mining, carting, preparing, 
packing and shipping, gives employment to fully 100,000 men and 
women, still almost entirely Sinhalese. The wealthiest mine-owners, 
too, are Sinhalese land-owners or merchants. 

As regards gems, there are perhaps 500 gem pits or quarries worked 
in the island during the dry season from November to June in the 
Ratnapura, Rakwane and Matara districts. Some of these are on 
a small scale; but altogether several thousands of Sinhalese find a 
precarious existence in digging for gems. Rich finds of a valuable 
ruby, sapphire, cat's-eye, amethyst, alexandrite or star stone, are 
comparatively rare; it is only of the commoner gems, such as 
moonstone, garnet, spinels, that a steady supply is obtained. The 
cat's-eye in its finer qualities is peculiar to Ceylon, and is occasion- 
ally in great demand, according to the fashion. The obstacle to the 
investment of European capital in " gemming " has always been the 
difficulty of preventing the native labourers in the pits- — even if 
practically naked— from concealing and stealing gems. A Chamber of 
Mines, with a suitable library, was established in Colombo duringl899. 

Manufactures.- — Little is done save in the preparation in factories 
and stores, in Colombo or on the plantations, of the several products 
exported. The manufacture of jewellery and preparation of precious 
stones, and, among native women and children, of pillow lace, give 
employment to several thousands. Iron and engineering works are 
numerous in Colombo and in the planting districts. The Sinhalese 
are skilful cabinetmakers and carpenters. The Moormen and Tamils 
furnish good masons and builders. 

Commerce. — There has been rapid development since 1882, and 
the returns for 1903 showed a total value of 22 J millions sterling. 
The principal imports were articles of food and drink (chiefly rice 
from India) manufactured metals (with specie), coal, cotton yarns 
and piece goods from Manchester, machinery and millwork and 
apparel. The Ceylon customs tariff for imports is one of 65% ad 
valorem, save in the case of intoxicating drinks, arms, ammunition, 
opium, &c. The chief export is tea. 

Roads. — The policy of the Sinhalese rulers of the interior was to 
exclude strangers from the hill country. Prior to the British occu- 
pation of the Kandyan territory in 18 15, the only means of 
access from one district to another was by footpaths through the 
forests. The Portuguese do not appear to have attempted to 
open up the country below the hills, and the Dutch confined them- 
selves to the improvement of the inland water-communications. 
The British government saw from the first the necessity of making 
roads into the interior for military purposes, and, more recently, for 
developing the resources of the country. The credit of opening up 
the country is due mainly to the governor, Sir Edward Barnes, by 
whose direction the great military road from Colombo to Kandy 
was made. Gradually all the military stations were connected by 
broad tracks, which by degrees were bridged and converted into 
good carriage roads. The governors Sir Henry Ward and Sir 
Hercules Robinson recognized the importance of giving the coffee 
planters every assistance in opening up the country, and the result 
of their policy is that the whole of the hill country is now intersected 
by a vast number of splendid roads, made at a cost of upwards of 
£2000 per mile. In 1848 an ordinance was passed to levy from every 
adult male in the colony (except Buddhist priests and British soldiers) 
six days' labour on the roads, or an equivalent in money. The labour 
and money obtained by this wise measure have enabled the local 
authorities to connect the government highways by minor roads, 
which bring every village of importance into communication with 
the principal towns. 

Railways. — After repeated vain attempts by successive governors 
to connect Colombo with the interior by railways, Sir Charles 
MacCarthy successfully set on foot a railway of 75 m. in length from 
Colombo to Kandy. The railway mileage had developed to 563 m. 
in 1908, including one of thejr finest mountain lines in the world — 



CEYLON 



783 



over 160 m. long, rising to 6200 ft. above sea-level, and falling at the 
terminus to 4000 ft. The towns of Kandy, Matale, Gampola, Nawa- 
lapitiya, Hatton and Haputale (and practically Nuwara Eliya) in the 
hills, are thus connected by rail, and in the low country the towns of 
Kurunegala, Galle, Matara, Kalutara, &c. Most of the debt on the 
railways (all government lines) is paid off, and the traffic receipts 
now make up nearly one-third of the general revenue. An Indo- 
Ceylon railway to connect the Indian and Ceylon systems has been 
the subject of separate reports and estimates by engineers serving 
the Ceylon and Indian governments, who have pronounced the 
work across the coral reef between Manaar and Rameswaram quite 
feasible. A commission sat in 1903 to consider the gauge of an 
Indo-Ceylon railway. Such a line promised to serve strategic as 
well as commercial purposes, and to make Colombo more than ever 
the port for southern India. The headquarters of the mail steamers 
have been removed from Galle to Colombo, where the colonial 
government have constructed a magnificent breakwater, and under- 
taken other harbour works which have greatly augmented both 
the external trade and the coasting trade of the island. 

Government. — Ceylon is a crown colony, that is, a possession of the 
British crown acquired by conquest or cession, the affairs of which 
are administered by a governor, who receives his appointment from 
the crown, generally for a term of six years. He is assisted by an 
executive and a legislative council. The executive council acts as 
the cabinet of the governor, and consists of the attorney-general, 
the three principal officers of the colony (namely, the colonial secre- 
tary, the treasurer and the auditor-general), and the general in 
command of the forces. The legislative council includes, besides 
the governor as president and nine official members, eight unofficial 
members — one for the Kandyan Sinhalese (or Highlanders) and one 
for the " Moormen " having been added in 1890. The term of office 
for the unofficial members is limited to five years, though the 
governor may reappoint if he choose. The king's advocate, the 
deputy-advocate, and the surveyor-general are now respectively 
styled attorney-general, solicitor-general, and director of public 
works. The civil service has been reconstituted into five classes, 
not including the colonial secretary as a staff appointment, nor ten 
cadets; these five classes number seventy officers. The district 
judges can punish up to two years' imprisonment, and impose 
fines up to Rs.iooo. The police magistrates can pass sentences 
up to six months' imprisonment, and impose fines of Rs.150. The 
criminal law has since 1890 been codified on the model of the Indian 
penal code; criminal and civil procedure have also been the subject 
of codification. There are twenty-three prisons in the island, mostly 
small; but convict establishments in and near the capital take all 
long-sentence prisoners. 

Banks and Currency. — Ceylon has agencies of the National Bank 
of India, Bank of Madras, Mercantile Bank of India, Chartered Bank 
of India, Australia and China, and of the Hong-kong and Shanghai 
Bank, besides mercantile agencies of other banks, also a govern- 
ment savings bank at Colombo, and post-office savings banks all 
over the island. In 1884, on the failure of the Oriental Bank, the 
notes in currency were guaranteed by government, and a government 
note currency was started in supersession of bank notes. The coin 
currency of Ceylon is in rupees and decimals of a rupee, the value 
of the standard following that fixed for the Indian rupee, about 
is. 4d. per rupee. 

Finance. — With the disease of the coffee plant the general revenue 
fell from Rs. 1,70,00,000 in 1877 to Rs. 1,20,00,000 in 1882, when 
trade vvas in a very depressed state, and the general prosperity of 
the island was seriously affected. Since then, however, the revenue 
has steadily risen with the growing export of tea, cocoa-nut produce, 
plumbago, &c, and in 1902 it reached a total of 28 millions of 
rupees. (J. F. D.; C. L.) 

History. — The island of Ceylon was known to the Greeks and 
Romans under the name of Taprobane, and in later times Serendib, 
Sirinduil and Zeylan have been employed to designate it by 
writers of the Western and Eastern worlds. Serendib is a 
corruption of the Sanskrit Sinhaladvipa. Like most oriental 
countries, Ceylon possesses a great mass of ancient records, in 
which fact is so confused with fable that they are difficult to 
distinguish. The labours of George Tumour (1 799-1843), 
however, helped to dissipate much of this obscurity, and his 
admirable edition (1836) of the Mahavamsa first made it possible 
to trace the main lines of Sinhalese history. 

The Sinhalese inscriptional records, to which George Tumour 
first called attention, and which, through the activity of Sir 
William Gregory in 1874, began to be accurately transcribed 
and translated, extend from the 2nd century B.C. onwards. 
Among the oldest inscriptions discovered are those on the rock 
cells of the Vessagiri Vihara of Anuradhapura, cut in the old 
Brahma-lipi character. The inscriptions show how powerful 
was the Buddhist hierarchy which dominated the government 
and national life. The royal decrees of successive rulers are 



mainly concerned with the safeguarding of the rights of the 
hierarchy, but a few contain references to executive acts of the 
kings, as in a slab- inscription of Kassapa V. (c. a.d. 929-939). 
In an edict ascribed to Mahinda IV. (c. a.d. 975-991) reference 
is made to the Sinhalese palladium, the famous tooth-relic of 
Buddha, now enshrined at Kandy, and the decree confirms 
tradition as to the identity of the fine stone temple, east of the 
Thuparama at Anuradhapura, with the shrine in which the 
tooth was first deposited when brought from Kalinga in the 
reign of Kirti Sri Meghavarna (a.d. 304-324). 

The earliest inhabitants of Ceylon were probably the ancestors 
of the modern Veddahs, a small tribe of primitive hunters who 
inhabit the eastern jungles; and the discovery of palaeolithic 
stone implements buried in some of their caves points to the fact 
that they represent a race which has been in the island for untold 
ages. As to subsequent immigrations, the great Hindu epic, 
the Ramayana, tells the story of the conquest of part of the 
island by the hero Rama and his followers, who took the capital 
of its king Rawana. Whatever element of truth there may be 
in this fable, it certainly represents no permanent occupation. 
The authentic history of Ceylon, so far as it can be traced, 
begins with the landing in 543 B.C. of Vijaya, the founder of the 
Sinhalese dynasty, with a small band of Aryan-speaking followers 
from the mainland of India. Vijaya married the daughter of a 
native chief, with whose aid he proceeded to master the whole 
island, which he parcelled out among his followers, some of whom 
formed petty kingdoms. The Sinhalese introduced from the 
mainland a comparatively high type of civilization, notably 
agriculture. The earliest of the great irrigation tanks, near 
Anuradhapura, was opened about 504 B.C. by the successor of 
Vijaya; and about this time was established that system of 
village communities which still obtains over a large part of Ceylon. 

The island was converted to Buddhism at the beginning of 
the 3rd century B.C. by the preaching of Mahinda, a son of the 
great Buddhist emperor Asoka; a conversion that was followed 
by an immense multiplication of daghobas, curious bell-shaped 
reliquaries of solid stone, and of Buddhist monasteries. For 
the rest, the history of ancient Ceylon is largely a monotonous 
record of Malabar or Tamil invasions, conquests and usurpations. 
Of these latter the first was in 237 B.C. when two officers in the 
cavalry and fleet revolted, overthrew the Sinhalese ruler with 
the aid of his own Tamil mercenaries, and reigned jointly, as 
Sena I. and Guptika, until 215. The Sinhalese Asela then ruled 
till 205, when he was overthrown by a Tamil from Tanjore, 
Elala, who held the reins of power for 44 years. In 161 B.C. 
Elala was defeated and slain by Dutegemunu, still remembered 
as one of the great Sinhalese heroes of Ceylon. The ruins of the 
great monastery, known as the Brazen Palace, at Anuradhapura, 
remain a memorial of King Dutegemunu's splendour and religious 
zeal. He died in 137 B.C., and thenceforth the history of Ceylon 
is mainly that of further Tamil invasions, of the construction 
of irrigation tanks, and of the immense development of the 
Buddhist monastic system. A tragic episode in the royal family 
in the 5th century a.d. is, however, worthy of notice as connected 
with one of Ceylon's most interesting remains, the Sigiri rock 
and tank (see Sigiri). In a.d. 477 King Datu Sen was murdered 
by his son, who mounted the throne as Kasyapa I., and when 
he was driven from the capital by the inhabitants, infuriated 
by his crime, built himself a stronghold on the inaccessible 
Sigiri rock, whence he ruled the country until in 495 he was 
overthrown and slain by his brother Mugallana (495-513), who 
at the time of his father's murder had escaped to India. 

Towards the close of the 10th century Ceylon was invaded by 
Rajaraja the Great, the Chola king, and after a series of pro- 
tracted campaigns was annexed to his empire in 1005. Tha 
island, did not, however, remain long under Tamil domination. 
In 1071 Vijaya Bahu succeeded in re-establishing the Sinhalese 
dynasty, and for a while Ceylon was freed from foreign inter- 
vention. The most notable of the successors of Vijaya Bahu, 
and indeed of all the long line of Sinhalese rulers, was Parakrama 
Bahu I. (1155-1180), whose colossal statue still stands near 
Polonnaruwa. He not only took advantage of the unaccustomed 



7 8 4 

tranquillity of the country to restore the irrigation tanks and 
the mojaasteries, tot he availed himself of a disputed succession 
to the Pandya throne of Madura to turn the tables on his Tamil 
enemies by invading India. According to the Mahavamsa his 
generals met with immediate and unbroken success; according 
to the more probable account preserved in a long Chola in- 
scription at Arpakkam near Kanchi, they were, though at first 
successful, ultimately driven out by a coalition of the southern 
princes (V. A, Smith, Early History of India, ed. 1908, p. 411). 
In any case, within thirty years of Parakrama Bahu's death 
his work was undone; the Malabar invaders were once more 
able to effect a settlement in the island, and the Sinhalese capital 
was moved farther and farther south, till in 1410 it had become 
established at Kotta, now a suburb of Colombo. In 1408 a new 
misfortune had befallen the Sinhalese dynasty; in revenge for 
an insult offered to a Chinese envoy, a Chinese army invaded 
the island and carried away King Vijaya Bahu IV. into captivity. 
For thirty years from this date the Sinhalese kings of Ceylon 
were tributary to China. 

When, in 1505, the Portuguese Francisco de Almeida landed 
in Ceylon, he found the island divided into seven kingdoms. 
Twelve years later the viceroy of Goa ordered the erection of a 
fort at Colombo, for which permission was obtained from the 
king of Kotta; and from this time until the advent of the Dutch 
in the 17 th century the Portuguese endeavoured, amid perpetual 
wars with the native kings, who were assisted by Arab and other 
traders jealous of European rivalry, to establish their control 
over the island. They ultimately succeeded so far as the coast 
was concerned, though their dominion scarcely penetrated inland. 
Materially their gain was but small, for the trade of Ceylon was 
quite insignificant; but they had the spiritual satisfaction of 
prosecuting a vigorous propaganda of Catholicism, St Ffancis 
Xavier being the most notable of the missionaries who at this 
time laboured in the island. 

The fanatical zeal and the masterful attitude of the Portuguese 
were a constant source of dissension with the native rulers, and 
when the Dutch, under Admiral Spilberg, landed on the east 
coast in 1602 and sought the alliance of the king of Kandy in 
the interior of the island, every inducement was held out to them 
to aid in expelling the Portuguese. Nothing seems to have come 
of this until 1638-1639, when a Dutch expedition attacked and 
razed the Portuguese forts on the east coast. In the following 
year they landed at Negombo, without however establishing 
themselves in any strong post. In 1644 Negombo was captured 
and fortified by the Dutch, while in 1656 they took Colombo, 
and in 1658 they drove the Portuguese from Jaffna, their last 
stronghold in Ceylon. 

Pursuing a wiser policy than their predecessors, the Dutch 
lost no opportunity of improving that portion of the country 
which owned their supremacy, and of opening a trade with the 
interior. More tolerant and less disposed to stand upon their 
dignity than the Portuguese, they subordinated political to com- 
mercial ends, flattered the native rulers by a show of deference, 
and so far succeeded in their object as to render their trade 
between the island and Holland a source of great profit. Many 
new branches of industry were developed. Public works were 
undertaken on a large scale, and education, if not universally 
placed within the reach of the inhabitants of the maritime 
provinces, was at least well cared for on a broad plan of govern- 
ment supervision. That which they had so much improved by 
policy, they were, however, unable to defend by force when the 
British turned their arms against them. A century and a half 
had wrought great changes in the physical and mental status 
of the Dutch colonists. The territory which in 1658 they had 
slowly gained by undaunted and obstinate bravery, they as 
rapidly lost in 1796 by imbecility and cowardice. 

The first intercourse of the English with Ceylon was as far 
back as 1763, when an embassy was despatched from Madras 
to the king of Kandy, without, however, leading to any result. 
On the rupture between Great Britain and Holland in 1795, a 
force was sent against the Dutch possessions in Ceylon, where 
the opposition offered was so slight that by the following year 



CEYLON 



the whole of their forts were in the hands of the English 
commander. 

The abiding results of the occupation of Ceylon by the 
Portuguese and Dutch is described by Sir Emerson Tennent 
(Ceylon) as follows: 

" The dominion of the Netherlands in Ceylon was nearly equal in 
duration with that of Portugal, about 140 years; but the policies 
of the two countries have left a very different impress on the char- 
acter and institutions of the people amongst whom they lived. The 
most important bequest left by the utilitarian genius of Holland is 
the code of Roman Dutch law, which still prevails in the supreme 
courts of justice, whilst the fanatical propagandism of the Portu- 
guese has reared for itself a monument in the abiding and expanding 
influence of the Roman Catholic faith. This flourishes in every 
hamlet and province where it was implanted by the Franciscans, 
whilst the doctrines of the reformed church of Holland, never 
preached beyond the walls of the fortresses, are already almost 
forgotten throughout the island, with the exception of an expiring 
community at Colombo. Already the language of the Dutch, which 
they sought to extend by penal enactments, has ceased to be spoken 
even by their direct descendants, whilst a corrupted Portuguese is 
to the present day the vernacular of the lower classes in every town 
of importance. As the practical and sordid government of the 
Netherlands only recognized the interest of the native population 
in so far as they were essential to uphold their trading monopolies, 
their memory was recalled by no agreeable associations : whilst the 
Portuguese, who, in spite of their cruelties, were identified with the 

Ceople by the bond of a common faith, excited a feeling of admiration 
y the boldness of their conflicts with the Kandyans, and the 
chivalrous though ineffectual defence of their beleaguered fortresses. 
The Dutch and their proceedings have almost ceased to be remem- 
bered by the lowland Sinhalese; but the chiefs of the south and 
west perpetuate with pride the honorific title Don, accorded to them 
by their first European conquerors, and still prefix to their ancient 
patronymics the sonorous Christian names of the Portuguese." 

The British forces by which the island had been conquered 
were those of the East India Company, and Ceylon was therefore 
at first placed under its jurisdiction and administered from 
Madras. The introduction of the Madras revenue system, how- 
ever, together with a host of Malabar collectors, led to much 
discontent, which culminated in rebellion; and in 1798 the 
colony was placed directly under the crown. By the treaty of 
Amiens, in 1803, this situation was regularized, from the inter- 
national point of view, by the formal cession to Great Britain 
of the former Dutch possessions in the island. For a while the 
British dominion was confined to the coast. The central tract 
of hilly country, hedged in by impenetrable forests and pre- 
cipitous mountain ranges, remained in possession of Sri Vikrama 
Raja Sinha, the last of the Sinhalese dynasty, who showed 
no signs of encouraging communication with his European 
neighbours. 

Minor differences led in 1803 to an invasion of the Kandyan 
territory; but sickness, desertion and fatigue proved more 
formidable adversaries to the British forces than the troops of 
the Sinhalese monarch, and peace was eventually concluded upon 
terms by no means favourable to the English. The cruelty and 
oppression of the king now became so intolerable to his subjects 
that disaffection spread rapidly amongst them. Punishments 
of the most horrible kinds were inflicted, but failed to repress 
the popular indignation; and in 1815 the British, at the urgent 
request of many of the Adigars and other native chiefs, proceeded 
against the tyrant, who was captured near Kandy, and subse- 
quently ended his days in exile. With him ended a long line of 
sovereigns, whose pedigree may be traced through upwards of 
two thousand years. 

By a convention entered into with the Kandyan chiefs on the 
2nd of March 1815, the entire sovereignty of the island passed 
into the hands of the British, who in return guaranteed to the 
inhabitants civil and religious liberty. The religion of Buddha 
was declared inviolable, and its rights, ministers and places of 
worship were to be maintained and protected; the laws of the 
country were to be preserved and administered according to 
established forms; and the royal dues and revenues were to be 
levied as before for the support of government. 

With the exception of a serious outbreak in some parts of the 
interior in 1817, which lasted for upwards of a year, and of two 
minor attempts at rebellion easily put down, in 1843 and 1848, 



CHABAZITE— CHABOT 



785 



the political atmosphere of Ceylon has remained undisturbed 
since the deportation of the last king of Kandy. 

Authorities. — Major Thomas Skinner, Fifty Years in Ceylon, 
edited by his son, A. Skinner (London, 1891) ; Constance F. Gordon 
Gumming, Two "Happy Years in Ceylon (2 vols., Edinburgh, 1892) ; 
H. W. Cave, The Ruined Cities of Ceylon (London, 1897), and The 
Book of Ceylon (London, 1908) ; Sir Emerson Tennent, Ceylon 
(2 vols. 4th ed., i860); J. Ferguson, Ceylon in 1903 (Colombo); 
J. C. Willis, Ceylon (Colombo, 1907). See also E. Muller, Ancient 
Inscriptions in Ceylon, published for the government (1883-1884), 
and the important archaeological survey in Epigraphia Zeylonica, 
part i., 1904, ii., 1907, iii., 1907, by Don Martino de Silva Wickre- 
masinghe, who in 1899 was appointed epigraphist to the Ceylon 
government. Among other works on special subjects may be 
mentioned H. Trimen, F.R.S., director of Ceylon Botanic Gardens, 
Ceylon Flora, in 5 vols., completed by Sir Joseph Hooker; Captain 
V. Legge, F.Z.S., History of the Birds of Ceylon (London, 1870) ; 
Dr Copleston, bishop of Colombo, Buddhism, Primitive and Present, 
in Magadha and in Ceylon (London, 1892); review by Sir West 
Ridgeway, Administration of Ceylon, 1896-1903; Professor W. A. 
Herdman, Report on the Pearl Oyster Fisheries, 1903-1904. 

CHABAZITE, a mineral species belonging to the group of 
zeolites. It occurs as white to flesh-red crystals which vary from 
transparent to translucent and have a vitreous lustre. The 
crystals are rhombohedral, and the predominating form is often 
a rhombohedron (r) with interfacial angles of -85 14'; they 
therefore closely resemble cubes in appearance, and the mineral 
was in fact early (in 1772) described as a cubic zeolite. A 
characteristic feature is the twinning, the crystals being fre- 
quently interpenetration twins with the principal axis as twin-axis 




Fig. 1. Fig. 2. 

Twinned Crystals of Chabazite. 

(figs. 1, 2). The appearance shown in fig. 1, with the corners 
of small crystals in twinned position projecting from the faces 
r of the main crystal, is especially characteristic of chabazite. 
Such groups resemble the interpenetrating twinned cubes of 
fluorspar, but the two minerals are readily distinguished by 
their cleavage, fluorspar having a perfect octahedral cleavage 
truncating the corners of the cube, whilst in chabazite there are 
less distinct cleavages parallel to the rhombohedral (cube-like) 
faces. Another type of twinned crystal is represented in fig. 2, 
in which the predominating form is an obtuse hexagonal pyramid 
(/) ; the faces of these flatter crystals are often rounded, giving 
rise to lenticular shapes, hence the name phacolite (from (frauds, 
a lentil) for this variety of chabazite. 

The hardness of chabazite is 45, and the specific gravity 
2-o8-2-i6. As first noticed by Sir David Brewster in 1830, the 
crystals often exhibit anomalous optical characters: instead 
of being uniaxial, a basal section may be divided into sharply- 
defined biaxial sectors. Heating of the crystals is attended by 
a loss of water and a change in their optical characters; it is 
probable therefore that the anomalous optical characters are 
dependent on the amount of water present. 

Besides phacolite, mentioned above, other varieties of chabazite 
are distinguished. Herschelite and seebachite are essentially 
the same as phacolite. Haydenite is the name given to small 
yellowish crystals, twinned on a rhombohedron plane r, from 
Jones's Falls near Baltimore in Maryland. Acadialite is a 
reddish chabazite from Nova Scotia (the old French name of 
which is Acadie) . 

Chemically, chabazite' is a complex hydrated calcium and 
sodium silicate, with a small proportion of the sodium replaced by 
potassium, and sometimes a small amount of the calcium replaced 
by barium and strontium. The composition is however variable, 



and is best expressed as an isomorphous mixture of the mole- 
cules (Ca, Na 2 ) Al 2 (Si0 4 ) 2 +4H 2 and (Ca,Na 2 ) Al 2 (Si 3 8 ) 2 +8H 2 0, 
which are analogous to the felspars. Most analyses correspond 
with a formula midway -between these extremes, namely, 
(Ca,Na 2 )Al 2 (Si0 3 ) 4 +6H 2 0. 

Chabazite occurs with other zeolites in the amygdaloidal 
cavities of basaltic rocks; occasionally it has been found in 
gneisses and schists. Well-formed crystals are known from 
many localities; for example, Kilmalcolm in Renfrewshire, the 
Giant's Causeway in Co. Antrim, and Oberstein in Germany. 
Beautiful, clear glassy crystals of the phacolite (" seebachite ") 
variety occur with phillipsite and radiating bundles of brown 
calcite in cavities in compact basalt near Richmond, Melbourne, 
Victoria. Small crystals have been observed lining the cavities 
of fossil shells from Iceland, and in the recent deposits of the 
hot springs of Plombieres and Bourbonne-les-Bains in France. 

Gmelinite and levynite are other species of zeolites which may 
be mentioned here, since they are closely related to chabazite, 
and like it are rhombohedral and frequently twinned. Gmelinite 
forms lirge flesh-red crystals usually of hexagonal habit, and 
was early known as soda-chabazite, it having the composi- 
tion of chabazite but with sodium predominating over 
calcium (Na 2 ,Ca)Al 2 (Si0 3 )i6H 2 0. The formula of levynite is 
CaAl 2 Si 3 O l0 +5H2O. (L. J. S.) 

CHABLIS, a town of north-central France, in the department 
of Yonne, on the left bank of the Serein, 14 m. E. by N. of Auxerre 
by road. Pop. (1906) 2227. Its church of St Martin belongs 
to the end of the 12th century. The town gives its name to a 
well-known white wine produced in the neighbouring vineyards, 
of which the most esteemed are Clos, Bouguerots, Moutonne, 
Grenouille, Montmaires, Lys and Vaux-Desirs. There are 
manufactures of biscuits. 

CHABOT, FRANCOIS (1757-1794), French revolutionist, 
had been a Franciscan friar before the Revolution, and after the 
civil constitution of the clergy continued to act as " constitu- 
tional " priest, becoming grand vicar of Henri Gregoire, bishop 
of Blois. Then he was elected to the Legislative Assembly, 
sitting at the extreme left, and forming with C. Bazire and Merlin 
de Thionville the " Cordelier trio." Re-elected to the Convention 
he voted for the death of Louis XVI., and opposed the proposal 
to prosecute the authors of the massacre of September, " because 
among them there are heroes of Jemmapes." Some of his 
sayings are well known, such as that Christ was the first " sans- 
culotte." Compromised in the falsification of a decree suppressing 
the India Company and in a plot to bribe certain members of 
the Convention, especially Fabre d'Eglantine and C. Bazire, he 
was arrested, brought before the Revolutionary Tribunal, and 
was condemned and executed at the same time as the Dantonists, 
who protested against being associated with such a " fripon." 

CHABOT, GEORGES ANTOINE, known as Chabot de 
l'Aixier (1758-1819), French jurist and statesman, was pre- 
sident of the tribunal of Montlucon when he was elected as 
a deputy suppliant to the National Convention. A member of 
the council of the Ancients, then of the Tribunate, he was 
president of the latter when the peace of Amiens was signed. 
He had a resolution adopted, tending to give Napoleon Bonaparte 
the consulship for life; and in 1804 supported the proposal 
to establish a hereditary monarchy. Napoleon named him 
inspector-general of the law schools, then judge of the court of 
cassation. He published various legal works, e.g. Tableau de la 
legislation ancienne sur les successions et de la Ugislation nouvelle 
etablie par le code civil (Paris, 1804), and Questions transitoires 
sur le code Napolion (Paris, 1809). 

CHABOT, PHILIPPE DE, Seigneur de Brion, Count of 
Charny and Buzancais (c. 1492-1543), admiral of France. 
The Chabot family was one of the oldest and most powerful in 
Poitou. Philippe was a cadet of the Jarnac branch. He was a 
companion of Francis I. as a child, and on that king's accession 
was loaded with honours and estates. After the battle of Pavia 
he was made admiral of France and governor of Burgundy 
(1526), and shared with Anne de Montmorency the direction of 
affairs. He was at the height of his power in 1535, and 



7 86 



CHABRIAS— CHAD 



commanded the army for the invasion of the states of the duke of 
Savoy; but in the campaigns of 1536 and 1537 he was eclipsed 
by Montmorency, and from that moment his influence began to 
wane. He was accused by his enemies of peculation, and 
condemned on the 10th of February 1541 to a fine of 1,500,000 
livres, to banishment, and to the confiscation of his estates. 
Through the good offices of Madam d'Etampes, however, he 
obtained the king's pardon almost immediately (March 1541), 
was reinstated in his posts, and regained his estates and even 
his influence, while Montmorency in his turn was disgraced. 
But his health was affected by these troubles, and he died soon 
afterwards on the 1st of June 1543. His tomb in the Louvre, 
by an unknown sculptor, is a fine example of French Renaissance 
work. It was his nephew, Guy Chabot, seigneur de Jarnac, 
who fought the famous duel with Francois de Vivonne, seigneur 
de la Chataigneraie, in 1547, at the beginning of the reign of 
Henry II. 

The main authorities for Chabot's life are his MS. correspondence 
in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, and contemporary memoirs. 
See also E. de Barthelemy, " Chabot de Brion," in the Revue des 
questions historiques (vol. xx. 1876) ; Martineau, " L'Amiral Chabot," 
in the Positions des theses de I'Ecole des Chartes (1883). 

CHABRIAS (4th century B.C.), a celebrated Athenian general. 
In 388 B.C. he defeated the Spartans at Aegina and commanded 
the fleet sent to assist Evagoras, king of Cyprus, against the 
Persians. In 378, when Athens entered into an alliance with. 
Thebes against Sparta, he defeated Agesilaus near Thebes. On 
this occasion he invented a manoeuvre, which consisted in 
receiving a charge on the left knee, with shields resting on the 
ground and spears pointed against the enemy. In 376 he 
gained a decisive victory over the Spartan fleet off Naxos, but, 
when he might have destroyed the Spartan fleet, remembering 
the fate of the generals at Arginusae, he delayed to pick up the 
bodies of his dead. Later, when the Athenians changed sides 
and joined the Spartans, he repulsed Epaminondas before the 
walls of Corinth. In 366, together with Callistratus, he was 
accused of treachery in advising the surrender of Oropus to the 
Thebans. He was acquitted, and soon after he accepted a 
command under Tachos, king of Egypt, who had revolted 
against Persia. But on the outbreak of the Social War (357) 
he joined Chares in the command of the Athenian fleet. He lost 
his life in an attack on the island of Chios. 

See Cornelius Nepos, Ckabrias; Xenophon, Hellenica, v. 1-4; 
Diod. Sic. xv. 29-34; an d C. Rehdantz, Vitae Iphicratis, Chabriae, 
et Timothei (1845) ; art. Delian League, section B, and authorities 
there quoted. 

CHABRIER, ALEXIS EMMANUEL (1841-1894), French 
composer, was born at Ambert, Puy de D6me, on the 18th of 
January 1841. At first he only cultivated music as an amateur, 
and it was not until 1879 that he threw up an administration 
appointment in order to devote himself entirely to the art. He 
had two years previously written an opera bouffe entitled L'Etoile, 
which was performed at the Bouffes Farisiens. In 1881 he was 
appointed chorus-master of the concerts then recently established 
by Lamoureux. In 1883 he composed the brilliant orchestral 
rhapsody entitled Espana, the themes of which he had jotted 
down when travelling in Spain. His opera Gwendoline was 
brought out with considerable success at Brussels on the 10th 
of April 1886, and was given later at the Paris Grand Opera. 
The following year 1887, Le Roi malgre lui, an opera of a lighter 
description, was produced in Paris at the Opera Comique, its 
run being interrupted by the terrible fire by which this theatre 
was destroyed. His last opera, Briseis, was left unfinished, 
and performed in a fragmentary condition at the Paris Opera, 
after the composer's death in Paris on the 13th of September 
1894. Chabrier was also the author of a set of piano pieces 
entitled Pieces pittoresques, Valses romantiques, for two pianos, 
a fantasia for horn and piano, &c. His great admiration for 
Wagner asserted itself in Gwendoline, a work which, in spite of 
inequalities due to want of experience, is animated by a high 
artistic ideal, is poetically conceived, and shows considerable 
harmonic originality, besides a thorough mastery over the 
treatment of the orchestra. The characteristics of Le Roi 



malgre' lui have been well summed up by M. Joncieres when he 
alludes to " cette verve inepuisable, ces rythmes endiables, cette 
exuberance de gaiete et de vigueur, a laquelle vcnait se joindre 
la note melancolique et emue." Chabrier's premature death 
prevented him from giving the full measure of his worth. 

CHACMA, the Hottentot name of the Cape baboon, Papio 
porcarius, a species inhabiting the mountains of South Africa 
as far north as the Zambezi. Of the approximate size of an 
English mastiff, this powerful baboon is blackish grey in colour 
with a tinge of green due to the yellow rings on most of the hairs. 
Unlike most of its tribe, it is a good climber; and where wooded 
cliffs are not available, will take up its quarters in tall trees. 
Chacmas frequently strip orchards and fruit-gardens, break 
and devour ostrich eggs, and kill lambs and kids for the sake of 
the milk in their stomachs. 

CHACO, a territory of northern Argentina, part of a large 
district known as the Gran Chaco, bounded N. by the territory 
of Formosa, E. by Paraguay and Corrientes, S. by Santa Fe, 
and W. by Santiago del Estero and Salta. The Bermejo river 
forms its northern boundary, and the Paraguay and Parana 
rivers' its eastern; these rivers are its only means of communica- 
tion. Pop. (1895) 10,422; (1904, est.) 13,937; area, 52,741 sq. 
m. The northern part consists of a vast plain filled with number- 
less lagoons; the southern part is slightly higher and is covered 
with dense forests, occasionally broken by open grassy spaces. 
Its forests contain many species of trees of great economic 
value; among them is the quebracho, which is exported for the 
tannin which it contains. The capital, Resistencia, with an 
estimated population of 3500 in 1904, is situated on the Parana 
river opposite the city of Corrientes. There is railway communi- 
cation between Santa Fe and La Sabana, an insignificant timber- 
cutting village on the southern frontier. In the territory there 
are still several tribes of uncivilized Indians, who occasionally 
raid the neighbouring settlements of Santa Fe. 

CHACONNE (Span, chacona), a slow dance, introduced into 
Spain by the Moors, now obsolete. It resembles the Passa- 
caglia. The word is used also of the music composed for this 
dance — a slow stately movement in j time. Such a movement 
was often introduced into a sonata, and formed the conventional 
finale to an opera or ballet until the time of Gluck. 

CHAD [Ceadda], SAINT (d. 672), brother of Cedd, whom he 
succeeded as abbot at Lastingham, was consecrated bishop of 
the Northumbrians by Wine, the West Saxon bishop, at the 
request of Oswio in 664. On the return of Wilfrid from France, 
where he had been sent to be consecrated to the same see, a 
dispute of course arose, which was settled by Theodore in favour 
of Wilfrid after three years had passed. Chad thereupon retired 
to Lastingham, whence with the permission of Oswio he was 
summoned by Wulfhere of Mercia to succeed his bishop Jaruman, 
who died 667. Chad built a monastery at Barrow in Lincoln- 
shire and fixed his see at Lichfield. He died after he had held 
his bishopric in Mercia two and a half years, and was succeeded 
by Wynfrith. Bede gives a beautiful character of Chad. 

See Bede's Hist. Eccl. edited by C. Plummer, iii. 23, 24, 28; iv. 
2, 3 (Oxford, 1896); Eddius, Vita Wilfridi, xiv., xv. edited by 
J. Raine, Rolls Series (London, 1879). 

CHAD, a lake of northern Central Africa lying between 
12 50' and 14 10' N. and 13 and 15 E. The lake is situated 
about 850 ft. above the sea in the borderland between the fertile 
and wooded regions of the Sudan on the south and the arid 
steppes which merge into the Sahara on the north. The area of 
the lake is shrinking owing to the progressive desiccation of the 
country, Saharan climate and conditions replacing those of the 
Sudan. The drying-up process has been comparatively rapid 
since the middle of the 19th century, a town which in 1850 was 
on the southern margin of the lake being in 1905 over 20 m. from 
it. On the west the shore is perfectly flat, so that a slight rise 
in the water causes the inundation of a considerable area — a 
fact not without its influence on the estimates made at varying 
periods as to the size of the lake. Around the north-west and 
north shores is a continuous chain of gently sloping sand-hills 
covered with bush. This region abounds in big game and birds 



CHADDERTON— CHADERTON 



787 



are plentiful. In the east, the country of Kanem, the desiccation 
has been most marked. Along this coast is a continuous chain 
of islands running from north-west to south-east. But what 
were islands when viewed by Overweg in 1851, formed in 1903 
part of the mainland and new islands had arisen in the lake. 
They are generally low, being composed of sand and clay, and lie 
from 5 to 20 m. from the shore, which throughout its eastern side 
nowhere faces open water. The channels between the islands 
do not exceed 2 m. in width. Two principal groups are dis- 
tinguished, the Kuri archipelago in the south, and the Buduma 
in the north. The inhabitants of the last-named islands were 
noted pirates until reduced to order by the French. The coast- 
line is, in general, undefined and marshy, and broken into numer- 
ous bays and peninsulas. It is also, especially on the east, 
lined by lagoons which communicate with the lake by intricate 
channels. The lake is nowhere of great depth, and about midway 
numerous mud-banks, marshes, islands and dense growths of 
aqueous plants stretch across its surface. Another stretch 
of marsh usually cuts off the northernmost part of the lake from 




Emery VMlka wc 



the central sections. The open water varies in depth from 3 ft. 
in the north-west to over 20 in the south, where desiccation 
is less apparent. Fed by the Shari (q.v.) and other rivers, the 
lake has no outlet and its area varies according to the season. 
The flood water brought down by the Shari in December and 
January causes the lake to rise to a maximum of 24 ft., the 
water spreading over low-lying ground, left dry again in May or 
June. But after several seasons of heavy rainfall the waters 
have remained for years beyond their low-water level. Never- 
theless the secular shrinking goes on, the loss by evaporation and 
percolation exceeding the amount of water received; whilst, 
on the average, the rainfall is diminishing. In 1870 the lake 
rose to an exceptional height, but since then, save in 1897, there 
has been only the normal seasonal rise. The prevalent north- 
east wind causes at times a heavy swell on the lake. Fish 
abound in its waters, which are sweet, save at low-level, when 
they become brackish. The lagoons are believed to act as 
purifying pans in which the greater part of the salt in the water 
is precipitated. In the south-west end of the lake the water is 
yellow, caused by banks of clay; elsewhere it is clear. 

The southern basin of Chad is described under the Shari, 
which empties its waters into the lake about the middle of the 
southern shore, forming a delta of considerable extent. Beyond 
the south-east corner of the lake is a depression known as the 
Bahr-el-Ghazal (not to be confounded with the Nile affluent of 



the same name) . This depression is the termination of what is 
in all probability the bed of one of the dried-up Saharan rivers. 
Coming from the Tibesti highlands the Bahr-el-Ghazal has a 
south-westerly trend to Lake Chad. Near the lake the valley 
was formerly swampy, and at high-water the lake overflowed into 
it. There was also at one time communication between the 
Shari and the Bahr-el-Ghazal, so that the water of the first- 
named stream reached Chad by way of the Bahr-el-Ghazal. 
There is now neither inlet nor outlet to the lake in this direction, 
the mouth of the Ghazal having become a fertile millet field. 
There is still, however, a distinct current from the Shari delta 
to the east end of the lake — known to the natives, like the de- 
pression beyond, as the Bahr-el-Ghazal — indicative of the former 
overflow outlet. 

Besides the Shari, the only important stream entering Lake 
Chad is the Waube or Yo (otherwise the Komadugu Yobe), 
which rises near Kano, and flowing eastward enters the lake on its 
western side 40 m. north of Kuka. > In the rains the Waube 
carries down a considerable body of water to the lake. 

Lake Chad is supposed to have been known by report to 
Ptolemy, and is identified by some writers with the Kura lake 
of the middle ages. It was first seen by white men in 1823 
when it. was reached by way of Tripoli by the British expedition 
under Dr Walter Oudney, R.N., the other members being Captain 
Hugh Clapperton and Major (afterwards Lieut. -Colonel) Dixon 
Denham. By them the lake was named Waterloo. In 1850 
James Richardson, accompanied by Heinrich Barth and Adolf 
Overweg, reached the lake, also via Tripoli, and Overweg was 
the first European to navigate its waters (1851). The lake was 
visited by Eduard Vogel (1855) and by Gustav Nachtigal (1870), 
the last-named investigating its hydrography in some detail. 
In 1890-1893 its shores were divided by treaty between Great 
Britain, France and Germany. The first of these nations to 
make good its footing in the region was France. A small steamer, 
brought from the Congo by Emile Gen til, was in 1897 launched 
on the Shari, and reaching the Chad, navigated the southern 
part of the lake. Communication between Algeria and Lake Chad 
by way of the Sahara was opened, after repeated failures, by the 
French explorer F. Foureau in 1899-1900, At the same time 
a French officer, Lieut. Joalland, reached the lake from the 
middle Niger, continuing his journey round the north end to 
Kanem. A British force under Colonel T. L. N. Morland visited 
the lake at the beginning of 1902, and in May of the same year 
the Germans first reached it from Cameroon. In 1902-1903 
French officers under Colonel Destenave made detailed surveys 
of the south-eastern and eastern shores and the adjacent islands. 
In 1903 Captain E. Lenfant, also a French officer, succeeded in 
reaching the lake (which he circumnavigated) via the Benue, 
proving the existence of water communication between the Shari 
and the Niger. In 1905 Lieut. Boyd Alexander, a British 
officer, further explored the lake, which then contained few 
stretches of open water. The lake is bordered W. and S.W. by 
Bornu, which is partly in the British protectorate of Nigeria 
and partly in the German protectorate of Cameroon. Bagirmi 
to the S.E. of the lake and Kanem to the N.E. are both French 
possessions. The north and north-west shores also belong to 
France. One of the ancient trade routes across the Sahara — 
that from Tripoli to Kuka in Bornu — strikes the lake at its north- 
west corner, but this has lost much of its former importance. 

See the works of Denham, Clapperton, Barth and Nachtigal cited 
in the biographical notices; Geog. Journal, vol. xxiv. (1904) ; Capt. 
Tilho in La Geographie (March 1906) ; Boyd Alexander, From the 
Niger to the Nile, vol. i. (London, 1907) ; A. Chevalier, Mission 
Chari-Lac Tchad 1902-1904 (Paris. 1908) ; E. Lenfant, La Grande 
Route du Tchad (Paris, 1905) ; H. Freydenberg, Etude sur le Tchad 
et le bassin du Chari (Paris, 1908). 

CHADDERTON, an urban district of Lancashire, England, 
within the parliamentary borough of Oldham (q.v.). Pop. 
(1901) 24,892. Cotton and chemical works, and the coal-mines 
of the neighbourhood, employ the large industrial population. 

CHADERTON, LAURENCE (?i 536-1640), Puritan divine, was 
born at Lees Hall, in the parish of Oldham, Lancashire, probably 
in September 1536, being the second son of Edmund Chaderton, 



7SS 



CHADWICK— CHAERONEIA 



a gentleman of an ancient and wealthy family, and a zealous 
Catholic. Under the tuition of Laurence Vaux, a priest, he 
became an able scholar. In 1564 he entered Christ's College, 
Cambridge, where, after a short time, he formally adopted the 
reformed doctrines and was in consequence disinherited by his 
father. In 1567 he was elected a fellow of his college, and 
subsequently was chosen lecturer of St Clement's church, 
Cambridge, where he preached to admiring audiences for many 
years. He was a man of moderate views, though numbering 
among his friends extremists like Cartwright and Perkins. So 
great was his reputation that when Sir Walter Mildmay founded 
Emmanuel College in 1584 he chose Chaderton for the first 
master, and on his expressing some reluctance, declared that if 
he would not accept the office the foundation should not go on. 
In 1604 Chaderton was appointed one of the four divines for 
managing the cause of the Puritans at the Hampton Court 
conference; and he was also one of the translators of the Bible. 
In 1578 he had taken the degree of B.D., and in 1613 he was 
created D.D. At this period he made provision for twelve 
fellows and above forty scholars in Emmanuel College. Fearing 
that he might have a successor who held Arminian doctrines, 
he resigned the mastership in favour of John Preston, but 
survived him, and lived also to see the college presided over 
successively by William Sancroft (or Sandcroft) and Richard 
Holdsworth. He died on the 13 th of November 1640 at the age 
of about 103, preserving his bodily and mental faculties to the end. 

Chaderton published a sermon preached at St Paul's Cross about 
1580, and a treatise of his On Justification was printed by Anthony 
Thysius, professor of divinity at Leiden. Some other works by 
him on theological subjects remain in manuscript. 

CHADWICK, SIR EDWIN (1800-1800), English sanitary 
reformer, was born at Longsight, near Manchester, on the 24th 
of January 1800. Called to the bar without any independent 
means, he sought to support himself by literary work, and his 
essays in the Westminster Review (mainly on different methods 
of applying scientific knowledge to the business of government) 
introduced him to the notice of Jeremy Bentham, who engaged 
him as a literary assistant and left him a handsome legacy. In 
1832 he was employed by the royal commission appointed to 
inquire into the operation of the poor laws, and in 1833 he was 
made a full member of that body. In conjunction with Nassau 
W. Senior he drafted the celebrated report of 1834 which procured 
the reform of the old poor law. His special contribution was the 
institution of the union as the area of administration. He 
favoured, however, a much more centralized system of admini- 
stration than was adopted, and he never ceased to complain 
that the reform of 1834 was fatally marred by the rejection of 
his views, which contemplated the management of poor-law 
relief by salaried officers controlled from a central board, the 
boards of guardians acting merely as inspectors. In 1834 
he was appointed secretary to the poor law commissioners. 
Finding himself unable to administer in accordance with his 
own views an act of which he was largely the author, his relations 
with his official chiefs became much strained, and the disagree- 
ment led, among other causes, to the dissolution of the poor law 
commission in 1846. Chadwick's chief contribution to political 
controversy was his constant advocacy of entrusting certain 
departments of local affairs to trained and selected experts, 
instead of to representatives elected on the principle of local 
self-government. While still officially connected with the poor 
law he had taken up the question of sanitation in conjunction 
with Dr Southwood Smith, and their joint labours produced a 
most salutary improvement in the public health. His report 
on " The Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population " 
(1842) is a valuable historical document. He was a commissioner 
ai the Board of Health from its establishment in 1848 to its 
abolition in 1854, when he retired upon a pension, and occupied 
the remainder of his life in voluntary contributions to sanitary 
and economical questions. He died at East Sheen, Surrey, on 
the 6th of July 1890. He had been made K.C.B. in 1889. 

See a volume on The Evils of Disunity in Central and Local Ad- 
ministration . . . and the New Centralization for the People, by 



Edwin Chadwick (1885) ; also The Health of Nations, a Review of the 
Works of Edwin Chadwick, with a Biographical Introduction, by 
Sir B. W. Richardson (1887). 

CHAEREMON, Athenian dramatist of the first half of the 
4th century B.C. He is generally considered a tragic poet. 
Aristotle {Rhetoric, iii. 12) says his works were intended for 
reading, not for representation. According to Suidas, he was 
also a comic poet, and the title of at least one of his plays {Achilles 
Slayer of Tkersites) seems to indicate that it was a satyric drama. 
His Centaurus is described by Aristotle {Poet. i. 12) as a rhapsody 
in all kinds of metres. The fragments of Chaeremon are distin- 
guished by correctness of form and facility of rhythm, but 
marred by a florid and affected style reminiscent of Agathon. 
He especially excelled in descriptions (irrelevantly introduced) 
dealing with such subjects as flowers and female beauty. It is 
not agreed whether he is the author of three epigrams in the 
Greek Anthology (Palatine vii. 469, 720, 721) which bear 
his name. 

See H. Bartsch, De Chaeremone Poeta tragico (1843); fragments 
in A. Nauck, Fragmenta Tragicorum Graecorum. 

CHAEREMON, of Alexandria (1st century a.d..), Stoic philo- 
sopher and grammarian. He was superintendent of the portion 
of the Alexandrian library that was kept in the temple of 
Serapis, and as custodian and expounder of the sacred books 
(Upoypannarevs, sacred scribe) belonged to the higher ranks of 
the priesthood. In a.d. 49 he was summoned to Rome, with 
Alexander of Aegae, to become tutor to the youthful Nero. 
He was the author of a History of Egypt; of works on Comets, 
Egyptian Astrology, and Hieroglyphics; and of a grammatical 
treatise on Expletive Conjunctions (crw5e<tyioi irapa7rXi7pwju<mKoO . 
Chaeremon was the chief of the party which explained the 
Egyptian religious system as a mere allegory of the worship of 
nature. His books were not intended to represent the ideas of his 
Egyptian contemporaries; their chief object was to give a 
description of the sanctity and symbolical secrets of ancient 
Egypt. He can hardly be identical with the Chaeremon who 
accompanied {c. 26 B.C.; Strabo xvii. p. 806) Aelius Gallus, 
praefect of Egypt, on a journey into the interior of the country. 

Fragments in C. Miiller, Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum, iii. 
495-499- 

CHAERONEIA, or Chaeronea, an ancient town of Boeotia, 
said by some to be the Homeric Arne, situated about 7 m. W. 
of Orchomenus. Until the 4th century B.C. it was a dependency 
of Orchomenus, and at all times it played but a subordinate 
part in Boeotian politics. Its importance lay in its strategic 
position near the head of the defile which presents the last serious 
obstacle to an invader in central Greece. Two great battles 
were fought on this site in antiquity. In 338 B.C. Philip II. 
and Alexander of Macedon were confronted by a confederate 
host from central Greece and Peloponnese under the leadership 
of Thebes and Athens, which here made the last stand on behalf 
of Greek liberty. A hard-fought conflict, in which the Greek 
infantry displayed admirable firmness, was decided in favour 
of Philip through the superior organization of his army. In 86 
B.C. the Roman general L. Cornelius Sulla defeated the army of 
Mithradates VI., king of Pontus, near Chaeroneia. The latter's 
enormous numerical superiority was neutralized by Sulla's 
judicious choice of ground and the steadiness of his legionaries; 
the Asiatics after the failure of their attack were worn down and 
almost annihilated. Chaeroneia is also notable as the birth- 
place of Plutarch, who returned to his native town in old age, 
and was held in honour by its citizens for many successive 
generations. Pausanias (ix. 40) mentions the divine honours 
accorded at Chaeroneia to the sceptre of Agamemnon, the work 
of Hephaestus (cf. Iliad, ii. 101). The site of the town is partly 
occupied by the village of Kapraena; the ancient citadel was 
known as the Petrachus, and there is a theatre cut in the rock. 
A colossal seated lion a little to the S.E. of the site marks the 
grave of the Boeotians who fell fighting against Philip; this 
lion was found broken to pieces ; the tradition that it was blown 
up by Odysseus Androutsos is incorrect (see Murray, Handbook 
for Greece, ed. 5, 1884, p. 409). It has now been restored and 
re-erected (1905). 



CHAETOGNATHA— CHAETOPODA 



789 



-9' 



.nr 
it 



..cl 



sa-/ 



Authorities. — Thucydides iv. 76; Diodorus xvi. 85-86; Plu- 
tarch, Alexander, ch. 9; Sulla, chs. 16-19; Appian, Mithradatica, 
chs, 42-45 ; W. M. Leake, Travels in Northern Greece (London, 1835), 
ii. 112-117, 192-201 ; B. V. Head, Historia Numorum (Oxford, 1887), 
p. 292; J. Kromayer, Antike Schlachtj elder in Griechenland (Berlin, 
I9°3)> PP- I2 7' I 95 ; G. Sotiriades in Athen. Mitteil. 1903, pp. 301 ff . ; 
1905, p. 120; 1906, p. 396; 'E<t>w. 'ApxatoX., 1908, p. 65. 

CHAETOGNATHA, the name given by R. Leuckhart to a small 
group of transparent and for the most part pelagic organisms, 
whose position in the animal kingdom is 
a very isolated one. Only three genera, 
Sagilla, Spadetta and Krohnia, are recog- 
nised, and the number of species is small. 
Nevertheless these animals exist in ex- 
traordinary quantities, so that at certain 
seasons and under certain conditions the 
surface of the sea seems almost stiff with 
the incredible multitude of organisms 
which pervade it. Rough seas, &c, cause 
them to seek safety in dropping into 
deeper water. Deep-sea forms also occur, 
but in spite of this the group is essentially 
pelagic. 

As a rule the body is some I to 2 or 3 cm. 

in length, though some species are larger, by 

4 or 5 mm. in breadth, and it is shaped 

.,.it something like a torpedo with side flanges 

--*• and a slightly swollen, rounded head. It 

can be divided into three regions — (i.) head, 

(ii.) trunk, and (iii.) tail, separated from one 

another by two transverse septa. The 

almost spherical head is covered by a hood 

which can be retracted; it bears upon its 

3 side a number of sickle-shaped, chitinous 

-<" hooks and one or more short rows of low 

'*9 spines— both of these features are used in 

characterizing the various species. A pair 

of eyes lie dorsally and behind them is a 

closed circlet, often pulled out into various 

' shapes, of modified epidermis, to Which an 

olfactory function has been attributed. The 

interior of the head is filled up with masses 

of muscle fibres which are mainly occupied 

with moving the sickle-shaped hooks. The 

f j trunk contains a spacious body-cavity filled 

y during the breeding season by the swollen 

ovaries, and the same is true of the tail if 

we substitute testes for ovaries. 

The skin consists of a transparent cuticle 
excreted by the underlying ectoderm-, the 
cells of which though usually one-layered 
Spadella cephaloptera may be heaped up into several layers in 
(Busch). t^e head; beneath this is a basement 

5/, Septa dividing membrane, and then a layer of longitudinal 
body-cavity trans- musc l e fibres which are limited inside by a 
layer of peritoneal cells. The muscles are 
striated and arranged in four quadrants, 
two dorso-lateral and two ventro-lateral , 
an arrangement which recalls that of the 
Nematoda, whilst in their histology they 
somewhat resemble the muscles of the 
Oligochaeta. Along each side of the body 
stretches a horizontal fin and a similar 
flange surrounds the tail. Into these fins, 
which are largely cuticular and strengthened 
by radiating bars, a single layer of ectoderm 
cells projects. 

The mouth, a longitudinal slit, opens on 
. to the ventral surface of the head. It leads 
Tactile hairs spring- ; n t a straight alimentary canal whose walls 
"f^v. a" 1 sur consist of a layer of ciliated cells ensheathed 

of body. m a tn in layer of peritoneal cells. There is 

e 'i rwJP' no arma ture, and no glands, and the whole 

el, Oviduct. tract can only be divided into an oesophagus 

no, Testes. anc j an intestine. The latter runs with no 

«■'.« . S ,eren f' [hns. twists or coils straight to the anus, which is 
/^.Lateral and caudal s i tU ated at the junction of the trunk with 
jo, Seminal pouch. the tail. Amedian mesentery running dorso- 

rhe eyes are indi- ventrally supports the alimentary canal and 
is continued behind it into the tail, thus 
dividing the body cavity into two lateral 
halves. 

There are no specialized circulatory, 
respiratory or excretory organs. 

The nervous system consists of a cerebral ganglion in the head, 



versely. 

g J , Cerebral ganglia. 

»', Commissure unit- 
ing this with ven- 
tral ganglion (not 
shown in fig.). 

n ! , Nerve uniting cere- 
bral ganglia with 
small ganglia on 
head. 

nr, Olfactory nerve. 

d, Alimentary canal. 

r, Olfactory organ. 

te, Tentacle. 



cated as black dots 
behind the cerebral 
ganglia. 



a conspicuous ventral ganglion in the trunk, and of lateral conv 
missures uniting these ganglia on each side. The whole of this 
system has retained its primitive connexion with the ectoderm. 
The cerebral ganglion also gives off a nerve on each side to a pair of 
small- ganglia, united by a median commissure, which have sunk 
into and control the muscles of the head. As in other animals there 
is a minute but extensive nervous plexus, which permeates the whole 
body and takes its origin from the chief ganglia. In addition to the 
eyes and the olfactory circle on the head scattered tactile papillae 
are found on the ectoderm. 

Chaetognatha are hermaphrodite. The ovaries are attached to 
the side walls of the trunk region ; between them and the body wall 
lie the two oviducts whose inner and anterior end is described as 
closed, their outer ends opening one on each side of the anus, where 
the trunk joins the tail. According to Miss N. M. Stevens the so- 
called oviduct acts only as a " sperm-duct " or receptaculum seminis. 
The spermatozoa enter it and pass through its walls and traverse a 
minute duct formed of two accessory cells, and finally enter the 
ripe ovum. Temporary oviducts are formed between the " sperm- 
duct " and the germinal epithelium at each oviposition. A number 
of ova ripen simultaneously. The two testes lie in the tail and are 
formed by lateral proliferations of the living peritoneal cells. These 
break off and, lying in the coelomic fluid, break up into spermatozoa. 
They pass out through short vasa deferentia with internal ciliated 
funnels, sometimes an enlargement on their course — the seminal 
vesicles — and a minute external pore situated on the side of the tail. 

With hardly an exception the transparent eggs are laid into the 
sea and float on its surface. The development is direct and there is 
no larval stage. The segmentation is complete; one side of the 
hollow blastosphere invaginates and forms a gastrula. The blasto- 
pore closes, a new mouth and a new anus subsequently arising. 
The archenteron gives off two lateral pounchs and thus becomes 
trilobed. The middle lobe forms the alimentary canal; it closes 
behind and opens to the exterior anteriorly and so makes the mouth. 
The two lateral lobes contain the coelom ; each separates off in front 
a segment which forms the head and presumably then divides again 
to form anteriorly the trunk, and posteriorly the tail regions. An 
interesting feature of the development of Chaetognaths is that, 
as in some insects, the cells destined to form the reproductive organs 
are differentiated at a very early period, being apparent even in the 
gastrula stage. 

The great bulk of the group is pelagic, as the transparent nature 
of all their tissues indicates. They move by flexing their bodies. 
Spadella cephaloptera is, however, littoral and oviposits on sea-weed, 
and the " Valdivia " brought home a deep-sea species. 

The three genera are differentiated as follows : — 

Sagitta M. Slabber, with two pairs of lateral fins. This genus was 
named as long ago as 1775. 

Krohnia P. Langerhans, with one lateral fin on each side, extend- 
ing on to the tail. 

Spadella P. Langerhans, with a pair of lateral fins on the tail and 
a thickened ectodermic ridge running back on each side from the 
head to the anterior end of the fin. 

The group is an isolated one and should probably be regarded as a 
separate phylum. It has certain histological resemblances with 
the Nematoda and certain primitive Annelids, but little stress must 
be laid on these. The most that can be said is that the Chaetognaths 
begin life with three segments, a feature they share with such widely- 
differing groups as the Brachiopoda, the Echinoderma and the 
Enteropneusta, and probably Vertebrata generally. 

See O. Hertwig, Die Chaetognathen, eine Monographie (Jena, 
1880); B. J. Grassi, Chelognathi: Flora u. Fauna d. Golfes von 
Neapel (1883); S. Strodtman, Arch. Naturg. lviii., 1892; N. M. 
Stevens, Zool. Jahrb. Anal, xviii., 1903, and xxi., 1905. (A. E. S.) 

CHAETOPODA (Gr. x°*rq, hair, irovs, foot), a zoological class, 
including the majority of the Annelida (q.v.), and indeed, save 
for the Echiuroidea (q.v.), co-extensive with that group as 
usually accepted. They are divisible into the Haplodrili (q.v.) 
or Archiannelida, the Polychaeta containing the marine worms, 
the Oligochaeta or terrestrial and fresh- water annelids (see 
Earthworm), the Hirudinea or leeches (see Leech), and a small 
group of parasitic worms, the Myzostomida (q.v.). 

The distinctive 'characters of the class Chaetopoda as a whole 
are partly embodied in the name. They possess (save for certain 
Archiannelida, most Hirudinea, and other very rare exceptions) 
setae or chaetae implanted in epidermal pits. The setae are 
implanted metamerically in accordance with the metamerism 
of the body, which consists of a prostomium followed by a number 
of segments. The number of segments in an individual is fre- 
quently more or less definite. The anterior end of body always 
shows some " cephalization." The internal organs are largely 
repeated metamerically, in correspondence with the external 
metamerism. Thus the body cavity is divided into a sequence 
of chambers by transverse septa; and even among the Hirudinea, 



79° 



CHAETOPODA 



where this condition is usually not to be observed, there is 
embryological evidence that the existing state of affairs is derived 
from this. Commonly the nephridia are strictly paired a single 
pair to each segment, while the branches of the blood vascular 
system are similarly metameric. The alimentary canal is nearly 
always a straight tube running from the mouth, which is sur- 
rounded by the first segment of the body and overhung by the 
prostomium, to the anus, which is then either surrounded by the last 
segment of the body or opens dorsally a little way in front of this. 

The Class as a Whole. — The Chaetopoda are with but few 
exceptions (Myzostomida in part, Sternaspis) elongated worms, 
flattened or, more usually, cylindrical, and bilaterally sym- 
metrical. The body consists of a number of exactly similar 
or closely similar segments, which are never fused and meta- 
morphosed, as in the Arthropoda, to form specialized regions 
of the body. It is, however, always possible to recognize a 
head, which consists at least of the peristomial segment with a 
forward projection of the same, the prostomium. A thorax also 
is sometimes to be distinguished from an abdomen. Where 
locomotive appendages (the parapodia of the Polychaeta) exist, 
they are never jointed, as always in the Arthropoda; nor are 
they modified anteriorly to form jaws, as in that group. 

The prostomium overhangs the mouth, and is often of considerable 
size and, as a rule, quite distinct from the segment following, being 




E, 
M, 
d.c, 
per, 



■ *" A '*■ ^ ^ / ~~B ■* 

Fig. i . — A, side view of the head region of Nereis cultrifera ; 
B, dorsal view of the same. 

pi, Prostomial palp. 

PP. 

Pr, 

pr.t, 

t.s, 

v.c, 



Parapodium. 
Prostomium. 
Prostomial tentacle. 
Trunk segment. 
Ventral cirrus. 



Eye. 
Mouth. 
Dorsal cirrus. 

Peristomium, probably equal 
to two segments, 
per.c, Peristomial cirri. 

separated by an external groove, and containing, at least temporarily, 
the brain, which always arises there. Its cavity also is at first 
independent of the coelom though later invaded by the latter. In 
any case the cavity of the prostomium is single, and not formed, 
as is the cavity of the segments of the body, by paired coelomic 
chambers. It has, however, been alleged that this cavity is formed 
by a pair of mesoblastic somites (N. Kleinenberg), in which case there 
is more reason for favouring the view that would assign an equality 
between the prostomium and the (in that case) other segments of the 
body. The peculiar prostomium of Tomopteris is described below. 
The body wall of the Chaetopoda consists of a " dermo-muscular " 
tube which is separated from the gut by the coelom and its peritoneal 
walls, except in most leeches. A single layer of epidermic cells, some 
of which are glandular, forms the outer layer. Rarely are these 
ciliated, and then only in limited tracts. They secrete a cuticle 
which never approaches in thickness the often calcified cuticle of 
Arthropods. Below this is a circular, and below that again a longi- 
tudinal, layer of muscle fibres. These muscles are not striated, as 
they are in the Arthropoda. 

Setae. — These chitinous, rod-like, rarely squat and then hook-like 
structures are found in the majority of the Chaetopoda, being absent 
only in certain Archiannelida, most leeches, and a very few Oligo- 
chaeta. They exist in the Brachiopoda (which are probably not 
unrelated to the Chaetopoda) , but otherwise are absolutely distinctive 
of the Chaetopods. The setae are invariably formed each within 
an epidermic cell, and they are sheathed in involutions of the epider- 
mis. Their shape and size varies greatly and is often of use in 
classification. The setae are organs of locomotion, though their 
large size and occasionally jagged edges in some of the Polychaeta 
suggest an aggressive function. They are disposed in two groups on 
either side, corresponding in the Polychaeta to the parapodia; 
the two bundles are commonly reduced among the earthworms to 
two pairs of setae or even to a single seta. On the other hand, in 



certain Polychaeta the bundles of setae are so extensive that they 
nearly form a complete circle surrounding the body; and in the 
Oligochaet genus Perichaeta ( = Pheretima) , and some allies, there 
is actually a complete circle of setae in each segment broken only by 
minute gaps, one dorsal, the other ventral. 

Coelom. — The Chaetopoda are characterized by a spacious coelom, 
which is divided into a series of chambers in accordance with the 
general metamerism of the body. This is the typical arrangement, 
which is exhibited in the majority of the Polychaeta and Oligo- 
chaeta ; in these the successive chambers of the coelom are separated 
by the intersegmental septa, sheets of muscle fibres extending from 
the body wall to the gut and thus forming partitions across the body. 
The successive cavities are not, however, completely closed from 
each other; there is some communication between adjoining seg- 
ments, and the septa are sometimes deficient here and there. Thus 
in the Chaetopoda the perivisceral cavity is coelomic; in this 
respect the group contrasts with the Arthropoda and Molluscs, 
where the perivisceral cavity is, mainly at least, part of the vascular 
or haemal system, and agrees with the Vertebrata. The coelom is 
lined throughout by cells, which upon the intestine become large 
and loaded with excretory granules, and are known as chloragogen 
cells. Several forms of cells float freely in the fluid of the coelom. 
In another sense also the coelom is not a closed cavity, for it com- 
municates in several ways with the external medium. Thus, among 
the Oligochaeta there are often a series of dorsal pores, or a single 
head pore, present also among the Polychaeta (in Ammochares) . 
In these and other Chaetopods the coelom is also put into indirect 
relations with the outside world by the nephridia and by the gonad 
ducts. In these features, and in the fact that the gonads are local 
proliferations of the coelomic epithelium, which have undergone no 
further changes in the simpler forms, the coelom of this group shows 
in a particularly clear fashion the general characters of the coelom 
in the higher Metazoa, It has been indeed largely upon the con- 
ditions characterizing the Chaetopoda that the conception of the 
coelom in the Coelomocoela has been based. 

Among the simpler Chaetopoda the coelom retains the character 
of a series of paired chambers, showing the above relations to the 
exterior and to the gonads. There are, however, further com- 
plications in some forms. Especially are these to be seen in the 
more modified Oligochaeta and in the much more modified Hirudinea. 
In the Polychaeta, which are to be regarded as structurally simpler 
forms than the two groups just referred to, there is but little sub- 
division of the cpelom of the segments, indeed a tendency in the 
reverse direction, owing to the suppression of septa. Among the 
Oligochaeta the dorsal vessel in Dinodrilus and Megascolides is 
enclosed in a separate coelomic chamber which may or may not 
communicate with the main coelomic cavity. To this pericardial 
coelom is frequently added a gonocoel enclosing the gonads and the 
funnels of their ducts. This condition is more fully dealt with below 
in the description of the Oligochaeta. The division and, indeed, 
partial suppression of the coelom culminates in the leeches, which 
in this, as in some other respects, are the most modified of Annelids. 

Nervous System. — In all Chaetopods this system consists of 
cerebral ganglia connected by a circumoesophageal commissure 
with a ventral ganglionated cord. The plan of the central nervous 
system is therefore that of the Arthropoda. Among the Archiannelida, 
in Aeolosoma and some Polychaetes, the whole central nervous system 
remains imbedded in the epidermis. In others, it lies in the coelom, 
often surrounded by a special and occasionally rather thick sheath. 
The cerebral ganglia constitute an archicerebrum for the most part, 
there being no evidence that, as in the Arthropoda, a movement 
forward of post-oral ganglia has taken place. In the leeches, however, 
there seems to be the commencement of the formation of a syn- 
cerebrum. In the latter, the segmentally arranged ganglia are more 
sharply marked off from the connectives than in other Chaetopods, 
where nerve cells exist along the whole ventral chain, though more 
numerous in segmentally disposed swellings. 

Vascular System. — In addition to the coelom, another system of 
fluid-holding spaces lies between the body wall and the gut in the 
Chaetopoda. This is the vascular or haemal system (formerly and 
unnecessarily termed pseudhaemal). With a few exceptions among 
the Polychaeta the vascular system is always present among the 
Chaetopoda, and always consists of a system of vessels with definite 
walls, which rarely communicate with the coelom. It is in fact 
typically a closed system. The larger trunks open into each other 
either directly by cross branches, or a capillary system is formed. 
There are no lacunar blood spaces with ill-defined or absent walls 
except for a sinus surrounding the intestine, which is at least fre- 
quently present. The principal trunks consist of a dorsal vessel 
lying above the gut, and a ventral vessel below the gut but above the 
nervous cord. These two vessels in the Oligochaeta are united in 
the anterior region of the body by a smaller or greater number of 
branches which surround the oesophagus and are, some of them at 
least, contractile and in that case wider than the rest. The dorsal 
vessel also communicates with the ventral vessel indirectly by the 
intestinal sinus, which gives off branches to both the longitudinal 
trunks, and by tegementary vessels and capillaries which supply the 
skin and the nephridia. In the smaller and simpler forms the 
capillary networks are much reduced, but the dorsal and ventral 
vessels are usually present. The former, however, is frequently 



CHAETOPODA 



791 



developed only in the anterior region of the body where it emerges 
from the peri-intestinal blood sinus. On the other hand, additional 
longitudinal trunks are sometimes developed, the chief one of which 
is a supra-intestinal vessel lying below the dorsal vessel and closely 
adherent to the walls of the oesophagus in which region it appears. 
The capillaries sometimes (in many leeches and Oligochaeta) extend 
into the epidermis itself. Usually they do not extend outwards of 
the muscular layers of the body wall. The main trunks of the 
vascular system often possess valves at the origin of branches which 
regulate the direction of the blood flow. Among many Oligochaeta 
the dorsal blood-vessel is partly or entirely a double tube, which is 
a retention of a character shown by F. Vezhdovsky to exist in the 
embryo of certain forms. The blood in the Chaetopoda consists 
of a plasma in which float a few corpuscles. The plasma is coloured 
red by haemoglobin: it is sometimes (in Sabella and a few other 
Polychaeta) green, which tint is due to another respiratory pigment. 
The plasma may be pink (Magelona) or yellow {Aphrodite) in which 
cases the colour is owing to another pigment. In Aeolosoma it is 
usually colourless. The vascular system is in the majority of 
Chaetopods a closed system. It has been asserted (and denied) that 
the cellular rod which is known as the " Heart-body " (Herzkorper), 
and is to be found in the dorsal vessel of many Oligochaeta and 
Polychaeta, is formed of cells which are continuous with the chlora- 
gogen cells, thus implying the existence of apertures of communica- 
tion with the coelom. The statement has been often made and 
denied, but it now seems to have been placed on a firm basis (E. S. 
Goodrich), that among the Hirudinea the coelom, which is largely 
broken up into narrow tubes, may be confluent with the tubes of 
the vascular system. This state of affairs has no antecedent im- 
probability about it, since in the Vertebrata the coelom is unquestion- 
ably confluent with the haemal system through the lymphatic 
vessels. Finally, there are certain Polychaeta, e.g. the Capitellidae, 
in which the vascular system has vanishod altogether, leaving a 
coelom containing haemoglobin-impregnated corpuscles. It has 
been suggested (E. Ray Lankester) that this condition has been 
arrived at through some such intermediate stage as that offered by 
Polychaet Magelona. In this worm the ventral blood-vessel is so 
swollen as to occupy nearly the whole of the available coelom. 
Carry the process but a little farther and the coelom disappears and 
its place is taken by a blood space or haemocoel. It has been held 
that the condition shown in certain leeches tend to prove that the 
coelom and haemocoel are primitively one series of spaces which 
have been gradually differentiated. The facts of development, 
however, prove their distinctness, though those same facts do not 
speak clearly as to the true nature of the blood system. One view 
of the origin of the latter (largely based upon observations upon the 
development of Polygordius) sees in the blood system a persistent 
blastocoel. F. Vezhdovsky has lately seen reasons for regarding 
the blood system as originating entirely from the hypoblast by the 
secretion of fluid, the blood, from particular intestinal cells and the 
consequent formation of spaces through pressure, which become 
lined with these cells. 

Nephridia and Coelomoducts. — The name " Nephridium " was 
originally given by Sir E. Ray Lankester to the members of a series 
of tubes, proved in some cases to be excretory in nature, which 
exist typically to the number of a single pair in most of the segments 
of the Chaetopod body, and open each by a ciliated orifice into the 
coelom on the one hand, and by a pore on to the exterior of the 
body on the other. In its earlier conception, this view embraced 
as homologous organs (so far as the present group is concerned) not 
only the nephridia of Oligochaeta and Hirudinea, which are obviously 
closely similar, but the wide tubes with an intercellular lumen and 
large funnels of certain Polychaeta, and (though with less assurance) 
the gonad ducts in Oligochaeta and Hirudinea. The function of 
nitrogenous excretion was not therefore a necessary part of the 
view — though it may be pointed out that there are grounds for 
believing that the gonad ducts are to some extent also organs of 
excretion (see below). Later, the investigations of E. Meyer and 
E. S. Goodrich, endorsed by Lankester, led to the opinion that under 
the general morphological conception of " nephridium " were 
included two distinct sets of organs, viz. nephridia and coelomo- 
ducts. The former (represented by, e.g. the " segmental organs " 
of Lutnbricus) have been asserted to be " ultimately, though not 
always, actually traceable to the ectoderm"; the latter (repre- 
sented by, e.g. the oviduct of Lumbricus) are parts of the coelomic 
wall itself, which have grown out to the exterior. The nephridia, in 
fact, on this view, are ectodermic ingrowths, the coelomoducts coelomic 
outgrowths. The cavity of the former has nothing to do with coelom. 
The cavity of the latter is coelom. 

The embryological facts upon which this view has been based, 
however, have been differently interpreted. According to C. O. 
Whitman the entire nephridial system (in the leech Clepsine) is 
formed by the differentiation of a continuous epiblastic band on 
each side. The exact opposite is maintained by R. S. Bergh (for 
Lumbricus and Criodrilus), whose figures show a derivation of the 
entire nephridium from mesoblast, and an absence of any connexion 
between successive nephridia by any continuous band, epiblastic 
or mesoblastic. A midway position is taken up by Wilson, who 
asserts the mesoblastic formation of the funnel, but also asserts 
the presence of a continuous band of epiblast from which certainly 



the terminal vesicle of the nephridium, and doubtfully the glandular 
part of the tube is derived. Vezhdovsky's figures of Rhynchelmis 
agree with those of Bergh in showing the backward growth of the 
nephridium from the funnel cell. There are thus substantial reasons 
for believing that the nephridium grows backwards from a funnel 
as does the coelomoduct. It is therefore by no means certain that 
so profound a difference embryologically can be asserted to exist 
between the excretory nephridia and the ducts leading from the 
coelom to the exterior, which are usually associated with the ex- 
trusion of the genital products among the Chaetopoda. 

There are, however, anatomical and histological differences to be 
seen at any rate at the extremes between the undoubted nephridia 
of Goodrich, Meyer and Lankester, and the coelomoducts of the same 
authors. 

1. Nephridia. — Excretory organs which are undisputed nephridia 
are practically universal among the Oligochaeta, Hirudinea and 
Archiannelida, and occur in many Polychaeta. Their total absence 
has been asserted definitely only in Paranais littoralis. Usually these 




Fig. 2 (from 

A, Diagram of the nephridium 
of Nereis diversicolor. 

B, Diagram of the nephridium of 
Alciope, into which opens the 
large genital funnel (coelo- 
mostome). 

C, Small portion of the nephri- 
dium of Glycera siphono- 
stoma, showing the canal cut 
through, and the solenocytes 
on the outer surface. 

D, Optical section of a branch of 



Goodrich). 

the nephridium of Nephthys 

scolopendroides. 
c.s, Cut surface. 
est, Coelomostome. 
/, Flagellum. 
g.f. Genital funnel. 
n, Neck of solenocyte. 
n.c, Nephridial canal. 
n.p, Nephridiopore. 
nst, Nephridiostome. 
nu, Nucleus of solenocyte. 
s, Solenocytes. 
/, Tube. 



organs are present to the number of a single pair per somite, and are 
commonly present in the majority of the segments of the body, 
failing often among the Oligochaeta in a varying number of the 
anterior segments. They are considerably reduced in number in 
certain Polychaeta. Essentially, a nephridium is a tube, generally very 
long and much folded upon itself, composed of a string of cells placed 
end to end in which the continuous lumen is excavated. Such cells 
are termed " drain pipe " cells. Frequently the lumen is branched 
and may form a complicated anastomosing network in these cells. 
Externally, the nephridium opens by a straight part of the tube, 
which is often very wide, and here the intracellular lumen becomes 
intercellular. Rarely the nephridium does not communicate with 
the coelom ; in such cases the nephridium ends in a single cell, like 
the "flame cell " of a Platyhelminth worm, in which there is a lumen 
blocked at the coelomic end by a tuft of fine cilia projecting into the 
lumen. This is so with Aeolosoma (Vezhdovsky). The condition 
is interesting as a persistence of the conditions obtaining in the 
provisional nephridia of e.g. Rhynchelmis, which afterwards become 
by an enlargement and opening up of the funnel the permanent 
nephridia of the adult worm. In some Polychaets (e.g. Glycera, 
see fig. 2) there are many of these flame cells to a single nephridium 
which are specialized in form, and have been termed " solenocytes " 
(Goodrich). They are repeated in Polygordius, and are exactly 



79 2 



CHAETOPODA 



to be compared with similarly-placed cells in the nephridia of 
Amphioxus. 

More usually, and indeed in nearly every other case among the 
Oligochaeta and Hirudinea, thecoelomic aperture of the nephridium 
consists of several cells, ciliated like the nephridium itself for a greater 
or less extent, forming a funnel. The funnel varies greatly in size 
and number of its component cells. There are so many differences 
of detail that no line can be drawn between the one-celled funnel 
of Aeolosoma and the extraordinarily large and folded funnel of the 
posterior nephridia in the Oligochaete Thamnodrilus. In the last- 
mentioned worm the funnels of the anterior nephridia are small and 
but few celled; it is only the nephridia in and behind the 17th 
segment of the body which are particularly large and with a sinuous 
margin, which recall the funnels of the gonad ducts (i.e. coelomo- 
ducts). 

Among the Polychaeta the nephridium of Nereis (see fig. 2) is like 
that of the Oligochaeta and Hirudinea in that the coiled glandular 
tube has an intracellular duct which is ciliated in the same way in 
parts. The Polychaeta, however, present us with another form 
of nephridium seen, for example, in Arenicola, where a large funnel 
leads into a short and wide excretory tube whose lumen is inter- 
cellular. In the young stages of this worm which have been in- 
vestigated by W. B. Benham, the tube, though smaller, and with a 
but little pronounced funnel, has still ah intercellular duct. That 
these organs in Polychaeta serve for the removal of the generative 
products to the exterior is proved not only by the correspondence 
in number to them of the gonads, but by actual observation of the 
generative products in transit. This form of nephridia leads to the 
shorter but essentially similar organs in the Polychaete Sternaspis, 
and to those of the Echiuroidea (q.v.) and of the Gephyrea (q.v.). 

Though the paired arrangement of the nephridia is the prevalent 
one in the Chaetopoda, there are many examples, among the Oligo- 
chaeta, of species and genera in which there are several, even many, 
nephridia in each segment of the body, which may or may not be 
connected among themselves, but have in any case separate orifices 
on to the exterior. 

2. Coelomoduas. — In this category are included (by Goodrich 
and Lankester) the gonad ducts of the Oligochaeta, certain funnels 
without any aperture to the exterior that have been detected in 
Nereis, &c, funnels with wide and short ducts attached to nephridia 
in other Polychaeta, gonad ducts in the Capitellidae, the gonad 
ducts of the leeches. In all these cases we have a duct which has 
a usually wide, always intercellular, lumen, generally, if not 
always, ciliated, which opens directly into the coelom on the one 
hand and on to the exterior of the body on f. he other. These char- 
acters are plain in all the cases cited, excepting only the leeches 
which will be considered separately. 

There is not a great deal of difference between most of these 
structures and true nephridia. It is not clear, for example, to which 
category it is necessary to refer the excretory organs of Arenicola, 
or Polynoe. Both series of organs consist essentially of a ciliated 
tube leading from the coelom to the exterior. Both series of organs 
grow back centrifugally from the funnel. In both the cavity origin- 
ally or immediately continuous with the coelom appears first in the 
funnel and grows backwards. In some cases, e.g. oviducts of Oligo- 
chaeta, sperm ducts of Phreoryctes, the coelomoducts occupy, like 
the nephridia, two segments, the funnel opening into that in front 
of the segment which carries the external pore. It is by no means 
certain that a hard and fast line can be drawn between intra- and 
intercellular lumina. Finally, in function there are some points of like- 
ness. The gonad ducts of Lumbricus, &c, must perform one function 
of nephridia ; they must convey to the exterior some of the coelomic 
fluid with its disintegrated products of waste. There is no possi- 
bility that sperm and ova can escape by these tubes not in company 
with coelomic fluid. In the case of many Oligochaeta where there 
is no vascular network surrounding the nephridium, this function 
must be the chief one of those glands, the more elaborate process 
of excretion taking place in the case of nephridia surrounded by a 
rich plexus of blood capillaries. A consideration of the mode of 
development and appearance 6>f the coelomoducts that have thus 
far been enumerated (with the possible exception of those of the 
leeches) seems to show that there is a distinct though varying relation 
between them and the nephridia. It has been shown that in Tubifex, 
and some other aquatic Oligochaeta, the genital segments are at first 
provided with nephridia, and that these disappear on the appearance 
of the generative ducts, which are coelomoducts. In Lumbricus 
the connexion is a little closer ; the funnel of the nephridium, in the 
segments in which the funnels of the gonad ducts are to be developed, 
persists and is continuous with the gonad duct funnels on their first 
appearance. In the development of the Acanthodrilid earthworm 
Octochaetus (F. E. Beddard) the funnels of thepronephridia disappear 
except in the genital segments, where they seem to be actually 
converted into the genital funnels. At the least there is no doubt 
that the genital funnels are developed precisely where the nephridial 
funnels formerly existed. If the genital funnels are not wholly or 

Fartly formed out of the nephridial funnels they have replaced them. 
n the genital segments of Eudrilus the nephridia are present, but 
the funnels have not been found though they are obvious in other 
segments. Here also the genital funnels have either replaced or 
been formed out of nephridial funnels. In Haplotaxis neterogync 



(W. B. Benham) the sperm ducts are hardly to be distinguished from 
nephridia; they are sinuous tubes with an intra-cellular duct. But 
the funnel is large and thus differs from the funnels of the nephridia 
in adjoining segments. Here again the nephridial funnel seems to 
have been converted into or certainly replaced by a secondarily 
developed funnel. This example is similar to cases among the Po'v- 
chaeta where a true nephridium is provided with a large funnel, a 
coelomostome, according to the nomenclature of Lankester. The 
whole organ, having, as is thought but not known, this double origin, 
is termed a nephromixium. The various facts, however, seem to be 
susceptible of another interpretation. It may be pointed out that 
the several examples described recall a phenomenon which is not 
uncommon and is well known to anatomists. That is the replace- 
ment of an organ by, sometimes coupled with its partial conversion 
into, a similar or slightly different organ performing the same or an 
analogous function. Thus the postcaval vein of the higher verte- 
brata is partly a new structure altogether, and is partly formed out 
of the pre-existing posterior cardinals. The more complete replace- 
ments, such as the nephridia of the genital segment of Tubifex by 
a subsequently formed genital duct, may be compared with the 
succession of the nesonephros to the pronephros in vertebrates, and 
of the metanephros to the mesonephros in the higher vertebrates. 
It might be well to term these structures, mostly serving as gonad 
ducts, which have an undoubted resemblance to nephridia, and for 
the most part an undoubted connexion with nephridia, " Nephro- 
dinia," to distinguish them from another category of " ducts " 
which are communications between the coelom and the exterior, 
and which have no relation whatever to nephridia or to the organs 
just discussed. For these latter, the term coelomoducts might 
well be reserved. To this category belong certain sacs and pouches 
in many, perhaps most, genera of the Oligochaeta family, Eudrilidae, 
and possibly the gonad ducts in the Hirudinea. As an example of 
the former it has been shown (Beddard) that a large median sac in 
Lybiodrilus is at first freely open to the coelom, that it later becomes 
shut off from the same, that it then acquires an external orifice, and, 
finally, that it encloses the ovary or ovaries, between which and the 
exterior a passage is thus effected. To this category will belong the 
oviducts in Teleostean fishes and probably the gonad ducts in several 
groups of invertebrates. 

Polychaeta. — This group may be thus defined and the 
definition contrasted and compared with those of the other 
divisions of the Chaetopoda. Setae always present and often 
very large, much varied in form and very numerous, borne by 
the dorsal and ventral parapodia (when present). The pros- 
tomium and the segments generally often bear processes sensory 
and branchial. Eyes often present and comparatively com- 
plicated in structure. Clitellum not present as a definite organ, 
as in Oligochaeta. The anus is mostly terminal, and there are 
no anterior and posterior suckers. Nervous^ system often 
imbedded in the epidermis. Vascular system generally present 
forming a closed system of tubes. Alimentary canal rarely 
coiled, occasionally with glands which are simple caeca and 
sometimes serve as air reservoirs; jaws often present and an 
evefsible pharynx. Nephridia sometimes of the type of those 
of the Oligochaeta; in other cases short, wide tubes with a large 
funnel serving also entirely or in part as gonad ducts. Fre- 
quently reduced in number of pairs; rarely (Capitellidae) more 
than one pair per segment. Gonads not so restricted in position 
as in Oligochaets, and often more abundant; the individuals 
usually unisexual. No specialized system of spermathecae, 
sperm reservoirs, and copulatory apparatus, as in Oligochaeta; 
development generally through a larval form; reproduction by 
budding also occurs. Marine (rarely fresh-water) in habit. 

The Polychaeta contrast with the Oligochaeta by the great 
variety of outward form and by the frequency of specialization 
of different regions of the body. The head is always recognizable 
and much more conspicuous than in other Chaetopoda. As in 
the Oligochaeta the peristomial segment is often without setae; 
but this character is not by any means so constant as in the 
Oligochaeta. The prostomium bears often processes, both 
dorsal and ventral, which in the Sabellids are split into the circle 
of branchial plumes, which surround or nearly surround the 
mouth in those tube-dwelling Annelids. Tomopteris is remark- 
able for the fact that the hammer-shaped prostomium has paired 
ventral processes each with a single seta. It is held, however, 
that these are a pair of parapodia which have shifted forwards. 
The presence of parapodia distinguish this from other groups 
of Chaetopoda. Typically, the parapodium consists of two 
processes of the body on each side, each of which bears a bundle 
of setae; these two divisions of the " limb " are termed 



CHAETOPODA 



793 




Fig. 3. — a, Bristle of Pionosyttis 
Malmgreni; b, Hook of Terebella. 



respectively notopodium and neuropodium. The notopodium may 
be rudimentary or absent and the entire parapodium reduced to 
the merest ridge or even completely unrepresented. Naturally, 
it is among the free living forms that the parapodium is best 
developed, and least developed among the tubicolous 
Polychaeta. To each division of the parapodium 
belongs typically a long tentacle, the cirrus, which 
may be defective upon one or other .of the noto- 
podium or neuropodium, and may be developed into 
an arborescent gill or into a flat scale-like process, 
the elytron (in Polynoe, &c). There are other gills 
developed in addition to those which represent the 
rri. 

Setae. — The setae of the Polychaeta are disposed in 
two bundles in many genera, but in only one bundle in 
such forms as have no notopodium {e.g. Syttis). In 
some genera the setae are in vertical rows, and in certain 
Capitellidae these rows so 
nearly meet that an arrange- 
ment occurs reminiscent of 
the continuous circle of setae 
in the perichaetous Oligo- 
chaeta. The setae vary much 
in form and are often longer 
and stronger than in the Oligo- 
chaetes. Jointed setae and 
very short hooks or " uncini " 
(see fig. 3) are among the most 
remarkable forms. Simple 
bifid setae, such as those of 
Oligochaetes, are also present 
in certain forms. 

Among the burrowing and 
tubicolous forms it is not uncommon for the body to be distinguish- 
able into two or more regions; a " thorax," for example, is sharply 
marked off from an " abdomen " in the Sabellids. In these forms 
the bundles of setae are either capilliform or uncinate, and the dorsal 
setae of the thorax are like the ventral setae of the abdomen. It is 
a remarkable and newly-ascertained fact that in regeneration (in 
Potamilla) the thorax is not replaced by the growth of uninjured 
thoracic segments ; but that the anterior segments of the abdomen 
take on the same characters, the setae dropping out and being 
replaced in accordance with the plan of the setae in the thorax of 
uninjured worms. Among the Oligochaeta the sexually mature 
worm is distinguished from the immature worm by the clitellum 
and by the development of genital setae. Among the Polychaeta 
the sexual worm is often more marked from the asexual form, so 
much so that these latter have been placed in different species or 
even genera. The alteration in form does not only affect structures 
used in generation; but the form of the parapodia, &c, alter. 
There are even dimorphic forms among the Syllids where the sexes 
are, as in many Polychaets, separate. 

Nephridia. — The nephridia of the Polychaeta have been generally 
dealt with above in considering the nephridial system of the Chaeto- 
poda as a whole. They contrast with those of the Oligochaeta and 
Hirudinea by reason of their frequently close association with the 
gonads, the same organ sometimes serving the two functions of 
excretion and conveyance of the ova and spermatozoa out of the 
body. On the hypothesis that such a form as Dinophilus (see 
Haplodrili) has preserved the characters of the primitive Chaetopod 
more nearly than any existing Polychaet or Oligochaet, it is clear 
that the nephridia in the Oligochaeta have preserved the original 
features of those organs more nearly than most Polychaeta. Thus 
Nereis among the latter worms, from the resemblance which its 
excretory system bears to that of the Oligochaeta, may be made the 
starting-point of a series. In this worm the paired nephridia exist 
in most of the segments of the body, and their form (see fig. 2) is much 
like that of the nephridia in the Enchytraeidae. The funnel, which 
is not large, appears to open, as a rule at least, into the segment in 
front of that which bears the external orifice. Quite independent 
of these are certain large dorsally situate funnel-like folds of the 
coelomic epithelium, ciliated, but of which no duct has been dis- 
covered leading to the exterior. It is possible that we have here 
gonad ducts distinct from nephridia which at the time of sexual 
maturity do open on to the exterior. 

In Polynoe the nephridia are short tubes with a slightly folded 
funnel whose lumen is intercellular, and this intercellular lumen 
is characteristic of the Polychaetes as contrasted with leeches and 
Oligochaetes. Among the Terebelloidea there is a remarkable 
differentiation of the nephridia into two series. One set lies in front 
of the diaphragm, which is the most anterior and complete septum, 
the rest having disappeared or being much less developed. The 
anterior nephridia, of which there are one to three pairs, contrast 
with the posterior series by their small funnels and large size, the 

fosterior nephridia having a large funnel followed by a short tube, 
n Chaetozone setosa the anterior nephridia occupy five segments. 
There is usually a gap between the two scries, several segments being 



without nephridia. It seems that the posterior nephridia are mainly 
gonad ducts, and the gonads are developed in close association with 
the funnels. The same arrangement is found in some other Poly- 
chaetes; for instance, in Sabellaria there is a single pair of large 
anterior nephridia, which open by a common pore, followed after an 
interval by large-funnelled and short nephridia. This differentiation 
is not, however, peculiar to the Polychaetes; for in several Oligo- 
chaetes the anterior nephridia are of large size, and opening as they 
do into the buccal cavity clearly play a different function to those 
which follow. In Thantnodrilus, as has been pointed out, there are 
two series of nephridia which resemble those of the Ter„ebelloidea 
in the different sizes of their funnels. In Lanice conchilega the 
posterior series of nephridia are connected by a thick longitudinal 
duct, which seems to be seen in its most reduced form in Owenia, 
where a duct on each side runs in the epidermis, being in parts a 
groove, and receives one short tubular nephridium only and occupies 
only one segment. This connexion of successive nephridia (in 
Lanice) has its counterpart in Allolobophora, Lybiodrilus, and 
apparently in the Lumbriculids Teleuscolex and Styloscolex, among 
the Oligochaeta. Among the Capitellidae, which in several respects 
resemble the Oligochaeta, wide and short gonad ducts coexist in 
the same segments with nephridia, the latter being narrower and 
longer. It is noteworthy that in this family only among the Poly- 
chaeta, the nephridia are not restricted to a single pair in each seg- 
ment; so that the older view that the gonad ducts are meta- 
morphosed nephridia is not at variance with the anatomical facts 
which have been just stated. 

Alimentary Canal. — The alimentary canal ot Polychaetes is usually 
a straight tube running from the anterior mouth to the posterior 
anus. But in some forms, e.g. Sternaspis, the gut is coiled. In others, 
again, e.g. Cobangia, the anus is anterior and ventral. A gizzard is 
present in a few forms. The buccal cavity is sometimes armed with 
jaws. The oesophagus is provided often with caeca which in Syllids 
and Hesibnidae have been found to contain air, and possibly therefore 
perform the function of the fish's air-bladder. In other Polychaetes 
one or more pairs of similar outgrowths are glandular. The intestine 
is provided with numerous branched caeca in Aphrodite. 

Reproduction.— As is the case with the Oligochaeta, the Poly- 
chaeta furnish examples of species which multiply asexually by 

budding. There is 
a further resem- 
blance between the 
two orders of Chae- 
topoda in that this 
budding is not a 
general pheno- 
menon, but con- 
fined to a few forms 
only. Budding, in 
fact, among the 
Polychaetes is 
limited to the 
family Syllidae. In 
the Oligochaetes 
it is only the 
families Aeoloso- 
matidae and Nai- 
didae that show 
the same phenomenon. It has been men. 
tioned that in the Nereids a sexual form 
occurs which differs structurally from the 
asexual worms, and was originally placed in 
a separate genus, Heteronereis ; hence the 
name " Heteronereid " for the sexual worm. 
In Syttis there is also a " Heterosyllid " form 
in which the gonads are limited to a posterior 
region of the body which is further marked 
off from the anterior non-sexual segments 
by the oak-like setae. In some Syllids this 
posterior region separates off from the rest, 

Eroducing a new head ; thus a process of 
ssion occurs which has been termed schizo- 
gamy. A similar life history distinguishes 
certain Sabellid worms, e.g. Filigrana. Among 
the Syllids this simple state of affairs is 
further complicated. In Autolytus there is, 
to begin with, a conversion of the ppsterior 
half of the body to form a sexual zooid. But 
before this separates off a number of other 
_ , zooids are formed from a zone of budding 
• ^ IG ; ^~~ Uas y c ™ ne which appears between the two first-formed 
tnJracta, Kr. (Alter ind i v i dua i s . Ultimately, a chain of sexual 
Malmgren.) zooids is thus formed. A given stock only 

produces zooids of one sex. In Myrianida there is a further 
development of this process. The conversion of the posterior 
end of the simple individual into a sexual region is dispensed 
with; but from a preanal budding segment a series of sexual buds 
are produced. The well-known Syllid, discovered during the voyage 
of the " Challenger," shows a modification of this form of budding. 
Here, however, the buds are lateral, though produced from a budding 




794 



CHAETOPODA 



zone, and they themselves produce other buds, so that a ramifying 
colony is created. 

Quite recently, another mode of budding has been described in 
Trypanosyllis gemmipara, where a crowd of some fifty buds arising 
symmetrically are produced at the tail end of the worm. In some 
Syllids, such as Pionosyllis gestans, the ova are attached to the body 



$££& 




A 

Fig. 5. — A, Autolytus (after Mensch) with numerous buds. B, 
Portion of a colony of Syllis ramosa (from M'Intosh). b.z, Budding 
zone; p, anterior region of the parent worm; 1-5, buds. 

of the parent in a regular line, and develop in situ ; this process, 
which has been attributed to budding, is an " external gestation," 
and occurs in a number of species. 

As is very frequently the case with marine forms, as compared 
with their fresh-water and terrestrial allies, the Polychaeta differ 
from the Oligochaeta and Hirudinea in possessing a free living 




Fig. 6. — A, Side view of the larva of Lopadorhynchus (from Kleinen- 
berg), showing the developing trunk region. B, Side view of the 
trochophore larva of Eupomatus uncinatus (from Hatschek). 



A, Anus. 


me, 


Mesoblast. 


E, Eye. 


ms, 


Larval muscle. 


M, Mouth. 


0, 


Otocyst. 


ap. Apical organ. 


PP, 


Parapodium. 


h, " Head kidney." 


Pr, 


Praeoral ciliated ring, or 


i, Intestine. 




prototroch. 



larval form which is hatched at an early stage in development. 
This larva is termed the Trochosphere larva, and typically (as it is 
held) is an egg-shaped larva with two bands of cilia, one preoral and 
one postoral, with an apical nervous plate surmounted by a tuft of 
longer cilia, and with a simple bent alimentary canal, with lateral 
mouth and posterior anus, between which and the ectoderm is a 
spacious cavity (blastocoel) traversed by muscular strands and often 
containing a larval kidney. The segmentation is of the mesoblast 



to begin with, and appears later behind the mouth, the part anterior 
to this becoming the prostomium of the adult. The chief modi- 
fications of this form are seen in the Mitraria 
larva of Ammochares with only the preoral band, 
which is much folded and which has provisional 
and long setae; the atrochous larva, where the 
covering of cilia is uniform and not split into 
bands; and the polytrochous larva where there 
are several bands surrounding the body. There 
are also other modifications. 

Classification. — The older arrangement of the 
Polychaeta into Errantia or free living and 
Tubicola or tube-dwelling forms will hardly fit 
the much increased knowledge of the group. 
W. B. Benham's division into Phanerocephala 
in which the prostomium is plain, and Cryto- 
cephala in which the prostomium is hidden by 
the peristomium adopted by Sedgwick, can only 
be justified by the character used; for the Tere- 
bellids, though phanerocephalous, have many 
of the features of the Sabellids. It is perhaps 
safer to subdivide the Order into 6 Suborders 
(in the number of these following Benham, except 
in combining the Sabelliformia and Hermelli- 
formia). Of these 6, the two first to be con- 
sidered are very plainly separable and represent 
the extremes of Polychaete organization. (1) 
Nereidiformia. — " Errant " Polychaetes with 
well-marked prostomium possessing tentacles 
and palps with evident and locomotor para- 
podia, supported (with few exceptions) by strong 
spines, the aciculi; muscular pharynx usually 
armed with jaws; septa and nephridia regu- 
larly metameric and similar throughout body; 
free living and predaceous. (2) Cryptocephala. 
— Tube-dwelling with body divided into thorax 
and abdomen marked by the setae, which are 
reversed in position in the neuropodium and 
notopodium respectively in the two regions. 
Parapodia hardly projecting; palps of pro- 
somium forming branched gills; no pharynx or 
eversible buccal region; no septa in thorax, 
septa in abdomen regularly disposed. Nephridia 
in two series; large, anterior nephridia followed 

by small, short tubes in abdomen. The remain- Fig. 7. Nereis 

ing groups are harder to define, with the exception pelagi'ca. L. (After 
of the (3) Capitelliformia, which are mud-living Oersted) 
worms of an " oligochaetous " appearance, and 
with some affinities to that order. The peristomium has no setae, and 
the setae generally are hair-like or uncinate, often forming almost com- 
plete rings. The genital ducts are limited to one segment (the 8th in 
Capitella capitata), and there are genital setae on this and the next 




Fig. 8. — Sabella vesiculosa, Mont. 
(After Montagu.) 



Fig. 9. 
Arenicola marina, L. 



segment. In other forms genital ducts and nephridia coexist in the 
same segment. The nephridia are sometimes numerous in each seg- 
ment. There is no blood system, and the coelomic corpuscles contain 



CHAETOPODA 



795 



haemoglobin. (4) Terebelliformia. These worms are in some 
respects like the Sabellids (Cryptocephala). The parapodia, as in 
the Capitellidae, are hardly developed. The buccal region is un- 
armed and not eversible. The prostomium has many long filaments 
which recall the gills of the Sabellids, &c. The nephridia are special- 
ized into two series, as in the last-mentioned worms. (5) Spioni- 
formia (including Chaetopterus, Spio, &c.) and (6) Scoleciformia 
(Arenicola, Chloraema, Sternaspis) are the remaining groups. In 
both, the nephridia are all alike; there are no jaws; the pro- 
stomium rarely has processes. The body is often divisible into 
regions. 

Literature. — W. B. Benham, " Polychaeta " in Cambridge 
Natural History; E. Claparede, Annelides cketopodes du golfe de 
Naples (1868 and 1870); E. Ehlers, Die Borstenwurmer (1868); 
H. Eisig, Die Capitelliden (Naples Monographs), and development 
of do. in Mitth. d. zool. Stat. Neapel (1898); W. C. M'Intosh, " Chal- 
lenger" Reports (1885); E. R. Lankester, Introductory Chapter in 
A Treatise on Zoology; E. S. Goodrich, Quart. Journ. Mic. Sci. 
(1897-1900); E. Meyer, Mitth. d. zool. Stat. Neapel (1887, 1888), as 
well as numerous other memoirs by the above and by J. T. Cunning- 
ham, de St Joseph, A. Malaquin, A. Agassiz, A. T. Watson, Malm- 
gren, Bobretsky and A. F. Marion, E. A. Andrews, L. C. Cosmovici, 
R. Horst, W. Michaelsen, G, Gilson, F. Buchanan, H. Levinsen, 
Joyeux-Laffuie, F. W. Gamble, &c. 

Oligochaeta. — As contrasted with the other subdivisions 
of the Chaetopoda, the Oligochaeta may be thus defined. Setae 

very rarely absent (genus 
Achaeta) and as a rule not 
so large or so numerous in 
each segment as in the 
Polychaeta, and different 
|gT|g* in shape. Eyes rarely 
'Tilsipl' present and then rudimen- 
tary. Prostomium gener- 
ally small, sometimes pro- 
longed, but never bearing 
tentacles or processes. 
Appendages of body re- 
duced to branchiae, present 
only in four species, and 
to the ventral copulatory 
appendages of Alma and 
Criodrilus. Clitellum 
always present, extending 
over two (many limicolous 
forms) to forty-five seg- 
ments {Alma). Segments 
of body numerous and not 
distinctive of species, being 
irregular and not fixed in 
numbers. In terrestrial 
forms dorsal pores are usu- 
ally present; in aquatic 
forms a head pore only. 
Anus nearly always ter- 
minal, rarely dorsal, at a 
little distance from end 
of body. Suckers absent. 
Nervous system rarely 
{Aeolosoma) in continuity 
with epidermis. Vascular 
system always present, 
forming a closed system, 
more complicated in the 
larger forms than in the 
aquatic genera. Several 
specially large contractile 
trunks in the anterior segments uniting the dorsal and ventral 
vessels. Nephridia generally paired, often very numerousin each 
segment, in the form of long, much-coiled tubes with intracellular 
lumen. Gonads limited in number of pairs, testes and ovaries 
always present in the same individual. Special sacs developed 
from the intersegmental septa lodge the developing ova and 
sperm. Special gonad ducts always present. Male ducts often 
open on to exterior through a terminal chamber which is 
variously specialized, and sometimes with a penis. 




Fig. I o. — Diagrams of various Earth- 
worms, to illustrate external characters. 
A, B, C, anterior segments from the 
ventral surface ; D, hinder end of body 
of Urochaeta. 

A, Lumbricus : 9, 10, segments contain- 

ing spermathecae, the orifices of 
which are indicated ; 14, segment 
bearing oviducal pores; 15, seg- 
ment bearing male pores; 32, 37, 
first and last segments of clitellum. 

B, Acanthodrilus: cp, orifices of sper- 

mathecae ; 9 , oviducal pores ; 
rj\ male pores; on 17th and 19th 
segments are the apertures of the 
atria. 

C, Perichaeta: the spermathecal pores 

are between segments 6 and 7, 7 
and 8, 8 and 9, the oviducal pores 
upon the 14th and the male pores 
upon the 18th segment. 
In all the figures the nephridial pores 

are indicated by dots and the setae by 

strokes. 



Generative pores usually paired, sometimes single and median. 
Spermathecae nearly always present. Alimentary canal straight, 
often with appended glands of complicated or simpler structure; 
no jaws. Eggs deposited in a cocoon after copulation. Develop- 
ment direct. Reproduction by budding also occurs. Fresh- 
water (rarely marine) and terrestrial. 

The Oligochaeta show a greater variety of size than any other 
group of the Chaetopoda. They range from a millimetre or 
so (smaller species of Aeolosoma) to 6 ft. or even rather more 
{Microchaeta rappi, &c.) in length. 

Setae. — The setae, which are always absent from the peristomial 
segment, are also sometimes absent from a greater number of the 




9' Hf 



Fig. 11. — Setae of Oligochaeta. 

a, Penial seta of Perichaeta cey- d, Seta of Lumbricus. 

lonica. 

b, Extremity of penial seta of 

Acanthodrilus (after Horst). 

c, Seta of Urochaeta (Perier). 



e, Seta of Criodrilus. 

f, g, Setae of Bohemilla comata. 
h, i, j, Setae of Psammoryctes bar- 

batus (/tojafterVezhdovsky). 



anterior segments of the body, and have completely disappeared in 
Achaeta cameranoi. When present they are either arranged in four 
bundles of from one to ten or even more setae, or are disposed in con- 
tinuous lines completely encircling each segment of the body. This 
latter arrangement characterizes many genera of the family Mega- 
scolicidae and one genus (Periscolex) of the Glossoscolicidae. It has 
been shown (Bourne) that the " perichaetous " condition is prob- 
ably secondary, inasmuch as in worms which are, when adult, 
" perichaetous " the setae develop in pairs so that the embryo 
passes through a stage in which it has four bundles of setae, two 
to each bundle, the prevalent condition in the group. Rarely there 
is an irregular disposition of the setae which are not paired, though 
the total number is eight to a segment (fig. 10), e.g. Pontoscolex. 
The varying forms of the setae are illustrated in fig. 11. 

Structure.— The body wall consists of an epidermis which secretes 
a delicate cuticle and is only ciliated in Aeolosoma, and in that genus 
only on the under surface of the prostomium. The epidermis con- 
tains numerous groups of sense cells; beneath the epidermis there 
is rarely (Kynotus) an extensive connective tissue dermis. Usually 
the epidermis is immediately followed by the circular layer of muscles, 
and this by the longitudinal coat. Beneath this again is a distinct 
peritoneum lining the coelom, which appears to be wanting as a 
special layer in some Polychaetes (Benham, Gilson). The muscular 
layers are thinner in the aquatic forms, which possess only a single 
row of longitudinal fibres, or (Enchytraeidae) two layers. In the 
earthworms, on the other hand, this coat is thick and composed of 
many layers. 

The clitellum consists of a thickening of the epidermis, and is of 
two forms among the Oligochaeta. In the aquatic genera the 
epidermis comes to consist entirely of glandular cells, which are, 
however, arranged in a single layer. In the earthworms, on the other 
hand, the epidermis becomes specialized into several layers of cells, 
all of which are glandular. It is therefore obviously much thicker 
than the clitellum in the limicolous forms. The position of the 
clitellum, which is universal in occurrence, varies much as does the 
number of component segments. As a rule — to which, however, 
there are exceptions — the clitellum consists of two cr three segments 
only in the small aquatic Oligochaeta, while in the terrestrial forms 
it is as a general rule, to which again there are exceptions, a more 
extensive, sometimes much more extensive, region. 

In the Oligochaeta there is a closer correspondence between ex- 
ternal metamerism and the divisions of the coelom than is apparent 
in some Chaetopods. The external segments are usually definable 
by the setae ; and if the setae are absent, as in the anterior segments 



79 6 



CHAETOPODA 



of several Geoscolicidae, the nephridiopores indicate the segments ; 
to each segment corresponds internally a chamber of the coelom 
which is separated from adjacent segments by transverse septa.which 
are only unrecognizable in the genus Aeolosoma and in the head 
region of other Oligochaeta. In the latter case, the numerous bands 
of muscle attaching the pharynx to the parietes have obliterated the 
regular partition by means of septa. 

Nephridia. — The nephridia in this group are invariably coiled tubes 
with an intracellular lumen and nearly invariably open into the 
coelom by a funnel. There are no renal organs with a wide inter- 
cellular lumen, such as occur in the Polychaeta, nor is there ever any 
permanent association between nephridia and ducts connected with 
the evacuation of the generative products, such as occur in Alciope, 
Saccocirrus, &c. In these points the Oligochaeta agree with the 
Hirudinea. They also agree in the general structure of the nephridia. 
It has been ascertained that the nephridia of Oligochaeta are preceded 
in the embryo by a pair of delicate and sinuous tubes, also found in 
the Hirudinea and Polychaeta, which are larval excretory organs. 
It is not quite certain whether these are to be regarded as the remnant 
of an earlier excretory system, replaced among the Oligochaeta by 
the subsequently developed paired structures, or whether these 
" head kidneys ' are the first pair of nephridia precociously de- 
veloped. The former view has been extensively held, and it is 
supported by the fact that in Octochaetus the first segment of the 
body has a pair of nephridia which is exactly like those which follow, 
and, like them/persists. On the other hand, in most Oligochaeta the 
first segment has in the adult no nephridium, and in the case of 
Octochaetus the existence of a " head kidney " antedating the subse- 
quently developed nephridia of the first and other segments has 
neither been seen nor proved to be absent. In any case the nephridia 
which occupy the segments of the body generally are first of all 
represented by paired structures, the " pronephridia," in which the 
funnel is composed of but one cell, which is flagellate. This stage 
has at any rate been observed in Rhynchelmis and Lumbricus (in 
its widest sense) by Vezhdovsky. It is further noticeable that in 
Rhynchelmis the covering of vesicular cells which clothes the drain- 
pipe cells of the adult nephridium is cut off from the nephridial 
cells themselves and is not a peritoneal layer surrounding the 
nephridium. Thus the nephridia, in this case at least, are a part 
of the coelom and are not shut off from it by a layer of peritoneum, 
as are other organs which lie in it, e.g. the gut. A growth both of 
the funnel, which becomes multicellular, and of the rest of the nephri- 
dium produces the adult nephridia of the genera mentioned. The 
paired disposition of these organs is the prevalent one among the 
Oligochaeta, and occurs in all of twelve out of the thirteen families 
into which the group is divided. 

Among the Megascolicidae, however, which in number of genera 
and species nearly equals the remaining families taken together, 
another form of the excretory system occurs. In the genera Phere- 
tima, Megascolex, Dichogaster, &c, each segment contains a large 
number of nephridia, which, on account of the fact that they are 
necessarily smaller than the paired nephridia of e.g. Lumbricus , have 
been termed micronephridia, as opposed to meganephridia ; there is, 
however, no essential difference in structure, though micronephridia 
are not uncommonly (e.g. Megascolides, Octochaetus) unprovided 
with funnels. It is disputed whether these micronephridia are or 
are not connected together in each segment and from segment to 
segment. In any case they have been shown in three genera to de- 
velop by the growth and splitting into a series of original paired 
pronephridia. A complex network, however, does occur in Lybio- 
drilus and certain other Eudrilidae, where the paired nephridia 
possess ducts leading to the exterior which ramify and anastomose 
on the thickness of the body wall. The network is, however, of the 
duct of the nephridium, possibly ectodermic in origin, and does not 
affect the glandular tubes which remain undivided and with one 
coelomic funnel each. 

The Oligochaeta are the only Chaetopods in which undoubted 
nephridia may possess a relationship with the alimentary canal. 
Thus, in Octochaetus multiporus a large nephridium opens anteriorly 
into the buccal cavity, and numerous nephridia in the same worm 
evacuate their contents into the rectum. The anteriorly-opening 
and usually very large nephridia are not uncommon, and have 
been termed " peptonephridia." 

Gonads and Gonad Ducts. — The Oligochaeta agree with the leeches 
and differ from most Polychaeta in that they are hermaphrodite. 
There is no exception to this generalization. The gonads are, more- 
over, limited and fixed in numbers, and are practically invariably 
attached to the intersegmental septa, usually to the front septum 
of a segment, more rarely to the posterior septum. The prevalent 
number of testes is one pair in the aquatic genera and two pairs in 
earthworms. But there are exceptions; thus a species of Lampro- 
drilus has four pairs of testes. The ovaries are more usually one 
pair, but two are sometimes present. The segments occupied by 
the gonads are fixed, and are for earthworms invariably X, XI, or one 
of them for the testes, and XIII for the ovaries. The position 
varies in the aquatic Oligochaeta. The Oligochaeta contrast with 
the Polychaeta in the general presence of outgrowths of the septa 
in the genital segments, which are either close to, or actually involve, 
the gonads, and into which may also open the funnels of the gonad 
ducts. These sacs contain the developing sperm cells or eggs, and 



are with very few exceptions universal in the group. The testee 
are more commonly thus involved than are the ovaries. It is indeed 
only among the Eudrilidae that the enclosure of the ovaries in septal 
sacs is at all general. Recently the same thing has been recorded in 
a few species of Pheretima ( — Perichaeta), but details are as yet 
wanting. We can thus speak in these worms of gonocoels, i.e. 
coelomic cavities connected only with the generative system. These 
cavities communicate with the exterior through the gonad ducts, 
which have nothing to do with them, but whose coelomic funnels are 
taken up by them in the course of their growth. There are, however, 
in the Eudrilidae, as already mentioned, sacs envolving the ovaries 
which bore their own way to the exterior, and thus may be termed 
coelomoducts. These sacs are dealt with later under the description 
of the spermathecae, which function they appear to perform. The 
gonad ducts are male and female, and open opposite to or, rarely, 
alongside of the gonads, whose products they convey to the exterior. 
The oviducts are always short trumpet-shaped tubes and are some- 
times reduced (Enchytraeidae) to merely the external orifices. It 
is possible, however, that those oviducts belong to a separate morpho- 
logical category, more comparable to the dorsal pores and to 
abdominal pores in some fishes. The sperm ducts are usually longer 
than the oviducts; but in Limicolae both series of tubes opening 
by the funnel into one segment and on to the exterior in the following 
segment. While the oviducts always open directly on to the ex- 
terior, it is the rule for the sperm ducts to open on to the exterior 
near to or through certain 
terminal chambers, which 
have been variously 
termed atrium and pro- 
state, or spermiducal 
gland. The distal ex- 
tremity of this apparatus 
is sometimes eversible as 
a penis. Associated with 
these glandsare frequently 
to be found bundles or 
pairs of long and variously 
modified setae which are 
termed penial setae.to dis- 
tinguish them from other 
setae sometimes but not 
always associated with 
rather similar glands which 
are found anteriorly to 
these, and often in the 
immediate neighbourhood 
of the spermathecae; the 
latter are spoken of as 
genital setae. 

Spermathecae. — These 
structures appear to be 
absolutely distinctive of 
the Oligochaeta, unless 
the sacs which contain 
sperm and open in common 
with the nephridia of Sac- 
cocirrus (see Haplodrili) 
are similar. Spermathecae 
are generally present in 
the Oligochaeta and are absent only in comparatively few genera and 
species. Their position varies, but is constant for the species, and 
they are rarely found behind the gonads. They are essentially 
spherical, pear-shaped or oval sacs opening on to the exterior but 
closed at the coelomic end. In a few Enchytraeidae and Lumbri- 
culidae the spermathecae open at the distal extremity into the 
oesophagus, which is a fact difficult of explanation. Among the 
aquatic Oligochaeta and many earthworms (the families Lumbri- 
cidae, Geoscolicidae and a few other genera) the spermathecae are 
simple structures, as has been described. In the majority of the 
Megascolicidae each sac is provided with one or more diverticula, 
tubular or oval in form, of a slightly different histological character 
in the lining epithelium, and in them is invariably lodged the sperm. 
The spermathecae are usually paired structures, one pair to each 
of the segments where they occur. In many Geoscolicidae, however, 
and certain Lumbricidae and Perichaetidae, there are several, even 
a large number, of pairs of very small spermathecae to each of the 
segments which contain them. 

In the Eudrilidae there are spermathecae of different morpho- 
logical value. In figs. 12 and 13 are shown the spermathecae of the 
genera Hyperiodrilus and Heliodrilus, which are simple sacs ending 
blindly as in other earthworms, but of which there is only one median 
opening in the thirteenth segment or in trie eleventh. In Heliodrilus 
the blind extremity of the spermatheca is enclosed in a coelonvjc sac 
which is in connexion with the sacs envolving the ovaries and ovi- 
ducts. In Hyperiodrilus the whole spermatheca is thus included 
in a corresponding sac, which is of great extent. In such other 
genera of the family as have been examined, the true spermatheca 
has entirely disappeared, and the sac which contains it in Hyperio- 
drilus alone remains. This sac has been already referred to as a 
coelomoduct. Its orifice on to the exterior is formed by an involution 




Fig. 12. — Female reproductive system 
oiHeliodrilus. — XI-XIV,eleventh to four- 
teenth segments, sperm, spermatheca; 
sp. o,its external orifice ; sp. sac, sperma- 
thecal sac; ov, sac containing ovary; 
r.o, egg sac ; od, oviduct. 



CHAETOPODA 



797 



(as it appears) of the epidermis, and that it performs the function 
of a spermatheca is shown by its containing spermatozoa, or, in 
Sluhlmannia, a spermatophore. In Polytoreutus, also, spermato- 
phores have been found in these spermathecal sacs. We have thus 
the replacement of a spermatheca, corresponding to those of the 
remaining families of Oligochaeta, and derived, as is believed, from 
the epidermis, by a structure performing the same function, but 
derived from the mesoblastic tissues, and with a cavity which is 
coelom. 

Alimentary Canal. — The alimentary canal is always a straight tube, 
and the anus, save in the genera Criodrilus and Dero, is completely 
terminal. A buccal cavity, a pharynx, an oesophagus and an 
intestine are always distinguishable. Commonly among the terres- 
trial forms there is a gizzard, or two gizzards, or a larger number, 
in the oesophageal region. There is no armed protrusible pharynx, 
such as exists in some other Chaetopods. This may be associated 
with mud-eating habits; but it is not wholly certain that this is the 
case; for in Chaetogaster and Agriodrilus, which are predaceous 
worms, there is no protrusible pharynx, though in the latter the 
oesophagus is thickened through its extent with muscular fibres. 
The oesophagus is often furnished with glandular diverticula, the 
" glands of Morren," which are often of complex structure through 
the folding of their walls. Among the purely aquatic families such 
structures ar.e very rare, and are represented by two caeca in the 
genus Limnodriloides. It is a remarkable fact, not yet understood, 
that in certain Enchytraeidae and Lumbriculidae the spermathecae 
open into the oesophagus as well as on to the exterior. The only 
comparable fact among other worms is the Laurer's canal or genito- 
intestinal canal in the Trematoda. The intestine is usually in 

the higher forms provided 
with a typhlosole, in 
which, in Pontoscolex, runs 
a ciliated canal or canals 
communicating with the 
intestine. It is possible 
that this represents the 
syphon or supplementary 
intestine of Capitellidae, 
which has been shown to 
develop as a groving of 
the intestine ultimately 
cut off from it. The in- 
testine has a pair of caeca 
or two or three pairs (but 
all lie in one segment) in 
the genus Pheretima and 
in one species of Rhino- 
drilus. In Typhoeus and 
Megascolex there are com- 
Fig. 13. — Female reproductive system plex glands appended to 
of Hyperiodrilus. — XIII, XIV, thirteenth the intestine. 




In Benhamia caecifera 
and at least one other 
earthworm there are 



and fourteenth segments. 

sp, Spermatheca. ov, Ovary. 

sp' } Spermathecal sac r.o, Egg sac. 

involving the last. od, Oviduct, numerous caeca, one pair 

to each segment. 
Classification.— The classifications of Adolf Eduard, Grube and 
Claparede separated into two subdivisions the aquatic and the terres- 
trial forms. This scheme, opposed by many, has been reinstated by 
Sedgwick. The chief difficulty in this scheme is offered by the 
Moniligastridae, which in some degree combine the characters of 
both the suborders, into neither of which will they fit accurately. 
The following arrangement is a compromise: — 

Group I. Aphaneura.— This group is referred by A. Sedgwick to the 
Archiannelida. It is, however, though doubtless near to the base 
of the Oligochaetous series, most nearly allied in the reproductive 
system to the Oligochaeta. It contains but one family, Aeolo- 
somatidae- There are three pairs of spermathecae situated in seg- 
ments III-V, a testis in V and an ovary in VI. There are a clitellum 
and sperm ducts which though like nephridia have a larger funnel 
and a less complexly wound duct. This family consists of only one 
well-known genus, Aeolosoma, which contains several species. They 
are minute worms with coloured oil drops (green, olive green or 
orange) contained in the epidermis. The nervous system is em- 
bedded in the epidermis, and the pairs of ganglia are separated as 
in Serpula, &c. ; each pair has a longish commissure between its 
two ganglia. The intersegmental septa are absent save for the 
division of the first segment. The large prostomium is ciliated 
ventrally. The setae are either entirely capillary or there are in 
addition some sigmoid setae even with bifid free extremities. This 
genus also propagates asexually, like Ctenodrilus, which may possibly 
belong to the same family. Asexual reproduction universal. 

Group II. Limicolae. — With a few exceptions the Limicolae are, 
as the name denotes, aquatic in habit. They are small to moderate- 
sized Oligochaeta, with a smaller number of segments than in the 
Terricolae. The alimentary canal is simple and a gizzard or oeso- 
phageal diverticula rarely developed. The vascular system is simple 
with as a rule direct communication between dorsal and ventral 
vessels in each segment. Nerve cord lies in coelom ; brain in first 
segment or prostomium in many forms. Clitellum generally only 



two or three segments and more anterior in position than in Terri- 
colae. Nephridia always paired and without plexus of blood capil- 
laries. Spermatheca rarely with diverticula ; sperm ducts as a rule 
occupying two segments only, usually opening by means of an 
atrium. Srjerm sacs generally occupying a good many segments 
and with simple interior undivided by a network of trabeculae. 
Ova large and with much yolk. Asexual reproduction only in Naids. 
Egg sacs as large or nearly so as sperm sacs. Testes and ovaries 
always free. The following families constitute the group, viz. 
Naididae, Enchytraeidae, Tubificidae, Lumbriculidae, Phreoryctidae, 
Phreodrilidae, Alluroididae, the latter possibly not referable to this 
group. 

Group III. Moniligastres.— Moderate-sized to very large Oligo- 
chaeta, terrestrial in habit, with the appearance of Terricolae. 
Generative organs anterior in position as in Limicolae. Sperm 
ducts and atria as in Limicolae; egg sacs large; body wall thick; 
vascular system and nephridia as in Terricolae. Only one family, 
Moniligastridae. 

Group IV. Terricolae. — Earthworms, rarely aquatic in habit. 
Of small to very large size. Clitellum commonly extensive and 
more posterior in position than in other groups. Vascular system 
complicated without regular connexion between dorsal and ventral 
vessels, except in anterior segments. Nephridia as a rule with 
abundant vascular supply. Testes, and occasionally ovaries, en- 
closed in sacs. Sperm sacs generally limited to one or two segments 
with interior subdivided by trabeculae. Sperm ducts traverse several 
segments on their way to exterior. They open in common with, 
or near to, or, more rarely, into, glands which are not certainly 
comparable to the atria of the Limicolae. Egg sacs minute and 
functionless (?). Eggs minute with little yolk. Nephridia some- 
times very numerous in each segment. Spermathecae often with 
diverticula. 

Earthworms are divided into the following families, viz. Mega- 
scolicidae, Geoscolicidae, Eudrilidae, Lumbricidae. 

As an appendix to the Oligochaeta, and possibly referable to that 
group, though their systematic position cannot at present be deter- 
mined with certainty, are to be placed the Bdellodrilidae (Disco- 
drilidae auct.), which are small parasites upon crayfish. These worms 
lay cocoons like the Oligochaeta and leeches, and where they depart 
from the structure of the Oligochaeta agree with that of leeches. 
The body is composed of a small and limited number of segments 
(not more than fourteen), and there is a sucker at each end of the 
body. There are no setae and apparently only two pairs of nephridia, 
of which the anterior pair open commonly by a common pore on the 
third segment after the head, whose segments have not been accu- 
rately enumerated. The intervening segments contain the genitalia, 
which are on the Oligochaeta plan in that the gonads are independent 
of their ducts and that there are special spermathecae, one pair. 
The male ducts are either one pair or two pairs, which open by a 
common and complicated efferent terminal apparatus furnished 
with a protrusible penis. The ganglia are crowded at the posterior 
end of the body as in leeches, and there is much tendency to the 
obliteration of the coelom as in that group. Pterodrilus and Cirro- 
drilus bear a few, or circles of, external processes which may be 
branchiae; Bdellodrilus and Astacobdella have none. The vascular 
system is as in the lower Oligochaeta. There are two chitinous 
jaws in the buccal cavity, a dorsal and a ventral, which are of 
specially complicated structure in Cirrodrilus. 

Literature.— F. E. Beddard, A Monograph of the Oligochaeta 
(Oxford, 1895), also Quart. Journ. Micr. Set., 1886-1895, and Proc. 
Zool. Soc, 1885-1906; W. B. Benham, Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci., 
1886-1905 ; W. Michaelsen, " Oligochaeta " in Das Tierreich, 
1900, and Miiih, Mus. (Hamburg, 1 890-1906) ; A. G. Bourne, Quart. 
Journ. Micr. Sci., 1894; H. J. Moore, Journ. Morph., 1895; F. 
Vezhdovsky, System d. Oligochaeten (Prague, 1884), and Entwick- 
lungsgeschichtliche Untersuchungen; and numerous papers by the 
above and by G. Eisen, E. Perrier, D. Rosa, R. Horst, L. Cognetti, 
U. Pierantoni, W. Baldwin Spencer, H. Ude, &c, and embryological 
memoirs by R. S. Bergh, E. B. Wilson, N. Kleinenberg, &c. 

Hirudinea. — The leeches are more particularly to be compared 
with the Oligochaeta, and the following definition embraces the 
main features in which they agree and disagree with that group. 
Setae are only present in the genus Acanthobdella. Eyes are 
present, but hardly so complex as in certain genera of Polychaetes. 
The appendages of the body are reduced to branchiae, present 
in certain forms. A clitellum is present. The segments of body 
are few (not more than thirty-four) and fixed in number. The 
anus is dorsal. One or two (anterior and posterior) suckers 
always present. Nervous system always in coelom. Coelom 
generally reduced to a system of tubes, sometimes communicating 
with vascular system; in Acanthobdella and Ozobranchus a series 
of metamerically arranged chambers as in Oligochaeta. Ne- 
phridia always paired, rarely (Pontobdella) forming a network 
communicating from segment to segment; lumen of nephridia 
always intracellular, funnels pervious or impervious. Alimentary 



79» 



CHAETOPODA 



canal sometimes with protrusible proboscis; never with gizzard 
or oesophageal glands; intestine with caeca as a rule. Jaws 
often present. Testes several pairs, rarely one pair, continuous 
with sperm ducts; ovaries, one pair, continuous with oviducts; 
generative pores single and median. No separate spermathecae 
or septal chambers for the development of the ova and sperm. 
Eggs deposited in a cocoon. Development direct. No asexual 
generation. Fresh-water, marine and terrestrial. Parasitic 
or carnivorous. 

In external characters the Hirudinea are unmistakable and not 
to be confused with other Annelids, except perhaps with the Bdello- 
drtiidae, which resemble them in certain particulars. The absence 
of setae — save in Acanthobdella, where five of the anterior segments 
possess each four pairs of setae with reserve setae placed close behind 
them (fig. 14), and the presence of an anterior and posterior sucker, 
produce a looping mode of progression similar to that of a Geometrid 
larva. The absence of setae and the great secondary annulation 
render the mapping of the segments a subject of some difficulty. 
The most reliable test appears to be the nerve ganglia, which are 
more distinct from the intervening connectives than in other 
Annelids. 

In the middle of the body, where the limits of the somites can be 
checked by a comparison with the arrangement of the nephridia 
and the gonads, and where the ganglia are quite distinct and separ- 
ated by long connectives, each ganglion is seen to consist of six 
masses of cells enclosed by capsules and to give off three nerves on 

each side. This corre- 
sponds to the usual pre- 
sence (in the Rhyncho- 
bdellidae) of three annuli 
to each segment. An- 
teriorly and posteriorly 
separate ganglia have 
fused. The brain con- 
sists not only of a group 
of six capsules corre- 
sponding to the archi- 
cerebrum of the Oligo- 
chaeta, but of a further 
mass of cells surrounding 
and existing below the 
alimentary canal, which 
can be analysed into five 
or six more separate gan- 
Fig. 14.— Acanthobdella, from the ven- S lia - The wh ° le mass lies 
tral surface, showing the five sets of setae ln the seventh or eighth 
(5, to 5 5 ) and the replacing setae (Sr) segment. At the pos- 
tehind them. The three pairs of pig- tenor end of the body 
mented spots show the position of the there are likewise seven 
eyes on the dorsal surface. (After separate ganglia partially 
Kovalevsky.) fuse( * to form a single 

3/ ganglionic mass, which 

innervates the segments lying behind the anus and corre- 
sponding to the posterior sucker. So that a leech in which only 
twenty-seven segments are apparent by the enumeration of the 
annuli, separate ganglia, nephridia, lines of sensillae upon the body, 
really possesses an additional seven lying behind that which is 
apparently the last of the series and crowded together into a minute 
space. The annuli into which segments are externally divided are 
so deeply incised as to render it impossible to distinguish, as can be 
readily done in the Oligochaeta as a rule, the limits of an annulus 
from that of a true segment. As remarked, the prevalent number 
of annuli to a segment is three in the Rhynchobdellidae. But in that 
group {Cystobranchus) there may be as many as eight annuli. In 
the Gnathobdellidae the prevailing number of annuli to a segment 
is five; but here again the number is often increased, and Trocheta 
has no less than eleven. The reason for this excessive annulation 
has been seen in the limited number of segments (thirty-four) of 
which the body is composed, which are laid down early and do not 
increase. In the Oligochaeta, on the other hand, there is growth of 
new segments. It is important to notice that the metameric plan 
of growth of Chaetopods is still preserved. 

The nephridia are like those of the Oligochaeta in general struc- 
ture ; that is to say, they consist of drain-pipe cells which are placed 
end to end and are perforated by their duct. The internal funnel 
varies in the same way as in the Oligochaeta in the number of cells 
which form it. In Clepsine (Glossiphonia) there are only three cells, 
and in Nephelis five to eight cells. In Hirudo the funnel is not 
pervious and is composed of a large number of cells. Externally, 
the nephridium opens by a vesicle, as in many Oligochaetes whose 
lumen is intercellular. In Pontobdella and Branchellion the nephridia 
form a network extending from segment to segment, but there is 
only one pair of funnels in each segment. Slight differences in form 
have been noted between nephridia of different segments; but the 
Hirudinea do not show the marked differentiation that is to be seen 
in some other Chaetopods; nor do the nephridia ever acquire any 
relations to the alimentary canal. 




Coelom. — The coelom of the Hirudinea differs in most genera from 
that of the Oligochaeta and Polychaeta. The difference is that it is 
broken up into a complex sinus system. The least modified type 
is shown by Acanthobdella, a leech, parasitic upon fishes, in which 
transverse sections (see figs. 15 and 16) show the gut, the nervous 
system, &c, lying in a spacious chamber which is the coelom. This 
coelom is lined by peritoneal cells and is divided into 1 series of 
metameres by septa which correspond to the segmentation of the 



.rnd.v 



el 




cl 



Fig. 15.- 
c, Coelom. 



-Section of Acanthobdella (after Kovalevsky). 
Nerve cord. 



Intestine. 
Circular muscle. 
Longitudinal muscle. 
Dorsal vessel. 
Ventral vessel. 



c.ch, Coelomic epithelium (yellow- m, 

cells). • mc, 

eg, Glandular cells. ml, 

cl, Muscle cells of lateral line. vd, 

cp, Pigment cells. vv, 
ep, Ectoderm. 

body, the arrangement being thus precisely like that of typical 
Chaetopoda. Moreover, upon the intestine the coelomic cells are 
modified into chloragogen cells. In Acanthobdella the testes are, 
however, not contained in the general coelom, and the nephridia 
lie in the septa. It is remarkable, in view of the spaciousness of the 
coelom, that the funnels of the latter have not been seen. Ozo- 
branchus possesses a coelom which is less typically chaetopodous 
than that of Acanthobdella, but more so than in other leeches. There 
is a spacious cavity surrounding the gut and containing also blood- 
vessels, and to some extent the generative organs, and the nervous 
cord. Furthermore, in the mid region of the body this coelom is 
broken up by metamerically arranged septa, as in Acanthobdella. 
These septa are, however, rather incomplete and are not fastened 
to the gut; and, as in Acanthobdella, the nephridia are embedded 



true 



cch 




Fig. 16. — Section of Acanthobdella (after Kovalevsky). Identical 
letters as in fig. 2; in addition, en, nerve cord; in, intestine; nf, 
parts of nephridium; on, external opening of nephridium ; ov, ova; 
/, testis. 

in them. In addition to the median lacuna there are two lateral 
lacunae, one upon each side. These regions of the coelom end at the 
ends of the body and communicate with each other by means of a 
branched system of coelomic sinuses, which are in places very fine 
tubes. Neither in this genus nor in the last is there any communi- 
cation between coelom and vascular system. In Clepsine (Glossi- 
phonia) there is a further breaking up of the coelom. The median 
lacuna no longer exists, but is represented by a dorsal and ventral 
sinus. The former lodges the dorsal, the latter the ventral, blood- 
vessel. The gut has no coelomic space surrounding it. A complex 



CHAETOSOMATIDA— CHAFER 



799 



network places these sinuses and the lateral sinuses in communi- 
cation. Here also the blood system has no communication with the 
sinus system of the coelom. In Hirudo and the Gnalhobdellidae 
there is only one system of cavities which consist of four principal 
longitudinal trunks, of which the two lateral are contractile, which 
communicate with a network ramifying everywhere, even among 
the cells of the epidermis. The network is partly formed out of 
pigmented cells which are excavated and join to form tubes, the so- 
called botryoidal tissue, not found among the Rhynchobdellidae at 
all. It seems clear from the recent investigations of A. G. Bourne 
and E. S. Goodrich that the vascular system and the coelom are in 
communication (as in vertebrates by means of the lymph system). 
On the other hand, it has been held that in these leeches there is no 
vascular system at all and that the entire system of spaces is coelom. 
In favour of regarding the vascular system as totally absent, is the 
fact that the median coelomic channels contain no dorsal and 
ventral vessel. In favour of seeing in the lateral trunks and their 
branches a vascular system, is the contractility of the former, and 
the fact of the intrusion of the latter into the epidermis, matched 
among the Oligochaeta, where undoubted blood capillaries perforate 
the epidermis. A further fact must be considered in deciding this 
question, which is the discovery of ramifying coelomic tubes, ap- 
proaching close to, but not entering, the epidermis in the Polychaete 
Arenicola. These tubes are lined by flattened epithelium and often 
contain blood capillaries; they communicate with the coelom and 
are to be regarded as prolongation of it into the thickness of the 
body wall. 

Gonads and Gonad Ducts. — The gonads and their ducts in the 
Hirudinea invariably form a closed system of cavities entirely shut 
off from the coelom in which they lie. There is thus a broad resem- 
blance to the Eudrilidae, to which group of Oligochaeta the Hiru- 
dinea are further akin by reason of the invariably unpaired condition 
of the generative apertures, and the existence of a copulatory 
apparatus (both of which characters, however, are present occasion- 
ally in other Oligochaeta). 

The testes are more numerous than the ovaries, of which latter 
there are never more than one pair. The testes vary in numbers of 
pairs. Four (Ozobranchus) to six (Glossiphonia) or ten (Philaemon) 
are common numbers. In Acanthobdetta, however, the testes of each 
side of the body have grown together to form a continuous band, 
which extends in front of external pore. Each testis communicates 
by means of an efferent duct with a common collecting duct of its 
side of the body, which opens on to the exterior by means of a pro- 
trusible penis, and to which is sometimes appended a seminal vesicle. 
The efferent ducts are ciliated, and there is a patch of cilia at the 
point where they communicate with the cavity of each testis. The 
ovaries are more extensive in some forms (e.g. Ozobranchus) than 
in others, where they are small rounded bodies. The two ducts 
continuous with the gonads open by a common vagina on to the 
exterior behind the male pores. This " vagina " is sometimes of 
exaggerated size. Thus, in Philaemon pungens (Lambert) it has 
the form of a large sac, into which open by a single orifice the con- 
joined oviducts. From this vagina arises a narrow duct leading to 
the exterior. In Ozobranchus the structures in question are still 
more complicated. The two long ovarian sacs communicate with 
each other by a transverse bridge before uniting to form the terminal 
canal. Into each ovarian sac behind the transverse junction opens 
a slender tube, which is greatly coiled, and, in its turn, opens into 
a spherical "spermathecal sac." From this an equally slender tube 
proceeds, which joins its fellow of the opposite side, and the two form 
a thick, walled tube, which opens on to the exterior within the bursa 
copulatrix through which the penis protrudes. These two last- 
mentioned types show features which can be, as it seems, matched 
in the Eudrilidae. 

The gonads develop (O. Burger) in coelomic spaces close to 
nephridial funnels, which have, however, no relation to the gonad 
ducts. The ovaries are solid bodies, of which the outer layer becomes 
separated from the plug of cells lying within ; thus a cavity is formed 
which is clearly coelom. This cavity and its walls becomes pro- 
longed to form the oviducts. A stage exactly comparable to the 
stage in the leeches, where the ovary is surrounded by a closed sac, 
has been observed in Eudrilus. In this Annelid later the sac in 
question joins its fellow, passing beneath the nerve cord exactly 
as in the leech, and also grows out to reach the exterior. The sole 
difference is therefore that in Eudrilus the ovarian sac gives rise 
to a tube which bifurcates, one branch meeting a corresponding 
branch of the other ovary of the pair, while the second branch 
reaches the exterior. In the leech the two branches are fused into 
one. We have here clearly a case of a true coelomoduct performing 
the function of an oviduct in both leeches and Eudrilidae. The facts 
just referred to suggest further comparisons between the Hirudinea 
and Eudrilidae. The large sacs which have been termed vagina 
are suggestive of the large coelomic spermathecae in Eudrilids, a 
comparison which needs, however, embryological data, not at 
present forthcoming, for its justification. It is at least clear that in 
Ozobranchus this comparison is justifiable; but only probable, or 

Jierhaps possible, in the case of Philaemon. In the former, the duct, 
eading from the ovarian sac, and swelling along its course into the 
spherical sac, the " spermatheca," is highly suggestive of the oviduct 
and receptaculum of the Eudrilidae. 



The testes during development become hollowed out and are 
prolonged into the vasa efferentia. These ducts therefore have not 
their exact counterparts in the Oligochaeta, unless we are to assume 
that they collectively are represented by the seminal vesicles of 
earthworms and the vasa deferentia. It is to be noted that the 
Hirudinea differ from the Oligochaeta in that the male pore is in 
advance of the gonads (except in Acanthobdetta, which here, as in 
so many points, approximates to the Oligochaeta), whereas in 
Oligochaeta that pore is behind the gonads (again with an exception, 
Allurus). 

Classification. — The Hirudinea may bedivided into three families: — 

(i.) Rhynchobdellidae. — A protrusible proboscis exists, but there 
are no jaws. The blood is colourless. Pontobdella, Glossiphonia, &c. 

(ii.) Gnalhobdellidae. — A proboscis absent, but jaws usually 
present. Blood coloured red with haemoglobin. Hirudo, Nephelis, 
&c. 

(iii.) Acanthobdellidae. — Proboscis present, but short. Paired 
setae of Oligochaetous pattern present in anterior segments. Blood 
red. Acanthobdetta. 

Literature. — A. O. Kovalevsky, Bull. Imp. Sci. (St Petersburg, 
November 1896) (Acanthobdetta); A. G. Bourne, Quart. Journ. 
Micr. Sci., 1884; A. Oka, Zeitschr. wiss. Zool., 1894; E. S. Good- 
rich, Quart. Journ. Micr. Sci., 1899; W. E. Castle, Bull. Mus. Contp. 
Zool., 1900; A. M. Lambert, Proc. Roy. Soc. (Victoria, 1897) ; C. O. 
Whitman, Journ. Morph., 1889 and 1891 ; O. Burger, Zeitschr. wiss. 
Zool., 1902, and other memoirs by the above, and by St V. Apathy, 
R. Blanchard, H. Bolsius, A. Dendy, R. S. Bergh, &c. (F. E. B.) 

CHAETOSOMATIDA, a small group of minute, free-living, 
aquatic organisms which are usually placed as an annex to 
the Nematoda. Indeed Mechnikov, to 
whom we owe much of our knowledge 
of these forms, calls them " creeping 
Nematoda." They are usually found 
amongst seaweed in temperate seas, but 
they are probably widely distributed; 
some are fresh-water. The genus Chaeto- 
soma, with the two species Ch. claparedii 
and Ch. ophicephalum and the genus 
Tristicochaeta, have swollen heads. The 
third genus Rhabdogaster has no such 
distinct head, though the body may be 
swollen anteriorly. The mouth is ter- 
minal and anterior and surrounded by a 
ring of spicules or a half-ring of hooks. 
Scattered hairs cover the body. Just in 
front of the anus there is in Chaetosoma 
a double, and in Tristicochaeta a triple 
row of about fifteen stout cylindrical 
projections upon which the animals 
creep. The females are a little larger ? rom Cambridge^ Natnrai 
than the males; in Ch. claparedii the b /permission of Macm5ian& 
former attain a length of 1-5 mm., the Co - Ltd - 
latter of 1-12 mm. The mouth opens Mature female of 
into an oesophagus which passes into an Chaetosoma claparedii. 
intestine; this opens by a ventral anus gZ^^Tllt- 
situated a little in front of the posterior tine ; c, anus ; d, ovary ; 
end. The testis is single, and its duct e, generative pore; /, 
opens with the anus, and is provided ventral bristles, 
with a couple of spicules. The ovary is 

double, and the oviducts open by a median ventral pore about 
the middle of the body; in this region there is a second swelling 
both in Chaetosoma and in Rhabdogaster. The last-named form 
is in the female 0-36 mm. in length. In it the hairs are confined 
to the dorsal middle line and the creeping setae are hooked, of 
a finer structure than in Chaetosoma, and situated so far forward 
that the vagina opens amongst them. Ch. ophicephalum has 
been taken in the English Channel. 

See E. Mechnikov, Zeitschr. wiss.' Zool. xvii., 1867, p. 537; 
Panceri, Atti Ace. Napoli, vii., 1878, p. 7. (A. E. S.) 

CHAFER, a word used in modern speech to distinguish the 
beetles of the family Scarabaeidae, and more especially those 
species which feed on leaves in the adult state. The word is 
derived from the O. Eng. ceafor, and it is interesting to note 
that the cognate Ger. Kdfer is applied to beetles of all kinds. 
For the characters of the Scarabaeidae see Coleoptera. This 
family includes a large number of beetles, some of which feed on 




8oo 



CHAFF— CHAGRES 



dung and others on vegetable tissues. The cockchafers and their 
near allies belong to the subfamily Melolonthinae, and the 
rose-chafers to the Cetoniinae; in both the beetles eat leaves, and 
their grubs spend a long life underground devouring roots. 
In Britain the Melolonthines that are usually noted as injurious 
are the two species of cockchafer (Melolontha vulgaris and M . 
hippocastani), large heavy beetles with black pubescent pro- 
thorax, brown elytra and an elongated pointed tail-process; 
the summer-chafer (Rhizotrogus solstitialis) , a smaller pale 
brown chafer; and the still smaller garden-chafer or " cocker- 
bundy " (Phyllopertha korticola), which has a dark green pro- 
thorax and brown elytra. Of the Cetoniines, the beautiful 
metallic green rose-chafer, Cetonia aurala, sometimes causes 
damage, especially in gardens. The larvae of the chafers are 
heavy, soft-skinned grubs, with hard brown heads provided with 
powerful mandibles, three pairs of well-developed legs, and a 
swollen abdomen. As they grow, the larvae become strongly 
flexed towards the ventral surface, and lie curled up in their 
earthen cells, feeding on roots. The larval life lasts several 
years, and in hard frosts the grubs go deep down away from the 
surface. Pupation takes place in the autumn, and though the 
perfect insect emerges from the cuticle very soon afterwards, 
it remains in its underground cell for several months, not making 
its way to the upper air until the ensuing summer. After pairing, 
the female crawls down into the soil to lay her eggs. The grubs 
of chafers, when turned up by the plough, are greedily devoured 
by poultry, pigs and various wild birds. When the beetles 
become so numerous as to call for destruction, they are usually 
shaken off the trees where they rest on to sheets or tarred boards. 
On the continent of Europe chafers are far more numerous than 
in the United Kingdom, and the rural governments in France 
give rewards for their destruction. D. Sharp states that in the 
department of Seine-inferieure 867,173,000 cockchafers and 
647,000,000 larvae were killed in the four years preceding 1870. 
The anatomy of Melolontha is very fully described in a classical 
memoir by H. E. StrausB-Diirckheim (Paris, 1828). (G. H. C.) 

CHAFF (from the A.S. ceaf, allied to the O. High Ger. cheva, 
a husk or pod), the husks left after threshing grain, and also hay 
and straw chopped fine as food for cattle; hence, figuratively, 
the refuse or worthless part of anything. The colloquial use 
of the word, to chaff, in the sense of to banter or to make fun of a 
person, may be derived from this figurative sense, or from 
" to chafe," meaning to vex or irritate. 

CHAFFARINAS, or Zaitarines, a group of islands belonging 
to Spain off the north coast of Morocco, near the Algerian 
frontier, 2§ m. to the north of Cape del Agna. The largest of 
these isles, Del Congreso, is rocky and hilly. It has a watch- 
house on the coast nearest to Morocco. Isabella II., the central 
island, contains several batteries, barracks and a penal convict 
settlement. The Spanish government has undertaken the con- 
struction of breakwaters to unite this island with the neighbouring 
islet of El Rey , with a view to enclose a deep and already sheltered 
anchorage. This roadstead affords a safe refuge for many large 
vessels. The Chaffarinas, which are the Tres Insulae of the 
Romans and the Zafran of the Arabs, were occupied by Spain 
in 1848. The Spanish occupation anticipated by a few days a 
French expedition sent from Oran to annex the islands to Algeria. 
The population of the islands is under 1000. 

CHAFFEE, ADNA ROM ANZA (1842- ), American general, 
was born at Orwell, Ohio, on the 14th of April 1842. At the 
outbreak of the Civil War he entered the United States cavalry 
as a private, and he rose to commissioned rank in 1863, 
becoming brevet captain in 1865. He remained in the army 
after the war and took part with distinction in many Indian 
campaigns. His promotion was, however, slow, and he was at 
the age of fifty-six still a lieutenant-colonel of cavalry. But in 
1898, at the outbreak of the Spanish- American War, he was made 
brigadier-general and soon afterwardsmajor-generalofvolunteers. 
In the Cuban campaign he won particular distinction, and the 
victory of the Americans in the action of El Caney was in large 
measure due to his careful personal reconnaissances of the ground 
to be attacked and to the endurance of his own brigade. After 



reverting for a time to the rank of brigadier-general, he was made 
a major-general U.S.V. again in 1900 and was appointed to 
command the United States contingent in China. He took a 
brilliant and successful part in the advance on Peking and the 
relief of the Legations. In 1901 he became a major-general in 
the regular army, and in 1901-1902 commanded the Division of 
the Philippines. In 1902-1903 he commanded the Department of 
the East, and from 1904 to 1906 was chief of the general staff 
of the army. In 1904 he received the rank of lieutenant-general 
in the United States army, being the first enlisted man of the 
regular army to attain this, the highest rank in the service. 
He was retired at his own request on the 1st of February 1906, 
after more than forty years' service. 

CHAFFINCH {Fringilla coelebs), the common English name 
of a bird belonging to the family Fringillidae (see Finch), and 
distinguished, in the male sex, by the deep greyish blue of its 
crown feathers, the yellowish green of its rump, the white of the 
wing coverts, so disposed as to form two conspicuous bars, and 
the reddish brown passing into vinous red of the throat and 
breast. The female is drab, but shows the same white markings 
as the male, and the young males resemble the females until 
after the first autumn moult, when they gradually assume the 
plumage of their sex. The chaffinch breeds early in the season, 
and its song may often be heard in February. Its nest, which 
is a model of neatness and symmetry, it builds on trees and bushes, 
preferring such as are overgrown with moss and lichens. It is 
chiefly composed of moss and wool, lined internally with grass, 
wool, feathers, and whatever soft material the locality affords. 
The outside consists of moss and lichens, and according to Selby, 
" is always accordant with the particular colour of its situation." 
When built in the neighbourhood of towns the nest is somewhat 
slovenly and untidy, being often composed of bits of dirty straw, 
pieces of paper and blackened moss; in one instance, near 
Glasgow, the author of the Birds of the West of Scotland found 
several postage-stamps thus employed. It lays four or five eggs 
of a pale purplish buff, streaked and spotted with purplish red. 
In spring the chaffinch is destructive to early flowers, and to 
young radishes and turnips just as they appear above the surface; 
in summer,, however, it feeds principally on insects and their 
larvae, while in autumn and winter its food consists of grain and 
other seeds. On the continent of Europe the chaffinch is a 
favourite s6ng-bird, especially in Germany, where great attention 
is paid to its training. 

CHAFING-DISH (from the O. Fr. chaufer, to make warm), 
a kind of portable grate heated with charcoal, and used for 
cooking or keeping food warm. In a light form, and heated 
over a spirit lamp, it is also used for cooking various dainty 
dishes at table. The employment of the chafing-dish for the 
latter purpose has been largely restored in modern cookery. 

CHAGOS, a group of atolls in the Indian Ocean, belonging to 
Britain, disposed in circular form round the Chagos bank, in 
4° 44' to 7° 39' S., and 70* 55' to 72 52' E. The atolls on the 
south and east side of the bank, which has a circumference of 
about 270 m., have disappeared through subsidence; a few — 
Egmont, Danger, Eagle, and Three Brothers — still remain on 
the east side, but most of the population (about 700) is centred 
on Diego Garcia, which lies on the south-east side, and is nearly 
13 m. long by 6 m. wide. The lagoon, which is enclosed by two 
coral barriers and accessible to the largest vessels on the north 
side, forms one of the finest natural harbours in the world. The 
group, which has a total land area of 76 sq. m., is dependent for 
administrative purposes on Mauritius, and is regularly visited 
by vessels from that colony. The only product is cocoa-nut oil, 
of which about 106,000 gallons are annually exported. The 
French occupied the islands in 1791 from Mauritius, and the oil 
industry(from which the group is sometimes called the Oil Islands) 
came into the hands of French Creoles. 

CHAGRES, a village of the Republic of Panama, on the 
Atlantic coast of the Isthmus, at the mouth of the Chagres 
river, and about 8 m. W. of Colon. It has a harbour from 10 to 
12 ft. deep, which is difficult to enter, however, on account of 
bars at its mouth. The port was discovered by Columbus in 



CHAIN—CHAIR 



8oi 



1502, and was opened for traffic with Panama, on the Pacific 
coast, by way of the Chagres river, in the 16th century. 
With the decline of Porto Bello in the 18th century 
Chagres became the chief Atlantic port of the Isthmus, and was 
at the height of its importance during the great rush of gold- 
hunters across the Isthmus to California in 1849 and the years 
immediately following. With the completion of the Panama 
railway in 1855, however, travel was diverted to Colon, and 
Chagres soon became a village of miserable huts, with no evidence 
of its former importance. On a high rock at the mouth of the 
river stands the castle of Lorenzo, which was destroyed by Sir 
Henry Morgan when he captured the town in 167 1, but 
was rebuilt soon afterwards by the Spaniards. Chagres was 
again captured in 1740 by British forces under Admiral Edward 
Vernon. 

CHAIN (through the O. Fr. chains, chmne, &c, from Lat. 
catena), a series of links of metal or other material so connected 
together that the whole forms a flexible band or cord. Chains 
are used for a variety of purposes, such as fastening, securing, 
or connecting together two or more objects, supporting or lifting 
weights, transmitting mechanical power, &c. ; or as an ornament 
to serve as a collar, as a symbol of office or state, or as part of 
the insignia of an order of knighthood; or as a device from 
which to hang a jewelled or other pendant, a watch, &c. (see 
Collar). Ornamental chains are made with a great variety of 
links, but those intended for utilitarian purposes are mostly of 
two types. In stud chains a stud or brace is inserted across each 
link to prevent its sides from collapsing inwards under strain, 
whereas in open link chains the links have no studs. The addition 
of studs is reckoned to increase the load which the chain can 
safely bear by 50%. Small chains of the open-link type are 
to a great extent made by machinery. For larger sizes the 
smith cuts off a length of iron rod of suitable diameter, forms it 
while hot to the shape of the link by repeated blows of his hammer, 
and welds together the two ends of the link, previously slipped 
inside its fellow, by the aid of the same tool; in some cases the 
bending is done in a mechanical press and the welding under a 
power hammer (see also Cable) . Weldless chains are also made ; 
in A. G. Strathern's process, for instance, cruciform steel bars 
are pressed, while hot, into links, each without join and engaging 
with its neighbours. Chains used for transmitting power are 
known as pitch-chains; the chain of a bicycle (q.v.) is an example. 

From the use of the chain as employed to bind or fetter a 
prisoner or slave, comes the figurative application to anything 
which serves as a constraining or restraining force; and from 
its series of connected links, to any series of objects, events, 
arguments, &c, connected by succession, logical sequence or 
reasoning. Specific uses are for a measuring line in land-survey- 
ing, consisting of 100 links, i.e. iron rods, 7-02 in. in length, 
making 22 yds. in all, hence a lineal measure of that length; 
and, as a nautical term, for the contrivance by which the lower 
shrouds of a mast are extended and secured to the ship's 
sides, consisting of dead-eyes, chain-plates, and chain-wale or 
" channel." 

CHAIR (in. Mid. Eng. chare, through O. Fr. chaere or chaiere, 
from Lat. cathedra, later caledra, Gr. KadkSpa, seat, cf . "cathedral " ; 
the modern Fr. form chaise, a chair, has been adopted in English 
with a particular meaning as a form of carriage; chaire in French 
is still used of a professorial or ecclesiastical " chair," or cathedra), 
a movable seat, usually with four legs, for a single person, the 
most varied and familiar article of domestic furniture. The 
chair is of extreme antiquity, although for many centuries and 
indeed for thousands of years it was an appanage of state and 
dignity rather than an article of ordinary use. " The chair " is 
still extensively used as the emblem of authority in the House 
of Commons and in public meetings. It was not, in fact, until 
the 1 6th century that it became common anywhere. The chest, 
the bench and the stool were until then the ordinary seats of 
everyday life, and the number of chairs which have survived 
from an earlier date is exceedingly limited; most of such ex- 
amples are of ecclesiastical or seigneurial origin. Our knowledge 
of the chairs of remote antiquity is derived almost entirely from 
v. 26 



monuments, sculpture and paintings. A few actual examples 
exist in the British Museum, in the Egyptian museum at Cairo, 
and elsewhere. In ancient Egypt they appear to have been of 
great richness and splendour. Fashioned of ebony and ivory, 
or of carved and gilded wood, they were covered with costly 
stuffs and supported upon representations of the legs of beasts 
of the chase or the figures of captives. An arm-chair in fine 
preservation found in a tomb in the Valley of the Kings is 
astonishingly similar, even in small details, to that " Empire " 
style which followed Napoleon's campaign in Egypt. The 
earliest monuments of Nineveh represent a chair without a back 
but with tastefully carved legs ending in lions' claws or bulls' 
hoofs; others are supported by figures in the nature of carya- 
tides or by animals. The earliest known form of Greek chair, 
going back to five or six centuries before Christ, had a back but 
stood straight up, front and back. On the frieze of the Parthenon 
Zeus occupies a square seat with a bar-back and thick turned 
legs; it is ornamented with winged sphinxes and the feet of 
beasts. The characteristic Roman chairs were of marble, also 
adorned with sphinxes; the curule chair was originally very 
similar in form to the modern folding chair, but eventually 
received a good deal of ornament. 

The most famous of the very few chairs which have come down 
from a remote antiquity is the reputed chair of St Peter in St 
Peter's at Rome. The wooden portions are much decayed, but 
it would appear to be Byzantine work of the 6th century, and 
to be really an ancient sedia gestatoria. It has ivory carvings 
representing the labours of Hercules. A few pieces of an earlier 
oaken chair have been let in; the existing one, Gregorovius 
says, is of acacia wood. The legend that this was the curule 
chair of the senator Pudens is necessarily apocryphal. It is not, 
as is popularly supposed, enclosed in Bernini's bronze chair, 
but is kept under triple lock and exhibited only once in a century. 
Byzantium, like Greece and Rome, affected the curule form of 
chair, and in addition to lions' heads and winged figures of 
Victory and dolphin-shaped arms used also the lyre-back which 
has been made familiar by the pseudo-classical revival of the 
end of the 18th century. The chair of Maximian in the cathedral 
of Ravenna is believed to date from the middle of the 6th century. 
It is of marble, round, with a high back, and is carved in high 
relief with figures of saints and scenes from the Gospels — the 
Annunciation, the Adoration of the Magi, the flight into Egypt 
and the baptism of Christ. The smaller spaces are filled with 
carvings of animals, birds, flowers and foliated ornament. 
Another very ancient seat is the so-called "Chair of Dagobert" in 
the Louvre. It is of cast bronze, sharpened with the chisel and 
partially gilt; it is of the curule or faldstool type and supported 
upon legs terminating in the heads and feet of animals. The 
seat, which was probably of leather, has disappeared. Its attri- 
bution depends entirely upon the statement of Suger, abbot of 
St Denis in the 1 2th century, who added a back and arms. Its 
age has been much discussed, but Viollet-le-Duc dated it to early 
Merovingian times, and it may in any case be taken as the oldest 
faldstool in existence. To the same generic type belongs 
the famous abbots' chair of Glastonbury; such chairs might 
readily be taken to pieces when their owners travelled. The 
faldisterium in time acquired arms and a back, while retaining 
its folding shape. The most famous, as well as the most, ancient, 
English chair is that made at the end of the 13th century for 
Edward I., in which most subsequent monarchs have been 
crowned. It is of an architectural type and of oak, and was 
covered with gilded gesso which long since disappeared. 

Passing from these historic examples we find the chair mono- 
polized by the ruler, lay or ecclesiastical, to a comparatively 
late date. As the seat of authority it stood at the head of the 
lord's table, on his dais, by the side of his bed. The seigneurial 
chair, commoner in France and the Netherlands than in England, 
is a very interesting type, approximating in many respects to 
the episcopal or abbatial throne or stall. It early acquired a 
very high back and sometimes had a canopy. Arms were in- 
variable, and the lower part was closed in with panelled or 
carved front and sides — the seat, indeed, was often hinged and 

11 



802 



CHAISE— CHALCEDON, COUNCIL OF 



sometimes closed with a key. That we are still said to sit " in " 
an arm-chair and " on " other kinds of chairs is a reminiscence of 
the time when the lord or seigneur sat " in his chair." These 
throne-like seats were always architectural in character, and as 
Gothic feeling waned took the distinctive characteristics of 
Renaissance work. It was owing in great measure to the Re- 
naissance that the chair ceased to be an appanage of state, and 
became the customary companion of whomsoever could afford 
to buy it. Once the idea of privilege faded the chair speedily 
came into general use, and almost at once began to reflect the 
fashions of the hour. No piece of furniture has ever been so 
close an index to sumptuary changes. It has varied in size, 
shape and sturdiness with the fashion not only of women's dress 
but of men's also. Thus the chair which was not, even with its 
arms purposely suppressed, too ample during the several reigns 
of some form or other of hoops and farthingale, became monstrous 
when these protuberances disappeared. Again, the costly laced 
coats of the dandy of the 18th and early 19th centuries were so 
threatened by the ordinary form of seat that a " conversation 
chair" was devised, which enabled the buck and the ruffler to sit 
with his face to the back, his valuable tails hanging unimpeded 
over the front. The early chair almost invariably had arms, and 
it was not until towards the close of the 16th century that the 
smaller form grew common. 

The majority of the chairs of all countries until the middle of 
the 17 th century were of oak without upholstery, and when it be- 
came customary to cushion them, leatherwas sometimesemployed; 
subsequently velvet and silk were extensively used, and at a 
later period cheaper and often more durable materials. Leather 
was not infrequently used even for the costly and elaborate 
chairs of the faldstool form — occasionally sheathed in thin plates 
of silver — which Venice sent all over Europe. To this day, 
indeed, leather is one of the most frequently employed materials 
for chair covering. The outstanding characteristic of most 
chairs until the middle of the 17 th century was massiveness and 
solidity. Being usually made of oak, they were of considerable 
weight, and it was not until the introduction of the handsome 
Louis XIII. chairs with cane backs and seats that either weight 
or solidity was reduced. Although English furniture derives 
so extensively from foreign and especially French and Italian 
models, the earlier forms of English chairs owed but little to 
exotic influences. This was especially the case down to the end 
of the Tudor period, after which France began to set her mark 
upon the British chair. The squat variety, with heavy and 
sombre back, carved like a piece of panelling, gave place to a 
taller, more slender, and more elegant form, in which the frame- 
work only was carved, and attempts were made at ornament 
in new directions. The stretcher especially offered opportunities 
which were not lost upon the cabinet-makers of the Restoration. 
From a mere uncompromising cross-bar intended to strengthen 
the construction it blossomed, almost suddenly, into an elaborate 
scroll-work or an exceedingly graceful semicircular ornament 
connecting all four legs, with a vase-shaped knob in the centre. 
The arms and legs of chairs of this period were scrolled, the 
splats of the back often showing a rich arrangement of spirals 
and scrolls. This most decorative of all types appears to have 
been popularized in England by the cavaliers who had been in 
exile with Charles II. and had become familiar with it in the 
north-western parts of the European continent. During he 
reign of William and Mary these charming forms degenerated 
into something much stiffer and more rectangular, with a solid, 
more or less fiddle-shaped splat and a cabriole leg with pad feet. 
The more ornamental examples had cane seats and ill-pro- 
portioned cane backs. From these forms was gradually developed 
the Chippendale chair, with its elaborately interlaced back, its 
graceful arms and square or cabriole legs, the latter terminating 
in the claw and ball or the pad foot. Hepplewhite, Sheraton 
and Adam all aimed at lightening the chair, which, even in the 
master hands of Chippendale, remained comparatively heavy. 
The endeavour succeeded, and the modern chair is everywhere 
comparatively slight. Chippendale and Hepplewhite between 
them determined what appears to be the final form of the chair, 



for since their time practically no new type has lasted, and in 
its main characteristics the chair of the 20th century is the direct 
derivative of that of the later 18th. 

The 18th century was, indeed, the golden age of the chair, 
especially in France and England, between which there was 
considerable give and take of ideas. Even Diderot could not 
refrain from writing of them in his Encyclopedic The typical 
Louis Seize chair, oval-backed and ample of seat, with descending 
arms and round-reeded legs, covered in Beauvais or some such 
gay tapestry woven with Boucher or Watteau-like scenes, is a 
very gracious object, in which the period reached its high-water 
mark. The Empire brought in squat and squabby shapes, 
comfortable enough no doubt, but entirely destitute of inspira- 
tion. English Empire chairs were often heavier and more sombre 
than those of French design. Thenceforward the chair in all 
countries ceased to attract the artist. The art nouveau school 
has occasionally produced something of not unpleasing simplicity; 
but more often its efforts have been frankly ugly or even 
grotesque. There have been practically no novelties, with the 
exception perhaps of the basket-chair and such like, which have 
been made possible by modern command over material. So 
much, indeed, is the present indebted to the past in this 
matter that even the revolving chair, now so familiar in 
offices, has a pedigree of something like four centuries (see also 
Sedan-chair). (J. P.-B.) 

CHAISE (the French for " chair," through a transference from 
a " sedan-chair " to a wheeled vehicle), a light two- or four-wheeled 
carriage with a movable hood or " calash "; the " post-chaise " 
was the fast- travelling carriage of the 18th and early 19th 
centuries. It was closed and four-wheeled for two or four horses 
and with the driver riding postillion. 

CHAKRATA, a mountain cantonment in the Dehra Dun 
district of the United Provinces of India, on the range of hills 
overlooking the valleys of the Jumna and the Tons, at an 
elevation of 7000 ft. It was founded in 1866 and first occupied 
in April 1869. 

CHALCEDON, more correctly Calchedon (mod. Kadikeui), an 
ancient maritime town of Bithynia, in Asia Minor, almost 
directly opposite Byzantium, south of Scutari. It was a Megarian 
colony founded on a site so obviously inferior to that which was 
within view on the opposite shore, that it received from the 
oracle the name of " the City of the Blind." In its early history 
it shared the fortunes of Byzantium, was taken by the satrap 
Otanes, vacillated long between the Lacedaemonian and the 
Athenian interests, and was at last bequeathed to the Romans 
by Attalus III. of Pergamum (133 B.C.). It was partly destroyed 
by Mithradates, but recovered during the Empire, and in a.d. 451 
was the seat of the Fourth General Council. It fell under the 
repeated attacks of the barbarian hordes who crossed over after 
having ravaged Byzantium, and furnished an encampment to 
the Persians under Chosroes, c. 616-626. The Turks used it as 
a quarry for building materials for Constantinople. The site 
is now occupied by the village of Kadikeui (" Village of the 
Judge "), which forms the tenth " cercle " of the municipality 
of Constantinople. Pop. about 33,000, of whom 8000 are 
Moslems. There is a large British colony with a church, and 
also Greek and Armenian churches and schools, and a training 
college for Roman Catholic Armenians. To the S. are the ruins 
of Panteichion (mod. Pendik), where Belisarius is said to have 
lived in retirement. 

See J. von Hammer, Constantinopolis (Pesth, 1822) ; Murray's 
Handbook for Constantinople (London, 1900). 

CHALCEDON, COUNCIL OF, the fourth ecumenical council of 
the Catholic Church, was held in 451, its occasion being the 
Eutychian heresy and the notorious " Robber Synod " (see 
Eutyches and Ephesus, Council of), which called forth 
vigorous protests both in the East and in the West, and a loud 
demand for a new general council, a demand that was ignored 
by the Eutychian Theodosius II., but speedily granted by his 
successor, Marcian, a " Flavianist." In response to the imperial 
summons, five to six hundred bishops, all Eastern, except the 
Roman legates and two Africans, assembled in Chalcedon on the 



CHALCEDONY 



803 



8th of October 451. The bishop of Rome claimed for his legates 
the right to preside, and insisted that any act that failed to receive 
their approval would be invalid. The first session was tumultu- 
ous; party feeling ran high, and scurrilous and vulgar epithets 
were bandied to and fro. The acts of the Robber Synod were 
examined; fraud, violence and coercion were charged against 
it; its entire proceedings were annulled, and, at the third 
session, its leader, Dioscurus, was deposed and degraded. The 
emperor requested a declaration of the true faith; but the 
sentiment of the council was opposed to a new symbol. It 
contented itself with reaffirming the Nicene and Constantino- 
politan creeds and the Ephesine formula of 431, and accepting, 
only after examination, the Christological statement contained 
in the Epistola Dogmatica of Leo I. {q.v.) to Flavianus. Thus 
the council rejected both Nestorianism and Eutychianism, and 
stood upon the doctrine that Christ had two natures, each 
perfect in itself and each distinct from the other, yet perfectly 
united in one person, who was at once both God and man. With 
this statement, which was formally subscribed in the presence 
of the emperor, the development of the Christological doctrine 
was completed, but not in a manner to obviate further con- 
troversy (see Monophysites and Monothelites). 

The remaining sessions, vii.-xvi., were occupied with matters 
of discipline, complaints, claims, controversies and the like. 
Canons were adopted, thirty according to the generally received 
tradition, although the most ancient texts contain but twenty- 
eight, and, as Hefele points out, the so-called twenty-ninth and 
thirtieth are properly not canons, but repetitions of proposals 
made in a previous session. » 

The most important enactments of the council of Chalcedon 
were the following: (1) the approval of the canons of the first 
three ecumenical councils and of the synods of Ancyra, Neo- 
Caesarea, Changra, Antioch and Laodicea; (2) forbidding trade, 
secular pursuits and war to the clergy, bishops not even being 
allowed to administer the property of their dioceses; (3) for- 
bidding monks and nuns to marry or to return to the world; 
likewise forbidding the establishment of a monastery in any 
diocese without the consent of the bishop, or the disestablish- 
ment of a monastery once consecrated; (4) punishing with 
deposition an ordination or clerical appointment made for 
money; forbidding " absolute ordination " (i.e. without assign- 
ment to a particular charge), the translation of clerics except 
for good cause, the enrolment of a cleric in two churches at once, 
and the performance of sacerdotal functions outside of one's 
diocese without letters of commendation from one's bishop; 
(5) confirming the jurisdiction of bishops over all clerics, regular 
and secular alike, and punishing with deposition any conspiracy 
against episcopal authority; (6) establishing a gradation of 
ecclesiastical tribunals, viz. bishop, provincial synod, exarch 
of the diocese, patriarch of Constantinople (obviously the council 
could not here have been legislating for the entire church); 
forbidding clerics to be running to Constantinople with com- 
plaints, without the consent of their respective bishops; (7) 
confirming the possession of rural parishes to those who had 
actually administered them for thirty years, providing for the 
adjudication of conflicting claims, and guaranteeing the integrity 
of metropolitan provinces; (8) confirming the third canon of 
the second ecumenical council, which accorded to Constanti- 
nople equal privileges (Jaa irpeaffeia) with Rome, and the second 
rank among the patriarchates, and, in addition, granting to 
Constantinople patriarchal jurisdiction over Pontus, Asia and 
Thrace. 

The Roman legates, who were absent (designedly ? ) when this 
famous twenty-eighth canon was adopted, protested against 
it, but in vain, the imperial commissioners deciding in favour of 
its regularity and validity. Leo I., although he recognized the 
council as ecumenical and confirmed its doctrinal decrees, rejected 
canon xxviii. on the ground that it contravened the sixth canon 
of Nicaea and infringed the rights of Alexandria and Antioch. 
In what proportion zeal for the ancient canons and the rights 
of others, and jealous fear of encroachment upon his own juris- 
diction, were mixed in the motives of Leo, it would be interesting 



to know. The canon was universally received in the East, and 
was expressly confirmed by the Quinisext Council, 692 (see 
Constantinople, Councils of). 

The emperor Marcian approved the doctrinal decrees of the 
council and enjoined silence in regard to theological questions. 
Eutyches and Dioscurus and their followers were deposed and 
banished. But harmony was not thus to be restored; hardly 
had the council dissolved when the church was plunged into the 
Monophysite controversy. 

See Mansi vi. pp. 529-1102, vii. pp. 1-868; Hardouin ii. pp. 1-772; 
Hefele (2nd ed.) ii. pp. 394-578 (English translation, iii. pp. 268- 
464); also extended bibliographies in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklo- 
padie, 3rd ed., s.v. " Eutyches " (by Loofs) and s.v. " Nestorianer " 
(by Kessler). (T. F. C.) 

CHALCEDONY, or Calcedony (sometimes called by old 
writers cassidoine), a variety of native silica, often used as an 
ornamental stone. The present application of the term is com- 
paratively modern. The " chalcedonius " of Pliny was quite 
a different mineral, being a green stone from the copper-mines 
of Chalcedon, in Asia Minor, whence the name. There has been 
some confusion between chalcedony andthe ancient "carcedonia," 
a stone which seems to have been a carbuncle from Africa, 
brought by way of Carthage (KapxtSiiv). Our chalcedony 
was probably included by the ancients among the various kinds 
of jasper and agate, especially the varieties termed " leucachates " 
and " cerachates." 

By modern mineralogists the name chalcedony is restricted 
to those kinds of silica which occur not in distinct crystals like 
ordinary quartz, but in concretionary, mammillated or stalac- 
titic forms, which break with a fine splintery fracture, and 
display a delicate fibrous structure. Chalcedony may be regarded 
as a micro-crystalline form of quartz. It is rather softer and 
less dense than crystallized quartz, its hardness being about 
6-5 and its specific gravity 2-6, the difference being probably 
due to the presence of a small amount of opaline silica between 
the fibres. Chalcedony is a translucent substance of rather 
waxy lustre, presenting great variety of colours, though usually 
white, grey, yellow or brown. A rare blue chalcedony is some- 
times polished under the name of " sapphirine " — a term applied 
also to a distinct mineral (an aluminium-magnesium silicate) 
from Greenland. 

Chalcedony occurs as a secondary mineral in volcanic rocks, 
representing usually the silica set free by the decomposition of 
various silicates, and deposited in cracks, forming veins, or in 
vesicular hollows, forming amygdales. Its occurrence gives the 
name to Chalcedony Park, Arizona. It is found in the basalts 
of N. Ireland, the Faroe Isles and Iceland: it is common in 
the traps of the Deccan in India, and in volcanic rocks in Uruguay 
and Brazil. Certain flat oval nodules from a decomposed lava 
(augite-andesite) in Uruguay present a cavity lined with quartz 
crystals and enclosing liquid (a weak saline solution), with a 
movable air-bubble, whence they are called " enhydros " or 
water-stones. Very fine examples of stalactitic chalcedony, in 
whimsical forms, have been yielded by some of the Cornish 
copper-mines. The surface of chalcedony is occasionally coated 
with a delicate bluish bloom. A chalcedonic deposit in the form 
of concentric rings, on fossils and fragments of limestone in S. 
Devon, is known as " orbicular silica " or " beekite," having 
been named after Dr Henry Beeke, dean of Bristol, who first 
directed attention to such deposits. Certain pseudomorphs of 
chalcedony after datolite, from Haytor in Devonshire, have 
received the name of " haytorite." Optical examination of 
many chalcedonic minerals by French mineralogists has shown 
that they are aggregates of various fibrous crystalline bodies 
differing from each other in certain optical characters, whence 
they are distinguished as separate minerals under such names 
as calcedonite,pseudocalcedonite,quartzine, lutecite and lussatite. 
Many coloured and variegated chalcedonies are cut and polished 
as ornamental stones, and are described under special headings. 
Chalcedony has been in all ages the commonest of the stones used 
by the gem-engraver. 

See Agate, Bloodstone, Carnelian, Chrysoprase, Helio- 
trope, Mocha Stone, Onyx. Sard and Sardonyx. (F. W. K,*) 



804 



CHALCIDICUM— CHALDAEA 



CHALCIDICUM, in Roman architecture, the vestibule or 
portico of a public building opening on to the forum; as in the 
basilica of Eumactria at Pompeii, and the basilica of Constantine 
at Rome, where it was placed at one end. 

CHALCIS, the chief town of the island of Euboea in Greece, 
situated on the strait of the Euripus at its narrowest point. 
The name is preserved from antiquity and is derived from the 
Greek x^Xkos (copper, bronze), though there is no trace of 
any mines in the neighbourhood. Chalcis was peopled by an 
Ionic stock which early developed great industrial and colonizing 
activity. In the 8th and 7th centuries it founded thirty town- 
ships on the peninsula of Chalcidice, and several important cities 
in Sicily (q.v.). Its mineral produce, metal- work, purple and 
pottery not only found markets among these settlements, but' 
were distributed over the Mediterranean in the ships of Corinth 
and Samos. With the help of these allies Chalcis engaged the 
rival league of its neighbour Eretria (q.v.) in the so-called 
Lelantine War, by which it acquired the best agricultural district 
of Euboea and became the chief city of the island. Early in the 
6th century its prosperity was broken by a disastrous war with 
the Athenians, who expelled the ruling aristocracy and settled 
a cleruchy on the site. Chalcis subsequently became a mem- 
ber of both the Delian Leagues. In the Hellenistic period 
it gained inportance as a fortress by which the Macedonian 
rulers controlled central Greece. It was used by kings Antiochus 
III. of Syria (192) and Mithradates VI. of Pontus (88) as a base 
for invading Greece. Under Roman rule Chalcis retained a 
measure of commercial prosperity; since the 6th century a.d. 
it again served as a fortress for the protection of central Greece 
against northern invaders. From 1209 it stood under Venetian 
control; in 1470 it passed to the Ottomans, who made it the 
seat of a pasha. In 1688 it was successfully held against a 
strong Venetian attack. The modem town has about 10,000 
inhabitants, and maintains a considerable export trade which 
received an impetus from the establishment of railway connexion 
with Athens and Peiraeus (1904). It is composed of two parts — 
the old walled town towards, the Euripus, called the Castro, 
where the Jewish and Turkish families who have remained there 
mostly dwell; and the more modern suburb that lies outside it, 
which is chiefly occupied by the Greeks. A part of the walls of 
the Castro and many of the houses within it were shaken down 
by the earthquake of 1894; part has been demolished in the 
widening of the Euripus. The most interesting object is the 
church of St Paraskeve, which was once the chief church of the 
Venetians; it dates from the Byzantine period, though many 
of its architectural features are Western. There is also a Turkish 
mosque, which is now used as a guard-house. 

Authorities. — Strabo vii. fr. 11, x. p. 447; Herodotus v. 77; 
Thucydides i. 15; Corpus Inscr. Atticarum, iv. (1) 27a, iv. (2) 10, iv. 
(2) p. 22; W. M. Leake, Travels in Northern Greece (London, 1835), 
ii. 254-270; E. Curtius in Hermes, x. (1876), p. 220 sqq.; A. Holm, 
Lange Fehde (Berlin, 1884); H. Dondorff, De Rebus Chalcidensium 
(Gottingen, 1869); for coinage, B. V. Head, Historia Numorum 
(Oxford, 1887), pp. 303-5; and art. Numismatics: Greek § Euboea. 
CHALCONDYLES 1 (or Chalcocondylas), LAONICUS, the 
only Athenian Byzantine writer. Hardly anything is known 
of his life. He wrote a history, in ten books, of the period from 
1 298-1463, describing the fall of the Greek empire and the rise 
of the Ottoman Turks, which forms the centre of the narrative, 
down to the conquest of the Venetians and Mathias, king of 
Hungary, by Mahommed II. The capture of Constantinople 
he rightly regarded as an historical event of far-reaching im- 
portance, although the comparison of it to the fall of Troy is 
hardly appropriate. The work incidentally gives a quaint and 
interesting sketch of the manners and civilization of England, 
France and Germany, whose assistance the Greeks sought to 
obtain against the Turks. Like that of other Byzantine writers, 
Chalcondyles' chronology is defective, and his adherence to the 
old Greek geographical nomenclature is a source of confusion. 
For his account of earlier events he was able to obtain infor- 
mation from his father, who was one of the most prominent 

1 A shortened form of Chalcocondyles, from xatek, copper, and 
K&v&vXos, knuckle. 



men in Athens during the struggles between the Greek and 
Frankish nobles. His model is Thucydides (according to Bekker, 
Herodotus); his language is tolerably pure and correct, his 
style simple and clear. The text, however, is in a very corrupt 
state. 

Editio princeps, ed. J. B. Baumbach (1615); in Bonn Corpui 
Scriptorum Hist. Byz. ed. I. Bekker (1843) ; Migne, Patrologia Graeca, 
clix. There is a French translation by Blaise de Vigenere (1577, 
later ed. by Artus Thomas with valuable illustrations on Turkish 
matters); see also F. Gregorovius, Geschichte der Stadt A then im 
Mittelalter, ii. (1889); Gibbon, Decline and Fall, ch. 66; C. Krum- 
bacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur (1897). There is a 
biographical sketch of Laonicus and his brother in Greek by An- 
tomus Calosynas, a physician of Toledo, who lived in the latter part 
of the 16th century (see C. Hopf, Chroniques greco-romanes, 1873). 
His brother, Demetrius Chalcondyles (1424-1511), was 
born in Athens. In 1447 he migrated to Italy, where Cardinal 
Bessarion gave him his patronage. He became famous as a 
teacher of Greek letters and the Platonic philosophy; in 1463 
he was made professor at Padua, and in 1479 he was summoned 
by Lorenzo de' Medici to Florence to fill the professorship 
vacated by John Argyropoulos. In 1492 he removed to Milan, 
where he died in 1511. He was associated with Marsilius 
Ficinus, Angelus Politianus, and Theodorus Gaza, in the revival 
of letters in the western world. One of his pupils at Florence 
was the famous John Reuchlin. Demetrius Chalcondyles 
published the editio princeps of Homer, Isocrates, and Suidas, 
and a Greek grammar (Erotemata) in the form of question and 
answer. 

See H. Hody, De Graecis illustribus (1742); C. Hopf, Chroniques 
greco-romanes (1873); E. Legrand, Bibliographie hellSnique, i. 
(1885). 

CHALDAEA. The expressions "Chaldaea" and "Chaldaeans" 
are frequently used in the Old Testament as equivalents for 
" Babylonia " and " Babylonians." Chaldaea was really the 
name of a country, used in two senses. It was first applied to 
the extreme southern district, whose ancient capital was the 
city of Bit Yakin, the chief seat of the renowned Chaldaean 
rebel Merodach-baladan, who harassed the Assyrian kings 
Sargon and Sennacherib. It is not as yet possible to fix the 
exact boundaries of the original home of the Chaldaeans, but 
it may be regarded as having been the long stretch of alluvial 
land situated at the then separate mouths of the Tigris and 
Euphrates, which rivers now combine to flow into the Persian 
Gulf in the waters of the majestic Shatt el 'Arab. 

The name " Chaldaea," however, soon came to have a more 
extensive application. In the days of the Assyrian king Ramman- 
nirari III. (812-783 B.C.), the term matKaldu covered practically 
all Babylonia. Furthermore, Merodach-baladan was called by 
Sargon II. (722-705 B.C.) " king of the land of the Chaldaeans " 
and " king of the land of Bit Yakin " after the old capital city, 
but there is no satisfactory evidence that Merodach-baladan 
had the right to the title " Babylonian." The racial distinction 
between the Chaldaeans and the Babylonians proper seems to 
have existed until a much later date, although it is almost 
certain that the former were originally a Semitic people. That 
they differed from the Arabs and Aramaeans is also seen from the 
distinction made by Sennacherib (705-681 B.C.) between the 
Chaldaeans and these races. Later, during the period covering 
the fall of Assyria and the rise of the Neo-Babylonian empire, 
the term mat Kaldu was not only applied to all Babylonia, 
but also embraced the territory of certain foreign nations who 
were later included by Ezekiel (xxiii. 23) under the expression 
"Chaldaeans." 

As already indicated, the Chaldaeans were most probably 
a Semitic people. It is likely that they first came from Arabia, 
the supposed original home of the Semitic races, at a very early 
date along the coast of the Persian Gulf and settled in the 
neighbourhood of Ur (" Ur of the Chaldees," Gen. xi. 28), whence 
they began a series of encroachments, partly by warfare and 
partly by immigration, against the other Semitic Babylonians. 
These aggressions after many centuries ended in the Chaldaean 
supremacy of Nabopolassar and his successors {c. 626 ff.), 
although there is no positive proof that Nabopolassar was 



CHALDEE— CMALIER 



•805 



purely Chaldaean in blood. The sudden rise of the later Baby- 
lonian empire under Nebuchadrezzar, the son of Nabopolassar, 
must have tended to produce so thorough an amalgamation of 
the Chaldaeans and Babylonians, who' had theretofore been 
considered as two kindred branches of the same original Semite 
stock, that in the course of time no perceptible differences 
existed between them. A similar amalgamation, although in 
this case of two peoples originally racially distinct, has taken 
place in modern times between the Manchu Tatars and the 
Chinese. It is quite evident, for example, from the Semitic 
character of the Chaldaean king-names, that the language of 
these Chaldaeans differed in no way from the ordinary Semitic 
Babylonian idiom which was practically identical with that of 
Assyria. Consequently, the term " Chaldaean " came quite 
naturally to be used in later days as synonymous with " Baby- 
lonian." When subsequently the Babylonian language went 
out of use and Aramaic took its place, the latter tongue was 
wrongly termed " Chaldee " by Jerome, because it was the only 
language known to him used in Babylonia. This error was 
followed until a very recent date by many scholars. 

The derivation of the name " Chaldaean " is extremely 
uncertain. Peter Jensen has conjectured with slight probability 
that the Chaldaeans were Semitized Sumerians, i.e. a non- 
Semitic tribe which by contact with Semitic influences had lost 
its original character. There seems to be little or no evidence 
to support such a view. Friedrich Delitzsch derived the name 
"Chaldaean" = Kasdim from the non-Semitic Kassites who 
held the supremacy over practically all Babylonia during an 
extended period (c. 1 783-1 200 B.C.). This theory seems also 
to be extremely improbable. It is much more likely that the 
name " Chaldaean " is connected with the Semitic stem kasadu 
(conquer), in which case Kaidi-Kaidi, with the well-known 
interchange of / and s, would mean " conquerors." It is also 
possible that KaSdu-Kaldu is connected with the proper name 
Chesed, who is represented as having been the nephew of 
Abraham (Gen. xxii. 22). There is no connexion whatever 
between the Black Sea peoples called " Chaldaeans " by Xeno- 
phon (Anab. vii. 25) and the Chaldaeans of Babylonia. 

In Daniel, the term " Chaldaeans" is very commonly employed 
with the meaning " astrologers, astronomers," which sense also 
appears in the classical authors, notably in Herodotus, Strabo 
and Diodorus. In Daniel i. 4, by the expression " tongue of 
the Chaldaeans," the writer evidently meant the language in 
which the celebrated Babylonian works on astrology and divina- 
tion were composed. It is now known that the literary idiom 
of the Babylonian wise men was the non-Semitic Sumerian; 
but it is not probable that the late author of Daniel (c. 168 B.C.) 
was aware of this fact. 

The word " Chaldaean " is used in Daniel in two senses. It is 
applied as elsewhere in the Old Testament as a race-name to the 
Babylonians (Dan. iii. 8, v. 30, ix. 1); but the expression is 
used oftener, either as a name for some special class of magicians, 
or as a term for magicians in general (ix. 1). The transfer of the 
name of the people to a special class is perhaps to be explained 
in the following manner. As just shown, " Chaldaean " and 
" Babylonian" had become in later times practically synonymous, 
but the term " Chaldaean " had lived on in the seoondaty re- 
stricted sense of " wise men." The early Kaldi had seized and 
held from very ancient times the region of old Sumer, which 
was the centre of the primitive non-Semitic culture. It seems 
extremely probable that these Chaldaean Semites were so strongly 
influenced by the foreign civilization as to adopt it eventually as 
their own. Then, as the Chaldaeans soon became the dominant 
people, the priestly caste of that region developed into a Chal- 
daean institution. It is reasonable to conjecture that southern 
Babylonia, the home of the old culture, supplied Babylon and 
other important cities with priests, who from their descent were 
correctly called " Chaldaeans." This name in later times, owing 
to the racial amalgamation of the Chaldaeans and Babylonians, 
lost its former national force, and became, as it occurs in Daniel, 
a distinctive appellation of the Babylonian priestly class. It is 
possible, though not certain, that the occurrence of the word kalu 



(priest) in Babylonian, which has no etymological connexion 
with Kaldii, may have contributed paronomastically towards 
the popular use of the term " Chaldaeans " for the Babylonian 
Magi. (See also Astrology.) 

Literature.— Delattre, Les Chaldeens jusqu'a la fond, de Vemp. 
de Nebuch. (1889) ; Winckler, Untersuchungen zur altor. Gesch. 
(1889), pp. 49 ff. ; Gesch. Bab. u. Assyr. (1892), pp. in ff. ; Prince, 
Commentary on Daniel (1899), pp. 59-61; see also Babylonia and 
Assyria and Sumer and Sumerian. (J. D. Pr.) 

CHALDEE, a term sometimes applied to the Aramaic portions 
of the biblical books of Ezra and Daniel or to the vernacular 
paraphrases of the Old Testament (see Targum). The explana- 
tion formerly adopted and embodied in the name Chaldee is 
that the change took place in Babylon. That the so-called 
Biblical Chaldee, in which considerable portions of the books of 
Ezra and Daniel are Written, was really the language of Babylon 
was supposed to be clear from Dan. ii. 4, where the Chaldaeans 
are said to have spoken to the king in Aramaic. But the cunei- 
form inscriptions show that the language of the Chaldaeans was 
Assyrian; and an examination of the very large part of the 
Hebrew Old Testament written later than the exile proves con- 
clusively that the substitution of Aramaic for Hebrew as the 
vernacular of Palestine took place very gradually. Hence 
scholars are now agreed that the term " Chaldee " is a misnomer, 
and that the dialect so called is really the language of the South- 
Western Arameans, who were the immediate neighbours of the 
Jews (W. Wright, Comparative Grammar of the Semitic Languages, 
p. 16). (See Semitic Languages.) 

CHALICE (through a central O. Fr. form of the Lat. calix, 
caiicis, cup), a drinking-vessel of the cup or goblet form, now only 
used of the cup used in the celebration of the Eucharist (q.v,). 
For the various forms which the " chalice " so used has taken, 
see Drinking-Vessels and Plate. When, in the eucharistic 
service, water is mixed with the wine, the " chalice " is known 
as the " mixed chalice." This has been customary both in the 
Eastern and Western Churches from early times. The Armenian 
Church does not use the " mixed chalice." It was used in the 
English Church before the Reformation. According to the 
present law of the English Church, the mixing of the water with 
wine is lawful, if this is not done as part of or during the services, 
i.e. if it is not done ceremonially (Martin v. Mackonochie, 1868, 
L.R. 2 P.C. 365; Read v. Bp. of Lincoln, 1892, A.C. 664).- 

CHALIER, JOSEPH (1747-1793), French Revolutionist. He 
was destined by his family for the church, but entered business, 
and became a partner in a firm at Lyons for which he travelled 
in the Levant, in Italy, Spain and Portugal. He was in Paris in 
1789, and entered into relations with Marat, Camille Desmoulins 
and Robespierre. On his return to Lyons, Chalier was the first 
to be named member of the municipal bureau. He organized 
the national guard, applied the civil constitution of the clergy, 
and regulated the finances of the city so as to tax the rich heavily 
and spare the poor. Denounced to the Legislative Assembly 
by the directory of the department of Rhone-et-Loire for having 
made a nocturnal domiciliary perquisition, he was sent to the 
bar of the Assembly, which approved of his conduct. In the 
election for mayor of Lyons, in November 1792, he was defeated 
by a Royalist. Then Chalier became the orator and leader of 
the Jacobins of Lyons, and induced the other revolutionary clubs 
and the commune of his city to arrest a great number of Royalists 
in the night of the 5th and 6th of February 1793. The mayor, 
supported by the national guard, opposed this project. Chalier 
demanded of the Convention the establishment of a revolutionary 
tribunal and the levy of a revolutionary army at Lyons. The 
Convention refused, and the anti-revolutionary party, encouraged 
by this refusal, took action. On the 29th and 30th of May 1793 
the sections rose; the Jacobins were dispossessed of the muni- 
cipality and Chalier arrested. On the 15th of July, in spite 
of the order of the Convention, he was brought before the 
criminal tribunal of the Rhone-et-Loire, condemned to death, 
and guillotined the next day. The Terrorists paid a veritable 
worship to his memory, as to a martyr of Liberty. 

See N. Wahl, "fitude sur Chalier," in Revue historique, t. xxxiv. ; 
and Les Premieres Annies de la Revolution & Lyon (Paris, 1894). 



8o6 



CHALK 



CHALK, the name given to any soft, pulverulent, pure white 
limestone. The word is an old one, having its origin in the 
Saxon cealc, and the hard form " kalk " is still in use amongst 
the country folk of Lincolnshire. The German Kalk comprehends 
all forms of limestone; therefore a special term, Kreide, is em- 
ployed for chalk — French craie. From being used as a common 
name, denoting a particular material, the word was subsequently 
utilized by geologists as an appellation for the Chalk formation; 
and so prominent was this formation in the eyes of the earlier 
workers that it imposed its name upon a whole system of rocks, 
the Cretaceous (Lat. creta, chalk), although this rock itself is by 
no means generally characteristic of the system as a whole. 

The Chalk formation, in addition to the typical chalk material 
— creta scriptoria — comprises several variations; argillaceous 
kinds — creta marga of Linnaeus — known locally as malm, marl, 
clunch, &c. ; and harder, more stony kinds, called rag, freestone, 
rock, hurlock or harrock in different districts. In certain parts 
of the formation layers of nodular flints (q.v.) abound ; in parts, 
it is inclined to be sandy, or to contain grains of glauconite 
which was originally confounded with another green mineral, 
chlorite, hence the name " chloritic marl " applied to one of the 
subdivisions of the chalk. In its purest form chalk consists of 
from 95 to 99% of calcium carbonate (carbonate of lime); in 
this condition it is composed of a mass of fine granular particles 
held together by a somewhat feeble calcareous cement. The 
particles are mostly the broken tests of foraminifera, along with 
the debris of echinoderm and molluscan shells, and many minute 
bodies, like coccoliths, of somewhat obscure nature. 

The earliest attempts at subdivision of the Chalk formation 
initiated by Wm. Phillips were based upon lithological characters, 
and such a classification as " Upper Chalk with Flints," " Lower 
Chalk without Flints," " Chalk marl or Grey chalk," was generally 
in use in England until W. Whitaker established the following order 
in 1865: — 

Upper Chalk, with flints 

( chalk rock 
Lower Chalk j chalk with few flints 
( chalk without flints 
1 Totternhoe stone 



Chalk Marl 



marl 



In France, a similar system of classification was in vogue, the 
subdivisions being craie blanche, craie Man, craie Moritee, until 
1843 when d'Orbigny proposed the term Senonien for the Upper 
Chalk and Turonien for the Lower; later he divided the Turonien, 
giving the name Cenomanien to the lower portion. The subdivisions 
of d'Orbigny were based upon the fossil contents and not upon the 
lithological characters of the rocks. In 1876 Prof. Ch. Barrois 
showed how d'Orbigny's classification might be applied to the 
British chalk rocks; and this scheme has been generally adopted 
by geologists, although there is some divergence of opinion as to 
the exact position of the base line of the Cenomanian. 

The accompanying table shows the classification now adopted in 
England, with the zonal fossils and the continental names of the 
substages : — 







N. France 




Zonal fossils used in Britain. 


Stages. 


and 


S.E. and 






Belgium. 


S. France. 




■Ostrea lunata (Norfolk) 


Danian? 






">; 






(Trimingham) 


.M 


2 


m 




Belemnitella mucronata 




*3 

J3 


a 


"3 

J3 


A.- 


Actinocamax quadratus 


Upper Chalk 


O 


> 







= Inoceramus lingua in Yorkshire 


Senonian 


bo 


-t-» 






Marsupitestestudinarium j ^intacnnus 


Craie blanche 


a 


to 

O 


c 

CO 


CMicraster cor-anguinum 




.a 


a 


a . 


B.s „ cor-testudinarium 




_c 


< 


-W S3 


\Holaster planus, Chalk rock 




E 


w 

« 
U 


»*< ■ 

•8* 


Terebratulina gracilis 


Middle Chalk 




Turonian 




JD 


S^ 


Rhynchonella Cuvieri, Melbourne rock 


Craie marneuse 


^ 


'S 

co 
G 


CO 
HI'S 

O p 




Lower Chalk, 




Chalk Marl and 


"3 


0> 






Cambridge Green- 


u 


3 


c 




sand 


S* 


CO 


Si : 


Actinocamax plenus 


Cenomanian 


CO 


£ 


uT . 


Holaster subglobosus, Totternhoe stone. 


Craie glauconieuse 


£ 


OS 


Schloenbachia varians. 








§ 



Since Prof. Barrois introduced the zonal system of subdivision 
(C. Evans had used a similar scheme six years earlier), our know- 
ledge of the English chalk has been greatly increased by the work 
of Jukes-Browne and William Hill, and particularly by the 
laborious studies of Dr A. W. Rowe. Instead of employing the 
mixed assemblage of animals indicated as zone fossils in the 
table, A. de Grossouvre proposed a scheme for the north of 
France based upon ammonite faunas alone, which he c'ontended 
would be of more general applicability (Recherches sur la Craie 
Supirieure, Paris, 1901). 

The Upper Chalk has a maximum thickness in England of 
about 1000 ft., but post-cretaceous erosion has removed much 
of it in many districts. It is more constant in character, and 
more typically chalky than the lower stages; flints are abundant, 
and harder nodular beds are limited to the lower portions, where 
some of the compact limestones are known as " chalk rock." 
The thickness of the Middle Chalk varies from about 100 to 240 ft. ; 
flints become scarcer in descending from the upper to the lower 
portions. The whole is more compact than the upper stage, 
and nodular layers are more frequent — the " chalk rock " of 
Dorset and the Isle of Wight belong to this stage. At the base 
is the hard " Melbourne rock." The thickness of the Lower 
Chalk in England varies from 60 to 240 ft. This stage includes 
part of the " white chalk without flints," the " chalk marl," 
and the "grey chalk." The Totternhoe stone is a hard freestone 
found locally in this stage. The basement bed in Norfolk is a 
pure limestone, but very frequently it is marly with grains of 
sand and glauconite, and often contains phosphatic nodules; 
this facies is equivalent to the " Cambridge Greensand " of 
some districts and the "chloritic marl " of others. In Devonshire 
the Lower Chalk has become thin sandy calcareous series. 

The chalk can be traced in England from Flamborough Head 
in Yorkshire, in a south-westerly direction, to the coast of Dorset; 
and it not only underlies the whole of the S.E. corner, where it 
is often obscured by Tertiary deposits, but it can be followed 
across the Channel into northern France. Rocks of the same 
age as the chalk are widespread (see Cretaceous System); 
but the variety of limestone properly called by this name is 
almost confined to the Anglo-Parisian basin. Some chalk occurs 
in the great Cretaceous deposits of Russia, and in Kansas, Iowa, 
Nebraska and S. Dakota in the United States. Hard white 
chalk occurs in Ireland in Antrim, and on the opposite shore of 
Scotland in Mull and Morven. 

Economic Products of the Chalk.— Common chalk has been 
frequently used for rough building purposes, but the more 
important building stones are " Beer stone," from Beer Head 
in Devonshire, " Sutton stone " from a little north of Beer, and 
the " Totternhoe stone." It is burned for lime, and when mixed 
with some form of clay is used for the manufacture of cement; 
chalk marl has been used alone for this purpose. As a manure, 
it has been much used as a dressing for 
clayey land. Flints from the chalk are used 
for road metal and concrete, and have been 
employed in building as a facing for walls. 
Phosphatic nodules for manure have been 
worked from the chloritic marl and Cam- 
bridge Greensand, and to some extent from 
the Middle Chalk. The same material is 
worked at Ciply in Belgium and Picardy in 
France. Chalk is employed in the manu- 
facture of carbonate of soda, in the prepara- 
tion of carbon dioxide, and in many other 
chemical processes; also for making paints, 
crayons and tooth-powder. Whiting or 
Spanish white, used to polish glass and 
metal, is purified chalk prepared by triturat- 
ing common chalk with a large quantity of 
water, which is then decanted and allowed 
to deposit the finely-divided particles it 
holds in suspension. 

Chalk Scenery. — Where exposed at the 
surface, chalk produces rounded, smooth, 



CHALKHILL— "CHALLENGER" EXPEDITION 



807 



grass-covered hills as in the Downs of southern England and the 
Wolds of Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. The hills are often inter- 
sected by clean-cut dry valleys. It forms fine cliffs on the coast 
of Kent, Yorkshire and Devonshire. 

Chalk is employed medicinally as a very mild astringent either 
alone or more usually with other astringents. It is more often 
used, however, for a purely mechanical action, as in the prepara- 
tion hydrargyrum cum creta. As an antacid its use has been 
replaced by other drugs. 

Black chalk or drawing slate is a soft carbonaceous schist, 
which gives a black streak, so that it can be used for drawing or 
writing. Brown chalk is a kind of umber. Red chalk or reddle 
is an impure earthy variety of haematite. French chalk is a 
soft variety of steatite, a hydrated magnesium silicate. 

The most comprehensive account of the British chalk is contained 
in the Memoirs of the Geological Survey of the United Kingdom, 
" The Cretaceous Rocks of Britain," vol. ii. 1903, vol. iii. 1904 
(with bibliography), by Jukes-Browne and Hill. See also " The 
White Chalk of the English Coast," several papers in the Proceedings 
of the Geologists' Association, London, (1) Kent and Sussex, xvi. 1900, 
(2) Dorset, xvii., 1901, (3) Devon, xviii., 1903, (4) Yorkshire, xviii., 
1904. (J. A. H.) 

CHALKHILL, JOHN (fl. 1600?), English poet. Two songs by 
him are included in Izaak Walton's Compleat Angler, and in 1683 
appeared " Thealma and Clearchus. A Pastoral History in 
smooth and easie Verse. Written long since by John Chalkhill, 
Esq., an Acquaintant and Friend of Edmund Spencer " (1683), 
with a preface written five years earlier by Walton. Another 
poem, " Alcilia, Philoparthens Loving Follie " (1595, reprinted 
in vol. x. of the Jahrbuch des deutschen Shakespeare- Vereins) , was 
at one time attributed to him. Nothing further is known of the 
poet, but a person of his name occurs as one of the coroners for 
Middlesex in the later years of Queen Elizabeth's reign. Pro- 
fessor Saintsbury, who included Thealma and Clearchus in vol. ii. 
of his Minor Poets of the Caroline Period (Oxford, 1906), points out 
a marked resemblance between his work and that of William 
Chamberlayne. 

CHALKING THE DOOR, a Scottish custom of landlord and 
tenant law. In former days the law was that " a burgh officer, in 
presence of witnesses, chalks the most patent door forty days 
before Whit Sunday, having made out an execution of 'chalking,' 
in which his name must be inserted, and which must be sub- 
scribed by himself and two witnesses." This ceremony now 
proceeds simply on the verbal order of the proprietor. The 
execution of chalking is a warrant under which decree of removal 
will be pronounced by the burgh court, in virtue of which the 
tenant may be ejected on the expiration of a charge of six days. 

CHALLAMEL, JEAN BAPTISTE MARIUS AUGUSTIN (1818- 
1894), French historian, was born in Paris on the 18th of March 
1818. His writings consist chiefly of popular works, which 
enjoyed great success. The value of some of his books is en- 
hanced by numerous illustrations, e.g. Histoire-musee de la 
Revolution francaise, which appeared in 50 numbers in 1 841-1842 
(3rd ed., in 72 numbers, 1857-1858); Histoire de la mode en 
France; la toilette des femmes depuis I'gpoque gallo-romaine 
jusqu'a nos jours (1874, with 12 plates; new ed., 1880, with 
21 coloured plates). His Memoires du peuple francaise (1865- 
1873) and La France et les Franqais A travers les siecles (1882) at 
least have the merit of being among the first books written on 
the social history of France. In this sense Challamel was a 
pioneer, of no great originality, it is true, but at any rate of 
fairly wide information. He died on the 20th of October 1894. 

CHALLEMEL-LACOUR, PAUL AMAND (1827-1896), French 
statesman, was born at Avranches on the 19th of May 1827. 
After passing through the Ecole Normale Superieure he became 
professor of philosophy successively at Pau and at Limoges. 
The coup d'itat of 1851 caused his expulsion from France for his 
republican opinions. He travelled on the continent, and in 1856 
settled down as professor of French literature at the Polytechnic 
of Zurich. The amnesty of 1 8 59 enabled him to return to France , 
but a projected course of lectures on history and art was im- 
mediately suppressed. He now supported himself by his pen, and 
became a regular contributor to the reviews. On the fall of the 



Second Empire in September 1870 the government of national 
defence appointed him prefect of the department of the Rhone, 
in which capacity he had to suppress the Communist rising at 
Lyons. Resigning his post on the 5th of February 1871, he was 
in January 1872 elected to the National Assembly, and in 1876 
to the Senate. He sat at first on the Extreme Left; but his 
philosophic and critical temperament was not in harmony with 
the recklessness of French radicalism, and his attitude towards 
political questions underwent a steady modification, till the close 
of his life saw him the foremost representative of moderate 
republicanism. During Gambetta's lifetime, however, Challemel- 
Lacour was one of his warmest supporters, and he was for a time 
editor of Gambetta's organ, the Ripublique francaise. In 1879 
he was appointed French ambassador at Bern, and in 1880 
was transferred to London; but he lacked the suppleness and 
command of temper necessary to a successful diplomatist. He 
resigned in 1882, and in February 1883 became minister of foreign 
affairs in the Jules Ferry cabinet, but retired in November 
of the same year. In 1890 he was elected vice-president of the 
Senate, and in 1893 succeeded Jules Ferry as its president. His 
influence over that body was largely due to his clear and reasoned 
eloquence, which placed him at the head of contemporary French 
orators. In 1893 he also became a member of the French 
Academy. He distinguished himself by the vigour with which he 
upheld the Senate against the encroachments of the chamber, but 
in 1895 failing health forced him to resign, and he died in Paris on 
the 26th of October 1896. He published a translation of A. 
Heinrich Ritter's Geschichte der Philosophie (1861); La Philo- 
sophic individualiste: Mude sur Guillaume de Humboldt (1864); 
and an edition of the works of Madame d'Epinay (1869). 

In 1897 appeared Joseph Reinach's edition of the CEuvres oratoires 
de Challemel-Lacour. 

CHALLENGE (O. Fr. chalonge, calenge, &c, from Lat. calumnia, 
originally meaning trickery, from caliii, to deceive, hence a false 
accusation, a " calumny "), originally a charge against a person 
or a claim to anything, a defiance. The term is now particularly 
used of an invitation to a trial of skill in any contest, or to a 
trial by combat as a vindication of personal honour (see Duel), 
and, in law, of the objection to the members of a jury allowed 
in a civil action or in a criminal trial (see Jury). 

"CHALLENGER" EXPEDITION. The scientific results of 
several short expeditions between i860 and 1870 encouraged 
the council of the Royal Society to approach the British govern- 
ment, oil the suggestion of Sir George Richards, hydrographer 
to the admiralty, with a view to commissioning a vessel for 
a prolonged cruise for oceanic exploration. The government 
detailed H.M.S. " Challenger," a wooden corvette of 2306 tons, 
for the purpose. Captain (afterwards Sir) George Nares was 
placed in command, with a naval crew; and a scientific staff 
was selected by the society with Professor (afterwards Sir) C. 
Wyville Thomson as director. The staff included Mr (afterwards 
Sir) John Murray and Mr H. N. Moseley, biologists; Dr von 
Willemoes-Suhm, Commander Tizard, and Mr J. Y. Buchanan, 
chemist and geologist. A complete scheme of instructions was 
drawn up by the society. The " Challenger " sailed from Ports- 
mouth in December 1872. For nearly a year the work of the 
expedition lay in the Atlantic, which was crossed several times. 
Teneriffe, the Bermudas, the Azores, Madeira, the Cape Verd 
Islands, Bahia and Tristan da Cunha were successively visited, 
and in October 1873 the ship reached Cape Town. Steering then 
south-east and east she visited the various islands between 45 
and 50° S., and reached Kerguelen Island in January 1874. 
She next proceeded southward about the meridian of 8o c E. 
She was the first steamship to cross the Antarctic circle, but 
the attainment of a high southerly latitude was not an object of 
the voyage, and early in March the ship left the south polar 
regions and made for Melbourne. Extensive researches were 
now made in the Pacific. The route led by New Zealand, the 
Fiji Islands, Torres Strait, the Banda Sea, and the China Sea to 
Hong Kong. The western Pacific was then explored northward 
to Yokohama, after which the " Challenger " struck across the 
ocean by Honolulu and Tahiti to Valparaiso. She then coasted 



8o8 



CHALLONER— CHALMERS, G 



southward, penetrated the Straits of Magellan, touched at 
Montevideo, recrossed the Atlantic by Ascension and the Azores, 
and reached Sheerness in May 1876. This voyage is without 
parallel in the history of scientific research. The " Challenger " 
Report was issued in fifty volumes (London, 1880-1895), mainly 
under the direction of Sir John Murray, who succeeded Wyville 
Thomson in this work in 1882. Specialists in every branch of 
science assisted in its production. The zoological collections 
alone formed the basis for the majority of the volumes; the 
deep-sea soundings and samples of the deposits, the chemical 
analysis of water samples, the meteorological, water-temperature, 
magnetic, geological, and botanical observations were fully 
worked out, and a summary of the scientific results, narrative 
of the cruise and indices were also provided. 

See also Lord G. Campbell, Log Letters from the " Challenger," 
(1876) ; W. J. J. Spry, Cruise of H.M.S. " Challenger " (1876) ; 
Sir C. Wyville Thomson, Voyage of the " Challenger," The Atlantic, 
Preliminary Account of General Results (1877); J. J. Wild, At 
Anchor; Narrative of Experiences afloat and ashore during the 
Voyage of H.M.S. " Challenger " (1878); H. N. Moseley, Notes by a 
Naturalist on the " Challenger " (1879). 

CHALLONER, RICHARD (1691-1781), English Roman 
Catholic prelate, was born at Lewes, Sussex, on the 29th of 
September 1691. After the death of his father, who was a rigid 
Dissenter, his mother, left in poverty, lived with some Roman 
Catholic families. Thus it came about that he was brought up 
as a Roman Catholic, chiefly at the seat of Mr Holman at 
Warkworth, Northamptonshire, where the Rev. John Gother, 
a celebrated controversialist, officiated as chaplain. In 1704. he 
was sent to the English College at Douai, where he was ordained 
a priest in 17 16, took his degrees in divinity, and was appointed 
professor in that faculty. In 1730 he was sent on the English 
mission and stationed in London. The controversial treatises 
which he published in rapid succession attracted much attention, 
particularly his Catholic Christian Instructed (1737), which was 
prefaced by a witty reply to Dr Conyers Middleton's Letters from 
Rome, showing an Exact Conformity between Popery and Paganism. 
Middleton is said to have been so irritated that he endeavoured 
to put the penal laws in force against his antagonist, who 
prudently withdrew from London. In 1741 Challoner was raised 
to the episcopal dignity at Hammersmith, and nominated co- 
adjutor with right of succession to Bishop Benjamin Petre, 
vicar-apostolic of the London district, whom he succeeded in 
1758. He resided principally in London, but was obliged to 
retire into the country during the " No Popery " riots' of 1780. 
He died on the 12th of January 1781, and was buried at Milton, 
Berkshire. Bishop Challoner was the author of numerous con- 
troversial and devotional works, which have been frequently 
reprinted and translated into various languages. He compiled 
the Garden of the Soul (1740 ?), which continues to be the most 
popular manual of devotion among English-speaking Roman 
Catholics, and he revised an edition of the Douai version of the 
Scriptures (1749-17 50), correcting the language and orthography, 
which in many places had become obsolete. Of his historical 
works the most valuable is one which was intended to be a Roman 
Catholic antidote to Foxe's well-known martyrology. It is 
entitled Memoirs of Missionary Priests and other Catholicks of 
both Sexes who suffered Death or Imprisonment in England on 
account of their Religion, from the year 1577 till the end of 
the reign of Charles II. (2 vols. 1741, frequently reprinted). 
He also published anonymously, in 1745, the lives of English, 
Scotch and Irish saints, under the title of Britannia Sancta, an 
interesting work which has, however, been superseded by that of 
Alban Butler. 

For a complete list of his writings see J. Gillow's Bibl. Diet, of 
Eng. Cath. i. 452-458; Barnard, Life of R. Challoner (1784); 
Flanagan, History of the Catholic Church in England (1857); there 
is also a critical history of Challoner by Rev. E. Burton. , 

CHALMERS, ALEXANDER (1750-1834), Scottish writer, 
was born in Aberdeen on the 29th of March 1759. He was 
educated as a doctor, but gave up this profession for journalism, 
and he was for some time editor of the Morning Herald. Besides 
editions of the works of Shakespeare, Beattie, Fielding, Johnson, 



Warton, Pope, Gibbon, Bolingbroke, he • published A General 
Biographical Dictionary in 32 vols.(i8i2-i8i7); a Glossary to 
Shakspeare (1797); an edition of Steevens's Shakespeare 
(1809); and the British Essayists, beginning with the Taller and 
ending with the Observer, with biographical and historical prefaces 
and a general index. He died in London on the 1 9th of December 

1834. 

CHALMERS, GEORGE (1742-1825), Scottish antiquarian and 
political writer, was born at Fochabers, a village in the county of 
Moray, in 1742. His father, James Chalmers, was a grandson of 
George Chalmers of Pittensear, a small estate in the parish of 
Lhanbryde, now St Andrews-Lhanbryde, in the same county, 
possessed by the main line of the family from about the beginning 
of the 17 th to the middle of the 18th century. After completing 
the usual course at King's College, Aberdeen, young Chalmers 
studied law in Edinburgh for several years. Two uncles on the 
father's side having settled in America, he visited Maryland in 
1763, with the view, it is said, of assisting to recover a tract of 
land of some extent about which a dispute had arisen, and was in 
this way induced to commence practice as a lawyer at Baltimore, 
where for a time he met with much success. Having, however, 
espoused the cause of the Royalist party on the breaking out of 
the American War of Independence, he found it expedient to 
abandon his professional prospects in the New World, and return 
to his native country. For the losses he had sustained as a 
colonist he received no compensation, and several years elapsed 
before he obtained an appointment that placed him in a state of 
comfort and independence. 

In the meantime Chalmers applied himself with great diligence 
and assiduity to the investigation of the history and establish- 
ment of the English colonies in North America; and enjoying 
free access to the state papers and other documents preserved 
among what were then termed the plantation records, he became 
possessed of much important information. His work entitled 
Political Annals of the present United Colonies from their Settlement 
to the Peace of 1763, 4to, London, 1780, was to have formed two 
volumes; but the second, which should have contained the period 
between 1688 and 1763, never appeared. The first volume, 
however, is complete in itself, and traces the original settlement of 
the different American colonies, and the progressive changes in 
their constitutions and forms of government as affected by the 
state of public affairs in the parent kingdom. Independently of 
its value as being compiled from original documents, it bears 
evidence of great research, and has been of essential benefit to 
later writers. Continuing his researches, he next gave to the 
world An Estimate of the Comparative Strength of Britain during 
the Present and Four Preceding Reigns, London, 1782, which passed 
through several editions. At length, in August 1786, Chalmers, 
whose sufferings as a Royalist must have strongly recommended 
him to the government of the day, was appointed chief clerk to 
the committee of privy council on matters relating to trade, a 
situation which he retained till his death in 1825, a period of 
nearly forty years. As his official duties made no great demands 
on his time, he had abundant leisure to devote to his favourite 
studies, — the antiquities and topography of Scotland having 
thenceforth special attractions for his busy pen. 

Besides biographical sketches of Defoe, Sir John Davies, Allan 
Ramsay, Sir David Lyndsay, Churchyard and others, prefixed to 
editions of their respective works, Chalmers wrote a life of 
Thomas Paine, the author of the Rights of Man, which he pub- 
lished under the assumed name of Francis Oldys, A.M., of the 
University of Pennsylvania; and a life of Ruddiman, in which 
considerable light is thrown on the state of litera ture in Scotland 
during the earlier part of the last century. His life of Mary, 
Queen of Scots, in two 4to vols., was first published in 1818. It is 
founded on a MS. left by John Whitaker, the historian of Man- 
chester; but Chalmers informs us that he found it necessary to 
rewrite the whole. The history of that ill-fated queen occupied 
much of his attention, and his last work, A Detection of the Love- 
Letters lately attributed in Hugh Campbell's work to Mary Queen of 
Scots, is an exposure of an attempt to represent as genuine some 
fictitious letters said to have passed between Mary and BothwelL 



CHALMERS, G. P.— CHALMERS, T. 



809 



which had fallen into deserved oblivion. In 1797 appeared his 
Apology for the Believers in the Shakespeare Papers which were 
exhibited in Norfolk Street, followed by other tracts on the same 
subject. These contributions to the literature of Shakespeare 
are full of curious matter, but on the whole display a great waste of 
erudition, in seeking to show that papers which had been proved 
forgeries might nevertheless have been genuine. Chalmers also 
took part in the Junius controversy, and in The Author of Junius 
Ascertained, from a Concatenation of Circumstances amounting 
to Moral Demonstration, Lond. 181 7, 8vo, sought to fix the author- 
ship of the celebrated letters on Hugh Boyd. In 1824 he published 
The Poetical Remains of some of the Scottish Kings, now first 
collected; and in the same year he edited and presented as a con- 
tribution to the Bannatyne Club Robene and Makyne and the 
Testament of Cresseid, by Robert Henryson. His political writings 
are equally numerous. Among them may be mentioned Collec- 
tion of Treaties between Great Britain and other Powers, Lond. 
1790, 2 vols. 8vo; Vindication of the Privileges of the People in 
respect to the Constitutional Right of Free Discussion, &c, Lond. 
1796, 8vo, published anonymously; A Chronological Account of 
Commerce and Coinage in Great Britain from the Restoration till 
1810, Lond. 1810, 8vo; Opinions of Eminent Lawyers on various 
points of English Jurisprudence, chiefly concerning the Colonies, 
Fisheries, and Commerce of Great Britain, Lond. 1814, 2 vols. 
8vo; Comparative Views of the State of Great Britain before and 
since the War, Lond. 1817, 8vo. 

But Chalmers's greatest work is his Caledonia, which, however, 
he did not live to complete. The first volume appeared in 1807, 
and is introductory to the others. It is divided into four books, 
treating successively of the Roman, the Pictish, the Scottish 
and the Scoto-Saxon periods, from 80 to 1306 a.d. In these we are 
presented, in a condensed form, with an account of the people, 
the language and the civil and ecclesiastical history, as well as 
the agricultural and commercial state of Scotland during the 
first thirteen centuries of our era. Unfortunately the chapters 
on the Roman period are entirely marred by the author's having 
accepted as genuine Bertram's forgery De Situ Britanniae; 
but otherwise his opinions on controverted topics are worthy of 
much respect, being founded on a laborious investigation of all 
the original authorities that were accessible to him. The second 
volume, published in 18 10, gives an account of the seven south- 
eastern counties of Scotland — Roxburgh, Berwick, Haddington, 
Edinburgh, Linlithgow, Peebles and Selkirk — each of them being 
treated of as regards name, situation and extent, natural objects, 
antiquities, establishment as shires, civil history, agriculture, 
manufactures and trade, and ecclesiastical history. In 1824, 
after an interval of fourteen years, the third volume appeared, 
giving, under the same headings, a description of the seven 
south-western counties — Dumfries, Kirkcudbright, Wigtown, 
Ayr, Lanark, Renfrew and Dumbarton. In the preface to this 
volume the author states that the materials for the history of 
the central and northern counties were collected, and that he 
expected the work would be completed in two years, but this 
expectation was not destined to be realized. He had also been 
engaged on a history of Scottish poetry and a history of printing 
in Scotland. Each of them he thought likely to extend to two 
large quarto volumes, and on both he expended an unusual 
amount of enthusiasm and energy. He had also prepared for the 
press an elaborate history of the life and reign of David I. In 
his later researches he was assisted by his nephew James, son of 
Alexander Chalmers, writer in Elgin. 

George Chalmers died in London on the 31st of May 1825. 
His valuable and extensive library he bequeathed to his nephew, 
at whose death in 1841 it was sold and dispersed. Chalmers was a 
member of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies of London, an 
honorary member of the Antiquarian Society of Scotland, and 
a member of other learned societies. In private life he was 
undoubtedly an amiable man, although the dogmatic tone that 
disfigures portions of his writings procured him many opponents. 
Among his avowed antagonists in literary warfare the most 
distinguished were Malone and Steevens, the Shakespeare editors; 
Mathias, the author of the Pursuits of Literature; Dr Jamieson, 



the Scottish lexicographer; Pinkerton, the historian; Dr Irving, 
the biographer of the Scottish poets; and Dr Currie of Liverpool. 
But with all his failings in judgment Chalmers was a valuable 
writer. He uniformly had recourse to original sources of in- 
formation; and he is entitled to great praise for his patriotic 
and self-sacrificing endeavours to illustrate the history, literature 
and antiquities of his native country. (J. M'D.; 

CHALMERS, GEORGE PAUL (1836-1878), Scottish painter, 
was born at Montrose, and studied at Edinburgh. His land- 
scapes are now more valued than the portraits which formed his 
earlier work. The best of these are " The End of the Harvest " 
(1873), " Running Water " (1875), and " The Legend " (in the 
National Gallery, Edinburgh). He became an associate (1867) 
and a full member (1 871) of the Scottish Academy. 

CHALMERS, JAMES (1841-1901), Scottish missionary to 
New Guinea, was born at Ardrishaig in Argyll. After serving 
in the Glasgow City Mission he passed through Cheshunt College, 
and, being accepted by the London Missionary Society, was 
appointed to Rarotonga in the South Pacific in 1866. Here the 
natives gave him the well-known name " Tamate." After ten 
years' service, especially in training native evangelists, he was 
transferred to New Guinea. In addition to his enthusiastic but 
sane missionary work, Chalmers did much to open up the island, 
and, with his colleague W. G. Lawes, gave valuable aid in the 
British annexation of the south-east coast of the island. On 
the 8th of April 1901, in company with a brother missionary, 
Oliver Tomkins, he was killed by cannibals at Goaribari Island. 
R. L. Stevenson has left on record his high appreciation of 
Chalmers's character and work. 

Chalmers's Autobiography and Letters were edited by Richard 
Lovett in 1902, who also wrote a popular life called Tamate. 

CHALMERS, THOMAS (1780-1847), Scottish divine, was born 
at Anstruther in Fifeshire, on the 17 th of March 1780. At the 
age of eleven he was entered as a student at St Andrews, where he 
devoted himself almost exclusively to mathematics. In January 
1799 he was licensed as a preacher of the Gospel by the St 
Andrews presbytery. In May 1803, after attending further 
courses of lectures in Edinburgh, and acting as assistant to the 
professor of mathematics at St Andrews, he was ordained as 
minister of Kilmany in Fifeshire, about 9 m. from the university 
town, where he continued to lecture. His mathematical lectures 
roused so much enthusiasm that they were discontinued by order 
of the authorities, who disliked the disturbance of the university 
routine which they involved. Chalmers then opened mathemati- 
cal classes on his own account which attracted many students; 
at the same time he delivered a course of lectures on chemistry, 
and ministered to his parish at Kilmany. In 1805 he became a 
candidate for the vacant professorship of mathematics at 
Edinburgh, but was unsuccessful. In 1808 he published an 
Inquiry into the Extent and Stability of National Resources, a 
contribution to the discussion created by Bonaparte's commercial 
policy. Domestic bereavements and a severe illness then turned 
his thoughts in another direction. At his own request the article 
on Christianity was assigned to him in Dr Brewster's Edinburgh 
Encyclopaedia, and in studying the credentials of Christianity he 
received a new impression of its contents. His journal and letters 
show how he was led from a sustained effort to attain the morality 
of the Gospel to a profound spiritual revolution. After this his 
ministry was marked by a zeal which made it famous. The 
separate publication of his article in the Edinburgh Encyclo- 
paedia, and contributions to the Edinburgh Christian Instructor 
and the Eclectic Review, enhanced his reputation as an author. 
In 181 5 he became minister of the Tron Church, Glasgow, in 
spite of determined opposition to him in the town council on the 
ground of his evangelical teaching. From Glasgow his repute 
as a preacher spread throughout the United Kingdom. A 
series of sermons on the relation between the discoveries of 
astronomy and the Christian revelation was published in January 
181 7, and within a year nine editions and 20,000 copies were in 
circulation. When he visited London Wilberforce wrote, " all 
the world is wild about Dr Chalmers." 

In Glasgow Chalmers made one of his greatest contributions 



8io 



CHALMERS, T. 



to the life of his own time by his experiments in parochial organ- 
ization. His parish contained about n,ooo persons, and of 
these about one-third were unconnected with any church. He 
diagnosed this evil as being due to the absence of personal influ- 
ence, spiritual oversight, and the want of parochial organizations 
which had not kept pace in the city, as they had done in rural 
parishes, with the growing population. He declared that twenty 
new churches, with parishes, should be erected in Glasgow, and 
he set to work to revivify, remodel and extend the old parochial 
economy of Scotland. The town council consented to build one 
new church, attaching to it a parish of 10,000 persons, mostly 
weavers, labourers and factory workers, and this church was 
offered to Dr Chalmers that he might have a fair opportunity 
of testing his system. 

In September 1819 he became minister of the church and 
parish of St John, where of ,'2000 families more than 800 had no 
connexion with any Christian church. He first addressed him- 
self to providing schools for the children. Two school-houses 
with four endowed teachers were established, where 700 children 
were taught at the moderate fees of 2s. and 3s. per quarter. 
Between 40 and 50 local Sabbath schools were opened, where 
more than 1000 children were taught the elements of secular and 
religious education. The parish was divided into 25 districts 
embracing from 60 to 100 families, over each of which an elder 
and a deacon were placed, the former taking oversight of their 
spiritual, the latter of their physical needs. Chalmers was the 
mainspring of the whole system, not merely superintending the 
visitation, but personally visiting all the families, and holding 
evening meetings, when he addressed those whom he had visited. 
This parochial machinery enabled him Jo make a singularly 
successful experiment in dealing with the problem of poverty. 
At this time there were not more than 20 parishes north of the 
Forth and Clyde where there was a compulsory assessment for 
the poor, but the English method of assessment was rapidly 
spreading. Chalmers believed that compulsory assessment 
ended by swelling the evil it was intended to mitigate, and that 
relief should be raised and administered by voluntary means. 
His critics replied that this was impossible in large cities. When 
he undertook the management of the parish of St John's, the 
poor of the parish cost the city £1400 per annum, and in four 
years, by the adoption of his method, the pauper expenditure 
was reduced to £280 per annum. The investigation of all new 
applications for relief was committed to the deacon of the district, 
and every effort was made to enable the poor to help themselves. 
When once the system was in operation it was found that a 
deacon, by spending an hour a week among the families com- 
mitted to his charge, could keep himself acquainted with their 
character and condition. 

In 1823, after eight years of work at high pressure, he was glad 
to accept the chair of moral philosophy at St Andrews, the 
seventh academic offer made to him during his eight years in 
Glasgow. In his lectures he excluded mental philosophy and 
included the whole sphere of moral obligation, dealing with 
man's duty to God and to his fellow-men in the light of Christian 
teaching. Many of his lectures are printed in the first and 
second volumes of his published works. In ethics he made con- 
tributions to the science in regard to the place and functions of 
volition and attention, the separate and underived character of 
the moral sentiments, and the distinction between the virtues 
of perfect and imperfect obligation. His lectures kindled the 
religious spirit among his students, and led some of them to 
devote themselves to missionary effort. In November 1828 he 
was transferred to the chair of theology in Edinburgh. He then 
introduced the practice of following the lecture with a viva voce 
examination on what had been delivered. He also introduced 
text-books, and came into stimulating contact with his people; 
perhaps no one has ever succeeded as he did by the use of these 
methods in communicating intellectual, moral and religious im- 
pulse to so many students. 

These academic years were prolific also in a literature of various 
kinds. In 1826 he published a third volume of the Christian and 
Civic Economy of Large Towns, a continuation of work begun 



at St John's, Glasgow. In 1 83 2 he published a Political Economy, 
the chief purpose of which was to enforce the truth that the 
right economic condition of the masses is dependent on their 
right moral condition, that character is the parent of comfort, 
not vice versa. In 1833 appeared a treatise on The Adaptation of 
External Nature to the Moral and Intellectual Constitution of Man. 
In 1834 Dr Chalmers was elected fellow of the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh, and in the same year he became corresponding 
member of the Institute of France; in- 1835 Oxford conferred on 
him the degree of D.C.L. In 1834 he became leader of the 
evangelical section of the Scottish Church in the General 
Assembly. He was appointed chairman of a committee for 
church extension, and in that capacity made a tour through 
a large part of Scotland, addressing presbyteries and holding 
public meetings. He also issued numerous appeals, with the 
result that in 1841, when he resigned his office as convener of the 
church extension committee, he was able to announce that in 
seven years upwards of £300,000 had been contributed, and 220 
new churches had been built. His efforts to induce the Whig 
government to assist in this effort were unsuccessful. 

In 1 84 1 the movement which ended in the Disruption was 
rapidly culminating, and Dr Chalmers found himself at the 
head of the party which stood for the principle that " no minister 
shall be intruded into any parish contrary to the will of the 
congregation " (see Free Church of Scotland). Cases of con- 
flict between the church and the civil power arose in Auchter- 
arder, Dunkeld and Marnoch; and when the courts made it 
clear that the church, in their opinion, held its temporalities 
on condition of rendering such obedience as the courts required, 
the church appealed to the government for relief. In January 
1843 the government put a final and peremptory negative on 
the church's claims for spiritual independence. On the 18th of 
May 1843 470 clergymen withdrew from the general assembly 
and constituted themselves the Free Church of Scotland, with 
Dr Chalmers as moderator. He had prepared a sustentation 
fund scheme for the support of the seceding ministers, and this 
was at once put into successful operation. On the 30th of May 
1847, immediately after his return from the House of Commons, 
where he had given evidence as to the refusal of sites for Free 
Churches by Scottish landowners, he was found dead in bed. 

Dr Chalmers' action throughout the Free Church controversy 
was so consistent in its application of Christian principle and 
so free from personal or party animus, that his writings are a 
valuable source for argument and illustration on the question 
of Establishment. " I have no veneration," he said to the 
royal commissioners in St Andrews, before either the voluntary 
or the non-intrusive controversies had arisen, " for the Church of 
Scotland qua an establishment, but I have the utmost veneration 
for it qua an instrument of Christian good. " He was transparent 
in character, chivalrous, kindly, firm, eloquent and sagacious; 
his purity of motive and unselfishness commanded absolute con- 
fidence; he had originality and initiative in dealing with new and 
difficult circumstances, and great aptitude for business details. 

During a life of incessant activity Chalmers scarcely ever 
allowed a day to pass without its modicum of composition; 
at the most unseasonable times, and in the most unlikely places, 
he would occupy himself with literary work. His writings 
occupy more than 30 volumes. He would have stood higher as 
an author had he written less, or had he indulged less in that 
practice of reiteration into which he was constantly betrayed by 
his anxiety to impress his ideas upon others. As a political 
economist he was the first to unfold the connexion that subsists 
between the degree of the fertility of the soil and the social 
condition of a community, the rapid manner in which capital 
is reproduced (see Mill's Political Economy, i. 94), and the 
general doctrine of a limit to all the modes by which national 
wealth may accumulate. He was the first also to advance that 
argument in favour of religious establishments which meets 
upon its own ground the doctrine of Adam Smith, that religion 
like other things should be left to the operation of the natural 
law of supply and demand. In the department of natural 
theology and the Christian evidences he ably advocated that 



CHALONER-^CHALON-$UR-SAONE 



8n 



method of reconciling the Mosaic narrative with the indefinite 
antiquity of the globe which William Buckland (1784-1856) 
advanced in his Bridgewater Treatise, and which Dr Chalmers 
had previously communicated to him. His refutation of Hume's 
objection to the truth of miracles is perhaps his intellectual 
chef-d'oeuvre. The distinction between the laws and dispositions 
of matter, as between the ethics and objects of theology, he was 
the first to indicate and enforce, and he laid great emphasis on 
the superior authority as witnesses for the truth of Revelation of 
the Scriptural as compared with the Extra-Scriptural writers, and 
of the Christian as compared with the non-Christian testimonies. 
In his Institutes of Theology, no material modification is attempted 
on the doctrines of Calvinism,which he received with all simplicity 
of faith as revealed in the Divine word, and defended as in 
harmony with the most profound philosophy of human nature 
and of the Divine providence. 

For biographical details see Dr W. Hanna's Memoirs (Edinburgh, 
4 vols., 1849-1852); there is a good short Life by Mrs Oliphant 
(1893). (W. Ha.; D. Mn.) 

CHALONER, SIR THOMAS (1521-1565), English statesman 
and poet, was the son of Roger Chaloner, mercer of London, 
a descendant of the Denbighshire Chaloners. No details are 
known of his youth except that he was educated at both Oxford 
and Cambridge. In 1540 he went, as secretary to Sir Henry 
Knyvett, to the court of Charles V., whom he accompanied in 
his expedition against Algiers in 1541, and was wrecked on the 
Barbary coast. In 1547 he joined in the expedition to Scotland, 
and was knighted, after the battle of Musselburgh, by the 
protector Somerset, whose patronage he enjoyed. In 1549 he 
was a witness against Dr Bonner, bishop of London; in 1551 
against Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester; in the spring 
of the latter year he was sent as a commissioner to Scotland, and 
again in March 1552. In 1553 he went with Sir Nicholas Wotton 
and Sir William Pickering on an embassy to France, but was 
recalled by Queen Mary on her accession. In spite of his Pro- 
testant views, Chaloner was still employed by the government, 
going to Scotland in 1 555-1 556, and providing carriages for 
troops in the war with France, 1557-1558. In 1558 he went as 
Elizabeth's ambassador to the emperor Ferdinand at Cambrai, 
from July 1559 to February 1559/60 he was ambassador to 
King Philip at Brussels, and in 1561 he went in the same capacity 
to Spain. His letters are full of complaints of his treatment 
there, but it was not till 1564, when in failing health, that he 
was allowed to return home. He died at his house in Clerkenwell 
on the 14th of October 1565. He acquired during his years of 
service three estates, Guisborough in Yorkshire, Steeple Claydon 
in Buckinghamshire, and St Bees in Cumberland. He married 
(1) Joan, widow of Sir Thomas Leigh; and(2) Etheldreda,daughter 
of Edward Frodsham, of Elton, Cheshire, by whom he had one 
son, Sir Thomas Chaloner (1561-1615), the naturalist. Chaloner 
was the intimate of most of the learned men of his day, and with 
Lord Burghley he had a life-long friendship. Throughout his 
busy official life he occupied himself with literature, his Latin 
verses and his pastoral poems being much admired by his con- 
temporaries. Chaloner's " Howe the Lorde Mowbray . . . was 
. . . banyshed the Realme, "printed in the 1559 edition of William 
Baldwin's Mirror for Magistrates (repr. in vol. ii. pt. 1 of Joseph 
Haslewood's edition of 181 5), has sometimes been attributed 
to Thomas Churchyard. His most important work, De Rep. 
Anglorum instauranda libri decern, written while he was in Spain, 
was first published by William Malim (1579, 3 pts.), with compli- 
mentary Latin verses in praise of the author by Burghley and 
others. Chaloner's epigrams and epitaphs were also added to 
the volume, as well as In landem Henrici octavi . . . carmen 
Panegericum, first printed in 1 560. Amongst his other works 
are The praise of folie, Moriae encomium ... by Erasmus . . . 
Englished by Sir Thomas Chaloner, Knight (1549, ed. Janet E. 
Ashbee, 1901); A book of the Office of Servantes (1543), translated 
from Gilbert Cognatus; and An homilie of Saint John Chrysostome 
. . . Englished by T. C. (1544). 

See " The Chaloners, Lords of the Manor of St Bees," by William 
Jackson, in Transactions of the Cumberland Assoc, for the Advance- 
ment of Literature and Science, pt. vi. pp. 47-74, 1880-1881. 



CHALONS-SUR-MARNE, a town of north-eastern France, 
capital of the department of Marne, 107 m. E. of Paris on the 
main line of the Eastern railway to Nancy, and 25 m. S.S.E. of 
Reims. Pop. (1906) 22,424. Chalons is situated in a wide level 
plain principally on the right bank of the Marne, its suburb of 
Marne,which contains the railwaystations of the Eastern and Est- 
Etat railways, lying on the left bank. The town proper is bordered 
on the west by the lateral canal of the Marne, across which lies 
a strip of ground separating it from the river itself. Chalons 
is traversed by branches of the canal and by small streams, and 
its streets are for the most part narrow and irregular, but it is 
surrounded by ample avenues and promenades, the park known 
as the Jard, in the south-western quarter, being especially 
attractive. Huge barracks lie to the north and east. There are 
several interesting churches in the town. The cathedral of St 
Etienne dates chiefly from the 13th century, but its west facade 
is in the classical style and belongs to the 17 th century. There 
are stained-glass windows of the 13 th century in the north 
transept. Notre-Dame, of the 12th and 13th centuries, is con- 
spicuous for its four Romanesque towers, two flanking the apse; 
the other two, surmounted by tall lead spires, flanking the 
principal facade. The churches of St. Alpin, St Jean and St 
Loup date from various periods between the nth and the 17th 
centuries. The hotel-de-ville (17 71), facing which stands a 
monument to President Carnot; the prefecture (1759-1764), once 
the residence of the intendants of Champagne; the college, once 
a Jesuit establishment; and a training college which occupies 
the Augustinian abbey of Toussaints (16th and 17th centuries), 
are noteworthy civil buildings. The houses of Chalons are 
generally ill-built of timber and plaster, or rough-cast, but some 
old mansions, dating from the 15 th to the 16th centuries, remain. 
The church of Ste Pudentienne, on the left bank of the river, is a 
well-known place of pilgrimage. The town is the seat of a bishop 
and a prefect, and headquarters of the VI. army corps; it has 
tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a chamber of 
commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, a museum, a library, 
training colleges, a higher ecclesiastical seminary, a communal 
college and an important technical school. The principal industry 
is brewing, which is carried on in the suburb of Marne. Galleries 
of immense length, hewn in a limestone hill and served by lines 
of railway, are used as store-houses for beer. The preparation 
of champagne, the manufacture of boots and shoes, brushes, 
wire-goods and wall-paper also occupy many hands. There is 
trade in cereals. 

Chalons-sur-Marne occupies the site of the chief town of the 
Catalauni, and some portion of the plains which lie between it 
and Troyes was the scene of the defeat of Attila in the conflict 
of 451. In the 10th and following centuries it attained great 
prosperity as a kind of independent state under the supremacy 
of its bishops, who were ecclesiastical peers of France. In 12 14 
the militia of Chalons served at the battle of Bouvines; and in 
the 15th century the citizens maintained their honour by twice 
(1430 and 1434) repulsing the English from their walls. In the 
16th century the town sided with Henry IV., king of France, 
who in 1589 transferred thither the parlement of Paris, which 
shortly afterwards burnt the bulls of Gregory XIV. and Clement 
VIII. In 1856 Napoleon III. established a large camp, known 
as the Camp of Chalons, about 16 m. north of the town by the 
railway to Reims. It was situated in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of Grand Mourmelon and Petit Mourmelon, and occupied 
an area of nearly 30,000 acres. The " Army of CMlons," formed 
by Marshal MacMahon in the camp after the first reverses of the 
French in 1870, marched thence to the Meuse, was surrounded 
by the Germans at Sedan, and forced to capitulate. The camp 
is still a training-centre for troops. 

About 5 m. E. of Chalons is L'Epine, where there is a beautiful 
pilgrimage church (15th and 16th centuries, with modern restora- 
tion) with a richly-sculptured portal. In the interior there is 
a fine choir-screen, an organ of the 16th century, and an ancient 
and much-venerated statue of the Virgin. 

CHALON-SUR-SAONE, a town of east-central France, capital 
of an arrondissement in the department of Saone-et-Loire, 



8l2 



CHALUKYA— CHALYBITE 



81 m. N. of Lyons by the Paris-Lyon railway. Pop. (1906) 
26,538. It is a well-built town, with fine quays, situated in an 
extensive plain on the right bank of the Sa6ne at its junction 
with the Canal du Centre. A handsome stone bridge of the 15th 
century, decorated in the 18th century with obelisks, connects 
it with the suburb of St Laurent on an island in the river. The 
principal building is the church of St Vincent, once the cathedral. 
It dates mainly from the 12th to the 15th centuries, but the 
facade is modern and unpleasing. The old bishop's palace is 
a building of the 15th century. The church of St Pierre, with 
two lofty steeples, dates from the late 17th century. Chalon pre- 
serves remains of its ancient ramparts and a number of old houses. 
The administrative buildings are modern. An obelisk was erected 
in 1730 to commemorate the opening of the canal. There is a 
statue of J. N. Niepce, a native of the town. Chalon is the seat 
of a sub-prefect and a court of assizes, and there are tribunals 
of first instance and commerce, a branch of the Bank of France, 
a chamber of commerce, communal colleges for boys and girls, 
a school of drawing, a public library and a museum. Chalon 
ranks next to Le Creusot among the manufacturing towns of 
Burgundy; its position at the junction of the Canal du Centre 
and the Saone, and as a railway centre for Lyons, Paris, D61e, 
Lons-le-Saunier and Roanne, brings it a large transit trade. The 
founding and working of copper and iron is its main industry; 
the large engineering works of Petit-Creusot, a branch of those 
of Le Creusot, construct bridges, tug-boats and torpedo-boats; 
distilleries, glass-works, chemical works, straw-hat manufactories, 
oil-works, tile-works and sugar refineries also occupy many 
hands. Wine, grain, iron, leather and timber are among the 
many products for which the town is an entrepot. About 2 m. 
east of Chalon is St Marcel (named after the saint who in the 
2nd century preached Christianity at Chalon) , which has a church 
of the 1 2 th century, once belonging to a famous abbey. 

Chalon-sur-Saone is identified with the ancient CabUlonum, 
originally an important town of the Aedui. It was chosen in 
the 6th century by Gontram, king of Burgundy, as his capital; 
and it continued till the 10th to pay for its importance by being 
frequently sacked. The bishopric, founded in the 4th century, was 
suppressed at the Revolution. In feudal times Chalon Was the 
capital of a countship. In 1 23 7 it was given in exchange for other 
fiefs in the Jura by Jean le Sage, whose descendants neverthe- 
less retained the title. Hugh IV., duke of Burgundy, the other 
party to the exchange, gave the citizens a communal charter 
in 1256. In its modern history the most important event was 
the resistance offered to a division of the Austrian army in 
1814. 

CHALUKYA, the name of an Indian dynasty which ruled 
in the Deccan from a.d. 550 to 750, and again from 973 to 1190. 
The Chalukyas themselves claimed to be Rajputs from the north 
who imposed their rule on the Dravidian inhabitants of the 
Deccan tableland, and there is some evidence for connecting 
them with the Chapas, a branch of the foreign Gurjaras. The 
dynasty was founded by a chief named Pulakesin I., who 
mastered the town of Vatapi (now Badami, in the Bijapur 
district) about 550. His sons extended their principality east 
and west; but the founder of the Chalukya greatness was his 
grandson Pulakesin II., who succeeded in 608 and proceeded 
to extend his rule at the expense of his neighbours. In 609 he 
established as his viceroy in Vengi his brother Kubja Vishnu- 
vardhana, who in 615 declared his independence and established 
the dynasty of Eastern Chalukyas, which lasted till 1070. In 
620 Pulakesin defeated Harsha (q.v.), the powerful overlord of 
northern India, and established the Nerbudda as the boundary 
between the South and North. He also defeated in turn the 
Chola, Pandya and Kerala kings, and by 630 was beyond 
dispute the most powerful sovereign in the Deccan. In 642, 
however, his capital was taken and he himself killed by the 
Pallava king Narasimhavarman. In 6 5 5 the Chalukya power was 
restored by Pulakesin's son Vikramaditya I.; but the struggle 
with the Pallavas continued until, in 740, Vikramaditya II. 
destroyed the Pallava capital. In 750 Vikramaditya's son, 
Kirtivarman Chalukya, was overthrown by the Rashtrakutas. 



In 973, Taila or Tailapa II. (d. 995), a scion of the royal 
Chalukya race, succeeded in overthrowing the Rashtrakuta 
king Kakka II., and in recovering all the ancient territory of 
the Chalukyas with the exception of Gujarat. He was the founder 
of the dynasty known as the Chalukyas of Kalyani. About a.d. 
1000 a formidable invasion by the Chola king Rajaraja the 
Great was defeated, and in 1052 Somesvara I., or Ahama valla 
(d. 1068), the founder of Kalyani, defeated and slew the Chola 
Rajadhiraja. The reign of Vikramaditya VI., or Vikramanka, 
which lasted from 1076 to 1126, formed another period of 
Chalukya greatness. Vikramanka's exploits against the Hoysala 
kings and others, celebrated by the poet Bilhana, were held to 
justify him in establishing a new era dating from his accession. 
With his death, however, the Chalukya power began to decline. 
In 1 1 56 the commander-in-chief Bijjala (or Vijjana) Kalachurya 
revolted, and he and his sons held the kingdom till n 83. In 
this year Somesvara IV. Chalukya recovered part of his patri- 
mony, only to succumb, about 11 90, to the Yadavas of Devagiri 
and the Hoysalas of Dorasamudra. Henceforth the Chalukya 
rajas ranked only as petty chiefs. 

See J. F. Fleet, Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts; Prof. R. G. 
Bhandarker, " Early History of the Deccan," in the Bombay 
Gazetteer (1896), vol. i. part ii.; Vincent A. Smith, Early Hist, of 
India (Oxford, 1908), pp. 382 ff. 

CHALYBAUS, HEINRICH MORltZ (1 796-1862), German 
philosopher, was born at Pfaffroda in Saxony. For some years 
he taught at Dresden, and won a high reputation by his lectures 
on the history of philosophy in Germany. In 1839 he became 
professor in Kiel University, where, with the exception of one 
brief interval, when he was expelled with several colleagues 
because of his German sympathies, he remained till his death. 
His first published work, Historische Entwickelung der spekula- 
tiven Philosophic von Kant bis Hegel (1837, 5th ed. i860), which 
still ranks among the best expositions of modern German thought, 
has been twice translated into English, by A. Tulk (London, 
1854), and by A. Edersheim (Edinburgh, 1854). His chief works 
are Entwurf eines Systems der Wissenschaftslehre (Kiel, 1846) 
and System der spekulativen Ethik (2 vols., 1850). He opposed 
both the extreme realism of Herbart and what he regarded as 
the one-sided idealism of Hegel, and endeavoured to find a mean 
between them, to discover the ideal or formal principle which 
unfolds itself in the real or material world presented to it. 
His Wissenschaftslehre, accordingly, divides itself into (1) 
Principlehre, or theory of the one principle; (2) Vermittelungs- 
lehre, or theory of the means by which this principle realizes 
itself ; and (3) Teleologie. The most noticeable point is the position 
assigned by Chalybaus to the " World Ether," which is defined 
as the infinite in time and space, and which, he thinks, must 
be posited as necessarily coexisting with the Infinite Spirit or 
God. The fundamental principle of the System der Ethik is 
carried out with great strength of thought, and with an unusually 
complete command of ethical material. 

See J. E. Erdmann, Grundriss der Gesch. d. Philos. ii. 781-786; 
K. Prantl, in Allgem. deutsch. Biog. 

CHALYBITE, a mineral species consisting of iron carbonate 
(FeC0 3 ) and forming an important ore of iron. It was early 
known as spathose iron, spathic iron or steel ore. F. S. Beudant 
in 1832 gave the name siderose (from alh)pos, iron), which was 
modified by W. Haidinger in 1845 to siderite. Chalybite (from 
XaXi^, x<iXuj3os, Lat. chalybs, steel) is of slightly later date, 
having been given by E. F. Glocker in 1847. The name siderite 
is in common use, but it is open to objection since it had earlier 
been applied to several other species, and is also now used as a 
group name for meteoric irons. Chalybite crystallizes in the 
rhombohedral system and is isomorphous with calcite; like this 
it possesses perfect cleavages parallel to the faces of the primitive 
rhombohedron, the angles between which are 73 o'. Crystals 
are usually rhombohedral in habit, and the primitive rhombo- 
hedron r {iooj is a common form, the faces being often curved 
as represented in the figure. Acute rhombohedra in combination 
with the basal pinacoid are also frequent, giving crystals of 
octahedral aspect. The mineral often occurs in cleavable 



CHAMBA— CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



813 




Crystal of Chalybite. 



masses with a coarse or fine granular texture; also in botryoidal 
or globular (sphaerosiderite) and oolitic forms. When compact 
and mixed with much clay and sand it constitutes the well- 
known clay ironstone. Chalybite is usually yellowish-grey or 
brown in colour; it is translucent and has a vitreous lustre. 
Hardness 3!; sp. gr. 3-8. The double refraction (w-« = o-24i) 
is stronger than that of calcite. When pure it contains 48-2% 

of iron, but this is often partly 
replaced isomorphously by man- 
ganese, magnesium or calcium: the 
varieties known as oligon-spar or 
oligonite, sideroplesite and sidero- 
dote contain these elements respec- 
tively in large amount. These 
varieties form a passage to ankerite 
(q.v.) and mesitite, and all are 
referred to loosely as brown-spar. 
Chalybite is a common gangue mineral in metalliferous veins, 
and well-crystallized specimens are found with ores of copper, 
lead, tin, &c, in Cornwall, the Harz, Saxony and niany other 
places. It also occurs alone as large masses in veins and beds 
in rocks of various kinds. The clay ironstone so extensively 
worked as an ore of iron occurs as nodules and beds in the Coal 
Measures of England and the United States, and the oolitic iron 
ore of the Cleveland district in Yorkshire forms beds in the Lias. 
The mineral is occasionally found as concretionary masses 
(sphaerosiderite) in cavities in basic igneous rocks such as 
dolerite. (L. J. S.) 

CHAMBA, a native state of India, within the Punjab, amid 
the Himalayas, and lying on the southern border of Kashmir. 
It has an area of 3216 sq. m. Pop. (1001) 127,834. The sana- 
torium of Dalhousie, though within the state, is attached to the 
district of Gurdaspur. Chamba is entirely mountainous; in 
the east and north, and in the centre, are snowy ranges. The 
valleys in the west and south are fertile. The chief rivers are the 
Chandra and Ravi. The country is much in favour with sports- 
men. The principal crops are rice, maize and millet. Mineral 
ores of various kinds are known, but unworked. Trade is 
chiefly in forest produce. The capital of the state is Chamba 
(pop. 6000), situated above the gorge of the Ravi. External 
communications are entirely by road. The state was founded 
in the 6th century, and, though sometimes nominally subject 
to Kashmir and afterwards tributary to the Mogul empire, 
always practically maintained its independence. Its chronicles 
are preserved in a series of inscriptions, mostly engraved on 
copper. It first came under British influence in 1846, when it 
was declared independent of Kashmir. The line of the rajas of 
Chamba was founded in the 6th century a.d. by Marut, of 
an ancient family of Rajputs. In 1904 Bhuri Singh, K.C.S.I., 
CLE., an enlightened and capable ruler, succeeded. 

CHAMBAL, a river of India, one of the principal tributaries 
of the Jumna. Rising amid the summits of the Vindhya 
mountains in Malwa, it flows north, and after being joined by 
1 he Chambla and Sipra, passes through the gorges of the Mokan- 
darra hills. After receiving the waters of the Kali-Sind, Parbati 
and Banas, its principal confluents, the Chambal becomes a 
great river, enters the British district of Etawah, and joins 
the Jumna 40 m. below Etawah town, its total length being 
650 m. 

CHAMBERLAIN, JOSEPH (1836- ), British statesman, 
third son of Joseph Chamberlain, master of the Cordwainers' 
Company, was born at Camberwell Grove, London, on the 8th 
of July 1836. His father was a well-to-do man of business, a 
Unitarian in religion and a Liberal in politics. Young Chamber- 
lain was educated at Canonbury from 1845 to 1850, and at 
University College school, London, from 1850 to 1852. After 
two years in his father's office in London, he was sent to Birming- 
ham to join his cousin Joseph Nettlefold in a screw business in 
which his father had an interest; and ljy degrees, largely owing 
to his own intelligent management, this business became very 
successful. Nettlefold & Chamberlain employed new methods 
of attracting customers, and judiciously amalgamated rival 



firms with their own so as to reduce competition, with the result 
that in 1874, after twenty-two years of commercial life, Mr 
Chamberlain was able to retire with an ample fortune. Mean- 
while he had in 1861 married his first wife, Miss Harriet Kenrick 
(she died in 1863), and had gradually come to take an increasingly 
important part in the municipal and political life of Birmingham. 
He was a constant speaker at the Birmingham and Edgbaston 
Debating Society; and when in 1868 the Birmingham Liberal 
Association was reorganized, he became one of its leading 
members. In 1869 he was elected chairman of the executive 
council of the new National Education League, the outcome 
of Mr George Dixon's movement for promoting the education 
of the children of the lower classes by paying their school fees, 
and agitating for more accommodation and a better national 
system. In the same year he was elected a member of the town 
council, and married his second wife — a cousin of his first- 
Miss Florence Kenrick (d. 1875). 

In 1870 he was elected a member of the first school board for 
Birmingham; and for the next six years, and especially after 
1873, when he became leader of a majority and chairman, he 
actively championed the Nonconformist opposition to denomina- 
tionalism. He was then regarded as a Republican — the term 
signifying rather that he held advanced Radical opinions, which 
were construed by average men in the light of the current 
political developments in France, than that he really favoured 
Republican institutions. His programme was " free Church, 
free land, free schools, free labour." At the general election of 
1874 he stood as a parliamentary candidate for Sheffield, but 
without success. Between 1869 and 1873 he was a prominent 
advocate in the Birmingham town council of the gospel of 
municipal reform preached by Mr Dawson, Dr Dale and Mr 
Bunce (of the Birmingham Post); and in 1873 his party obtained 
a majority, and he was elected mayor, an office he retained until 
June 1876. As mayor he had to receive the prince and princess 
of Wales on their visit in June 1874, an occasion which excited 
some curiosity because of his reputation as a Republican; but 
those who looked for an exhibition of bad taste were disappointed, 
and the behaviour of the Radical mayor satisfied the require- 
ments alike of The Times and of Punch. 

The period of his mayoralty was one of historic importance 
in the growth of modern Birmingham. New municipal buildings 
were erected, Highgate Park was opened as a place of recreation, 
the free library and art gallery were developed. But the great 
work carried through by Mr Chamberlain for Birmingham Was 
the municipalization of the supply of gas and Water, and the 
improvement scheme by which slums were cleared away and 
forty acres laid out in new streets and open spaces. The pros- 
perity of modern Birmingham dates from 1875 and 1876, when 
these admirably administered reforms were initiated, and by 
his share in them Mr Chamberlain became not only one of its 
most popular citizens but also a man of mark outside. An orator 
of a business-like, straightforward type, cool and hard-hitting, 
his spare figure, incisive features and single eye-glass soon made 
him a favourite subject for the caricaturist; and in later life 
his aggressive personality, and the peculiarly irritating effect it 
had on his opponents, made his actions and speeches the object 
of more controversy than was the lot of any other politician of 
his time. His hobby for orchid-growing at his house " Highbury " 
near Birmingham also became famous. In private life his loyalty 
to his friends, and his "genius for friendship " (as John Morley 
said) made a curious contrast to his capacity for arousing the 
bitterest political hostility. It may be added here that tjie 
interest taken by him in Birmingham remained undiminished 
during his life, and he was largely instrumental in starting the 
Birmingham University (1900), of which he became chancellor. 
His connexion with Birmingham University was indeed peculiarly 
appropriate to his character as a man of business; but in 
spite of his representing a departure among men of the front 
rank in politics from the " Eton and Oxford " type, his general 
culture sometimes surprised those who did not know him. 
In later life Oxford- and Cambridge gave him their doctors' 
degrees; and in 1897 he was made lord rector of Glasgow 



8 14 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



University (delivering an address on " Patriotism " at his 
installation). 

In 1876 Mr Dixon resigned his seat in parliament, and Mr 
Chamberlain was returned for Birmingham in his place unopposed, 
as John Bright's colleague. He made his maiden speech in the 
House of Commons on the 4th of August 1876, on Lord Sandon's 
Education Bill. At this period, too, he paid much attention 
to the question of licensing reform, and in 1876 he examined the 
Gothenburg system in Sweden, and advocated a solution of the 
problem in England on similar lines. During 1877 the new 
federation of Liberal Associations which became known as the 
" Caucus " was started under Mr Chamberlain's influence in 
Birmingham — its secretary, Mr Schnadhorst, quickly making 
himself felt as a wire-puller of exceptional ability; and the new 
organization had a remarkable effect in putting life into the 
Liberal party, which since Mr Gladstone's retirement in 1874 
had been much in need of a stimulus. When the general election 
came in 1880, Mr Schnadhorst's powers were demonstrated in 
the successes won under his auspices. The Liberal party numbered 
349, against 243 Conservatives and 60 Irish Nationalists; and 
the Radical section of the Liberal party, led by Mr Chamberlain 
and Sir Charles Dilke, was recognized by Mr Gladstone by his 
inclusion of the former in his cabinet as president of the Board 
of Trade, and the appointment of the latter as under secretary for 
foreign affairs. In his new capacity Mr Chamberlain was re- 
sponsible for carrying such important measures as the Bank- 
ruptcy Act 1883, and the Patents Act. Another bill which he 
had much at heart, on merchant shipping, had to be abandoned, 
and a royal commission substituted, but the subsequent legis- 
lation in 1888-1894 owed much to his efforts. The Franchise 
Act of 1884 was also one in which he took a leading part as a 
champion of the opinions of the labouring class. At this time 
he took the current advanced Radical views of both Irish and 
foreign policy, hating " coercion," disliking the occupation of 
Egypt, and prominently defending the Transvaal settlement after 
Majuba. Both before and after the defeat of Mr Gladstone's 
government on the Budget in June 1885, he associated himself 
with what was known as the " Unauthorized Programme," i.e. 
free education, small holdings, graduated taxation and local 
government. In June 1885 he made a speech at Birmingham, 
treating the reforms just mentioned as the " ransom " that 
property must pay to society for the security it enjoys — for 
which Lord Iddesleigh called him " Jack Cade "; and he 
continually urged the Liberal party to take up these Radical 
measures. At the general election of November 1885 Mr 
Chamberlain was returned for West Birmingham. The Liberal 
strength generally was, however, reduced to 335 members, 
though the Radical section held their own; and the Irish vote 
became necessary to Mr Gladstone if he was to command a 
majority. In December it was stated that Mr Gladstone in- 
tended to propose Home Rule for Ireland, and in January Lord 
Salisbury's ministry was defeated on the Address, on an amend- 
ment moved by Mr Chamberlain's Birmingham henchman, 
Mr Jesse Collings (b. 1831), embodying the " three acres and a 
cow " of the Radical programme. Unlike Lord Hartington (after- 
wards duke of Devonshire) and other Liberals, who declined to 
join Mr Gladstone in view of the altered attitude he was adopting 
towards Ireland, Mr Chamberlain entered the cabinet as presi- 
dent of the Local Government Board (with Mr Jesse Collings 
as parliamentary secretary), but on the 15th of March 1886 he 
resigned, explaining in the House of Commons (8th April) that, 
while he had always been in favour of the largest possible ex- 
tension of local government to Ireland consistently with the 
integrity of the empire and the supremacy of parliament, and 
had therefore joined Mr Gladstone when he believed that this 
was what was intended, he was unable to consider that the 
scheme communicated by Mr Gladstone to his colleagues main- 
tained those limitations. At the same time he was not irreconcil- 
able, and he invited Mr Gladstone even then to modify his bill 
so as to remove the objections made to it. This indecisive 
attitude did not last long, and the split in the party rapidly 
widened. At Birmingham Mr Chamberlain was supported by 



the " Two Thousand," but deserted by the " Caucus " and Mr 
Schnadhorst. In May the Radicals who followed Mr Bright 
and Mr Chamberlain, and the Whigs who took their cue from 
Lord Hartington, decided to vote against the second reading 
of the Home Rule Bill, instead of allowing it to be taken and 
then pressing for modifications in committee, and on 7 th June 
the bill was defeated by 343 to 313, 94 Liberal Unionists— as 
they were generally called — voting against the government. 
Mr Chamberlain was the object of the bitterest attacks from the 
Gladstonians for his share in this result; he was stigmatized as 
" Judas," and open war was proclaimed by the Home Rulers 
against the " dissentient Liberals "—the description used by Mr 
Gladstone. The general election, however, returned to parlia- 
ment 316 Conservatives, 78 Liberal Unionists, and only 276 
Gladstonians and Nationalists, Birmingham returning seven 
Unionist members. When the House met in August, it was 
decided by the Liberal Unionists, under Lord Hartington's 
leadership, that their policy henceforth was essentially to combine 
with the Tories to keep Mr Gladstone out. The old Liberal feeling 
still prevailing among them was too strong, however, for their 
leaders to take office in a coalition ministry. It was enough for 
them to be able to tie down the Conservative government to such 
measures as were not offensive to Liberal Unionist principles. 
It still seemed possible, moreover, that the Gladstonians might 
be brought to modify their Home Rule proposals, and in January 
1887 a Round Table conference (suggested by Mr Chamberlain) 
was held between Mr Chamberlain, Sir G. Trevelyan, Sir William 
Harcourt, Mr Morley and Lord Herschell. But no rapproche- 
ment was effected, and reconciliation became daily more and 
more difficult. The influence of Liberal Unionist views upon 
the domestic legislation of the government was steadily bring- 
ing about a more complete union in the Unionist party, and 
destroying the old fines of political cleavage. Before 1892 Mr 
Chamberlain had the satisfaction of seeing Lord Salisbury's 
ministry pass such important acts, from a progressive point of 
view, as those dealing with Coal Mines Regulation, Allotments, 
County Councils, Housing, of the Working Classes, Free Educa- 
tion and Agricultural Holdings, besides Irish legislation like the 
Ashbourne Act, the Land Act of 1891, and the Light Railways 
and Congested Districts Acts. In October 1887 Mr Chamberlain, 
Sir L. Sackville West and Sir Charles Tupper were selected by 
the government as British plenipotentiaries to discuss with the 
United States the Canadian fisheries dispute, and a treaty was 
arranged by them at Washington on the 15th of February 1888. 
The Senate refused to ratify it; but a protocol provided for a 
modus vivendi pending ratification, giving American fishing vessels 
similar advantages to those contemplated in the treaty; and on 
the whole Mr Chamberlain's mission to America was accepted 
as a successful one in maintaining satisfactory relations with the 
United States. He returned to England in March 1888, and was 
presented with the freedom of the borough of Birmingham. The 
visit also resulted, in November 1888, in his marriage with his 
third wife, Miss Endicott, daughter of the United States secretary 
of war in President Cleveland's first administration. 

At the general election of 1892 Mr Chamberlain was again 
returned, with an increased majority, for West Birmingham; 
but the Unionist party as a whole came back with only 315 
members against 355 Home Rulers. In August Lord Salisbury's 
ministry was defeated; and on the 13th of February r893 Mr 
Gladstone introduced his second Home Rule Bill, which was 
eventually read a third time on the 1st of September. During 
the eighty-two days' discussion in the House of Commons Mr 
Chamberlain was the life and soul of the opposition, and his 
criticisms had a vital influence upon the attitude of the country 
when the House of Lords summarily threw out the bill. His 
chief contribution to the discussions during the later stages of 
the Gladstone and Rosebery ministries was in connexion with 
Mr Asquith's abortive Employers' Liability Bill, when he fore- 
shadowed the method of dealing with this question afterwards 
carried out in the Compensation Act of 1897. Outside parliament 
he was busy formulating proposals for old age pensions, which 
had a prominent place in the Unionist programme of 1895. In 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



8i5 



that year, on the defeat of Lord Rosebery, the union of the 
Unionists was sealed by the inclusion of the Liberal Unionist 
leaders in Lord Salisbury's ministry; and Mr Chamberlain 
became secretary of state for the colonies. There had been much 
speculation as to what his post would be, and his nomination 
to the colonial office, then considered one of secondary rank, 
excited some surprise; but Mr Chamberlain himself realized 
how important that department had become. He carried with 
him into the ministry his close Birmingham municipal associates, 
Mr Jesse Collings (as under secretary of the home office), and Mr 
J. Powell- Williams (1 840-1 904) as financial secretary to the war 
office. Mr Chamberlain's influence in the Unionist cabinet was 
soon visible in the Workmen's Compensation Act and other 
measures. This act, though in Sir Matthew White Ridley's charge 
as home secretary, was universally and rightly associated with 
Mr Chamberlain; and its passage, in the face of much interested 
opposition from highly-placed, old-fashioned conservatives and 
capitalists on both sides, was principally due to his determined 
advocacy. Another " social " measure of less importance, which 
formed part of the Chamberlain programme, was the Small 
Houses Acquisition Act of 1899; but the problem of old age 
pensions was less easily solved. This subject had been handed 
over in 1893 to a royal commission, and further discussed by a 
select committee in 1899 and a departmental committee in 1900, 
but both of these threw cold water on the schemes laid before 
them — a result which, galling enough to one who had made so 
much play with the question in the country, offered welcome 
material to his opponents for electioneering recrimination, as 
year by year went by between 1895 and 1900 and nothing re- 
sulted from all the confident talk on the subject in which Mr 
Chamberlain had indulged when out of office. Eventually it 
was the Liberal and not the Unionist party that carried an Old 
Age Pensions scheme through parliament, during the 1908 
session, when Mr Chamberlain was hors de combat. 

From January 1896 (the date of the Jameson Raid) onwards 
South Africa demanded the chief attention of the colonial 
secretary (see South Africa, and for details Transvaal). In 
his negotiations with President Kruger one masterful tempera- 
ment was pitted against another. Mr Chamberlain had a very 
difficult part to play, in a situation dominated by suspicion on 
both sides, and while he firmly insisted on the rights of Great 
Britain and of British subjects in the Transvaal, he was the 
continual object of Radical criticism at home. Never -has a 
statesman's personality been more bitterly associated by his 
political opponents with the developments they deplored. 
Attempts were even made to ascribe financial motives to Mr 
Chamberlain's actions, and the political atmosphere was thick 
with suspicion and scandal. The report of the Commons com- 
mittee (July 1897) definitely acquitted both Mr Chamberlain 
and the colonial office of any privity in the Jameson Raid, but 
Mr Chamberlain's detractors continued to assert the contrary. 
Opposition hostility reached such a pitch that in 1899 there was 
hardly an act of the cabinet during the negotiations with Presi- 
dent Kruger which was not attributed to the personal malignity 
and unscrupulousness of the colonial secretary. The elections of 
1900 (when he was again returned, unopposed, for West Birming- 
ham) turned upon the individuality of a single minister more 
than any since the days of Mr Gladstone's ascendancy, and Mr 
Chamberlain, never conspicuous for inclination to turn his other 
cheek to the smiter,was not slow to return the blows with interest. 

Apart from South Africa, his most important work at this time 
was the successful passing of the Australian Commonwealth Act 
(1900), in which both tact and firmness were needed to settle 
certain differences between the imperial government and the 
colonial delegates. 

Mr Chamberlain's tenure of the office of colonial secretary 
between 1895 and 1900 must always be regarded as a turning- 
point in the history of the relations between the British colonies 
and the mother country. His accession to office was marked by 
speeches breathing a new spirit of imperial consolidation, em- 
bodied either in suggestions for commercial union or in more 
immediately practicable proposals for improving the " imperial 



estate "; and at the Diamond Jubilee of 1897 the visits of the 
colonial premiers to London emphasized and confirmed the new 
policy, the fruits of which were afterwards seen in the cordial 
support given by the colonies in the Boer War. Even in what 
Mr Chamberlain called his " Radical days " he had never 
supported the " Manchester " view of the value of a colonial 
empire; and during the Gladstone ministry of 1882-1885 Mr 
Bright had remarked that the junior member for Birmingham 
was the only Jingo in the cabinet — meaning, no doubt, that 
he objected to the policy of laissez-faire and the timidity of what 
was afterwards known as " Little Englandism." While he was 
still under Mr Gladstone's influence these opinions were kept in 
subordination; but Mr Chamberlain was always an imperial 
federationist, and from 1887 onwards he constantly gave ex- 
pression to his views on the desirability of drawing the different 
parts of the empire closer together for purposes of defence and 
commerce. In 1895 the time for the realization of these views 
had come; and Mr Chamberlain's speeches, previously remark- 
able chiefly for debating power and directness of argument, 
were nowdominated by a newnote of constructive statesmanship, 
basing itself on the economic necessities of a world-wide empire. 
Not the least of the anxieties of the colonial office during this 
period was the situation in the West Indies, where the cane- 
sugar industry was being steadily undermined by the European 
bounties given to exports of continental beet; and though the 
government restricted themselves to attempts at removing the 
bounties by negotiation and to measures for palliating the worst 
effects in the West Indies, Mr Chamberlain made no secret of his 
repudiation of the Cobden Club view that retaliation would be 
contrary to the doctrines of free trade, and he did his utmost 
to educate public opinion at home into understanding that the 
responsibilities of the mother country are not merely to be con- 
strued according to the selfish interests of a nation of consumers. 
As regards foreign affairs, Mr Chamberlain more than once (and 
particularly at Leicester on 30th November 1899) indicated his 
leanings towards a closer understanding between the British 
empire, the United States and Germany, — a suggestion which 
did not save him from an extravagant outburst of German 
hostility during the Boer War. The unusually outspoken and 
pointed expression, however, of his disinclination to submit to 
Muscovite duplicity or to " pin-pricks " or " unmannerliness " 
from France was criticized on the score of discretion by a wider 
circle than that of his political adversaries. 

During the progress of the Boer War from 1899 to 1902, Mr 
Chamberlain, as the statesman who had represented the cabinet 
in the negotiations which led to it, remained the object of constant 
attacks from his Radical opponents — the " little Englanders " 
and " Pro-Boers," as he called them — and he was supported by 
the Imperialist and Unionist party with at least equal ardour. 
But as colonial secretary, except in so far as his consistent 
support of Lord Milner and his enthusiastic encouragement of 
colonial assistance were concerned, he naturally played only a 
subordinate part during the carrying out of the military opera- 
tions. Among domestic statesmen he was felt, however, to be the 
backbone of the party in power. He was the hero of the one 
side, just as he was the bugbear of the other. On the 13th of 
February 1902 he was presented with an address in a gold casket 
by the city corporation, and entertained at luncheon at the 
Mansion House, an honour not unconnected with the strong 
feeling recently aroused by his firm reply (at Birmingham, 
January n) to some remarks made by Count von Biilow, the 
German chancellor, in the Reichstag (January 8), reflecting the 
offensive allegations current in Germany against the conduct 
of the army in South Africa. Mr Chamberlain's speech, in answer 
to what had been intended as a contemptuous rebuke, was uni- 
versally applauded. His own imperialism was intensified by the 
way in which England's difficulties resulted in calling forth 
colonial assistance and so cementing the bonds of empire. The 
domestic crisis, and the sharp cleavage between parties at home, 
had driven the bent of his mind and policy further and further 
away from the purely municipal and national ideals which he 
had followed so keenly before he became colonial minister. The 



8i6 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



problems of empire engrossed him, and a new enthusiasm for 
imperial projects arose in the Unionist party under his inspira- 
tion. No English statesman probably has ever been, at different 
times in his career, so able an advocate of absolutely contra- 
dictory policies, and his opponents were not slow to taunt him 
with quotations from his earlier speeches. As the war drew to 
its end, new plans for imperial consolidation were maturing in 
his brain. Subsidiary points of utility, such as the formation of 
the London and Liverpool schools of tropical medicine from 1899 
onwards, were taken up by him with characteristic vigour. 
But the next step was to prove a critical one indeed for the 
loyalty of the party which had so far been unanimous in his 
favour. 

The settlement after the war was full of difficulties, financial 
and others, in South Africa. When Mr Arthur Balfour succeeded 
Lord Salisbury as prime minister in July 1902, Mr Chamberlain 
agreed to serve loyally under him, and the friendship between 
the two leaders was indeed one of the most marked features of the 
political situation. In November 1902 it was arranged that Mr 
Chamberlain should go out to South Africa, and it was hoped, 
not without reason, that his personality would effect more good 
than any ordinary official negotiations. At the time the best 
results appeared to be secured. He went from place to place in 
South Africa (December 26-February 25); arranged with the 
leading Transvaal financiers that in return for support from the 
British government in raising a Transvaal loan they would 
guarantee a large proportion of a Transvaal debt of £30,000,000, 
which should repay the British treasury so much of the cost of 
the war; and when he returned in March 1903, satisfaction was 
general in the country over the success of his mission. But 
meantime two things had happened. He had looked at the 
empire from the colonial point of view, in a way only possible 
in a colonial atmosphere; and at home some of his colleagues 
had gone a long way, behind the scenes, to destroy one of the 
very factors on which the question of a practical scheme for 
imperial commercial federation seemed to hinge. In the budget 
of 1902 a duty of a shilling a quarter on imported corn had been 
reintroduced. This small tax was regarded as only a "registration 
duty. Even by free-trade ministers like Gladstone it had been 
left up to 1869 untouched, and its removal by Robert Lowe 
(Lord Sherbrooke) had since then been widely regarded as a 
piece of economic pedantry. Its reimposition, officially sup- 
ported for the sake of necessary revenue in war-time, and 
cordially welcomed by the Unionist party, had justified itself, 
as they contended, in spite of the criticisms of the Opposition 
(who raised the cry of the " dear loaf"), by proving during the 
year to have had no general or direct effect on the price of bread. 
And the more advanced Imperialists, as well as the more old- 
fashioned protectionists (like Mr Chaplin) who formed an integral 
body of the Conservative party, had looked forward to this 
tax being converted into a differential one between foreign and 
colonial corn, so as to introduce a scheme of colonial preference 
and commercial consolidation between the colonies and the 
mother country. In South Africa — as in any other British 
colony, since all of them were accustomed to tariffs of a protec- 
tionist nature, and the idea of a preference (already started by 
Canada) was fairly popular — Mr Chamberlain had found this 
view well established. The agitation in England against the 
tax had now blown over. The Unionist rank and file were 
committed to its support, — many even advocating its increase 
to two shillings at least. But Mr Ritchie, the chancellor of the 
exchequer, having a surplus in prospect and taxation to take off, 
carried the cabinet in favour of again remitting this tax on corn. 
Mr Chamberlain himself had proposed only to take it off as 
regards colonial, and not foreign corn, — thus inaugurating a 
preferential system. But a majority of the cabinet supported 
Mr Ritchie. The remission of this tax, after all the conviction 
with which its restoration had been supported a year before, 
was very difficult for the party itself to stomach, and on any 
ground it was a distasteful act, loyally as the party followed 
their leaders. But to those who had looked to it as providing 
a lever for a gradual change in the established fiscal system, 



the volte-face was a bitter blow, and at once there began, though 
not at first openly, a split between the more rigid free-traders — 
advocates of cheap food and free imports — and those who 
desired to use the opportunities of a tariff, of however moderate 
a kind, for attaining national and imperial and not merely 
revenue advantages. This idea, which had for some time been 
floating in Mr Chamberlain's mind (see especially his speech 
at Birmingham of May 16, 1902), now took full possession of it. 
For the moment he remained in the cabinet, but the seed of 
dissension was sown. The first public intimation of his views 
was given in a speech to his constituents at Birmingham (May 15, 
1903), when he outlined a plan for raising more money by a 
rearranged tariff, partly to obtain a preferential system for the 
empire and partly to produce funds for social reform at home. 
On May 28th in the House of Commons he spoke on the same 
subject, and declared " if you are to give a preference to the 
colonies, you must put a tax on food." Considered in the light 
of after events, this putting the necessity of food-taxes in the 
forefront was decidedly injudicious; but imperialist conviction 
and enthusiasm were more conspicuous than electioneering tact 
in the launching of Mr Chamberlain's new scheme. 

The movement grew quickly, its supporters including a 
number of the cleverest younger politicians and journalists in 
the Unionist party. The idea of tariff reform — to broaden the 
basis of taxation, to introduce a preference, and to stimulate 
home industries and increase employment — took firm root; 
and the political economists of the party — Prof. W. Cunningham, 
Profv W. Ashley and Prof. W. A. S. Hewins, in particular- 
brought effective criticism to bear on the one-sided " free trade " 
in vogue. The first demand was for inquiry. The country was 
still bearing an income-tax of elevenpence in the pound; it 
appeared that the old sources of revenue were inadequate; and 
meanwhile the statistics of trade, it was argued, showed that 
the English free-import system hampered English trade while 
providing the foreigner with a free market. Mr Chamberlain 
and his supporters argued that since 1870 certain other countries 
(Germany and the United States), with protective tariffs, had 
increased their trade in much larger proportion, while English 
trade had only been maintained by the increased business done 
with British colonies. A scientific inquiry into the facts was 
needed. By the Opposition, who now found themselves the 
defenders of conservatism in the established fiscal policy of the 
country, this whole argument was scouted; but for a time the 
demand merely for inquiry, and the production of figures, gave 
no sufficient occasion for dissension among Unionists, even when, 
like Sir M. Hicks Beach, they were convinced free-importers 
on purely economic grounds; and Mr Balfour (?.».), as premier, 
managed to hold his colleagues and party together by taking the 
line that particular opinions on economic subjects should not 
be made a test of party loyalty. The Board of Trade was set 
to work to produce fiscal Blue-books, and hum-drum politicians 
who had never shown any genius for figures suddenly blossomed 
out into arithmeticians of the deepest dye. The Tariff Reform 
League was founded in order to further Mr Chamberlain's 
policy, holding its inaugural meeting on July 21st; and it 
began to take an active part in issuing leaflets and in work at 
by-elections. Discussion proceeded hotly on the merits of a 
preferential tariff, arid on August 15th a manifesto appeared 
against it signed by 'fourteen professors or lecturers on political 
economy, including Mr Leonard Courtney, Professor Edgeworth, 
Professor Marshall, Professor Bastable, Professor Smart, 
Professor J. S. Nicholson, Professor Gonner, Mr Bowley, Mr E. 
Cannan and Mr L. R. Phelps,— men of admitted competence, 
yet, after all, of no higher authority than the economists support- 
ing Mr Chamberlain, such as Dr Cunningham and Professor 
Ashley. 

Meanwhile, the death of Lord Salisbury (August 22) removed 
a weighty figure from the councils of the Unionist party. The 
cabinet met several times at the beginning of September, and 
the question of their attitude towards the fiscal problem became 
acute. The public had its first intimation of impending events 
in the appearance on September 16th of Mr Balfour's Economic 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



817 



Notes on Insular Free Trade, which had been previously cir- 
culated as a cabinet memorandum. The next day appeared 
the Board of Trade Fiscal Blue-book. And on the 18th the 
resignations were announced, not only of the more rigid free- 
traders in the cabinet, Mr Ritchie and Lord George Hamilton, 
but also of Mr Chamberlain. Letters in cordial terms were 
published, which had passed between Mr Chamberlain(September 
9) and Mr Balfour (September 16). Mr Chamberlain pointed 
out that he was committed to a preferential scheme involving 
new duties on food, and could not remain in the government 
without prejudice while it was excluded from the party pro- 
gramme; remaining loyal to Mr Balfour and his general objects, 
he could best promote this course from outside, and he suggested 
that the government might confine its policy to the " assertion 
of our freedom in the case of all commercial relations with 
foreign countries." Mr Balfour, while reluctantly admitting 
the necessity of Mr Chamberlain's taking a freer hand, expressed 
his agreement in the desirability of a closer fiscal union with the 
colonies, but questioned the immediate practicability of any 
scheme; he was willing to adopt fiscal reform so far as it covered 
retaliatory duties, but thought that the exclusion of taxation 
of food from the party programme was in existing circumstances 
necessary, so long as public opinion was not ripe. At the same 
time he welcomed the fact that Mr Chamberlain's son, Mr 
Austen Chamberlain, was ready to remain a member of the 
government. Mr Austen Chamberlain (b. 1863) accordingly 
became the new chancellor of the exchequer; he was already 
in the cabinet as postmaster-general, having previously made 
his mark as civil lord of the admiralty (1895-1900), and financial 
secretary to the treasury (1900-1902). 

From the turning-point of Mr Chamberlain's resignation, it is 
not necessary here to follow in detail the discussions and dis- 
sensions in the party as a whole in its relations with the prime 
minister (see Balfour, A. J.). It is sufficient to say that while 
Mr Balfour's sympathetic " send off " appeared to indicate his 
inclination towards Mr Chamberlain's programme, if only further 
support could be gained for it, his endeavour to keep the party 
together, and the violent opposition which gathered against 
Mr Chamberlain's scheme, combined to make his real attitude 
during the next two years decidedly obscure, both sections of the 
party — free-traders and tariff reformers — being induced from 
time to time to regard him as on their side. The tariff reform 
movement itself was now, however, outside the purely official 
programme, and Mr Chamberlain (backed by a majority of the 
Unionist members) threw himself with impetuous ardour, into a 
crusade on its behalf, while at the same time supporting Mr 
Balfour in parliament, and leaving it to him to decide as to the 
policy of going to the country when the time should be ripe. 
In his own words, he went in front of the Unionist army as a 
pioneer, and if his army was attacked he would go back to it; in 
no conceivable circumstances would he allow himself to be put in 
any sort of competition, direct or indirect, with Mr Balfour, his 
friend and leader, whom he meant to follow (October 6). 

On October 6th he opened his campaign with a speech at 
Glasgow. Analysing the trade statistics as between 1872 and 
1902, he insisted that British progress involved a relative decline 
compared with that of protectionist foreign countries like Ger- 
many and the United States; Great Britain exported less and 
less of manufactured goods, and imported more and more; the 
exports to foreign countries had decreased, and it was only the 
increased exports to the colonies that maintained the British 
position. This was the outcome of the working of a one-sided 
free-trade system. Now was the time, and it might soon be lost, 
for consolidating British trade relations with the colonies. 
If the mother country and her daughter states did not draw 
closer, they would inevitably drift apart. A further increase of 
£26,000,000 a year in the trade with the colonies might be 
obtained by a preferential tariff, and this meant additional 
employment at home for 166,000 workmen, or subsistence for a 
population of a far larger number. His positive proposals were: 
(1) no tax on raw materials; (2) a small tax on food other than 
colonial, e.g. two shillings a quarter on foreign corn but excepting 



maize, and 5% on meat and dairy produce excluding bacon; (3) 
a io % general tariff on imported manufactured goods. To meet 
any increased cost of living, he proposed to reduce the duties on 
tea, sugar and other articles of general consumption, and he 
estimated that his scheme would in no case increase a working- 
man's expenditure, and in most cases would reduce it. " The 
colonies," he said, " are prepared to meet us; in return for a very 
moderate preference, they will give us a substantial advantage 
in their markets." This speech, delivered with characteristic 
vigour and Imperialistic enthusiasm, was the type of others 
which followed in quick succession during the year. At Gree- 
nock next day he emphasized the necessity of retaliating against 
foreign tariffs— " I never like being hit without striking back." 
The practice of " dumping " must be fairly met; if foreign goods 
were brought into England to undersell British manufacturers, 
either the Fair Wages Clause and the Factory Acts and the Com- 
pensation Act would have to be repealed, or the workmen would 
have to take lower wages, or lose their work. " Agriculture has 
been practically destroyed, sugar has gone, silk has gone, iron is 
threatened, wool is threatened, cotton will go! How long are 
you going to stand it?" On October 20th he spoke at New- 
castle, on the 21st at Tynemouth, on the 27th at Liverpool, 
insisting that free-trade had never been a working-class measure 
and that it could not be reconciled with trade-unionism; on 
November 4th at Birmingham, on the 20th at Cardiff, on the 
2 1st at Newport, and on December 16th at Leeds. In all these 
speeches he managed to point his argument by application to 
local industries. In the Leeds speech he announced that, with a 
view to drawing up a scientific model tariff, a non-political 
commission of representative experts would be appointed under 
the auspices of the Tariff Reform League to take evidence from 
every trade; it included many heads of businesses, and Mr Charles 
Booth, the eminent student of social and industrial London, with 
Sir Robert Herbert as chairman, and Professor W. A. S. Hewins 
as secretary. The name of " Tariff Commission," given to this 
voluntary and unofficial body, was a good deal criticized, but 
though flouted by the political free-traders it set to work in 
earnest, and accumulated a mass of evidence as to the real facts 
of trade, which promised to be invaluable to economic inquirers. 
On January 18th, 1904, Mr Chamberlain ended his series of 
speeches by a great meeting at the Guildhall, in the city of 
London, the key-note being his exhortation to his audience to 
" think imperially." 

All this activity on Mr Chamberlain's part represented a great 
physical and intellectual feat on the part of a man now sixty- 
seven years of age; but his bodily vigour and comparatively 
youthful appearance were essential features of his personality. 
Nothing like this campaign had been known in the political world 
since Mr Gladstone's Midlothian days; and it produced a great 
public impression, stirring up both supporters and opponents. 
Free-trade unionists like Lord Goschen and Lord Hugh Cecil, and 
the Liberal leaders — for whom Mr Asquith became the principal 
spokesman, though Lord Rosebery's criticisms also had consider- 
able weight— found new matter in. Mr Chamberlain's speeches 
for their contention that any radical change in the traditional 
English fiscal policy, established now for sixty years, would only 
result in evil. The broad fact remained that while Mr Chamber- 
lain's activity gathered round him the bulk of the Unionist 
members and an enthusiastic band of economic sympathizers, 
the country as a whole remained apathetic and unconvinced. 
One reason was the intellectual difficulty of the subject and the 
double-faced character of all arguments from statistics, which 
were either incomprehensible or disputable; another was the 
fact that substantially this was a political movement, and that 
tariff reform was, after all, only one in a complexity of political 
issues, most of which during this period were being interpreted 
by the electorate in a sense hostile to the Unionist party. Mr 
Chamberlain had relied on his personal influence, which from 
1895 to 1902 had been supreme; but his own resignation, and the 
course of events, had since 1903 made his personality less authori- 
tative, and new interests— such as the opposition to the Educa- 
tion Act, to the heavy taxation, and to Chinese labour in the 



8i8 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. 



Transvaal, and indignation over the revelations concerned with 
the war — were monopolizing attention, to the weakening of his 
hold on the public. The revival in trade, and the production of 
new statistics which appeared to stultify Mr Chamberlain's 
prophecies of progressive decline, enabled the free-trade 
champions to reassure their audiences as to the very foundation 
of his case, and to represent the whole tariff reform movement as 
no less unnecessary than risky. Moreover, the split in the 
Unionist party brought the united Liberal party in full force into 
the field, and at last the country began to think that the danger 
of Irish Home Rule was practically over, and that a Liberal 
majority might be returned to power in safety, with the prospect 
of providing an alternative government which would assure 
commercial repose (Lord Rosebery's phrase) , relief from extra- 
vagant expenditure, and — as the working-classes were led to 
believe — a certain amount of labour legislation which the Tory 
leaders would never propose. On the other hand the colonies 
took a great interest in the new movement, though without 
putting any such pressure on the home public as Mr Chamberlain 
might have expected. At the opening of 1904 he was officially 
invited by Mr Deakin, the prime minister of the Commonwealth, 
to pay a visit to Australia, in order to expound his scheme, 
being promised an enthusiastic welcome " as the harbinger of 
commercial reciprocity between the mother country and her 
colonies." Mr Chamberlain, however, declined; his work at 
home was too pressing. 

From the end of Mr Chamberlain's series of expository speeches 
on his scheme of tariff reform, onwards during the various fiscal 
debates and discussions of 1904, it is unnecessary to follow 
events in detail. The scheme was now before the country, and 
Mr Chamberlain was anxious to take its verdict. Time was not 
on his side at his age, and if he had to be beaten at one election 
he was anxious to get rid of the other issues which would encumber 
the popular vote, and to press on to a second when he would 
be on the attacking side. But he would make no move which 
would embarrass Mr Balfour in parliament, and adhered to his 
promise of loyalty. The result was a long drawn out interval, 
while the government held on and its supporters became more 
embittered over their differences. Mr Chamberlain needed a rest, 
and was away in Italy and Egypt from March to May, and again 
in November. He made three important speeches at Welbeck 
(August 4), at Luton (October 5), and at Limehouse (December 
15), but he had nothing substantial to add to his case, and 
the party situation continued in all its embarrassments. Mr 
Balfour's introduction of his promise (at Edinburgh on October 3) 
to convene an imperial conference after the general election if the 
Unionists came back to power, in order to discuss a scheme for 
fiscal union, represented an academic rather than a practical 
advance, since the by-elections showed that the Unionists were 
certain to be defeated. The one important new development 
concerned the Liberal-Unionist organization. In January some 
correspondence was published between' Mr Chamberlain and 
the duke of Devonshire, dating from the previous October, as 
to difficulties arising from the central Liberal-Unionist organiza- 
tion subsidizing local associations which had adopted the pro- 
gramme of tariff reform. The duke objected to this departure 
from neutrality, and suggested that it was becoming " impossible 
with any advantage to maintain under existing circumstances 
the existence of the Liberal- Unionist organization." Mr Chamber- 
lain retorted that this was a matter for a general meeting of 
delegates to decide; if the duke was outvoted he might resign 
his presidency; for his own part he was prepared to allow the 
local associations to be subsidized impartially, so long as they 
supported the government, but he was not prepared for the 
violent disruption, which the duke apparently contemplated, 
of an association so necessary to the success of the Unionist 
cause. The duke was in a difficult position as president of the 
organization, since most of the local associations supported 
Mr Chamberlain, and he replied that the differences between 
them were vital, and he would not be responsible for dividing 
the association into sections, but would rather resign. Mr 
Chamberlain then called a general meeting on his own responsi- 



bility in February, when a new constitution was proposed; 
and in May, at the annual meeting of the Liberal-Unionist council, 
the free-food Unionists, being in a minority, retired, and the 
association was reorganized under Mr Chamberlain's auspices, 
Lord Lansdowne and Lord Selborne (both of them cabinet 
ministers) becoming vice-presidents. On July 14th the recon- 
stituted Liberal-Unionist organization held a great demonstration 
in the Albert Hall, and Mr Chamberlain's success in ousting 
the duke of Devonshire and the other free-trade members of 
the old Liberal-Unionist party, and imposing his own fiscal 
policy upon the Liberal-Unionist caucus, was now complete. 

During the spring and summer of 1905 Mr Chamberlain's 
more active supporters were in favour of forcing a dissolution 
by leaving the government in a minority, but he himself preferred 
to leave matters to take their course, so long as the prime minister 
was content to be publicly identified with the policy of eventually 
fighting on tariff reform lines. Speaking at the Albert Hall in 
July Mr Chamberlain pushed somewhat further than before 
his " embrace " of Mr Balfour; and in the autumn, when foreign 
affairs no longer dominated the attention of the government, 
the crisis rapidly came to a head. In reply to Mr Balfour's 
appeal for the sinking of differences (Newcastle, November 14), 
Mr Chamberlain insisted at Bristol (November 21) on the adop- 
tion of his fiscal policy; and Mr Balfour resigned on December 4. 
on the ground that he no longer retained the confidence of the 
party. At the crushing Unionist defeat in the general election 
which followed in January 1906, Mr Chamberlain was triumph- 
antly returned for West Birmingham, and all the divisions of 
Birmingham returned Chamberlainite members. Amid the wreck 
of the party — Mr Balfour and several of his colleagues themselves 
losing their seats — he had the consolation of knowing that the 
tariff reformers won the only conspicuous successes of the election. 
But he had no desire to set himself up as leader in Mr Balfour's 
place, and after private negotiations with the ex-prime minister, 
a common platform was arranged between them, on which 
Mr Balfour, for whom a seat was found in the City of London, 
should continue to lead the remnant of the party. The formula 
was given in a letter from Mr Balfour of February 14th (see 
Balfour, A. J.) which admitted the necessity of making fiscal 
reform the first plank in the Unionist platform, and accepted a 
general tariff on manufactured goods and a small duty on foreign 
corn as " not in principle objectionable." 

It may be left to future historians to attempt a considered 
judgment on the English tariff reform movement, and on Mr 
Chamberlain's responsibility for the Unionist debdcle of 1906. 
But while his enemies taunted him with having twice wrecked his 
party — first the Radical party under Mr Gladstone, and secondly 
the Unionist party under Mr Balfour — no well-informed critic 
doubted his sincerity, or failed to recognize that in leaving the 
cabinet and embarking on his fiscal campaign he showed real 
devotion to an idea. In championing the cause of imperial 
fiscal union, by means involving the abandonment of a system 
of taxation which had become part of British orthodoxy, he 
followed the guidance of a profound conviction that the stability 
of the empire and the very existence of the hegemony of the 
United Kingdom depended upon the conversion of public 
opinion to a revision of the current economic doctrine. There 
were doubtless miscalculations at the outset as to the resistance 
to be encountered. But from the purely party point of view 
he was entitled to say that he followed the path of loyalty to 
Mr Balfour which he had marked out from the moment of his 
resignation, and that he persistently, refused to be put in com- 
petition with him as leader. Even in the absence of the new issue, 
defeat was foredoomed for Mr Balfour's administration by the 
ordinary course of political events; and it might fairly be claimed 
that " Chinese slavery," " passive resistance," and labour 
irritation at the Taff Vale judgment (see Trade Unions) were 
mainly responsible for the Unionist collapse. Time alone would 
show whether the system of free imports could be permanently 
reconciled with British imperial policy or commercial prosperity. 
It remained the fact that Mr Chamberlain staked an already 
established position on his refusal to compromise with his 



CHAMBERLAIN, J. L.— CHAMBERLAIN 



8i« 



convictions on a question which appeared to him of vital and 
immediate importance. 

Mr Chamberlain's own activity in the political field was cut 
short in the middle of the session of 1906 by a serious attack of 
gout, which was at first minimized by his friends, but which, 
it was gradually discovered, had completely crippled him. 
Though encouragement was given to the idea that he might 
return to the House of Commons, where he continued to retain 
his seat for Birmingham, he was quite incapacitated for any 
public work; and this invalid condition was protracted through- 
out 1907, 1908 and 1909. But he remained in the background as 
the inspirer and adviser of the Tariff Reformers. The cause 
made continuous headway at by-elections, and though the general 
election of January 1910 gave the Unionists no majority it saw 
them returned in much increased strength, which was chiefly 
due to the support obtained for tariff reform principles. Mr 
Chamberlain himself was returned unopposed for West Birming- 
ham again. (H. Ch.) 

CHAMBERLAIN, JOSHUA LAWRENCE (1828- ), Ameri- 
can soldier and educationalist, was born at Brewer, Maine, 
on the 8th of September 1828. He graduated at Bowdoin College 
in 1852, and at the Bangor Theological Seminary in 1855, and 
was successively tutor in logic and natural theology (1855-1856), 
professor of rhetoric and oratory (1856-1861), and professor 
of modern languages (1861-1865), at Bowdoin. In 1862 he 
entered the Federal army as lieutenant-colonel of the 20th 
Maine Infantry. His military career was marked by great 
personal bravery and energy and intrepidity as a leader. He 
was six times wounded, and participated in all the important 
battles in the East from Antietam onwards, including Fredericks- 
burg, Chancellorsville, Gettysburg, the Wilderness, Cold Harbor, 
Petersburg and Five Forks. For his conduct at Petersburg, 
where he was severely wounded, he was promoted to be brigadier- 
general of volunteers. He was breveted major-general of 
volunteers on the 29th of March 1865, and led the Federal 
advance in the final operations against General R. E. Lee. 
In 1893 he received a Congressional medal of honour " for daring 
heroism and great tenacity in holding his position on the Little 
Round Top and carrying the advance position on the Great 
Round Top at the Battle of Gettysburg." After the war he was 
again professor of rhetoric and oratory at Bowdoin in 1865-1866, 
and in 1867-1870 was governor of Maine, having been elected 
as a Republican. From 187 1 to 1883 he was president of Bowdoin 
College, and during 1874-1879 was professor of mental and moral 
philosophy also. Appointed in 1880 by Alonzo Garcelon, the 
retiring governor, to protect the property and institutions of the 
state until a new governor should be duly qualified, and acting 
as major-general of the state militia, Chamberlain did much to 
avert possible civil war, at a time of great political excitement 
and bitter partisan feeling. (See Maine: History.) In 1883- 
1885 he was a lecturer on political science and public law at 
Bowdoin, and in 1900 became surveyor of customs for the district 
of Portland, Maine. He published Maine, Her Place in History 
(1877), and edited Universities and Their Sons (6 vols., 1898). 

CHAMBERLAIN, SIR NEVILLE BOWLES (1820-1902), 
British field marshal, was the third son of Sir Henry Chamberlain, 
first baronet, consul-general and charge d'affaires in Brazil, and 
was born at Rio on the 10th of January 1820. He entered the 
Indian army in 1837, served as a subaltern in the first Afghan 
War (1839-42), and was wounded on six occasions. He was 
attached to the Governor-General's Bodyguard at the battle 
of Maharajpur, in the Gwalior campaign of 1843, was appointed 
military secretary to the governor of Bombay in 1846, and 
honorary aide-de-camp to the governor-general of India in 1847. 
He served on the staff throughout the Punjab campaign of 1848- 
49, and was given a brevet majority. In 1850 he was appointed 
commandant of the Punjab military police, and in 1852 military 
' secretary to the Punjab government. Promoted lieut.-colonel in 
1854, he was given the command of the Punjab Frontier Force 
with rank of brigadier-general, and commanded in several 
expeditions against the frontier tribes. In the Indian Mutiny 
he succeeded Colonel Chester as adjutant-general of the Indian 



army, and distinguished himself at the siege of Delhi, where he 
was severely wounded. He was rewarded with a brevet- 
colonelcy, the appointment of A.D.C. to the queen, and the C.B. 
He was reappointed to the command of the Punjab Frontier 
Force in 1858, and commanded in the Umbeyla campaign (1863), 
in which he was severely wounded. He was now made major- 
general for distinguished service and a K.C.B. He was made 
K.C.S.I. in 1866, lieut.-general in 1872, G.C.S.I. in 1873, G.C.B- 
in 1875, and general in 1877. From 1876 to 1881 he was com- 
mander-in-chief of the Madras army, and in 1878 was sent on 
a mission to the amir cf Afghanistan, whose refusal to allow 
him to enter the country precipitated the second Afghan War. 
He was for some time acting military member of the council of 
the governor-general of India. He retired in 1886, was made 
a field marshal in 1900, and died on the 18th of February 1902. 

An excellent biography by G. W. Forrest appeared in 1909. 

CHAMBERLAIN (0. Fr. chamberlain, chamberlenc, Mod. Fr. 
chambellan, from 0. H. Ger. Chamarling, Chamarlinc, whence 
also the Med. Lat. cambellanus, camerlingus, camerlengus; Ital. 
camerlingo; Span, camerlengo, compounded of 0. H. Ger. 
Chamara, Kamara [Lat. camera, " chamber "], and the Ger. 
suffix -ling), etymologically, and also to a large extent historically, 
an officer charged with the superintendence of domestic affairs. 
Such were the chamberlains of monasteries or cathedrals, who 
had charge of the finances, gave notice of chapter meetings, and 
provided the materials necessary for the various services. In 
these cases, as in that of the apostolic chamberlain of the Roman 
see, the title was borrowed from the usage of the courts of the 
western secular princes. A royal chamberlain is now a court 
official whose function is in general to attend on the person of 
the sovereign and to regulate the etiquette of the palace. He is 
the representative of the medieval camberlanus, cambellanus, 
or cubicularius, whose office was modelled on that of the prae- 
fectus sacri cubiculi or cubicularius of the Roman emperors. But 
at the outset there was another class of chamberlains, the 
camerarii, i.e. high officials charged with the administration of 
the royal treasury {camera). The camerarius of the Carolingian 
emperors was the equivalent of the hordere or thesaurarius 
(treasurer) of the Anglo-Saxon kings; he develops into the 
Erzkdmmerer {archicamerarius) of the Holy Roman Empire, 
an office held by the margraves of Brandenburg, and the grand 
chambrier of France, who held his chamberie as a fief. Similarly 
in England after the Norman conquest the hordere becomes the 
chamberlain. This office was of great importance. Before the 
Conquest he had been, with the marshal, the principal officer of 
the king's court; and under the Norman sovereigns his functions 
were manifold. As he had charge of the administration of the 
royal household, his office was of financial importance, for a 
portion of the royal revenue was paid, not into the exchequer, but 
in camera regis. In course of time the office became hereditary 
and titular, but the complexities of the duties necessitated a 
division of the work, and the office was split up into three: the 
hereditary and sinecure office of magister camerarius or lord 
great chamberlain (see Lord Great Chamberlain), the more 
important domestic office of camerarius regis, king's chamberlain 
or lord chamberlain (see Lord Chamberlain), and the chamber- 
lains {camerarii) of the exchequer, two in number, who were 
originally representatives of the chamberlain at the exchequer, 
and afterwards in conjunction with the treasurer presided over 
that department. In 1826 the last of these officials died, when 
by an act passed forty-four years earlier they disappeared. 

In France the office of grand chambrier was early overshadowed 
by the chamberlains {cubicularii, cambellani, but sometimes 
also camerarii), officials in close personal attendance on the king, 
men at first of low rank, but of great and ever-increasing in- 
fluence. As the office of grand chambrier, held by great feudal 
nobles seldom at court, became more and more honorary, the 
chamberlains grew in power, in numbers and in rank, until, 
in the 13 th century, one of them emerges as a great officer 
of state, the chambellan de France or grand chambellan (also 
magister cambellanorum, mestre chamberlenc) , who at times shares 
with the grand chambrier the revenues derived from certain 



820 



CHAMBERLAYNE— CHAMBERS, R. 



trades in the city of Paris (see Regestum Memoralium Cameras 
computorum, quoted in du Cange, s. Camerarius). The honorary 
office of grand chambrier survived till the time of Henry II., 
who was himself the last to hold it before his accession; that of 
grand chambellan, which in its turn soon became purely honorary, 
survived till the Revolution. Among the prerogatives of the 
grand chambellan which survived to the last not the least 
valued was the right to hand the king his shirt at the ceremonial 
levee. The offices of grand chambellan, premier chambellan, and 
chambellan were revived by Napoleon, continued under the 
Restoration, abolished by Louis Philippe, and again restored 
by Napoleon III. 

In the papal Curia the apostolic chamberlain (Lat. camerarius, 
Ital. camerlingo) occupies a very important position. He is at 
the head of the treasury {camera thesauraria) and, in the days of 
the temporal power, not only administered the papal finances 
but possessed an extensive civil and criminal jurisdiction. 
During a vacancy of the Holy See he is at the head of the ad- 
ministration of the Roman Church. The office dates from the 
nth century, when it superseded that of archdeacon of the 
Roman Church, and the close personal relations of the camerarius 
with the pope, together with the fact that he is the official 
guardian of the ceremonial vestments and treasures, point to 
the fact that he is also the representative of the former vestararius 
and vice-dominus , whose functions were merged in the new 
office, of which the idea and title were probably borrowed from 
the usage of the secular courts of the West (Hinschius, Kirchenrecht, 
i. 405, &c). There are also attached to the papal household 
(jamiglia poniificia) a large number of chamberlains whose 
functions are more or less ornamental. These are divided into 
several categories: privy chamberlains (camerieri segreti), 
chamberlains, assistant and honorary chamberlains. These 
are gentlemen of rank and belong to the highest class of the 
household {jamiglia mobile). 

In England the modern representatives of the cubicularii are 
the gentlemen and grooms of the bed-chamber, in Germany the 
Kammerherr {K ammerer, from ca»reeram«,inBavariaand Austria) 
and Kammerjunker. The insignia of their office is a gold key 
attached to their coats behind. 

Many corporations appoint a chamberlain. The most 
important in England is the chamberlain of the corporation 
of the city of London, who is treasurer of the corporation, 
admits persons entitled to the freedom of the city, arid, in 
the chamberlain's court, of which he and the vice-chamberlain 
are judges, exercises concurrent jurisdiction with the police 
court in determining disputes between masters and apprentices. 
Formerly nominated by the crown, since 1688 he has been elected 
annually by the liverymen. He has a salary of £2000 a year. 
Similarly in Germany the administration of the finances of a 
city is called the Kdmmerei and the official in charge of it the 
Kiimmerer. 

See also State, Great Officers of; Household, Royal; Du 
Cange, Clossarium, s. "Camerarius" and " Cambellanus " ; Pere 
Anselme (Pierre de Guibours), Hist, genealogique et chronologique de 
la maison royale de France, &fc. (9 vols., 3rd ed., 1726-1733); A. 
Luchaire, Manuel des institutions francaises (Paris, 1892) ; W. R. 
Anson, Law and Custom of the Constitution (Oxford, 1896) ; Hinschius, 
Kirchenrecht, i. 405 (Berlin, 1869). 

CHAMBERLAYNE, WILLIAM (1619-1679), English poet, 
was born in 1619. Nothing is known of his history except that 
he practised as a physician at Shaftesbury in Dorsetshire, and 
fought on the Royalist side at the second battle of Newbury. 
He died on the nth of July 1679. His works are: Pharonnida 
(1659), a verse romance in five books; Love's Victory (1658), a 
tragi-comedy, acted under another title in 1678 at the Theatre 
Royal; England's Jubilee (1660), a poem in honour of the 
Restoration. A prose version of Pharonnida, entitled Eromena, 
or the Noble Stranger, appeared in 1683. Southey speaks of him 
as " a poet to whom I am indebted for many hours of delight." 
Pharonnida was reprinted by S. W. Singer in 1820, and again 
in 1905 by Prof. G. Saintsbury in Minor Poets of the Caroline 
Period (vol. i.). The poem is loose in construction, but contains 
some passages of great beauty. 



CHAMBERS, EPHRAIM (d. 1740), English encyclopaedist, 
was born at Kendal, Westmorland, in the latter part of the 17th 
century. He was apprenticed to a globe-maker in London, but 
having conceived the plan of his Cyclopaedia, or Universal 
Dictionary of Arts and Sciences, he devoted himself entirely to it. 
The first edition appeared by subscription in 1728, in two vols. 
fol., and dedicated to the king (see Encyclopaedia). The 
Encycloptdie of Diderot and d'Alembert owed its inception to a 
French translation of Chambers's work. In addition to the Cyclo- 
paedia, Chambers wrote for the Literary Magazine (1735-1736), 
and translated the History and Memoirs of the Royal Academy of 
Sciences at Paris (1742), and the Practice of Perspective from the 
French of Jean Dubreuil. He died on the 1 5th of May 1 740. 

CHAMBERS, GEORGE (1803-1840), English marine painter, 
born at Whitby, Yorkshire, was the son of a seaman, and for 
several years he pursued his father's calling. While at sea he 
was in the habit of sketching the different classes of vessels. His 
master, observing this, gratified him by cancelling his indentures, 
and thus set him free to follow his natural bent. Chambers then 
apprenticed himself to an old woman who kept a painter's shop 
in Whitby, and began by house-painting. He also took lessons 
of a drawing-master, and found a ready sale for small and cheap 
pictures of shipping. Coming afterwards to London, he was 
employed by Thomas Horner to assist in painting the great 
panorama of London for the Colosseum (the exhibition building 
in Regent's Park, demolished towards i860), and he next became 
scene-painter at the Pavilion theatre. In 1834 he was elected 
an associate, and in 1836 a full member, of the Water-colour 
Society. His best works represent naval battles. Two of these — 
the " Bombardment of Algiers in 181 6," and the " Capture of 
Porto Bello "—are in Greenwich hospital. Not long before his 
death he was introduced to William IV., and his professional 
prospects brightened; but his constitution, always frail, gave 
way, and he died on the 28th of October 1840. 

A Life, by John Watkins, was published in 1841. 

CHAMBERS, ROBERT (1802-1871), Scottish author and 
publisher, was born at Peebles on the 10th of July 1802. He 
was sent to the local schools, and gave evidence of unusual 
literary taste and ability. A small circulating library in the 
town, and a copy of the Encyclopaedia Britannica which his 
father had purchased, furnished him with stores of reading of 
which he eagerly availed himself. Long afterwards he wrote 
of his early years — " Books, not playthings, filled my hands in 
childhood. At twelve I was deep, not only in poetry and fiction, 
but in encyclopaedias." Robert had been destined for the 
church, but this design had to be abandoned for lack of means. 
The family removed to Edinburgh in 1813, and in 18 18 Robert 
began business as a bookstall-keeper in Leith Walk. He was 
then only sixteen, and his whole stock consisted of a few old 
books belonging to his father. In 1819 his elder brother William 
had begun a similar business, and the two eventually united as 
partners in the publishing firm of W. & R. Chambers. Robert 
Chambers showed an enthusiastic interest in the history and 
antiquities of Edinburgh, and found a most congenial task in 
his Traditions of Edinburgh (2 vols., 1824), which secured for him 
the approval and the personal friendship of Sir Walter Scott. 
A History of the Rebellions in Scotland from i6j8 to 1745 (5 
vols., 1828) and numerous other works followed. 

In the beginning of 1832 William Chambers started a weekly 
publication under the title of Chambers's Edinburgh Journal 
(known since 1854 as Chambers's Journal of Literature, Science 
and Arts), which speedily attained a large circulation. Robert 
was at first only a contributor. After fourteen numbers had 
appeared, however, he was associated with his brother as joint- 
editor, and his collaboration contributed more perhaps than 
anything else to the success of the Journal. 

Among the other numerous works of which Robert was in 
whole or in part the author, the Biographical Dictionary of • 
Eminent Scotsmen (4 vols., Glasgow, 1832-1835), the Cyclopaedia 
of English Literature (1844), the Life and Works of Robert Burns 
(4 vols., 1851), Ancient Sea Margins (1848), the Domestic Annals 
of Scotland (3 vols., 1859-1861) and the Book of Days (2 vols., 



CHAMBERS, SIR W.— CHAMBERS 



821 



1862-1864) were the most important. Chambers's Encyclopaedia 
(1859-1868), with Dr Andrew Findlater as editor, was carried 
out under the superintendence of the brothers (see Encyclo- 
paedia). The Cyclopaedia of English Literature 1 contains a 
series of admirably selected extracts from the best authors of 
every period, " set in a biographical and critical history of the 
literature itself." For the Life of Burns he made diligent and 
laborious original investigations, gathering many hitherto 
unrecorded facts from the poet's sister, Mrs Begg, to whose 
benefit the whole profits of the work were generously devoted. 
Robert Chambers was a scientific geologist, and availed himself 
of tours in Scandinavia and Canada for the purpose of geological 
exploration. The results of his travels were embodied in 
Tracings of the North of Europe (1851) and Tracings in Iceland 
and the Faroe Islands (1856). His knowledge of geology was 
one of the principal grounds on which the authorship of the 
Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (2 vols., 1843-1846) 
was eventually assigned to him. The book was published 
anonymously. Robert Chambers was aware of the storm that 
would probably be raised at the time by a rational treatment 
of the subject, and did not wish to involve his firm in the discredit 
that a charge of heterodoxy would bring with it. The arrange- 
ments for publication were made through Alexander Ireland 
of Manchester, and the secret was so well kept that such different 
names as those of Prince Albert and Sir Charles Lyell were 
coupled with the book. Ireland in 1884 issued a 12th edition, 
with a preface giving an account of its authorship, which there 
was no longer any reason for concealing. The Book of Days was 
Chambers's last publication, and perhaps his most elaborate. 
It was a miscellany of popular antiquities in connexion with the 
calendar, and it is supposed that his excessive labour in connexion 
with this book hastened his death, which took place at St Andrews 
on the 17th of March 1871. Two years before, the university 
of St Andrews had conferred upon him the degree of doctor of 
laws, and he was elected a member of the Athenaeum club in 
London. It is his highest claim to distinction that he did so 
much to give a healthy tone to the cheap popular literature 
which has become so important a factor in modern civilization. 

His brother, William Chambers (1800-1883) was born at 
Peebles, on the 16th of April 1800. He was the financial genius 
of the publishing firm. He laid the city of Edinburgh tinder the 
greatest obligations by his public spirit and munificence. As 
lord provost he procured the passing in 1867 of the Improvement 
Act, which led to the reconstruction of a great part of the Old 
Town, and at a later date he proposed and carried out, largely 
at his own expense, the restoration of the noble and then 
neglected church of St Giles, making it in a sense " the West- 
minster Abbey of Scotland." This service was fitly acknow- 
ledged by the offer of a baronetcy, which he did not live to receive, 
dying on the 20th of May 1883, three days before the reopening 
of the church. He was the author of a history of St Giles's, of 
a memoir of himself and his brother (1872), and of many other 
useful publications. On his death in 1883 Robert Chambers 
(1832-1888), son of Robert Chambers, succeeded as head of the 
firm, and edited the Journal until his death. His eldest son, 
Charles Edward Stuart Chambers (b. 1859), became editor of 
the Journal and chairman of W. & R. Chambers, Limited. 

See also Memoir of Robert Chambers, with A utobiographic Reminis- 
cences of William Chambers (1872), the 13th ed. of which (1884) has 
a supplementary chapter; Alexander Ireland's preface to the 12th 
ed. (1884) of the Vestiges of Creation; the Story of a Long and Busy 
Life (1884), by William Chambers; and some discriminating 
appreciation in James Payn's Some Literary Recollections (1884), 
chapter v. The Select Writings of Robert Chambers were published 
in 7 vols, in 1847, and a complete list of the works of the brothers 
is added to A Catalogue of Some of the Rarer Books . . . in the Collec- 
tion of C. E. S. Chambers (Edinburgh, 189 1 ). 

CHAMBERS, SIR WILLIAM (17 26-1 796), British architect, 
was the grandson of a rich merchant who had financed the 
armies of Charles XII., but was paid in base money, and whose 
son remained in Sweden many years endeavouring to obtain 

l A new and enlarged edition of this work, edited by David 
Patrick, LL. D., appeared in 1903. 



redress. In 1728 the latter returned to England and settled at 
Ripon, where William, who was born in Stockholm, was educated. 
At the age of sixteen he became supercargo to the Swedish East 
IndiaCompany, and voyaging to Canton made drawingsof Chinese 
architecture, furniture and costume which served as basis for 
his Designs for Chinese Buildings, &c. (1757). Two years later 
he quitted the sea to study architecture seriously, and spent a 
long time in Italy, devoting special attention to the buildings 
of classical and Renaissance architects. He also studied under 
Clerisseau in Paris, with whom and with the sculptor Wilton he 
lived at Rome. In 1755 he returned to England with Cipriani 
and Wilton, and married the beautiful daughter of the latter. 
His first important commission was a villa for Lord Bessborough 
at Roehampton, but he made his reputation by the grounds 
he laid out and the buildings he erected at Kew between 
1757 and 1762 for Augusta, princess dowager of Wales. Some 
of them have since been demolished, but the most important, 
the pagoda, still survives. The publication in a handsome 
volume of the designs for these buildings assured his position in 
the profession. He was employed to teach architectural drawing 
to the prince of Wales (George III.), and gained further pro- 
fessional distinction in 1759 by the publication of his Treatise 
of Civil Architecture. He began to exhibit with the Society of 
Artists in 1761 at Spring Gardens, and was one of the original 
members and treasurer of the Royal Academy when it was 
established in 1768. In 1772 he published his Dissertation on 
Oriental Gardening, which attempted to prove the inferiority 
of European to Chinese landscape gardening. As a furniture 
designer and internal decorator he is credited with the creation 
of that " Chinese Style " which was for a time furiously popular, 
although Thomas Chippendale (q.v.) had published designs in 
that manner at a somewhat earlier date. It is not unreasonable 
to count the honours as divided, since Chippendale unques- 
tionably adapted and altered the Chinese shapes in a manner 
better to fit them for European use. To the rage for every 
possible form of chinoiserie, for which he is chiefly responsible, 
Sir William Chambers owed much of his success in life. He 
became architect to the king and queen, comptroller of his 
majesty's works, and afterwards surveyor-general. In 1775 he 
was appointed architect of Somerset House, his greatest monu- 
ment, at a salary of £2000 a year. He also designed town 
mansions for Earl Gower at Whitehall and Lord Melbourne in 
Piccadilly, built Charlemont House, Dublin, and Duddingston 
House near Edinburgh. He designed the market house at 
Worcester, was employed by the earl of Pembroke at Wilton, by 
the duke of Marlborough at Blenheim, and by the duke of Bedford 
in Bloomsbury. The state coach of George III., his constant 
patron, was his work; it is now in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum. Although his practice was mainly Classic, he made 
Gothic additions to Milton Abbey inDorset. Sir William Chambers 
achieved considerable distinction as a designer of furniture. In 
addition to his work in the Chinese style and in the contemporary 
fashions, he was the author, of what is probably the most 
ambitious and monumental piece of furniture ever produced in 
England. This was a combined bureau, dressing-case, jewel- 
cabinet and organ, made for Charles IV., king of Spain, in 1793. 
These combination pieces were in the taste of the time, and the 
effort displays astonishing ingenuity and resource. The panels 
were painted by W. Hamilton, R.A., with representations of the 
four seasons, night and morning, fire and water, Juno and Ceres, 
together with representations of the Golden Fleece and the 
Immaculate Conception. The organ, in the domed top, is in a 
case decorated with ormolu and Wedgwood. This remarkable 
achievement, which possesses much sober elegance, formed part 
of the loan collection of English furniture at the Franco- 
British Exhibition in London in 1908. Sir William Chambers 
numbered among his friends Dr Johnson, Goldsmith, Sir Joshua 
Reynolds, David Garrick and Dr Burney. 

CHAMBERS (the Fr. chambre, from Lat. camera, a room), a 
term used generally of rooms or apartments, but especially in 
law of the offices of a lawyer or the semi-private rooms in which 
judges or judicial officers deal with questions of practice and 



822 



CHAMBERSBURG— CHAMBORD, COMTE DE 



other matters not of sufficient importance to be dealt with in 
court. It is a matter of doubt at what period the practice of 
exercising jurisdiction " in chambers " commenced in England; 
there is no statutory sanction before 1821, though the custom 
can be traced back to the 17th century. An act of 1821 provided 
for sittings in chambers between terms, and an act of 1822 
empowered the sovereign to call upon the judges by warrant to 
sit in chambers on as many days in vacation as should seem fit, 
while the Law Terms Act 1830 defined the jurisdiction to be 
exercised at chambers. The Judges' Chambers Act 1867 was 
the first act, however, to lay down proper regulations for chamber 
work, and the Judicature Act 1873 preserved that jurisdiction 
and gave power to increase it as might be directed or authorized 
by rules of court to be thereafter made. (See Chancery; 
King's Bench, Court of.) 

CHAMBERSBURG, a borough and the county-seat of Franklin 
county, Pennsylvania, U.S.A., at the confluence of Conoco- 
cheague Creek and Falling Spring, 52 m. S.W. of Harrisburg. 
Pop. (1890) 7863; (1900) 8864, of whom 769 were negroes; 
(1910) 11,800. It is served by the Cumberland Valley and 
the Western Maryland railways, and is connected by electric 
lines with Greencastle, Waynesboro, Caledonia, a beautiful park 
in the Pennsylvania timber reservation, on South Mountain, 
12 m. east of Chambersburg, and Pen Mar, a summer resort, 
on South Mountain, near the boundary line between Pennsyl- 
vania and Maryland. Chambersburg is built on an elevated 
site in the broad and fertile Cumberland Valley, and commands 
a fine view of the distant hills and dales. The borough is the 
seat of Chambersburg Academy, a preparatory school; Penn 
Hall, a school for girls; and Wilson College, a Presbyterian 
institution for women, opened in 1870. The Wilson College 
campus, the former estate of Col. A. K. McClure (1828-1909), 
a well-known journalist, was laid out by Donald G. Mitchell 
(" Ik Marvel "), who was an enthusiastic landscape gardener. 
The shops of the Cumberland Valley railway are at Chambersburg, 
and among the borough's manufactures are milling machinery, 
boilers, engines, hydraulic presses, steam-hammers, engineering 
and bridge supplies, hosiery, shoes, gloves, furniture, flour, 
paper, leather, carriages and agricultural implements; the 
total value of its factory product in 1905 was $1,085,185. The 
waterworks and the electric-lighting plant are owned and 
operated by the municipality. A settlement was founded here 
in 1730 by Benjamin Chambers, in whose honour the borough 
was named, and who, immediately after General Edward 
Braddock's defeat in 1755, built a stone fort and surrounded it 
with a stockade for the protection of the community from the 
Indians. Chambersburg was laid out in 1764 and was incor- 
porated as a borough in 1803. On the 30th of July 1864 Cham- 
bersburg was occupied by a Confederate cavalry force under 
General McCausland (acting under General Jubal A. Early's 
orders), who, upon the refusal of the citizens to pay $ 100,000 
for immunity, burned a large part of the borough. 

CHAMBERY, a city of France, capital of the department of 
Savoie, pleasantly situated in a fertile district, between two 
hills, on the rivers Leysse and Albane, 79 m. by rail S.S.W. 
of Geneva. Pop. (1906) town, 16,852; commune, 23,027. The 
town is irregularly built, and has only two good streets — the 
Place Saint-Leger and the Rue de Boigne, the latter being named 
after General Benoit Boigne (1741-1830), who left a fortune 
of 3,400,000 francs (accumulated in India) to the town. The 
principal buildings are the cathedral, dating from the 14th and 
15th centuries; the H6tel-Dieu, founded in 1647; the castle, 
a modern building serving as the prefecture, and preserving 
only a great square tower belonging to the original structure; 
the palace of justice, the theatre, the barracks, and the covered 
market, which dates from 1863. Several of the squares are 
adorned with fountains; the old ramparts of the city, destroyed 
during the French Revolution, have been converted into public 
walks; and various promenades and gardens have been con- 
structed. Chambery is the seat of an archbishop (raised to that 
dignity from a bishopric in 1817) and of a superior tribunal. 
It has also a Jesuit college, a royal academical society, a society 



of agriculture and commerce, a public library with 60,000 volumes, 
a museum (antiquities and paintings), a botanic garden, and 
many charitable institutions. It manufactures silk-gauze, lace, 
leather and hats, and has a considerable trade in liqueurs, wine, 
lead, copper and other articles. Overlooking the town on the 
north is the Rocher de Lemenc, which derives its name from the 
Lemincum of the Romans; and in the vicinity is Les Charmettes, 
for some time (1 736-1 740) the residence of Rousseau. 

The origin of Chambery is unknown, but its lords are mentioned 
for the first time in 1029. In 1232 it was sold to the count of 
Savoy, Thomas I., who bestowed several important privileges on 
the inhabitants. As capital of the duchy of Savoy, it has passed 
through numerous political vicissitudes. Between 1 536 and 1 7 13 
it was several times occupied by the French; in 1742 it was 
captured by a Franco-Spanish army; and in 1792 it was occupied 
by the Republican forces, and became the capital of the depart- 
ment of Mont Blanc. Restored to the house of Savoy by the 
treaties of Vienna and Paris, it was again surrendered to France 
in i860. Among the famous men whom it has given to France, 
the most important are Vaugelas (1585-1650), Saint-Real (1639- 
1692), and the brothers Joseph (1754-1821) and Xavier (1763- 
1852) de Maistre. 

CHAMBORD, HENRI CHARLES FERDINAND MARIE 
DIEUDONN& Comtede (1820-1883), the "King Henry V." of the 
French legitimists, was born in Paris on the 29th of September 
1820. His father was the due de Berry, the elder son of the comte 
d'Artois (afterwards Charles X.); his mother was the princess 
Caroline Ferdinande Louise of Naples. Born seven months after 
the assassination of his father, he was hailed as the " enfant du 
miracle," and was made the subject of one of Lamartine's most 
famous poems. He was created due de Bordeaux, and in 1821, 
as the result of a subscription organized by the government, 
received the chateau of Chambord. He was educated by tutors 
inspired by detestation of the French Revolution and its prin- 
ciples, and from the due de Damas in particular imbibed those 
ideas of divine right and of devotion to the Church to which 
he always remained true. After the revolution of July, Charles 
X. vainly endeavoured to save the Bourbon cause by abdicating 
in his favour and proclaiming him king under the title of Henry V. 
(August 2, 1830). The comte de Chambord accompanied his 
grandfather into exile, and resided successively at Holyrood, 
Prague, and Gorz. In 1841, during an extensive tour through 
Europe, he broke his leg — an accident that resulted in permanent 
lameness. The death of his grandfather, Charles X., in 1836, 
and of his uncle, the due d'Angouleme, in 1844, left him the last 
male representative of the elder branch of the Bourbon family; 
and his marriage with the archduchess Maria Theresa, eldest 
daughter of the duke of Modena (November 7, 1846), remained 
without issue. The title to the throne thus passed to the comte 
de Paris, as representative of the Orleans branch of the house of 
Bourbon, and the history of the comte de Chambord's life is 
largely an account of the efforts made to unite the Royalist party 
by effecting a reconciliation between the two princes. Though he 
continued to hold an informal court, both on his travels and at 
his castle of Frohsdorf , near Vienna, yet he allowed the revolution 
of 1848 and the coup d'itat of 1851 to pass without any decisive 
assertion of his claims. It was the Italian war of 1859, with its 
menace to the pope's independence, that roused him at last to 
activity. He declared himself ready " to pay with his blood for 
the triumph of a cause which was that of France, the Church, 
and God himself." Making common cause with the Church, the 
Royalists now began an active campaign against the Empire. 
On the 9th of December 1866 he addressed a manifesto to General 
Saint-Priest, in which he declared the cause of the pope to be that 
of society and liberty, and held out promises of retrenchment, 
civil and religious liberty, " and above all honesty." Again, on 
the 4th of September 1870, after the fall of the Empire, he invited 
Frenchmen to accept a government " whose basis was right and 
whose principle was honesty," and promised to drive the enemy 
from French soil. These vague phrases, offered as a panacea to a 
nation fighting for its life, showed conclusively his want of all 
political genius; they had as little effect on the French as his 



CHAMBORD— CHAMELEON 



823 



protest against the bombardment of Paris had on the Germans. 
Yet fortune favoured him. The elections placed the Republican 
party in a minority in the National Assembly; the abrogation of 
the law of exile against the royal family permitted him to return 
to his castle of Chambord; and it was thence that on the 5th of 
July 1871 he issued a proclamation, in which for the first time he 
publicly posed as king, and declared that he would never abandon 
the white standard of the Bourbons, "the flag of Henry IV., 
Francis I., and Joan of Arc," for the tricolour of the Revolution. 
He again quitted France, and answered the attempts to make 
him renounce his claims in favour of the comte de Paris by the 
declaration (January 25, 1872) that he would never abdicate. 
In the following month he held a great gathering of his adherents 
at Antwerp, which was the cause of serious disturbances. A 
constitutional programme, signed by some 280 members of the 
National Assembly, was presented for his acceptance, but without 
result. The fall of Thiers in May 1873, however, offered an oppor- 
tunity to the Royalists by which they hastened to profit. The 
comte de Paris and the prince de Joinville journeyed to Frohsdorf , 
and were formally reconciled with the head of the family (August 
5). The Royalists were united, the premier (the due de Broglie) 
an open adherent, the president (MacMahon)a benevolent neutral. 
MM. Lucien Brun and Chesnelong were sent to interview the 
comte de Chambord at Salzburg, and obtain the definite assur- 
ances that alone were wanting. They returned with the news 
that he accepted the principles of the French Revolution and the 
tricolour flag. But a letter to Chesnelong, dated Salzburg, 27th 
of October, declared that he had been misunderstood: he would 
give no guarantees ; he would not inaugurate his reign by an act 
of weakness, nor become " le roi legitime de la Revolution." 
" Je suis le pilote necessaire," he added, " le seul capable de 
conduire le navire au port, parce que j'ai mission et autorite pour 
cela." This outspoken adherence to the principle of divine right 
did credit to his honesty, but it cost him the crown. The due de 
Broglie carried the septennate, and the Republic steadily estab- 
lished itself in popular favour. A last effort was made in the 
National Assembly in June 1874 by the due de la Rochefoucauld- 
Bisaccia, who formally moved the restoration of the. monarchy. 
The comte de Chambord on the 2nd of July issued a fresh mani- 
festo, which added nothing to his former declarations. The 
motion was rejected by 272 to 79, and on the 25th of February 
1875 the Assembly definitely adopted the Republic as the national 
form of government. From this time the comte de Chambord, 
though continuing to publish letters on political affairs, made no 
further effort to regain the throne. He died at Frohsdorf on the 
24th of August 1883. 

See Manifestes et programmes politiques de M. le comte de Cham- 
bord, 1848-1873 (1873), and Correspondance de la famille royale et 
principalement de Mgr. le comte de Chambord avec le comte de Bouille 
(1884). Of the enormous literature relating to him, mention may 
be made of Henri V et la monarchie traditionnelle (1871), Le Comte de 
Chambord etudie dans ses voyages et sa correspondance (1880), and 
Henri de France, by H. de Pene (1885). (H. Sy.) 

CHAMBORD, a village of central France, in the department 
of Loir-et-Cher, on the left bank of the Cosson, 10 m. E. by N. 
of Blois by road. The village stands in the park of Chambord, 
which is enclosed by a wall 21 m. in circumference. The cele- 
brated chateau (see Architecture: Renaissance Architecture 
in France) forms a parallelogram flanked at the angles by 
round towers and enclosing a square block of buildings, the 
facade of which forms the centre of the main front. The profusion 
of turrets, pinnacles, and dormer windows which decorates the 
roof of this, the chief portion of the chateau, constitutes the main 
feature of the exterior, while in the interior are a well-preserved 
chapel of the 16th century and a famous double staircase, the 
construction of which permits two people to ascend and descend 
respectively without seeing one another. There are 440 apart- 
ments, containing pictures of the 17th century and souvenirs 
of the comte de Chambord. The chateau was originally a hunting- 
box of the counts of Blois, the rebuilding of which was begun 
by Francis I. in 1526, and completed under Henry II. It was 
the residence of several succeeding monarchs, and under Louis 
XIV. considerable alterations were made. In the same reign 



Moliere performed Monsieur de Pourceaugnac and Le Bourgeois 
gentilhomme for the first time in the theatre. Stanislaus, king 
of Poland, lived at Chambord, which was bestowed by his son-in- 
law, Louis XV., upon Marshal Saxe. It was given by Napoleon 
to Marshal Berthier, from whose widow it was purchased by 
subscription in 182 1, and presented to the due de Bordeaux, 
the representative of the older branch of the Bourbons, who 
assumed from it the title of comte de Chambord. On his death 
in 1883 it came by bequest into the possession of the family of 
Parma. 

CHAMBRE ARDENTE (Fr. " burning' chamber ") , the term 
for an extraordinary court of justice in France, mainly held for 
the trials of heretics. The name is perhaps an allusion to the 
fact that the proceedings took place in a room from which all 
daylight was excluded, the only illumination being from torches, 
or there may be a reference to the severity of the sentences in 
ardente, suggesting the burning of the prisoners at the stake. 
These courts were originated by the Cardinal of Lorraine, the 
first of them meeting in 1535 under Francis I. The Chambre 
Ardente co-operated with an inquisitorial tribunal also established 
by Francis I., the duty of which was to discover cases of heresy 
and hand them over for final judgment to the Chambre Ardente. 
The reign of Henry II. of France was particularly infamous for 
the cruelties perpetrated by this court on the Huguenots. The 
marquise de Brinvilliers (q.v.) and her associates were tried 
in the Chambre Ardente in 1680. The court was abolished in 
1682. 

See N. Weiss, La Chambre Ardente (Paris, 1889), and F. Ravaisson, 
Archives de la Bastille (Paris, 1866-1884, 16 vols.). - 

CHAMELEON, the common name of one of the three suborders 
of Lacertilia or lizards. The chief genus is Chamaeleon, containing 
most of the fifty to sixty species of the whole group, and with 
the most extensive range, 
all through Africa and 
Madagascar into Arabia, 
southern India and Ceylon. 
The Indian species is Ch. 
calcaratus; the dwarf 
chameleon of South Africa 
is Ch. pumilus; the giant of 
the whole tribe, reaching a 
total length of 2 ft., is 
Ch. parsoni of Madagascar. 
The commonest species in 
the trade is Ch. vulgaris of North Africa, introduced into 
southern Andalusia. A few queer genera, with much stunted 
tail, e.g. Rhampholeon, in tropical Africa and Brookesia in 
Madagascar are the most aberrant. The common chameleon is 
the most typical. The head is raised into a pyramidal crest far 
beyond the occiput, there is no outer ear, nor a drum-cavity. 
The limbs are very long and slender, and the digits form stout 
grasping bundles; on the hand the first three form an inner 
bundle, opposed to the remaining two; on the foot the inner 
bundle is formed by the first and second toe, the outer by the 
other three toes. The tail is prehensile, by being rolled down- 
wards; it is not brittle and cannot be renewed. The eyeballs are 
large, but the lids are united into one concentric fold, leaving only 
the small pupil visible. The right and left eyes are incessantly 
moved separately from each other and literally in every direction, 
up and down, forwards and straight backwards, producing the 
most terrible squinting. Chameleons alone of all reptiles can 
focus their eyes upon one spot, and conformably they alone 
possess a retinal macula centralis, or spot of acutest, binocular 
vision. The tongue has attained an extraordinary development. 
It is club-shaped, covered with a sticky secretion, and based 
upon a very narrow root, which is composed of extremely elastic 
fibres and telescoped over the much elongated, style-shaped, 
copular piece of the hyoid. The whole apparatus is kept in 
a contracted state like a spring in a tube. When the spring 
is released, so to speak, by filling the apparatus with blood and 
by the play of the hyoid muscles, the heavy thick end shoots out 
upon the insect prey and is withdrawn by its own elasticity. 




Left Forefoot of Chamaeleon 
o'shaughenesii, outer view. , 



824 



CHAMFER— CHAMFORT 



The whole act is like a flash. An ordinary chameleon can shoot 
a fly at the distance of fully 6 in., and it can manage even a big 
sphinx moth. 

Another remarkable feature is their changing of colour. This 
proverbial power is greatly exaggerated. They cannot assume 
in succession all the colours of the rainbow, nor are the changes 
quick. The common chameleon may be said to be greenish grey, 
changing to grass-green or to dull black, with or without maroon 
red, or brown, lateral series of patches. At night the same 
specimen assumes as a rule a more or less uniform pale straw- 
colour. After it has been watched for several months, when all 
its possibilities seem exhausted, it will probably surprise us by 
a totally new combination, for instance, a black garb with many 
small yellow specks, or green with many black specks. Pure 
red and blue are not in the register of this species, but they are 
rather the rule upon the dark green ground colour of the South 
African dwarf chameleon. The changes are partly under control 
of the will, partly complicated reflex actions, intentionally 
adaptive to the physical and psychical surroundings. The 
mechanism is as follows. The cutis contains several kinds of 
specialized cells in many layers, each filled with minute granules 
of guanine. The upper cells are the smallest, most densely 
filled with crystals, and cause the white colour by diffusion 
of direct light; near the Malpighian layer the cells are charged 
with yellow oil drops; the deeper cells are the largest, tinged 
light brown, and acting as a turbid medium they cause a blue 
colour, which, owing to the superimposed yellow drops, reaches 
our eye as green; provided always that there is an effective 
screen at the back, and this is formed by large chromatophores 
which lie at the bottom and send their black pigment half-way 
up, or on to the top of the layers of guanine and oil containing 
cells. When all the pigment is shifted towards the surface, as 
near the epidermis as possible, the creature looks black; when 
the black pigment is withdrawn into the basal portions of the 
chromatophores the skin appears yellow. 

The lungs are very capacious, and end in several narrow 
blind sacs which extend far down into the body cavity, so that 
not only the chest but the whole body can be blown up. This 
happens when the animals hiss and fight, as they often do. But 
when they know themselves discovered, they make themselves 
as thin as possible by compressing the chest and belly vertically 
by means of their peculiarly elongated ribs. The whole body 
is then put into such a position that it presents only its narrow 
edge to the enemy, and with the branch of the tree or shrub 
interposed. They are absolutely arboreal, but they hibernate 
in the ground. 

The usual mode of propagation is by eggs, which are oval, 
numerous, provided with a calcareous shell, and buried in humus, 
whence they are hatched about four months later. But a few 
species, e.g. the dwarf chameleon, are viviparous. 

Chameleons are insectivorous. They prefer locusts, grass- 
hoppers and lepidoptera, but are also fond of flies and mealworms. 
They are notoriously difficult to keep in good health. They 
want not only warmth, but sunshine, and they must have water, 
which they lick up in drops from the edges of wet leaves whenever 
they have a chance. The silliness of the fable that they live on 
air is shown by the fact that they usually die in an absolutely 
emaciated and parched condition after three or four months' 
starvation. (H. F. G.) 

In astronomy, " Chamaeleon " is a constellation situated near 
the south pole and surrounded by the constellations of Octans, 
Mensa, Piscis volans, Carina (Nauta), Musca and Apus. In 
chemistry, " chameleon mineral " is a name applied to the green mass 
which is obtained when pyrolusite (manganese dioxide) is fused with 
nitre, since a solution in water assumes a purple tint on exposure to 
the air; this change is due to the oxidation of the manganate, which 
is first formed, to a permanganate. 

CHAMFER, Champfer or Chaumfer (Fr. chanfrein; possibly 
from Lat. cantus, corner, and Jrangere, to break), an architectural 
term; when the edge or arris of any work is cut off at an angle 
of 45° in a small degree, it is said to be " chamfered," while it 
would be " canted " if on a large scale. The chamfer is much 
used in medieval work, and is sometimes plain, sometimes 



hollowed out and sometimes moulded. Chamfers are sometimes 
" stopped " by a bead or some moulding, but when cut short by 
a slope they are generally known as " stop chamfer." 

CHAMFORT, SEBASTIEN ROCH NICOLAS (1741-1794), 
French man of letters, was born at a little village near Clermont 
in Auvergne in 1 741 . He was, according to a baptismal certificate 
found among his papers, the son of a grocer named Nicolas. A 
journey to Paris resulted in the boy's obtaining a bursary at the 
College des Grassins. He worked hard, although he wrote later 
in one of his most contemptuous epigrams — " Ce quej'ai appris 
je ne le sais plus; le peu que je sais je I' at divine"." His college 
career ended, Chamfort assumed the dress of a petit abbe. " C'est 
un costume, et non point un Stat," he said; and to the principal 
of his college who promised him a benefice, he replied that he 
would never be a priest, inasmuch as he preferred honour to 
honours — " j'aime Vhonneur et non les konneurs." About this 
time he assumed the name of Chamfort. 

For some time he contrived to exist by teaching and as a 
booksellers' hack. His good looks and ready wit, however, soon 
brought him into notice; but though endowed with immense 
strength—" Hercule sous la figure d'Adonis," Madame de Craon 
called him— he lived so hard that he was glad of the chance of 
doing a " cure " at Spa when the Belgian minister in Paris, 
M. van Eyck, took him with him to Germany in 1761. On his 
return to Paris he produced a comedy, La Jeune Indienne (1764), 
which was performed with some success, and this was followed 
by a series of " epistles " in verse, essays and odes. It was not, 
however, until 1769, when he won the prize of the French 
Academy for his £loge on Moliere, that his literary reputation 
was established. 

Meanwhile he had lived from hand to mouth, mainly on the 
hospitality of people who were only too glad to give him board 
and lodging in exchange for the pleasure of the conversation 
for which he was famous. Thus Madame Helvetius entertained 
him at Sevres for some years. In 1770 another comedy, Le 
Marchand de Smyrne, brought him still further into notice, and 
he seemed on the road to fortune, when he was suddenly smitten 
with a horrible disease. His distress was relieved by the generosity 
of a friend, who made over to him a pension of 1 200 livres charged 
on the Mercure de France. With this assistance he was able to 
go to the baths of Contrexeville and to spend some time in the 
country, where he wrote an Eloge on La Fontaine which won the 
prize of the Academy of Marseilles (1774). In 1775, while taking 
the waters at Bareges, he met the duchesse de Grammont, sister 
of Choiseul, through whose influence he was introduced at court. 
In 1776 his poor tragedy, Mustapha et Zeangir, was played at 
Fontainebleau before Louis XVI. and Marie Antoinette; the 
king gave him a further pension of 1 200 livres. and the prince de 
Conde made him his secretary. But he was a Bohemian naturally 
and by habit, the restraints of the court irked him, and with 
increasing years he was growing misanthropical. After a year 
he resigned his post in the prince's household and retired into 
solitude at Auteuil. There, comparing the authors of old with 
the men of his own time, he uttered the famous mot that proclaims 
the superiority of the dead over the living as companions; and 
there too he presently fell in love. The lady, attached to the 
household of the duchesse du Maine, was forty-eight years old, 
but clever, amusing, a. woman of the world; and Chamfort 
married her. They left Auteuil, and went to Vaucouleurs, 
where in six months Madame Chamfort died. Chamfort lived in 
Holland for a time with M. de Narbonne, and returning to Paris 
received in 1781 the place at the Academy left vacant by the 
death of La Curne de Sainte-Palaye, the author of the Diction- 
naire des antiquiUs francaises. In 1784, through the influence 
of Calonne, he became secretary to the king's sister, Madame 
Elizabeth, and in 1 786 he received a pension of 2000 livres from the 
royal treasury. He was thus once more attached to the court, 
and made himself friends in spite of the reach and tendency of 
his unalterable irony; but he quitted it for ever after an un- 
fortunate and mysterious love affair, and was received into the 
house of M. de Vaudreuil. Here in 1 783 he had met Mirabeau, with 
whom he remained to the last on terms of intimate friendship. 



CHAMIER— CHAMISSO 



825 



whom he assisted with money and influence, and one at least 
of whose speeches — that on the Academies — he wrote. 

The outbreak of the .Revolution made a profound change in 
the relations of Chamfort's life. Theoretically he had long been 
a republican, and he now threw himself into the new movement 
with almost fanatical ardour, devoting all his small fortune to 
the revolutionary propaganda. His old friends of the court he 
forgot. " Those who pass the river of revolutions," he said, 
" have passed the river of oblivion." Until the 31st of August 
1 791 he was secretary of the Jacobin club; he became a street 
orator and entered the Bastille among the first of the storming 
party. He worked for the Mercure de France, collaborated with 
Ginguene in the Feuille villageoise, and drew up for Talleyrand 
his Adresse au peuple franqais. 

With the reign of Marat and Robespierre, however, his un- 
compromising Jacobinism grew critical, and with the fall of the 
Girondins his political life came to an end. But he could not 
restrain the tongue that had made him famous; he no more 
spared the Convention than he had spared the court. His 
notorious republicanism failed to excuse the sarcasms he lavished 
on the new order of things, and denounced by an assistant in 
the Bibliotheque Nationale, to a share in the direction of which 
he had been appointed by Roland, he was taken to the Made- 
lonnettes. Released for a moment, he was threatened again 
with arrest; but he had determined to prefer death to a repetition 
of the moral and physical restraint to which he had been sub- 
jected. He attempted suicide with pistol and with poniard; 
and, horribly hacked and shattered, dictated to those who came 
to arrest him the well-known declaration — ■" Moi, Sebastien- Rock- 
Nicolas Chamfort, declare avoir voulu mourir en homme libre pluldt 
que d'etre reconduit en esclave dans une maison d'arrit " — which 
he signed in a firm hand and in his own blood. He did not die 
at once, but lingered on until the 13th of April 1794 in charge 
of a gendarme, for whose wardship he paid a crown a day. To 
the Abbe Sieyes Chamfort had given fortune in the title of a 
pamphlet (" Qu'est-ce que le Tiers-Elat? Tout. Qu'a-t-il? 
Rien "), and to Sieyes did Chamfort retail his supreme sarcasm, 
the famous " Je m'en vais enfin de ce monde ou ilfaut que le coeur 
se brise ou se bronze." The maker of constitutions followed the 
dead wit to the grave. 

The writings of Chamfort, which include comedies, political 
articles, literary criticisms, portraits, letters, and verses, are 
colourless and uninteresting in the extreme. As a talker, how- 
ever, he was of extraordinary force. His Maximes et Pensees, 
highly praised by John Stuart Mill, are, after those of La Roche- 
foucauld, the most brilliant and suggestive sayings that have 
been given to the modern world. The aphorisms of Chamfort, 
less systematic and psychologically less important than those of 
La Rochefoucauld, are as significant in their violence and 
iconoclastic spirit of the period of storm and preparation that 
gave them birth as the Reflexions in their exquisite restraint and 
elaborate subtlety are characteristic of the tranquil elegance of 
their epoch; and they have the advantage in richness of colour, 
in picturesqueness of phrase, in passion, in audacity. Sainte- 
Beuve compares them to " well-minted coins that retain their 
value," and to keen arrows that " arrivent brusquement et sifflent 
encore." 

An edition of his works — CEuvres completes de Nicolas Chamfort — 
Was published at Paris in five volumes in 1824-1825. Selections — 
CEuvres de Chamfort — in one volume, appeared in 1852, with a bio- 
graphical and critical preface by Arsene Houssaye, reprinted from 
the Revue des deux mondes; and CEuvres choisies (2 vols.), with a 
preface and notes by M. de Lescure (1879). See also Sainte-Beuve, 
Causeries du Lundi. 

CHAMIER, FREDERICK (1796-1870), English novelist, was 
the son of an Anglo-Indian official. In 1809 he entered the navy, 
and was in active service until 1827. He retired in 1833, and 
was promoted to be captain in 1856. On his retirement he 
settled near Waltham Abbey, and wrote several nautical novels 
on the lines popularized by Marryat, that had considerable 
success. Thesewere TheLifeof a Sailor (1832), Ben Brace (1836), 
The Arethusa (1837), Jack Adams (1838), Tom Bowling (1841) 
and Jack Malcolm's Log (1846). He wrote a number of other 



books, and edited and brought down to 1827 James's Naval 
History (1837). 

CHAMILLART MICHEL (1652-1721), French statesman, 
minister of Louis XIV., was born at Paris of a family of the 
noblesse of recent elevation. Following the usual career of a 
statesman of his time he became in turn councillor of the parle- 
ment of Paris (1676), master of requests (1686), and intendant 
of the generality of Rouen (January 1689). Affable, of polished 
manners, modest and honest, Chamillart won the confidence of 
Madame de Maintenon and pleased the king. In 1690 he was 
made intendant of finances, and on the 5th of September 1699 
the king appointed him controller-general of finances, to which 
he added on the following 7 th of January the ministry of war. 
From the first Chamillart's position was a difficult one. The 
deficit amounted to more than 53 million livres, and the credit 
of the state was almost exhausted. He lacked the great in- 
telligence and energy necessary for the situation, and was unable 
to moderate the king's warlike tastes, or to inaugurate economic 
reforms. He could only employ the usual expedients of the 
time — the immoderate sale of offices, the debasement of the 
coinage (five times in six years), reduction of the rate of interest 
on state debts, and increased taxation. He attempted to force 
into circulation a kind of paper money, billets de monnaie, but 
with disastrous results owing to the state of credit. He studied 
Vauban's project for the royal tithe and Boisguillebert's pro- 
position for the taille, but did not adopt them. In October 1706 
he showed the king that the debts immediately due amounted 
to 288 millions, and that the deficit already foreseen for 1707 
was 160 millions. In October 1707 he saw with consternation 
that the revenue for 1708 was already entirely eaten up by 
anticipation, so that neither money nor credit remained for 1708. 
In these conditions Chamillart, who had often complained of 
the overwhelming burden he was carrying, and who had already 
wished to retire in 1706, resigned his office of controller-general. 
Public opinion attributed to him the ruin of the country, though 
Jie had tried in 1700 to improve the condition of commerce by 
the creation of a council of commerce. As secretary of state 
for war he had to place in the field the army for the War of the 
Spanish Succession, and to reorganize it three times, after the 
great defeats of 1704, 1706 and 1708. With an empty treasury 
he succeeded only in part, and he frankly warned the king that 
the enemy would soon be able to dictate the terms of peace. 
He was reproached with having secured the command of the 
army which besieged Turin (1 706) for his son-in-law, the incapable 
due de la Feuillade. Madame de Maintenon even became hostile 
to him, and he abandoned his position on the 10th of June 1709, 
retiring to his estates. He died on the 14th of April 1721. 

Chamillart's papers have been published by G. Esnault, Michel 
Chamillart, controleur general et secretaire d'etat de la guerre, corre- 
spondance et papiers inedits (2 vols., Paris, 1885) ; and by A. de Bois- 
lisle in vol. 2 of his Correspondance des controleurs generaux (1883). 
See D'Auvigny, Vies des hommes illustres (1739), tome vi. pp. 288-402 ; 
E. Moret, Quinze annees du regne de Louis XIV (Paris, 1 851) ; and 
the new edition of the Memoires de St-Simon, by A. de Boislisle. 

CHAMINADE, CECILE (1861- ), French musical composer, 
was born at Paris on the 8th of August 1861. She studied in 
Paris, her musical talent being shown at the age of eight by the 
writing of some church music which attracted Bizet's attention; 
and at eighteen she came out in public as a pianist. Her own 
compositions, both songs (in large numbers) and instrumental 
pieces, were soon produced in profusion: melodious and interest- 
ing, and often charming, they became very popular, without 
being entitled to rank with the greater style of music. Both 
in Paris and in England Mile Chaminade and her works became 
well known at the principal concerts. In 1908 she visited 
America and was warmly welcomed. 

CHAMISSO, ADELBERT VON [Louis Charles Adelaide de] 
(1 781-1838), German poet and botanist, was born at the chateau 
of Boncourt in Champagne, France, the ancestral seat of his 
family, on the 30th of January 1781. Driven from France by 
the Revolution, his parents settled in Berlin, where in 1796 
youjig Chamisso obtained the post of page-in- waiting to the 
queen, and in 1 798 entered a Prussian infantry regiment as ensign. 



826 



CHAMKANNI— CHAMOIS 



His family were shortly afterwards permitted to return to France ; 
he, however, remained behind and continued his career in the 
army. He had but little education, but now sought dis- 
traction from the soulless routine of the Prussian military service 
in assiduous study. In collaboration with Varnhagen von Ense, 
he founded in 1803 the Berliner Musenalmanach, in which his 
first verses appeared. The enterprise was a failure, and, in- 
terrupted by the war, it came to an end in 1806. It brought 
him, however, to the notice of many of the literary celebrities 
of the day and established his reputation as a rising poet. He 
had become lieutenant in 1801, and in 1805 accompanied his 
regiment to Hameln, where he shared in the humiliations follow- 
ing the treasonable capitulation of that fortress in the ensuing 
year. Placed on parole he went to France, where he found that 
both his parents were dead; and, returning to Berlin in the 
autumn of 1807, he obtained his release from the service 
early in the following year. Homeless and without a profession, 
disillusioned and despondent, he lived in Berlin until 1810, when, 
through the services of an old friend of the family, he was offered 
a professorship at the lycie at Napoleonville in La Vendee. He 
set out to take up the post, but drawn into the charmed circle 
of Madame de Stael, followed her in her exile to Coppet in 
Switzerland, where, devoting himself to botanical research, he 
remained nearly two years. In 1812 he returned to Berlin, 
where he continued his scientific studies. In the summer of the 
eventful year, 1813, he wrote the prose narrative Peter Schlemihl, 
the man who sold his shadow. This, the most famous of all his 
works, has been translated into most European languages 
(English by W. Howitt). It was written partly to divert his 
own thoughts and partly to amuse the children of his friend 
Hitzig. In 1 8 1 s Chamisso was appointed botanist to the Russian 
ship " Rurik," which Otto von Kotzebue (son of August von 
Kotzebue) commanded on a scientific voyage round the world. 
His diary of the expedition (Tagebuch, 1821) affords some interest- 
ing glimpses of England and English life. On his return in 1818 
he was made custodian of the botanical gardens in Berlin, and. 
was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences, and in 1820 
he married. Chamisso's travels and scientific researches re- 
strained for a while the full development of his poetical talent, 
and it was not until his forty-eighth year that he turned again 
to literature. In 1829, in collaboration with Gustav Schwab, and 
from 1832 in conjunction with Franz von Gaudy, he brought 
out the Deutsche Musenalmanach, in which his later poems were 
mainly published. He died on the 21st of August 1838. 

As a scientist Chamisso has not left much mark, although his 
Bemerkungen und Ansichten, published in an incomplete form 
in O. von Kotzebue's Entdeckungsreise (Weimar, 1821) and more 
completely in Chamisso's Gesammelte Werke (1836), and the 
botanical work, Ubersicht der nutzbarsten und schadlichsten 
Gewachse in Norddeutschland (1829) are esteemed for their 
careful treatment of the subjects with which they deal. As 
a poet Chamisso's reputation stands high, Frauen Liebe und 
Leben (1830), a cycle of lyrical poems, which was set to music 
by Schumann, being particularly famous. Noteworthy are 
also Schloss Boncourt and Salas y Gomez. In estimating his 
success as a writer, it should not be forgotten that he was cut 
off from his native speech and from his natural current of 
thought and feeling. He often deals with gloomy and some- 
times with ghastly and repulsive subjects; and even in his 
lighter and gayer proudctions there is an undertone of sadness 
or of satire. In the lyrical expression of the domestic emotions 
he displays a fine felicity, and he knew how to treat with 
true feeling a tale of love or vengeance. Die Lowenbraut may 
be taken as a sample of his weird and powerful simplicity; and 
Vergeltung is remarkable for a pitiless precision of treatment. 

The first collected edition of Chamisso's works" was edited by J. E. 
Hitzig, 6 vols. (1836); 6th edition (1874); there are also excellent 
editions by M. Koch (1883) and O. F. Walzel (1892). On Chamisso's 
life see J. E. Hitzig, " Leben und Briefe von Adelbert yon Chamisso " 
(inthe Gesammelte Werke); K. Fulda, Chamissound seine Zeit (1881); 
G. Hofmeister, Adelbert von Chamisso (1884); and, for the scientific 
side of Chamisso's life, E. du Bois- Raymond, Adelbert von Chamisso 
als Naturforscher (1889). 



CHAMKANNI, a small Pathan tribe on the Kohat border of 
the North-West Province of India. They inhabit the western 
part of the Kurmana Valley in the Orakzai portion of Tirah, 
but are supposed to be a distinct race. They took part in the 
frontier risings of 1897, and during the Tirah expedition of 
that year a brigade under General Gaselee was sent to punish 
them. 

CHAMOIS, the Franco-Swiss name of an Alpine ruminant 
known in the German cantons as Gemse, and to naturalists as 
Rupicapra tragus or R. rupicapra tragus. It is the only species 
of its genus, and typifies a subfamily, Rupicaprinae, of hollow- 
horned ruminants in some degree intermediate between antelopes 
and goats (see Antelope). About equal in height to a roebuck, 
and with a short black tail, the chamois is readily distinguishable 
from all other ruminants by its vertical, backwardly-hooked, 
black horns, which are common to males and females, although 
smaller in the latter. Apart from black and white face-markings, 
and the black tail and dorsal stripe, the prevailing colour of the 
Alpine chamois is chestnut brown in summer, but lighter and 
greyer in winter. In the Pyrenees the species is represented by a 
small race locally known as the izard; a very brightly-coloured 
form, if. t. picla, inhabits the Apennines; the Carpathian 
chamois is very dark-coloured, and the one from the Caucasus 
is the representative of yet another race. A thick under-fur is 
developed in the winter-coat, as in all other ruminants dwelling 
at high altitudes. Chamois are gregarious, living in herds of 15 
or 20, and feeding generally in the morning or evening. The old 
males, however, live alone except in the rutting season, which 
occurs in October, when they join the herds, driving off the 
younger bucks, and engaging in fierce contests with each other, 
that often end fatally for one at least of the combatants. The 
period of gestation is twenty weeks, when the female, beneath 
the shelter generally of a projecting rock, produces one and 
sometimes two young. In summer they ascend to the limits of 
perpetual snow, being only exceeded in the loftiness of their 
haunts by the ibex; and during that season they show their 
intolerance of heat by choosing such browsing-grounds as have 
a northern exposure. In winter they descend to the wooded 
districts that immediately succeed the region of glaciers, and it 
is there only they can be successfully hunted. Chamois are 
exceedingly shy; and their senses, especially those of sight and 
smell, very acute. The herd never feeds without having a 
sentinel posted on some prominence to give notice of the approach 
of danger; which is done by stamping on the ground with the 
forefeet, and uttering a shrill whistling note, thus putting the 
entire herd on the alert. No sooner is the object of alarm scented 
or seen than each one seeks safety in the most inaccessible 
situations, which are often reached by a series of astounding 
leaps over crevasses, up the faces of seemingly perpendicular 
rocks, or down the sides of equally precipitous chasms. The. 
chamois will not hesitate, it is said, thus to leap down 20 or even 
30 ft., and this it effects with apparent ease by throwing itself 
forward diagonally and striking its feet several times in its 
descent against the face of the rock. Chamois-shooting is most 
successfully pursued when a number of hunters form a circle 
round a favourite feeding ground, which they gradually narrow; 
the animals, scenting the hunters to windward, fly in the oppo- 
site direction, only to encounter those coming from leeward. 
Chamois-hunting, in spite of, or perhaps owing to the great 
danger attending it, has always been a favourite pursuit among 
the hardy mountaineers of Switzerland and Tirol, as well as of 
the amateur sportsmen of all countries, with the result that the 
animal is now comparatively rare in many districts where it was 
formerly common. Chamois feed in summer on mountain-herbs 
and flowers, and in winter chiefly on the young shoots and buds 
of fir and pine trees. They are particularly fond of salt, and 
in the Alps sandstone rocks containing a saline impregnation 
are often met with hollowed by the constant licking of these 
creatures. The skin of the chamois is very soft; made into 
leather it was the original shammy, which is now made, however, 
from the skins of many other animals. The flesh is prized as 
venison. (R. L.*) 



CHAMOMILE— CHAMPAGNE 



827 



CHAMOMILE, or Camomile Flowers, the flores anthemidis 
of the British Pharmacopoeia, the flower-heads of Anthemis 
nobilis (Nat. Ord. Compositae) , a herb indigenous to England 
and western Europe. It is cultivated for medicinal purposes 
in Surrey, at several places in Saxony, and in France and 
Belgium, — that grown in England being much more valuable 
than any of the foreign chamomiles brought into the market. 
In the wild plant the florets of the ray are ligulate and white, 
and contain pistils only, those of the disk being tubular and 
yellow; but under cultivation the whole of the florets tend to 
become ligulate and white, in which state the flower-heads are 
said to be double. The flower -heads have a warm aromatic 
odour, which is characteristic of the entire plant, and a very 
bitter taste. In addition to a bitter extractive principle, they 
yield about 2 % of a volatile liquid, which on its first extraction 
is of a pale blue colour, but becomes a yellowish brown on 
exposure to light. It has the characteristic odour of the flowers, 
and consists of a mixture of butyl and amyl angelates and 
valerates. Angelate of potassium has been obtained by treatment 
of the oil with caustic potash, and angelic acid may be isolated 
from this by treatment with dilute sulphuric acid. Chamomile 
is used in medicine in the form of its volatile oil, of which the 
dose is 5-3 minims. There is an official extract which is never 
used. Like all volatile oils the drug is a stomachic and carmi- 
native. In large doses the infusion is a simple emetic. 

Wild chamomile is Matricaria Chamomilla, a weed common 
in waste and cultivated ground especially in the southern counties 
of England. It has somewhat the appearance of true chamomile, 
but a fainter scent. 

CHAMONIX, a mountain valley in south-east France, its chief 
village, of the same name, being the capital of a canton of the 
arrondissement of Bonneville in the department of Haute- 
Savoie. The valley runs from N.E. to S.W., and is watered by 
the Arve, which rises in the Mer de Glace. On the S.E. towers 
the snowclad chain of Mont Blanc, and on the N.W.the less lofty, 
but rugged chain of the Brevent and of the Aiguilles Rouges. 
Near the head of the valley is the village of Argentiere Uior 
ft.), which is connected with Switzerland by " char " (light 
carriage) roads over the Tete Noire and past Salvan, and by a 
mule path over the Col de Balme, which joins the Tete Noire 
route near Trient and then crosses by a " char " road the Col de la 
Forclaz to Martigny in the Rhone valley. The principal village, 
Chamonix (3416 ft.), is 6 m. below Argentiere by electric railway 
(which continues via Finhaut to Martigny) and is visited annually 
by a host of tourists, as it is the best starting-point for the 
exploration of the glaciers of the Mont Blanc chain, as well as 
for the ascent of Mont Blanc itself. It is connected with Geneva 
by a railway (55 m.). In 1906 the population of the village was 
806, of the commune 3482. 

The valley is first heard of about 1001, when it was granted by 
the count of the Genevois to the great Benedictine house of St 
Michel de la Cluse, near Turin, which by the early 13th century 
established a priory therein. But in 1 786 the inhabitants bought 
their freedom from the canons of Sallanches, to whom the prioiy 
had been transferred in 1 519. In 1530 the inhabitants obtained 
from the count of the Genevois the privilege of holding two fairs 
a year, while the valley was often visited by the civil officials and 
by the bishops of Geneva (first recorded visit in 141 1, while 
St Francis de Sales came thither in 1606). But travellers for 
pleasure were long rare. The first party to publish (1744) an 
account of their visit was that of Dr R. Pococke, Mr W. Windham 
and other Englishmen who visited the Mer de Glace in 1741. 
In 1742 came P. Martel and several other Genevese, in 1760 
H. B. de Saussure, and rather later Bourrit. 

See J. A. Bonnefoy and A. Perrin, Le Prieurc de Chamonix (2 vols., 
Chambery, 1879 and 1883); A. Perrin, Histoire de la vallee et du 
prieure de Chamonix (Chambery, 1887); L. Kurz and X. Imfeld, 
Carte de la chatne du Mont Blanc (1896; new ed., 1905); L. Kurz, 
Climbers' Guide to the Chain of Mont Blanc (London, 1892); also 
works referred to under Blanc, Mont. (W. A. B. C.) 

CHAMPAGNE, an ancient province of the kingdom of France, 
bounded N. by Liege and Luxemburg; E. by Lorraine; S. by 
Burgundy; and W. by Picardy and Isle de France. I* now 



forms the departments of Ardennes, Marne, Aube and Haute 
Marne, with part of Aisne, Seine-et-Marne, Yonne and Meuse. 
Its name — in Latin Campania, " country of plains " — is derived 
from the immense plains near Reims, Chalons and Troyes. It 
was constituted towards the end of the middle ages by joining 
to the countship of Champagne the ecclesiastical duchies of 
Reims and Langres, together with the ecclesiastical countship of 
Chalons. Documents of the 12th and 13th centuries make it 
possible to determine the territorial configuration of the countship 
of Champagne with greater accuracy than in the case of any other 
fief of the crown of France. Formed at random by the acquisi- 
tions of the counts of the houses of Vermandois and Blois, 
Champagne reckoned among its dependencies, from 1 1 52 to 1 234, 
the countship of Blois and Chartres, of which Touraine was a fief, 
the countship of Sancerre, and various scattered fiefs in the 
Bourbonnais and in Burgundy. Officially called the " countship of 
Champagne and Brie " since 12 17, this state was formed by the 
union of the countships of Troyes and Meaux, to which the greater 
part of the districts embraced in the country known, since the 
beginning of the middle ages, by the name of Champagne and Brie 
came in course of time to be attached. Placed under the authority 
of a single count in 960, the countships of Troyes and Meaux 
were not again separated after 1125. For the counts of Troyes 
before the nth century see Troyes. We confine ourselves here 
to the counts of Champagne of the house of Blois. 

About 1020 Eudes or Odo L (Odo II., count of Blois) became 
count of Champagne. He disputed the kingdom of Burgundy 
with the emperor Conrad, and died in 1037, in a battle near Bar- 
le-Duc. In 1037 he was succeeded by his younger son, Stephen 
II. About 1050 Odo II., son of Stephen II., became count. 
This prince, guilty of murder, found refuge in Normandy, where 
he received the castle of Aumale. He took part in 1066 in the 
conquest of England, and became earl of Holderness. About 
1063 Theobald (Thibaud) I., count of Blois and Meaux, eldest son 
of Odo I., became count of Champagne. In 1077 he seized the 
countships of Vitry and Bar-sur-Aube, left vacant by Simon of 
Valois, who had retired to a monastery. In 1089 Odo III. , second 
son of Theobald II., became count, and was succeeded about 
1093 by his younger brother, Hugh, who became a templar in 
1125, and gave up the countship to his suzerain, the count of Blois. 
In 1 1 25 the countship of Champagne passed to Theobald II. the 
Great, already count of Blois and Meaux, and one of the most 
powerful French barons of his time. He was related to the royal 
house of England, and incurred the displeasure of the king of 
France, who in 1142 invaded Champagne and burnt the town 
of Vitry. After Theobald the Great the countship of Blois ceased 
to be the dominant fief of his house and became the appanage 
of a younger branch. In n 52 Henry the Liberal, eldest son of 
Theobald II., became count of Champagne; he married Mary, 
daughter of Louis VII. of France, and went to the crusade in 1 1 78. 
He was taken prisoner by the Turks, recovered his liberty through 
the good offices of the emperor of the East, and died a few days 
after his return to Champagne. In 1 181 his eldest son, Henry II., 
succeeded him under the tutelage of Mary of France. In 1190 
he went to the Holy Land, and became king of Jerusalem in 1 192 
by his marriage with Isabelle, widow of the marquis of Mont- 
ferrat. He died in 1 197 in his town of Acre from the results of an 
accident. In 1197 Theobald III., younger son of Henry I., be- 
came count, and was succeeded in 1201 by Theobald IV., " le 
Chansonnier " (the singer), who was the son of Theobald III. and 
Blanche of Navarre, and was born some days after the death of 
his father. From 1201 to 1222 he remained under the tutelage 
of his mother, who governed Champagne with great sagacity. 
The reign of this prince was singularly eventful. The two 
daughters of count Henry II. successively claimed the countship, 
so that Theobald had to combat the claims of Philippa, wife of 
Erard of Brienne, seigneur of Rameru, from 12 16 to 1222, and 
those of Alix, queen dowager of Cyprus, in 1233 and 1234. In 
1 2 26 he followed king Louis VII. to the siege of Avignon, and after 
the death of that monarch played a prominent part during the 
reign of St Louis. At first leagued with the malcontent barons, 
he allowed himself to be gained over by the queen-mother, and 



8 2 8 



CHAMPAGNY— CHAMPARAN 



thus eame into collision with his old allies. He became king of 
Navarre in 1234 by the death of his maternal uncle, Sancho VII. 
but by the onerous treaty which he concluded in that year with 
the queen of Cyprus he was compelled to cede to the king, in return 
for a large sum of money, the overlordship of the countships of 
Blois, Chartres and Sancerre, and the viscounty of Chateaudun. 
In 1239 and 1 240 he took part in an expedition to the Holy Land, 
probably accompanied St Louis in 1242 in the campaign of 
Saintonge against the English, and died on the 14th of July 1254 
at Pampeluna. If the author of the Grandes chroniques de 
France can be believed, Theobald IV. conceived a passion for 
Queen Blanche, the mother of St Louis, — a passion which she 
returned, and which explains the changes in his policy; but this 
opinion apparently must be relegated to the category of historical 
fables. The witty and courtly songs he composed place him in 
the front rank of the poets of that class, in which he showed 
somewhat more originality than his rivals. In 1 254 Theobald V. 
the Young, eldest son of Theobald IV. and, like his father, king 
of Navarre, became count of Champagne. He married Isabelle of 
France, daughter of St Louis, and followed his father-in-law to 
Tunis to the crusade, dying on his return. In 1270 he was 
succeeded by Henry III. the Fat, king of Navarre. Henry was 
succeeded in 1274 by his only daughter, Joan of Navarre, under 
the tutelage of her mother, Blanche of Artois, and afterwards of 
Edmund, earl of Lancaster, her mother's second husband. In 
1 284 she married the heir-presumptive to the throne of France, 
Philip the Fair, to whom she brought the countship of Champagne 
as well as the kingdom of Navarre. She became queen of France 
in 1285, and died on the 4th of April 1305, when her eldest son 
by King Philip, Louis Hutin, became count of Champagne. He 
was the last independent count of the province, which became 
attached to the French crown on his accession to the throne of 
France in 1314. 

The celebrated fairs of Champagne, which flourished in the 1 2 th 
and 13 th centuries, were attended by merchants from all parts 
of civilized Europe. They were six in number: two at Troyes, 
two at Provins, one at Lagny-sur-Marne, and one at Bar-sur- 
Aube. They formed a kind of continuous market, divided into 
six periods, and passed in turn from Lagny to Bar, from Bar to 
Provins, from Provins to Troyes, from Troyes to Provins and 
from Provins to Troyes, to complete the year. It was, in fact, 
a perpetual fair, which had at once unity and variety, offering to 
the different parts of the countship the means of selling succes- 
sively the special productions of their soil or their industry, and of 
procuring in exchange riches and comforts. These fairs had 
special legislation; and special magistrates, called " masters of 
the fairs," had control of the police. 

For the wine " champagne " see Wine. 

Authorities.— H. d Arbois de Jubainville, Histoire des dues et des 
comtes de Champagne (1859-1866); A. Longnon, Documents relatifs 
au comte de Champagne et de Brie (1901 seq. ; vol. i. with map) ; F. 
Bourquelot, Mtudes sur les foires de Champagne (1865). (A. Lo.) 

CHAMPAGNY, JEAN BAPTISTE NOMPERE DE (1756-1834), 
French politician, was born at Roanne, and entered the navy in 
1774. He fought through the war in America and resigned in 
1787. Elected deputy by the noblesse of Forex to the states- 
general in 1789, he went over to the third estate on the 21st of 
June and collaborated in the work of the Constituent Assembly, 
especially occupying himself with the reorganization of the navy. 
A political career seems to have attracted him little; he remained 
in private life from 1791 to 1799, when Napoleon named him 
member of the council of state. From July 1801 to August 1804 
he was ambassador of France at Vienna, and directed with great 
intelligence the incessant negotiations between the two courts. 
In August 1804 Napoleon made him minister of the interior, and 
in this position, which he held for three years, he proved an 
administrator of the first order. In addition to the ordinary 
charges of his office, he had to direct the recruitment of the army, 
organize the industrial exhibition of 1808, and to complete the 
public works undertaken in Paris and throughout France. He 
was devoted to Napoleon, on whom he lavished adulation in his 
speeches. In August 1807 the emperor chose him to succeed 



Talleyrand as minister for foreign affairs. He directed the 
annexation of the Papal States in April 1808, worked to secure the 
abdication of Charles IV. of Spain in May 1808, negotiated the 
peace of Vienna (1809) and the marriage of Napoleon. In April 
181 1 a quarrel with the emperor led to his retirement, and he 
obtained the sinecure office of intendant general of the crown. 
In 1 8 14, after the abdication, the empress sent him on a fruitless 
mission to the emperor of Austria. Then he went over to the 
Bourbons. During the Hundred Days he again joined Napoleon. 
This led to his exclusion by Louis XVIII. , but in 1819 he re- 
covered his dignity of peer. He died in Paris in 1834. He had 
three sons who became men of distinction. Francois (1804- 
1882) was a well-known author, who was made a member of the 
French Academy in 1869. His great work was a history of the 
Roman empire, in three parts, (1) Les CSsars (1841-1843, 4 vols.), 
(2) Les Antonins (1863, 3 vols.), (3) Les Cesars du III' siecle 
(1870, 3 vols.). Napoleon (1806-1872) published a Traill de la 
police municipale in 4 volumes (1844-1861), and was a deputy in 
the Corps Legislatif from 1852 to 1870. Jerome Paul (1809- 
1886) was also deputy in the Corps Legislatif from 1853 to 1870, 
and was made honorary chamberlain in 1859. He worked at the 
official publication of the correspondence of Napoleon I. 

CHAMPAIGN, a city of Champaign county, Illinois, U.S.A., 
about 125 m. S. by W. of Chicago, on the head-w r aters of the 
Vermilion river. Pop. (1890) 5839; (1900) 9098, of whom 973 
were foreign-born; (1910 census) 12,421. It is served by the 
Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St Louis, the Wabash, and 
the Illinois Central railways (the last having repair shops here), 
and by the Illinois (electric) Traction System from Danville, 
Illinois, to St Louis, Missouri. In 1 906 the city covered 3 • 5 sq. m. ; 
it is situated in a rich agricultural region, and has small manu- 
facturing interests. Immediately east of Champaign is the city 
of Urbana, the county-seat of Champaign county, served by 
the Wabash and the Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St Louis 
railways, with repair shops of the latter. In 1890 the population 
of Urbana was 3511; in 1900, 5728 (300 foreign-born); in 1910, 
8245. Partly in Urbana and partly in Champaign is the Uni- 
versity of Illinois (see Illinois) ; immediately south of its 
campus is the 400-acre farm of the university. Each city has a 
public library, and in Champaign are the Burnham Athenaeum, 
the Burnham hospital, the Garwood home for old ladies, and 
several parks, all gifts of former citizens. Champaign was 
founded in 1855, incorporated as a city in i860, and re-chartered 
in 1883. Urbana secured a city charter in 1855. 

CHAMPAIGNE, PHILIPPE DE (1602-1674), Belgian painter 
of the French school, was born at Brussels of a poor family. He 
was a pupil of J. Fouquieres; and, going to Paris in 1621, was 
employed by N. Du Chesne to paint along with Nicholas Poussin 
in the palace of the Luxembourg. His best works are to be 
found at Vincennes, and in the church of the Carmelites at Paris, 
where is his celebrated Crucifix, a signal perspective success, on 
one of the vaultings. After the death of Du Chesne, Philippe 
became first painter to the queen of France, and ultimately 
rector of the Academy of Paris. As his age advanced and his 
health failed, he retired to Port Royal, where he had a daughter 
cloistered as a nun, of whom (along with Catherine Agnes Arnauld) 
he painted a celebrated picture, now in the Louvre, highly remark- 
able for its solid unaffected truth. This, indeed, is the general 
character of his work, — grave reality, without special elevation or 
depth of character, or charm of warm or stately colour. He pro- 
duced an immense number of paintings, religious and other 
subjects as well as portraits, dispersed over various parts of 
France, and now over the galleries of Europe. Philippe was a 
good man, indefatigable, earnest and scrupulously religious. 
He died on the 12th of August 1674. 

CHAMPARAN, or Chumparun, a district of British India, 
in the Patna division of Bengal, occupying the north-west 
corner of Behar, between the two rivers Gandak and Baghmati 
and the Nepal hills. It has an area of 3531 sq. m. In 1901 the 
population was 1,790,463, showing a decrease of 4% in the 
decade. A broad grass-covered road or embankment defines the 
Nepal frontier, except where rivers or streams form a natural 



CHAMPEAUX— CHAMPIONNET 



829 



boundary. The district is a vast level except in the N. and N.W., 
where it undulates, and gradually assumes a rugged appearance 
as it approaches the mountains and forests of Nepal. Wide 
uncultivated tracts cover its north-western corner; the southern 
and western parts are carefully cultivated, and teem with an 
active agricultural population. The principal rivers are the 
Gandak, navigable all the year round, the Buri Gandak, Panch 
Nadi, Lalbagia, Koja and Teur. Old beds of rivers intersect 
Champaran in every direction, and one of these forms a chain 
of lakes which occupy an area of 139 sq. m. in the centre of the 
district. Champaran, with the rest of Bengal and Behar, was 
acquired by the British in 1765. Up to 1866 it remained a 
subdivision of Saran. In that year it was separated and formed 
into a separate district. The administrative headquarters are 
at Motihari (population, 13,730); Bettia is the centre of a very 
large estate; Segauli, still a small military station, was the 
scene of a massacre during the Mutiny. Champaran was the 
chief seat of indigo planting in Behar before the decline of that 
industry. There are about 40 saltpetre refineries. The district 
suffered severely from drought in 1866 and 1874, and again in 
1897. In the last year a small government canal was opened, 
and a canal from the Gandak has also been constructed. The 
district is traversed almost throughout its length to Bettia by 
the Tirhoot state railway. A considerable trade is conducted 
with Nepal. 

CHAMPEAUX, WILLIAM OF [Gulielmus Campellensis] 
(c. 1070-1121), French philosopher and theologian was born 
at Champeaux near Melun. After studying under Anselm of 
Laon and Roscellinus, he taught in the school of the cathedral 
of Notre Dame, of which he was made canon in 1103. Among 
his pupils was Abelard. In 1108 he retired into the abbey of 
St Victor, where he resumed his lectures. He afterwards 
became bishop of Chalons-sur-Marne, and took part in the 
dispute concerning investitures as a supporter of Calixtus II., 
whom he represented at the conference of Mousson. His only 
printed works are a fragment on the Eucharist (inserted by 
Jean Mabillon in his edition of the works of St Bernard), and 
the M or alia Abbreviata and De Origine Animae (in\E. Martene's 
Thesaurus novus Anecdotorum, 1717, vol. 5). In the last of these 
he maintains that children who die unbaptized must be lost, 
the pure soul being defiled by the grossness of the body, and 
declares that God's will is not to be questioned. He upholds 
the theory of Creatianism (that a soul is specially created for 
each human being). Ravaisson-Mollien has discovered a 
number of fragments by him, among which the most important 
is the De Essentia Dei et de Substantia Dei; a Liber Sententiarum, 
consisting of discussions on ethics and Scriptural interpretation, 
is also ascribed to Champeaux. He is reputed the founder of 
Realism. For his views and his controversy with Abelard, see 
Scholasticism and Abelard. 

See Victor Cousin, introduction to his Outrages inedits d' 'Abelard 
(1836), and Fragments pour servir a Vhistoire de la philosophie (1865) ; 
G. A. Patru, Wilhelmi Campellensis de natura et de origine rerum 
placita (1847) ; E. Michaud, Guillaume de Champeaux et les ecoles 
de Paris au XII' siecle (2nd ed., 1868); " William of Champeaux 
and his Times" in Christian Observer, lxxii. 843; B. Haureau, De 
la philosophie scolastique (Paris, 1850) ; Opuscula in J. P. Migne's 
Patrologia, clxiii. 

CHAMPERTY, or Champaety (Lat. campi partitio, 0. Fr. 
champ parti), in English law, a bargain between a plaintiff or 
defendant in a cause and another person, to divide the land 
{campum partiri) or other matter sued for, if they prevail, in 
consideration of that person carrying on or defending the suit 
at his own expense. It is a misdemeanour punishable by fine 
or imprisonment. It differs only from maintenance (q.v.), in 
that the recompense for the service which has been given ' is 
always part of the matter in suit, or some profit growing out of 
it. So an agreement by a solicitor not to charge costs on 
condition of retaining for himself a share of the sums recovered 
would be illegal and void. It is not, however, champerty to 
charge the subject-matter of a suit in order to obtain the means 
of prosecuting it. 

See Fifth Report of the Criminal Law Commissioners, pp. 34-9. 



CHAMPION (Fr. champion, Late Lat. campio from campus, 
a field or open space, i.e. one " who takes the field " or fights; 
cf. Ger. Kampf, battle, and Kampfer, fighter), in the judicial 
combats of the middle ages the substitute for a party to the suit 
disabled from bearing arms or specially exempt from the duty 
to do so (see Wager). Hence the word has come to be applied 
to any one who " champions," or contends on behalf of, any 
person or cause. In the laws of the Lombards (lib. ii. tit. 56 
§§ 38, 39), those who by reason of youth, age or infirmity could 
not bear arms were allowed to nominate champions, and the 
same provision was made in the case of women (lib. i. tit. 
3 § 6, tit. 16, §2). This was practically the rule laid down in all 
subsequent legislation on the subject. Thus the Assize oj 
Jerusalem (cap. 39) says: " These are the people who may defend 
themselves through champions; a woman, a sick man, a man 
who has passed the age of sixty, &c." The clergy, too, whether 
as individuals or corporations, were represented by champions; 
in the case of bishops and abbots this function was part of the 
duties of the advocatus (see Advocate). Du Cange gives 
instances of mercenary champions (campiones conductitii) , who 
were regarded as " infamous persons " and sometimes, in case 
of defeat, were condemned to lose hand or foot. Sometimes 
championships were " serjeanties," i.e. rendered service to lords, 
churches or cities in consideration of the grant of certain fiefs, or 
for annual money payments, the champion doing homage to the 
person or corporation represented by him {campiones homagii). 

The office of " king's champion " {campio regis) is peculiar 
to England. The function of the king's champion, when the 
ceremonial of the coronation was carried out in its completeness, 
was to ride, clad in complete armour, on his right the high 
constable, on his left the earl marshal, into Westminster Hall 
during the coronation banquet, and challenge to single combat 
any who should dispute the king's right to reign. The challenge 
was thrice repeated by the herald, at the entrance to the hall, 
in the centre, and at the foot of the dais. On picking up his 
gauntlet for the third time the champion was pledged by the 
king in a gilt-covered cup, which was then presented to him as 
his fee by the king. If he had had occasion to fight, and was 
victorious, his fee would have been the armour he wore and the 
horse he rode, the second best in the royal stables; but no such 
occasion has ever arisen. This picturesque ceremonial was last 
performed at the coronation of George IV. The office of king's 
champion is of great antiquity, and its origins are involved in 
great obscurity. It is said to have been held under William the 
Conqueror by Robert or Roger Marmion, whose ancestors had 
been hereditary champions in Normandy. The first authentic 
record, however is a charter of Henry I., signed by Robert 
Marmion {Robertus de Bajucis campio regis). Of the actual 
exercise of the office the earliest record dates from the coronation 
of Richard II. On this occasion the champion, Sir John Dymoke, 
appeared at the door of the Abbey immediately after the corona- 
tion mass, but was peremptorily told to go away and return 
later; moreover, in his bill presented to the court of claims, he 
stated that the champion was to ride in the procession before 
the service, and make his challenge to all the world. This seems 
to show that the ceremony, as might be expected, was originally 
performed before the king's coronation, when it would have had 
some significance. The office of king's champion is hereditary, 
and is now held by the family of Dymoke {q.v.). 

See Du Cange, Glossarium, s.v. " Campio " ; L. G. Wickham Legg, 
English Coronation Records (Westminster, 1901) ; J. H. T. Perkins, 
The Coronation Book (London, 1902). 

CHAMPIONNET, JEAN ETIENNE (1762-1800), French 
general, enlisted in the army at an early age and served in the 
great siege of Gibraltar. When the Revolution broke out he 
took a prominent part in the movement, and was elected by the 
men of a battalion to command them. In May 1793 he was 
charged with the suppression of the disturbances in the Jura, 
which he quelled without bloodshed. Under Pichegru he took 
part in the Rhine campaign of that year as a brigade commander, 
and at Weissenburg and in the Palatinate won the warm com- 
mendation of Lazare Hoche. At Fleurus his stubborn fighting 



8 3 o 



CHAMPLAIN, S. DE— CHAMPLAIN 



in the centre of the field contributed greatly to Jourdan's victory. 
In the subsequent campaigns he commanded the left wing of the 
French armies on the Rhine between Neuwied and Dusseldorf, 
and took a great part in all the successful and unsuccessful 
expeditions to the Lahn and the Main. In 1798 Championnet 
was named commander-in-chief of the " army of Rome " which 
was protecting the infant Roman republic against the Neapolitan 
court and the British fleet. Nominally 32,000 strong, the army 
scarcely numbered 8000 effectives, with a bare fifteen cartridges 
per man. The Austrian general Mack had a tenfold superiority 
in numbers, but Championnet so well held his own that he ended 
by capturing Naples itself and there setting up the Parthenopean 
Republic. But his intense earnestness and intolerance of 
opposition soon embroiled him with the civilians, and the 
general was recalled in disgrace. The following year, however, 
saw him again in the field as commander-in-chief of the " army 
of the Alps." This, too, was at first a mere paper force, but after 
three months' hard work it was able to take the field. The 
campaign which followed was uniformly unsuccessful, and, 
worn out by the unequal struggle, Championnet died at Antibes 
on the 9th of January 1800. In 1848 a statue was erected in his 
honour at Valence. 

See A. R. C. de St Albin, Championnet, ou les Campagnes de 
Hollande, de Rome et de Naples (Paris, i860). 

CHAMPLAIN, SAMUEL DE (1567-1635), French explorer, 
colonial pioneer and first governor of French Canada, was born 
at Brouage, a small French port on the Bay of Biscay, in 1567. 
His father was a sea captain, and the boy was early skilled in 
seamanship and navigation. He entered the army of Henry IV., 
and served in Brittany under Jean d'Aumont, Frangois de St 
Luc and Charles de Brissac. When the army of the League 
was disbanded he accompanied his uncle, who had charge of the 
ships in which the Spanish allies were conveyed home, and on 
reaching Cadiz secured (1599) the command of one of the vessels 
about to make an expedition to the West Indies. He was gone 
over two years, visiting all the principal ports and pushing 
inland from Vera Cruz to the city of Mexico. The MS. account 
of his adventures, Bref Discours des Choses plus remarquables 
que Samuel Champlain de Brouage a recognues aux Indes Occi- 
dentals, is in the library at Dieppe. It was not published in 
French until 1870, although an English translation was printed 
by the Hakluyt Society in 1859. It contains a suggestion of a 
Panama Canal, " by which the voyage to the South Sea would 
be shortened by more than 1500 leagues." In 1603 Champlain 
made his first voyage to Canada, being sent out by Aymar de 
Clermont, seigneur de Chastes, on whom the king had bestowed 
a patent. Champlain at once established friendly relations 
with the Indians and explored the St Lawrence to the rapids 
above Montreal. On his return he published an interesting 
and historically valuable little book, Des sauvages, ou voyage de 
Samuel Champlain de Brouage fait en la France Nouvelle. During 
his absence de Chastes had died, and his privileges and fur trade 
monopolies were conferred upon Pierre de Guast, sieur de Monts 
(1560-1611). With him, in 1604, Champlain was engaged in 
exploring the coast as far south as Cape Cod, in seeking a site 
for a new settlement, and in making surveys and charts. They 
first settled on an island near the mouth of the St Croix river, 
and then at Port Royal — now Annapolis, N.S. 

Meanwhile the Basques and Bretons, asserting that they were 
being ruined by de Monts' privileges, got his patent revoked, 
and Champlain returned with the discouraged colonists to Europe. 
When, however, in modified form, the patent was re-granted to 
his patron Champlain induced him to abandon Acadia and 
establish a settlement on the St Lawrence, of the commercial 
advantages of which, perhaps even as a western route to China 
and Japan, he soon convinced him. Champlain was placed in 
command of one of the two vessels sent out. He was to explore 
and colonize, while the other vessel traded, to pay for the ex- 
pedition. Champlain fixed on the site of Quebec and founded 
the first white settlement there in July 1608, giving it its present 
name. In the spring he joined a war party of Algonquins and 
Hurons, discovered the great lake that bears his name, and, near 



the present Ticonderoga, took with his arquebus an important 
part in the victory which his savage friends obtained over the 
Iroquois. The Iroquois naturally turned first to the Dutch and 
then to the English for allies. " Thus did new France rush into 
collision with the redoubted warriors of the Five Nations. Here 
was the beginning, and in some measure doubtless the cause, of 
a long suite of murderous conflicts, bearing havoc and flame to 
generations yet unborn " (Parkman). Champlain returned to 
France and again related to Henry IV. — who had previously 
learned his worth and had pensioned him — his exciting adventures. 
De Monts failed to secure a renewal of his patent, but resolved 
to proceed without it. Champlain was again (161 1) in Canada, 
fighting for and against the Indians and establishing a trading 
post at Mont Royal (see Montreal). He was the third white 
man to descend, and the second to descend successfully, the 
Lachine Rapids. De Monts, now governor of Paris, was too busy 
to occupy himself in the waning fortunes of the colony, and left 
them entirely to his associate. An influential protector was 
needed; and Champlain prevailed upon Charles de Bourbon, 
comte de Soissons, to interest himself to obtain from the king 
the appointment of lieutenant-general in New France. The 
comte de Soissons died almost immediately, and was succeeded 
in the office by Henri de Bourbon, prince de Conde, and he, like 
his predecessors and successors, retained Champlain as lieutenant- 
governor. " In Champlain alone was the life of New France. 
By instinct and temperament he was more impelled to the 
adventurous toils of exploration than to the duller task of 
building colonies. The profits of trade had value in his eyes only 
as means to these ends, and settlements were important chiefly 
as a base of discovery. Two great objects eclipsed all others, 
— to find a route to the Indies, and to bring the heathen tribes 
into the embraces of the Church, since, while he cared little for 
their bodies, his solicitude for their souls knew no bounds" 
(Parkman). 

In 1 6 1 3 Champlain again crossed the Atlantic and endeavoured 
to confirm Nicolas de Vignau's alleged discovery of a short route 
to the ocean by the Ottawa river, a great lake at its source, and 
another river flowing north therefrom. That year he got as 
far as Allumette Island in the Ottawa, but two years later, with 
a " Great War Party " of Indians, he crossed Lake Nipissing 
and the eastern ends of Lakes Huron and Ontario, and made a 
fierce but unsuccessful attack on an Onondaga fortified town 
a few miles south of Lake Oneida. This was the end of his 
wanderings. He now devoted himself to the growth and 
strengthening of Quebec. Every year he went to France with 
this end in view. He was one of the hundred associates of the 
Company of New France, created by Richelieu to reform abuses 
and take over all his country's interests in the new world. These 
ill-defended possessions England now prepared to seize. Three 
ships were sent out under letters of marque commanded by 
David, Lewis and Thomas Kirke, and Quebec, already on the 
verge of starvation, was compelled to surrender (1629). Champ- 
lain was taken to England a prisoner, but when Canada was 
restored to the French he returned (1633) to his post, where he 
died on the 25th of December 1635. He had married in 1610, 
Helene Boulle, then but twelve years old. She did not leave 
France for Canada, however, until ten years later. After his 
death she became a nun. 

Champlain's complete works in 6 vols, were published under the 
patronage of the university of Laval in 1870. There is a careful 
translation of Champlain's Voyages, by Professor and Mrs E. G. 
Bourne in the " Trailmaker " series edited by Prof. J. B. McMaster. 
See F. Parkman, Pioneers of France in the New World (1865); J- 
Winsor, Cartier to Frontenac (1894); N. E. Dionne, Champlain 
(i9°5)- (N. E. D.) 

CHAMPLAIN, a lake lying between the states of New York 
and Vermont, U.S.A., and penetrating for a few miles into 
Canada. It extends about 130 m. from N. to S., varies from 
1 m. to 1 m. in width for 40 m. from its S. terminus, and then 
widens until it reaches a maximum width of about 1 1 m. near 
Ausable Point. Its area is about 500 sq. m. Its surface is 96 
ft. above the sea. In the north part it is generally from 200 to 
300 ft. deep; opposite Essex, N.Y., near its middle, the depth 



CHAMPMESLE— CHAMPOLLION 



831 



increases to 400 ft.; but farther south it is much less; through- 
out the greater part of the lake there is a depth of water of more 
than 100 ft. Since the lake is caused by the ponding of water 
in a broad irregular valley, the shore line is nearly everywhere 
much broken, and in the northern portion are several islands, 
both large and small, most of which belong to Vermont. These 
islands divide the lake's northern end into two large arms 
which extend into Canada. From the western arm the Richelieu 
river flows out, carrying the water of Champlain to the St 
Lawrence. The waters abound in salmon, salmon- trout, sturgeon 
and other fish, and are navigated from end to end by large 
steamboats and vessels of considerable tonnage. The lake 
was formerly the seat of extensive traffic, especially in lumber, 
but navigation has greatly decreased; the tonnage entering and 
clearing at the lake was twice as great in the early '7o's as it 
was thirty years later. The principal ports are Burlington, Vt., 
and Plattsburg, N.Y. Lake Champlain lies in a valley from 1 to 
30 m. wide, between the Green Mountains on the east and the 
Adirondack Mountains on the west, and the scenery is most 
picturesque. On the east side is a rather gradual ascent for 20 m. 
or more from shore to summit, while on the west side the ascent 
is by a succession of hills, in some places from the water's edge. 
North of Crown Point low mountains rise 1000 to 1600 ft. above 
the lake, and behind these are the higher peaks of the Adirondacks, 
reaching an elevation of more than 5000 ft. Lake George is 
a tributary on the south, several small streams flow in from each 
side; the Champlain Canal, 63 m. in length, connects the lake 
with the Hudson river; and through the Richelieu it has a 
natural outlet to the north into the St Lawrence. 

Lake Champlain was named from Samuel de Champlain, who 
discovered it in July 1609. The valley is a natural pathway 
between the United States and Canada, and during the various 
wars which the English have waged in America it had great 
strategic importance. In 1731 the French built a fort at Crown 
Point; in 1756, another at Ticonderoga; and both were import- 
ant strategic points in the French and Indian War as well as in 
the American War of Independence. On the nth of October 
1776, the first battle between an American and a British fleet, 
the battle of Valcour Island, was fought on the lake. Benedict 
Arnold, the American commander, with a decidedly inferior 
force, withstood the British under Thomas Pringle for about 
seven hours, and then during the night escaped through the 
enemy's line. Although overtaken the next day he again, after 
a fight of a few hours, made a successful retreat. 

At the beginning of the War of 181 2 the American naval 
force on the lake, though very small, was superior to that of the 
British, but on the 3rd of June 1813 the British captured two 
American sloops in the narrow channel at the northern end and 
gained supremacy. Both sides now began to build and equip 
vessels for a decisive contest; by May 1814 the Americans 
had regained supremacy, and four months later a British land 
force of 11,000 men under Sir George Prevost (1767-1816) and a 
naval force of 16 vessels of about 2402 tons with 937 men and 
92 guns under Captain George Downie (d. 1814) confronted an 
American land force of 1500 men under Brigadier-General 
Alexander Macomb (1782-1841), strongly entrenched at Platts- 
burg, and an American naval force (anchored in Plattsburg Bay) 
of 14 vessels of about 2244 tons with 882 men and 86 guns under 
Commodore Thomas Macdonough (1783-1825). In the open 
lake the British naval force should have been the superior, but 
at anchor in the bay the Americans had a decided advantage. 
Expecting the British land force to drive the American fleet 
from its anchorage, Captain Downie, on the nth of September 
1814, began the battle of Lake Champlain. It had continued 
only fifteen minutes when he was killed; the land force failed 
to co-operate, and after a severe fight at close range for 2§ hours, 
during which the British lost about 300 men, the Americans 200 
and the vessels of both sides were greatly shattered, the British 
retreated both by land and by water, abandoning their plan of 
invading New York. 

See C. E. Peet, " Glacial and Post-Glacial History of the Hudson 
and Champlain Valleys," in vol. xii. of the Journal of Geology 



(Chicago, 1904); P. S. Palmer, History of Lake Champlain (Albany. 
1866) ; and Capt. A. T. Mahan, Sea Power in its Relations to the War 
of 1812 (2 vols., Boston, 1905). 

CHAMPMESlJ, MARIE (1642-1698), French actress, was 
born in Rouen of a good family. Her father's name was Desmares. 
She made her first appearance on the stage at Rouen with 
Charles Chevillet (1645-1701), who called himself sieur de 
Champmesle, and they were married in 1666. By 1669 they 
were playing in Paris at the Theatre du Marais, her first appear- 
ance there being as Venus in Boyer's File de Venus. The next 
year, as Hermione in Racine's Andromaque, she had a great 
success at the Hotel de Bourgogne. Her intimacy with Racine 
dates from then. Some of his finest tragedies were written for 
her, but her repertoire was not confined to them, and many an 
indifferent play — like Thomas Corneille's Ariane and Comte 
d' Essex — owed its success to " her natural manner of acting, 
and her pathetic rendering of the hapless heroine." Phedre 
was the climax of her triumphs, and when she and her husband 
deserted the Hotel de Bourgogne (see Bf.jart ad fin.), it was 
selected to open the Comedie Francaise on the 26 th of August 
1680. Here, with Mme Guerin as the leading comedy actress, 
she played the great tragic love parts for more than thirty years, 
dying on the 15th of May 1698. La Fontaine dedicated to her 
his novel Belphegor, and Boileau immortalized her in verse. 
Her husband distinguished himself both as actor and playwright, 
and his Parisien (1682) gave Mme Guerin one of her greatest 
successes. 

Her brother, the actor Nicolas Desmares (c. 1650-1714), 
began as a member of a subsidized company at Copenhagen, but 
by her influence he came to Paris and was received in 1685 
sans debut — the first time such an honour had been accorded — ■ 
at the Comedie Franchise, where he became famous for peasant 
parts. His daughter, to whom Christian V. and his queen stood 
sponsors, Christine Antoinette Charlotte Desmares (1682- 
1 753), was a fine actress in both tragedy and soubrette parts. 
She made her debut at the Comedie Francaise in 1699, in La 
Grange Chancel's Oreste et Pylade, and was at once received as 
societaire. She retired in 1721. 

CHAMPOLLION, JEAN FRANCOIS (1790-1832), French 
Egyptologist, called le Jeune to distinguish him from Cham- 
pollion-Figeac (q.v.), his elder brother, was born at Figeac, in the 
department of Lot, on the 23rd of December 1790. He was 
educated by his brother, and was then appointed government 
pupil at the Lyceum, which had recently been founded. His 
first work (1804) was an attempt to show by means of their 
names that the giants of the Bible and of Greek mythology were 
personifications of natural phenomena. At the age of sixteen 
(1807) he read before the academy of Grenoble a paper in which 
he maintained that the Coptic was the ancient language of 
Egypt. He soon after removed to Paris, where he enjoyed the 
friendship of Langles, De Sacy and Millin. In 1809 he was 
made professor of history in the Lyceum of Grenoble, and there 
published his earlier works. Champollion's first decipherment 
of hieroglyphics dates from 1821. In 1824 he was sent by Charles 
X. to visit the collections of Egyptian antiquities in the museums 
of Turin, Leghorn, Rome and Naples; and on his return he 
was appointed director of the Egyptian museum at the Louvre. 
In 1828 he was commissioned to undertake the conduct of a 
scientific expedition to Egypt in company with Rosellini, who 
had received a similar appointment from Leopold II., grand 
duke of Tuscany. He remained there about a year. In March 
1 83 1 he received the chair of Egyptian antiquities, which had 
been created specially for him, in the College de France. He 
was engaged with Rosellini in publishing the results of Egyptian 
researches at the expense of the Tuscan and French governments, 
when he was seized with a paralytic disorder, and died at Paris 
in 1832. Champollion, whose claims were hotly disputed for 
many years after his death, is now universally acknowledged 
to have been the founder of Egyptology. 

He wrote UHgypte sous les Pharaons (2 vols. 8vo, 1814); Sur 
I'ecriture hieratique (1821); Sur I' ecriture demotique ; Precis du sys- 
teme hieroglyphique, &c. (1824); Pantheon egyptien, ou collection 
des personnages mythologiques de I'ancienne Egypte (incomplete) ; 



8 3 2 



CHAMPOLLION-FIGEAC— CHANCELLOR 



Monumens de I'fcgyple el de la Nubie consideres par rapport d, Vhistoire, 
la religion, &c; Grammaire egyptienne (1836), and Dictionnaire 
egyptienne (1841), edited by his brother; Analyse methodique du 
texte demotique de Rosette; Apercu des resultats historiques de la 
decouverte de I 'alphabet hieroglyphique (1827) ; Memoires sur les signes 
employes par les Hgyptiens dans leurs trois systemes graphiques a la 
notation des principales divisions du temps; Lettres ecrites d'Egypte 
et de Nubie (1833); and also several letters on Egyptian subjects, 
addressed at different periods to the due de Blacas and others. 

See H. Hartleben, Champollion, sein Leben und sein Werk (2 vols., 
1906) ; also Egypt: Language and Writing (ad init.). 

CHAMPOLLION-FIGEAC, JACQUES JOSEPH (1 778-1867), 
French archaeologist, elder brother of Jean Francois Cham- 
pollion, was born at Figeac in the department of Lot, on the 
5th of October 1778. He became professor of Greek and librarian 
at Grenoble, but was compelled to retire in 1816 on account of 
the part he had taken during the Hundred Days. He afterwards 
became keeper of manuscripts at the Bibliotheque Nationale in 
Paris, and professor of palaeography at the Ecole des Chartes. 
In 1849 he became librarian of the palace of Fontainebleau. 
He edited several of his brother's works, and was also author of 
original works on philological and historical subjects, among 
which may be mentioned Nouvelles recherches sur les patois ou 
idiomes vulgaires de la France (1809), Annales de Lagides (18 19) 
and Chartes latines sur papyrus du VI' siecle de I'ere chrttienne. 
His son Aime (181 2-1894) became his father's assistant at the 
Bibliotheque Nationale, and besides a number of works on 
historical subjects wrote a biographical and bibliographical study 
of his family in Les Deux Champollion (Grenoble, 1887). 

CHANCE (through the 0. Fr. cMance, from the Late Lat. 
cadentia, things happening, from coder e, to fall out, happen; 
cf. " case "), an accident or event, a phenomenon which has no 
apparent or discoverable cause; hence an event which has not 
been expected, a piece of good or bad fortune. From the popular 
idea that anything of which no assignable cause is known has 
therefore no cause, chance (Gr. tvxv) was regarded as having a 
substantial objective existence, being itself the source of such 
uncaused phenomena. For the philosophic theories relating to 
this subject see Accidentalism. 

" Chance," in the theory of probability, is used in two ways. 
In the stricter, or mathematical usage, it is synonymous with 
probability; i.e. if a particular event may occur in n ways in an 
aggregate of p events, then the " chance " of the particular event 
occurring is given by the fraction n/p. In the second usage, the 
"chance" is regarded as the ratio of the number of ways which 
a particular event may occur to the number of ways in which it 
may not occur; mathematically expressed, this chance is 
nl(p-n) (see Probability) . In the English law relating to gaming 
and wagering a distinction is drawn between games of chance 
and games of skill (see Gaming and Wagering). 

CHANCEL (through 0. Fr. from Lat. plur. cancelli, dim. of 
cancer, grating, lattice, probably connected with an Indo- 
European root Kar-, to bend; cf. circus, curve, &c), in the 
earliest and strictest sense that part of a church near the altar 
occupied by the deacons and sub-deacons assisting the officiating 
priest, this space having originally been separated from the rest 
of the church by cancelli or lattice work. The word cancelli is 
used in classical Latin of a screen, bar or the like, set to mark 
off an enclosed space in a building or in an open place. It is 
thus used of the bar in a court of justice (Cicero, Verres, ii. 3 seq.). 
It is particularly used of the lattice or screen in the ancient 
basilica, which separated the bema, or raised tribunal, from the 
rest of the building. The use of the name m ecclesiastical 
buildings is thus natural, for the altar stood in the place occupied 
by the bema in the apse of the basilica. From the screen the 
term was early transferred to the space inter cancellos, i.e. the 
locus altaris cancellis septus. This railed-off space is now gener- 
ally known among Roman Catholics as the " sanctuary," the 
word chancel being little used. In the Church of England, 
however, the word chancel survived the Reformation, and is 
applied, both in the ecclesiastical and the architectural sense, 
to that part of the church occupied by the principal altar or 
communion table and by the clergy and singers officiating at the 
chief services; it thus includes presbytery, chancel proper and 



choir (q.v.), and in this sense, in the case of cathedrals and 
other large churches, is often used synonymously with choir. 
In this more inclusive sense the early basilican churches had no 
chancels, which were a comparatively late development; the 
cancelli, e.g. of such a church as San Clemente at Rome are 
equivalent not to the " chancel screen " of a medieval church 
but to the " altar rails " that divide off the sanctuary. In 
churches of the type that grew to its perfection in the middle 
ages the chancels are clearly differentiated from the nave by 
structural features: by the raising of the floor level, by the 
presence of a " chancel arch," and by a chancel or rood screen 
(see Rood). The chancel screen might be no more than a low 
barrier, some 4 ft. high, or a light structure of wood or wrought 
iron; sometimes, however, they were massive stone screens, 
which in certain cases were continued on either side between the 
piers of the choir and (on the European continent) round the 
east end of the sanctuary, as in the cathedrals of Paris, Bourges, 
Limoges, Amiens and Chartres. These screens served the 
purpose, in collegiate and conventual churches, of cutting off 
the space reserved for the services conducted for and by the 
members of the chapter or community. For popular services a 
second high altar was usually set up to the west of the screen, 
as formerly at Westminster Abbey. In parish churches the 
screen was set, partly to differentiate the space occupied by the 
clergy from that reserved for the laity, partly to support the 
representation of the crucifixion known as the Rood. In these 
churches, too, the chancel is very usually structurally differenti- 
ated by being narrower and, sometimes, less high than the nave. 

In the Church of England, the duty of repairing the chancel 
falls upon the parson by custom, while the repair of the body 
of the church falls on the parishioners. In particular cases, 
as in certain London churches, the parishioners also have to 
repair the chancel. Where there a^e both a rector and a vicar 
the repairs are shared between them, and this is also the case 
where the rector is a lay impropriator. By the rubric of the 
English Prayer Book " the chancels shall remain as they have 
done in times past," i.e. distinguished from the body of the 
church by some partition sufficient to separate the two without 
interfering with the view of the congregation. At the Reforma- 
tion, and for some time after, this distinction was regarded by 
the dominant Puritan party as a mark of sacerdotalism, and 
services were commonly said in other parts of the church, the 
chancels being closed and disused. The rubric, however, directs 
that " ' Morning and Evening Prayer ' shall be used in the 
accustomed place in the church, chapel or chancel, except it 
shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinary." Chancel screens, 
with or without gates, are lawful, but chancellors of dioceses 
have refused to grant a faculty to erect gates, as unnecessary or 
inexpedient. 

CHANCELLOR (M. Eng. and Anglo-Fr. canceler, chanceler, Fr. 
chancelier, Lat. cancellarius) , an official title used by most of the 
peoples whose civilization has arisen directly or indirectly out of 
the Roman empire. At different times and in different countries 
it has stood and stands for very various duties, and has been, and 
is, borne by officers of various degrees of dignity. The original 
chancellors were the cancellarii of Roman courts of justice, 
ushers who sat at the cancelli or lattice work screens of a 
" basilica " or law court, which separated the judge and counsel 
from the audience (see Chancel). In the later Eastern empire 
the cancellarii were promoted at first to notarial duties. The 
barbarian kingdoms which arose on the ruin of the empire in the 
West copied more or less intelligently the Roman model in all 
their judicial and financial administration. Under the Frankish 
kings of the Merovingian dynasty the cancellarii were sub- 
ordinates of the great officer of state called the referendarius, 
who was the predecessor of the more modern chancellor. The 
office became established under the form archi-cancellarius, or 
chief of the cancellarii. Stubbs says that the Carolingian 
chancellor was the royal notary and the arch-chancellor keeper 
of the royal seal. His functions would naturally be discharged 
by a cleric in times when book learning was mainly confined to 
the clergy. From the reign of Louis the Pious the post was held 



CHANCELLOR 



833 



by a bishop. By an equally natural process he became the chief 
secretary of the king and of the queen, who also had her chancellor. 
Such an office possessed an obvious capacity for developing on 
the judicial as well as the administrative side. Appeals and 
petitions of aggrieved persons would pass through the chancellor's 
hands, as well as the political correspondence of the king. Nor 
was the king the only man who had need of a chancellor. Great 
officers and corporations also had occasion to employ an agent to 
do secretarial, notarial and judicial work for them, and called 
him by the convenient name of chancellor. The history of the 
office in its many adaptations to public and private service is the 
history of its development on judicial, administrative, political, 
secretarial and notarial lines. 

The model of the Carolingian court was followed by the 
medieval states of Western Europe. In England the office of 

chancellor dates back to the reign of Edward the Con- 
ceUor in"' Iessor > tne nrst English king to use the Norman practice 
England, of sealing instead of signing documents; and from the 

Norman Conquest onwards the succession of chancellors 
is continuous. The chancellor was originally, and long continued 
to be, an ecclesiastic, who combined the functions of the most 
dignified of the royal chaplains, the king's secretary in secular 
matters, and keeper of the royal seal. From the first, then, 
though at the outset overshadowed by that of the justiciar, the 
office of chancellor was one of great influence and importance. 
As chaplain the chancellor was keeper of the king's conscience; 
as secretary he enjoyed the royal confidence in secular affairs; 
as keeper of the seal he was necessary to all formal expressions 
of the royal will. By him and his staff of chaplains the whole 
secretarial work of the royal household was conducted, the 
accounts were kept under the justiciar and treasurer, writs were 
drawn up and sealed, and the royal correspondence was carried on. 
He was, in fact, as Stubbs puts it, a sort of secretary of state for 
all departments. " This is he," wrote John of Salisbury (d. 
1 1 80), " who cancels (cancellat) the evil laws of the realm, and 
makes equitable (aequo) the commands of a pious prince," a 
curious anticipation of the chancellor's later equitable jurisdic- 
tion. Under Henry II., indeed, the chancellor was already 
largely employed in judicial work, either in attendance on the 
king or in provincial visitations; though the peculiar jurisdic- 
tion of the chancery was of later growth. By this time, however, 
the chancellor was " great alike in Curia and Exchequer "; he 
was secundus a rege, i.e. took precedence immediately after the 
justiciar, and nothing was done either in the Curia or the ex- 
chequer without his consent. So great was his office that William 
FitzStephen, the biographer of Becket, tells us that it was not 
purchasable (emenda non est), a statement which requires modi- 
fication, since it was in fact more than once sold under Henry I., 
Stephen, Richard and John (Stubbs, Const. Hist. i. pp. 384-497 ; 
Gneist, Const. Hist, of England, p. 219), an evil precedent which 
was, however, not long followed. 

The judicial duties of the chancellor grew out of the fact that 
all petitions addressed to the king passed through his hands. 
The number and variety of these became so great that in 1280, 
under Edward I., an ordinance was issued directing the chancellor 
and the justices to deal with the greater number of them; those 
which involved the use of the great seal being specially referred 
to the chancellor. The chancellor and justices were to determine 
which of them were "so great, and of grace, that the chancellor 
and others would not despatch them without the king," and these 
the chancellor and other chief ministers were to carry in person to 
the king (Stubbs ii. 263, note, and p. 268). At this period the 
chancellor, though employed in equity, had ministerial functions 
only; but when, in the reign of Edward III., the chancellor 
ceased to follow the court, his tribunal acquired a more definite 
character, and petitions for grace and favour began to be ad- 
dressed primarily to him, instead of being merely examined and 
passed on by him to the king; and in the twenty-second year of 
this reign matters which were of grace were definitely committed 
to the chancellor for decision. This is the starting-point of 
the equitable jurisdiction of the chancellor, whence developed 
that immense body of rules, supplementing the deficiencies or 
v.. 27 



modifying the harshness of the common law, which is known 
as Equity (q.v.). 

The position of the chancellor as speaker or prolocutor of the 
House of Lords dates from the time when the ministers of the 
royal Curia formed ex officio a part of the commune the 
concilium and parliament. The chancellor originally chancellor 
attended with the other officials, and he continued to top * f " a ' 
attend ex officio after they had ceased to do so. If he 
chanced to be a bishop, he was summoned regularly qua bishop; 
otherwise he attended without summons. When not a peer the 
chancellor had no place in parliament except as chancellor, and 
the act of 31 Henry VIII. cap. 10 (1539) laid down that, if not 
a peer, he had " no interest to give any assent or dissent in 
the House." Yet Sir Robert Bourchier (d. 1349), the first lay 
chancellor, had protested in 1341 against the first statute of 15 
Edward III. (on 'trial by peers, &c), on the ground that it had not 
received his assent and was contrary to the laws of the realm. 
From the time, however, of William, Lord Cowper (first lord 
high chancellor of Great Britain in 1705, created Baron Cowper 
in 1706), all chancellors have been made peers on their elevation 
to the woolsack. Sometimes the custody of the great seal has 
been transferred from the chancellor to a special official, the lord 
keeper of the great seal (see Lord Keeper) ; this was notably 
the case under Queen Elizabeth (cf. the French garde des sceaux, 
below). Sometimes it is put into commission, being affixed by 
lords commissioners of the great seal. By the Catholic Emancipa- 
tion Act of 1829 it was enacted that none of these offices could 
be held by a Roman Catholic (see further under Lord High 
Chancellor). The'office of lord chancellor of Ireland, and that 
of chancellor of Scotland (who ceased to be appointed after the 
Act of Union of 1707) followed the same lines of development. 

The title of chancellor, without the predicates " high " or 
" lord," is also applied in the United Kingdom to a number of 
other officials and functionaries of varying rank and 
importance. Of these the most important is the f"fjg e ot 
chancellor of the exchequer, an office which originated exchequer. 
in the separation of the chancery from the exchequer 
in the reign of Henry III. (1 216-127 2). His duties consisted 
originally in the custody and employment of the seal of the 
exchequer, in the keeping of a counter-roll to check the roll kept 
by the treasurer, and in the discharge of certain judicial functions 
in the exchequer of account. So long as the treasury board was 
in active working, the chancellorship of the exchequer was an 
office of small importance, and even during a great part of the 
19th century was not necessarily a cabinet office, unless held in 
conjunction with that of first lord of the treasury. At the present 
time the chancellor of the exchequer is minister of finance, and 
therefore always of cabinet rank (see Exchequer). 

The chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster is the representative 
of the crown in the management of its lands and the control 
of its courts in the duchy of Lancaster, the property 
of which is scattered over several counties. These 



Chancellor 
of the 



lands and privileges, though their inheritance has duchy. 
always been vested in the king and his heirs, have 
always been kept distinct from the hereditary revenues of the 
sovereign, whose palatine rights as duke of Lancaster were 
distinct from his rights as king. The Judicature Act of 1873 left 
only the chancery court of the duchy, but the chancellor can 
appoint and dismiss the county court judges within the limits 
of the duchy; he is responsible also for the* land revenues of 
the duchy, which are the private property of the sovereign, 
and keeps the seal of the duchy. His appointment is by letters 
patent, and his salary is derived from the revenue of the duchy. 
As the judicial and estate work is done by subordinate officials, 
the office is practically a sinecure and is usually given to a minister 
whose assistance is necessary to a government, but who for one 
reason or another cannot undertake the duties of an important 
department. John Bright described him as the maid-of-all-work 
of the cabinet. 

The chancellor of a diocese is the official who presides over 
the bishop's court and exercises jurisdiction in his name. 
This use of the word is comparatively modern, and, though 



834 



CHANCELLOR 



employed in acts of parliament, is not mentioned in the com- 
mission, having apparently been adopted on the analogy of the 
Eceiesi- like title in the state. The chancellor was originally 
astical the keeper of the archbishop or bishop's seals; but 
chao- jjjg fg ce) as now understood, includes two other 

offices distinguished in the commission by the titles 
of vicar-general and official principal (see Ecclesiastical 
Jurisdiction). The chancellor of a diocese must be distin- 
guished from the chancellor of a cathedral, whose office is the 
same as that of the ancient scholasticus (see Cathedral) . 

The chancellor of an order of knighthood discharges notarial 
duties and keeps the seal. The chancellor of a university is 

an official of medieval origin. The appointment was 
&c _ ' originally made by the popes, and the office from the 

first was one of great dignity and originally of great 
power. The chancellor was, as he remains, the head of the 
university; he had the general superintendence of its studies 
and of its discipline, could make and unmake laws, try and 
punish offences, appoint to prof essoriaL chairs and admit students 
to the various degrees (see Du Cange, 5. " Cancellarii Aca- 
demiarum "). In England the chancellorship of the universities 
is now a more or less ornamental office and is conferred on noble- 
men or statesmen of distinction, whose principal function is to 
look after the general interests of the university, especially 
in Its relations with the government. The chancellor is repre- 
sented in the university by a vice-chancellor, who performs the 
administrative and judicial functions of the office. In the United 
States the heads of certain educational establishments have 
the title of chancellor. In Scotland the foreman of a jury is 
called its chancellor. In the United States the chancellors are 
judges of ftie chancery courts of the states, e.g. Delaware and 
New Jersey, where these courts are still maintained as distinct 
from the courts of common law. In other states, e. g. New York 
since 1847, the title has been abolished, and there is no federal 
chancellor. 

In diplomacy generally the chancellor of an embassy or 
legation is an official attached to the suite of an ambassador or 
minister. He performs the functions of a secretary, archivist, 
notary and the like, and is at the head of the chancery, or 
chancellery (Fr. chancellerie) , of the mission. The functions 
of this office are the transcribing and registering of official 
despatches and other documents, and generally the transaction 
of all the minor business, e.g. marriages, passports and the like, 
.connected with the duties of a diplomatic agent towards his 
nationals in a foreign country. The dignified connotation of the 
title chancellor has given to this office a prestige which in itself 
it does not deserve; and " chancery " or " chancellery " is 
commonly used as though it were synonymous with embassy, 
while diplomatic style is sometimes called style de chancellerie, 
though as a matter of fact the chanceries have nothing to do 
with it. 

France. — The country in which the office of chancellor followed 
most closely the same lines as in England is France. He had 
become a great officer under the Carolingians, and he grew still 
greater under the Capetian sovereigns. The great chancellor, 
summus cancellarius or archi-cancellarius, was a dignitary who 
had indeed little real power. The post was commonly filled by 
the archbishop of Reims, or the bishop of Paris. The cancellarius, 
who formed part of the royal court and administration, was 
officially known as' the sub-cancellarius in relation to the summus 
cancellarius, but as proto-cancellarius in regard to his subordinate 
cancellarii. He was a very great officer, an ecclesiastic who was 
the chief of the king's chaplains or king's clerks, who administered 
all ecclesiastical affairs; he had judicial powers, and from the 
1 2 th century had the general control of foreign affairs. The 
chancellor in fact became so great that the Capetian kings, who 
did not forget the mayor of the palace, grew afraid of him. 
Few of the early ecclesiastical chancellors failed to come into 
collision with the king, or parted with him on good terms. 
Philip Augustus suspended the chancellorship throughout the 
whole of his reign, and appointed a keeper of the seals {garde 
ies sceaux). The office was revived under Louis VIII., but the 



ecclesiastical chancellorship was finally suppressed in 1227. 
The king of the 13th century employed only keepers of the seal. 
Under the reign of Philip IV. le Bel lay chancellors were first 
appointed. From the reign of Charles V. to that of Louis XL the 
French chancelier was elected by the royal council. In the 16th 
century he became irremovable, a distinction more honourable 
than effective, for though the king could not dismiss him from 
office he could, and on some occasions did, deprive him of the 
right to exercise his functions, and entrusted them to a keeper of 
the seal. The chancelier from the 13th century downwards was 
the head of the law, and performed the duties which are now 
entrusted to the minister of justice. His office was abolished 
when in 1790 the whole judicial system of France was swept 
away by the Revolution. The smaller chancelier s of the provincial 
parlements and royal courts disappeared at the same time. But 
when Napoleon was organizing the empire he created an arch- 
chancellor, an office which was imitated rather from the Erz- 
Kanzler of the Holy Roman Empire than from the old French 
chancelier. At the Restoration the office of chancellor of France 
was restored, the chancellor being president of the House of 
Peers, but it was finally abolished at the revolution of 1848. 
The administration of the Legion of Honour is presided over by 
a grand chancelier, who is a grand cross of the order, and who 
advises the head of the state in matters concerning the affairs 
of the order. The title of chancelier continues also to be used 
in France for the large class of officials who discharge notarial 
duties in some public offices, in embassies and consulates. They 
draw up diplomas and prepare all formal documents, and have 
charge of the registration and preservation of the archives. 

Spain. — In Spain the office of chancellor, canciller, was intro- 
duced by Alphonso VII. (1126-1157), who adopted it from the 
court of his cousins of the Capetian dynasty of France. The 
canciller did not in Spain go beyond being the king's notary. 
The chancellor of the privy seal, canciller del sello de la puridad 
(literally the secret seal), was the king's secretary, and sealed 
all papers other than diplomas and charters. The office was 
abolished in 1496, and its functions were transferred to the royal 
secretaries. The cancelario was the chancellor of a university. 
The canciller succeeded the maesescuela or scholasticus of a church 
or monastery. Canciller mayor de Castilla is an honorary title 
of the archbishops of Toledo. The gran canciller de las Indias, 
high chancellor of the Indies, held the seal used for the American 
dominions of Spain, and presided at the council in the absence 
of the president. The office disappeared with the loss of Spain's 
empirp in America. 

Italy, Germany, b°c. — In central and northern Europe, and in 
Italy, the office had different fortunes. In southern Italy, where 
Naples and Sicily were feudally organized, the chancellors of 
the Norman kings, who followed Anglo-Norman precedents very 
closely, and, at least in Sicily, employed Englishmen, were such 
officers as were known in the West. The similarity is somewhat 
concealed by the fact that these sovereigns also adopted names 
and offices from the imperial court at Constantinople. Their 
chancellor was officially known as Protonotary and Logothete, 
and their example was followed by the German princes of the 
Hohenstaufen family, who acquired the kingdoms of Naples and 
Sicily. The papal or apostolic chancery is dealt with in the 
article on the Curia Romana (q.v.). It may be pointed out here, 
however, that the close connexion of the papacy with the Holy 
Roman Empire is illustrated by the fact that the archbishop 
of Cologne, who by right of his see was the emperor's arch- 
chancellor (Erz-Kanzler) for Italy, was confirmed as papal arch- 
chancellor by a bull of Leo IX. in 1052. The origin and duration 
of this connexion are, however, obscure; it appears to have 
ceased before 1187. The last record of a papal chancellor in 
the middle ages dates from 121 2, from which time onward, for 
reasons much disputed, the head of the papal chancery bore 
the title vice-chancellor (Hinschius i. 439), until the office of 
chancellor was restored by the constitution Sapientius of Pius X. 
in 1908. 

The title of arch-chancellor (Erz-Kanzler) was borne by three 
great ecclesiastical dignitaries of the Holy Roman Empire. 



CHANCELLORSVILLE— CHANCERY 



835 



The archbishop of Mainz was arch-chancellor for Germany. 
The archbishop of Cologne held the dignity for Italy, and the 
archbishop of Trier for Gaul and the kingdom of Aries. The 
second and third of these dignities became purely formal with 
the decline of the Empire in the 13th century. But the arch- 
chancellorship of Germany remained to some extent a reality 
till the Empire was finally dissolved in 1806. The office continued 
to be attached to the archbishopric of Mainz, which was an 
electorate. Karl von Dalberg, the last holder of the office, and 
the first prince primate of the Confederation of the Rhine, 
continued to act in show at least as chancellor of that body, 
and was after a fashion the predecessor of the Bundes Kanzler, 
or chancellor of the North German Confederation. The duties 
imposed on the imperial chancery by the very complicated 
constitution of the Empire were, however, discharged by a vice- 
chancellor who was attached to the court of the emperor. The 
abbot of Fulda was chancellor to the empress. 

The house of Austria in their hereditary dominions, and in 
those of their possessions which they treated as hereditary, 
even where the sovereignty was in theory elective, made a large 
and peculiar use of the title chancellor. The, officers so called 
were of course distinct from the . arch-chancellor and vice- 
chancellor of the Empire, although the imperial crown became 
in practice hereditary in the house of Habsburg. In the family 
states their administration was, to use a phrase familiar to the 
French, " polysynodic." As it was when fully developed, and 
as it remained until the March revolution of 1848, it was 
conducted through boards presided over by a chancellor. There 
were three aulic chancellorships for the internal affairs of their 
dominions, " a united aulic chancellorship for all parts of the 
empire {i.e. of Austria, not the Holy Roman) not belonging to 
Hungary or Transylvania, and a separate chancellorship for 
each of those last-mentioned provinces " (Hartig, Genesis of 
the Revolution in Austria). There were also a house, a court, and 
a state chancellor for the business of the imperial household 
and foreign affairs, who were not, however, the presidents of a 
board. These " aulic " {i.e. court) officers were in fact secretaries 
of the sovereign, and administrative or political rather than 
judicial in character, though the boards over which they presided 
controlled judicial as well as administrative affairs. In the case of 
such statesmen as Kaunitz and Metternich, who were house, 
court, and state chancellors as well as " united aulic " chancellors, 
the combination of offices made them in practice prime ministers, 
or rather lieutenants-general, of the sovereign. The system 
was subject to modifications, and in the end it broke down 
under its own complications. We are not dealing here with 
the confusing history of the Austrian administration, and these 
details are only quoted to show how it happened that in Austria 
the title chancellor came to mean a political officer and minister. 
There is obviously a vast difference between such an official 
as Kaunitz, who as house, court, and state chancellor was 
minister of foreign affairs, and as " united aulic "chancellor had a 
general superiority over the whole machinery of government, and 
the lord high chancellor in England, the chancelier in France, or 
the canciller mayor in Castile, though the title was the same. The 
development of the office in Austria must be understood in order 
to explain the position and functions of the imperial chancellor 
{Reichs Kanzler) of the modern German empire. Although the 
present empire is sometimes rhetorically and absurdly spoken of 
as a revival of the medieval Empire, it is in reality an adaptation 
of the Austrian empire, which was a continuation under a new 
name of the hereditary Habsburg monarchy. The Reichs Kanzler 
is the immediate successor of the Bnndes Kanzler, or chancellor 
of the North German Confederation {Bund). But the Bundes 
Kanzler, who bore no sort of resemblance except in mere 
name to the Erz-Kanzler of the old Empire, was in a position 
not perhaps actually like that of Prince Kaunitz, but capable of 
becoming much the same thing. When the German empire was 
established in 187 1 Prince Bismarck, who was Bundes Kanzler 
and became Reichs Kanzler, took care that his position should 
be as like as possible to that of Prince Kaunitz or Prince Metter- 
nich. The constitution of the German empire is separately 



dealt with, but it may be pointed out here that the Reichs 
Kanzler is the federal minister of the empire, the chief of the 
federal officials, and a great political officer, who directs the 
foreign affairs, and superintends the internal affairs, of the 
empire. 

In these German states the title of chancellor is also given as 
in France to government and diplomatic officials who do notarial 
duties and have charge of archives. The title of chancellor has 
naturally been widely used in the German and Scandinavian 
states, and in Russia since the reign of Peter the Great. It has 
there as elsewhere wavered between being a political and a 
judicial office. Frederick the Great of Prussia created a Gross 
Kanzler for judicial duties in 1746. But there was in Prussia 
a state chancellorship on the Austrian model. It was allowed 
to lapse on the death of Hardenberg in 1822. The Prussian 
chancellor after his time was one of the four court ministries 
{Hofamter) of the Prussian monarchy. 

Authorities. — Du Cange, Glossarium, s.v. " Cancellarius " ; 
W. Stubbs, Const. Hist, of England (1874-1878); Rudolph Gneist, 
Hist, of the English Constitution (Eng. trans., London, 1891); 
L. O. Pike, Const. Hist, of the House of Lords (London, 1894); 
Sir William R. Anson, The Law and Custom of the Constitution, 
vol. ii. part i. (Oxford, 1907) ; A. Luchaire, Manuel des institutions 
francaises (Paris, 1892); K. F. Stumpf, Die Reichs Kanzler (3 vols., 
Innsbruck, 1865-1873); G. Seeliger, Erzkanzler und Reichskanz- 
leien {ib. 1889); P. Hinschius, Kirchenrecht (Berlin, 1869); Sir R. J. 
Phillimore, Eccles. Law (London, 1895) ; P. Pradier-Fodere, Cours 
de droit diplomatique, ii. 542 (Paris, 1899). 

CHANCELLORSVILLE, a village of Spottsylvania county, 
Virginia, U.S.A., situated almost midway between Washington 
and Richmond. It was the central point of one of the greatest 
battles of the Civil War, fought on the 2nd and 3rd of May 1863, 
between the Union Army of the Potomac under Major-General 
Hooker, and the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia under 
General Lee. (See American Civil War, and Wilderness.) 
General " Stonewall " Jackson was mortally wounded in this 
battle. 

CHANCE-MEDLEY (from the A.-Fr. chance-medlee, a mixed 
chance, and not from chaude-medlee, a hot affray), an accident 
of a mixed character, an old term in English law for a form of 
homicide arising out of a sudden affray or quarrel. The homicide 
has not the characteristic of " malice prepense " which would 
raise the death to murder, nor the completely accidental nature 
which would reduce it to homicide by misadventure. It was 
practically identical, therefore, with manslaughter. 

CHANCERY, in English law, the court of the lord chancellor 
of England, consolidated in 1873 along with the other superior 
courts in the Supreme Court of Judicature. Its origin is noticed 
under the head of Chancellor. 

It has been customary to say that the court of chancery 
consists of two distinct tribunals — one a court of common law, 
the other a court of equity. From the former have issued all 
the original writs passing under the great seal, all commissions 
of sewers, lunacy, and the like — some of these writs being origin- 
ally kept in a hanaper or hamper (whence the " hanaper office "), 
and others in a little sack or bag (whence the " petty-bag office ") . 
The court had likewise power to hold pleas upon scire facias {q.v.) 
for repeal of letters patent, &c. " So little," says Blacks tone, 
" is commonly done on the common law side of the court that 
I have met with no traces of any writ of error being actually 
brought since the fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth." 

The equitable jurisdiction of the court of chancery was 
founded on the supposed superiority of conscience and equity 
over the strict law. The appearance of equity in England is in 
harmony with the general course of legal history in progressive 
societies. What is remarkable is that, instead of being Incor- 
porated with or superseding the common law, it gave rise to a 
wholly independent set of tribunals. The English dislike of the 
civil law, and the tendency to follow precedent which has never 
ceased to characterize English lawyers, account for this un- 
fortunate separation. The claims of equity in its earlier stages 
are well expressed in the little treatise called Doctor and Student, 
published in the reign of Henry VIII.: — " Conscience never 
resisteth the law nor addeth to it, but only when the law ia 



8 3 6 



CHANCERY 



directly in itself against the law of God, or law of reason." So also 
King James, speaking in the Star Chamber, says: " Where the 
rigour of the law in many cases will undo a subject, then the 
chancery tempers the law with equity, and so mixes mercy with 
justice, as it preserves a man from destruction." This theory 
of the essential opposition between law and equity, and of the 
natural superiority of the latter, remained long after equity had 
ceased to found itself on natural justice, and had become as 
fixed and rigid as the common law itself. The jealousy of the 
common lawyers came to a head in the time of Lord Ellesmere, 
when Coke disputed the right of the chancery to give relief 
against a judgment of the court of queen's bench obtained 
by gross fraud and imposition. James I., after consultation, 
decided in favour of the court of equity. The substitution of 
lay for clerical chancellors is regarded by G. Spence (Equitable 
Jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery, 2 vols.,1846-1849) as having 
at first been unfortunate, inasmuch as the laymen were ignorant 
of the principles on which their predecessors had acted. Lord 
Nottingham(i62i-i682) is usually credited with the first attempt 
to reduce the decisions of the court to order, and his work was 
continued by Lord Hardwicke (1690- 17 64). By the time of 
Lord Eldon equity had become fixed, and the judges, like their 
brethren in the common law courts, strictly followed the pre- 
cedents. Henceforward chancery and common law courts have 
exhibited the anomaly of two co-ordinate sets of tribunals, 
empowered to deal with the same matters, and compelled to 
proceed in many cases on wholly different principles. The court 
of chancery could in most cases prevent a person from taking 
advantage of a common law right, not approved of by its own 
system. But if a suitor chose to go to a court of common law, 
he might claim such unJHSt rights, and it required the special 
intervention of the court of equity to prevent his enforcing them. 
In many cases also a special application had to be made to 
chancery for facilities which were absolutely necessary to the 
successful conduct of a case at common law. Another source of 
difficulty and annoyance was the uncertainty in many cases 
whether the chancery or common law courts were the proper 
tribunal, so that a suitor often found at the close of an expensive 
and protracted suit that he had mistaken his court and must go 
elsewhere for relief. Attempts more or less successful were made to 
lessen those evils by giving the powers to both sets of courts; but 
down to the consolidation effected by the Judicature Act, the 
English judicial system justified the sarcasm of Lord Westbury, 
that one tribunal was set up to do injustice and another to stop it. 

The equitable jurisdiction of chancery was commonly divided 
into exclusive, concurrent and auxiliary. Chancery had exclusive 
jurisdiction when there were no forms of action by which relief 
could be obtained at law, in respect of rights which ought to be 
enforced. Trusts were the most conspicuous example of this 
class. It also included the rights of married women, infants 
and lunatics. Chancery had concurrent jurisdiction when the 
common law did riot give adequate relief, e.g. in cases of fraud, 
accident, mistake, specific performance of contracts, &c. It had 
auxiliary jurisdiction when the administrative machinery of the 
law courts was unable to procure the necessary evidence. 

The Judicature Act 1873 enacted (§ 24) that in every civil 
cause or matter commenced in the High Court of Justice, law 
and equity should be administered by the High Court of Justice 
and the court of appeal respectively, according to the rules therein 
contained, which provide for giving effect in all cases to "equit- 
able rights and other matters of equity." The 25th section 
declared the law hereafter to be administered in England on 
certain points, and ordained that " generally in all matters not 
hereinbefore particularly mentioned in which there is any con- 
flict or variance between the rules of equity and the rules of 
the common law with reference to the same matter, the rules 
of equity shall prevail." The 34th section specifically assigned 
to the chancery division the following causes and matters: — 
The administration of the estates of deceased persons; the 
dissolution of partnerships, or the taking of partnership, or 
other accounts; the redemption or foreclosure of mortgages; 
the raising of portions, or other charges on land; the sale 



and distribution of the proceeds of property subject to any 
lien or charge; the execution of trusts, charitable or private; 
the rectification, or setting aside, or cancellation of deeds or 
other written instruments; the specific performance of contracts 
between vendors and purchasers of real estates, including con- 
tracts for leases; the partition or sale of real estates; the ward- 
ship of infants and the care of infants' estates. 

The chancery. division originally consisted of the lord chancellor 
as president and the master of the rolls, and the three vice- 
chancellors. The master of the rolls was also a member of the 
court of appeal, but Sir George Jessel, who held that office when 
the new system came into force, regularly sat as a judge of 
first instance until 1881, when, by the act of that year (sec. 2), 
the master of the rolls became a member of the court of appeal 
only, and provision was made for the appointment of a judge 
to supply the vacancy thus occasioned (sec. 3). Sir James Bacon 
( 1 798-1895) was the last survivor of the vice-chancellors. He 
retained his seat on the bench until the year 1886, when he 
retired after more than seventeen years' judicial service. For 
some reason the solicitors, when they had the choice, preferred 
to bring their actions in the chancery division. The practice 
introduced by the Judicature Act of trying actions with oral 
evidence instead of affidavits, and the comparative inexperience 
of the chancery judges and counsel in that mode of trial, tended 
to lengthen the time required for the disposal of the business. 
Demand was consequently made for more judges in the chancery 
division. By an act of 1877 the appointment of an additional 
judge in that division was authorized, and Sir Edward Fry 
(afterwards better known as a lord justice) was appointed. 
In August 1899 the crown consented to the appointment of a 
new judge of the High Court in the chancery division on an 
address from both Houses of Parliament, pursuant to the 87 th 
section of the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876. The chancery 
division, therefore, consists of the lord chancellor and six puisne 
judges. The latter are styled and addressed in the same manner 
as was customary in the old common law courts. 1 Formerly 
there were only four judges of this division (being the successors 
of the master of the rolls and the three vice-chancellors) to whom 
chambers were attached. The fifth judge heard only causes 
with witnesses transferred to him from the overflowing of the 
lists of his four brethren. In each set of chambers there were 
three chief clerks, with a staff of assistant clerks under them. 
The chief clerks had no original jurisdiction, but heard applica- 
tions only on behalf of the judge to whose chambers they belonged, 
and theoretically every suitor had the right to have his applica- 
tion heard by the judge himself in chambers. But the appoint- 
ment of a sixth judge enabled the lord chancellor to carry out 
a reform recommended by a departmental committee which 
reported in 1885. The great difficulty in the chancery division 
always was to secure the continuous hearing of actions with 
witnesses, as nearly one-half of the judge's time was taken up 
with cases adjourned to him from chambers and other adminis- 
trative business and non-witness actions and motions. The in- 
terruption of a witness action for two or three days, particularly 
in a country case, occasioned great expense, and had other 
inconveniences. It was a simple remedy to link the judges in 
pairs with one list of causes and one set of chambers assigned to 
each pair. This reform was effected by the alteration of a few 
words in certain rules of court. There are, therefore, only three 
sets of chambers, each containing four chief clerks, or, as they 
are now styled, masters of the Supreme Court, and one of the 
linked judges, by arrangement between themselves, continuously 
tries the witness actions in their common list, while the other 
attends in chambers, and also hears the motions, petitions, 
adjourned summonses and non-witness cases. 

Although styled masters it does not appear that the chief 

1 The comte de Franqueville comments on the misuse of the title 
" Lord " in addressing judges as another anomaly which only adds to 
the confusion, but perhaps unnecessarily. According to Foss (vol. 
viii. p. 200) it was only in the 1 8th century that the judges began to 
be addressed by the title of "Your Lordship." In the Year Books (he 
adds) they are constantly addressed by the title of " Sir." "Sir, 
vous voyez bien," &c. 



CHANDA— CHANDERNAGORE 



837 



clerks have any larger or different jurisdiction than they had 
before. They are still the representatives of and responsible 
to the judges to whom the chambers are attached. The judge 
may either hear an application in chambers, or may direct any 
matter which he thinks of sufficient importance to be argued 
before him in court, or a party may move in court to discharge 
an order made in chambers with a view to an appeal, but this is 
not required if the judge certifies that the matter was sufficiently 
discussed before him in chambers. 

Under the existing rules of court many orders can now be 
made on summons in chambers which used formerly to require 
a suit or petition in court (see Order LV. as to foreclosure, 
administration, payment out of money in court and generally). 
The judge is also enabled to decide any particular question arising 
in the administration of the estate of a deceased person or execu- 
tion of the trusts of a settlement without directing administration 
of the whole estate or execution of the trusts generally by the 
court (Order LV. rule 10), and where an application for accounts 
is made by a dissatisfied beneficiary or creditor to order the 
accounts to be delivered out of court, and the application to 
stand over till it can be seen what questions (if any) arise upon 
the accounts requiring the intervention of the court (Order LV. 
2, 100). Delay and consequent worry and expense are thus 
saved to the parties, and, at the same time, a great deal of routine 
administration is got rid of and a larger portion of the judicial 
term can be devoted to hearing actions and deciding any question 
of importance in court. The work of the chambers staff of the 
judges has probably been increased; but, on the other hand, 
it has been lightened by the removal of the winding-up business. 
The chancery division has also inherited from the court of 
chancery a staff of registrars and taxing masters. 

In the United States " chancery " is generally used as the 
synonym of " equity." Chancery practice is practice in cases 
of equity. Chancery courts are equity courts (see Equity). 
For the diplomatic sense of chancery (chancellery) see Chan- 
cellor. 

CHANDA, a town and district of British India, in the Nagpur 
division of the Central Provinces. In 1901 the town had a 
population of 17,803. It is situated at the junction of the Virai 
and Jharpat rivers. It was the capital of the Gond kingdom 
of Chanda, which was established on the ruins of a Hindu state 
in the nth or 12th century, and survived until 1751 (see Gond- 
wana). The town is still surrounded by a stone wall 55 m. in 
circuit. It has several old temples and tombs, and the district 
at large is rich in remains of antiquity. There are manufactures 
. of cotton, silk, brass-ware and leather slippers, and a considerable 
local trade. 

The District of Chanda has an area of 10, 1 56 sq. m. Except- 
ing in the extreme west, hills are thickly dotted over the country, 
sometimes in detached ranges, occasionally in isolated peaks 
rising sheer out from the plain. Towards the east they increase 
in height, and form a broad tableland, at places 2000 ft. above 
sea-level. The Wainganga river flows through the district from 
north to south, meeting the Wardha river at Seoni, where their 
streams unite to form the Pranhita. Chanda is thickly studded 
with fine tanks, or rather artificial lakes, formed by closing the 
outlets of small valleys, or by throwing a dam across tracts 
intersected by streams. The broad clear sheets of water thus 
created are often very picturesque in their surroundings of wood 
and rock. The chief architectural objects of interest are the 
cave temples at Bhandak, Winjbasani, Dewala and Ghugus; 
a rock temple in the bed of the Wardha river below Ballalpur; 
the ancient temples at Markandi, Ambgaon and elsewhere; 
the forts of Wairagarh and Ballalpur; and the old walls of the 
city of Chanda, its system of waterworks, and the tombs of the 
Gond kings. In 1901 the population was 601,533, showing a 
decrease of 15% in the decade. The principal crops are rice, 
millet, pulse, wheat, oil-seeds and cotton. The district contains 
the coalfield of Warora, which was worked by government till 
1906, when it was closed. Other fields are known, and iron ores 
also occur. The district suffered severely from famine in 1900, 
when in April the number of persons relieved rose to 90,000. 



CHANDAUSI, a town of British India, in the Moradabad 
district of the United Provinces, 28 m. south of Moradabad. 
Pop. (1901) 25,711. It is an important station on the Oudh & 
Rohilkhand railway, with a junction for Aligarh. Its chief 
exports are of cotton, hemp, sugar and stone. There is a factory 
for pressing cotton. 

CHAND BARDAI (fl. c. 1200), Hindu poet, was a native of 
Lahore, but lived at the court of Prithwi Raja (Prithiraj), the 
last Hindu sovereign of Delhi. His Prithiraj Rasau, a poem of 
some 100,000 stanzas, chronicling his master's deeds and the 
contemporary history pf his part of India, is valuable not only 
as historical material but as the earliest monument of the Western 
Hindi language, and the first of the long series of bardic 
chronicles for which Rajputana is celebrated. It is written in 
ballad form, and portions of it are still sung by itinerant bards 
throughout north-western India and Rajputana. 

See Lieut.-Col. James Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajast'han 
(2 vols., London, 1829-1832; repub. by Lalit Mohan Auddy, 2 vols. 
ib., 1894-1895), where good translations are given. 

CHANDELIER, a frame of metal, wood, crystal, glass or china, 
pendent from roof or ceiling for the purpose of holding lights. 
The word is French, but the appliance has lost its original 
significance of a candle-holder, the chandelier being now chiefly 
used for gas and electric lighting. Clusters of hanging lights 
were in use as early as the 14th century, and appear originally 
to have been almost invariably of wood. They were, however, 
so speedily ruined by grease that metal was gradually sub- 
situted, and fine and comparatively early examples in beaten 
iron, brass, copper and even silver are still extant. Throughout 
the 17th century the hanging candle-holder of brass or bronze 
was common throughout northern Europe, as innumerable 
pictures and engravings testify. In the great periods of the art 
of decoration in France many magnificent chandeliers were 
made by Boulle, and at a later date by Gouthiere and Thomire 
and others among the extraordinarily clever fondeurs-ciseleurs 
of the second half of the 18th century. The chandelier in rock 
crystal and its imitations had come in at least a hundred years 
before their day, and continued in favour to the middle of the 
19th century, or even somewhat later. It reached at last the 
most extreme elaboration of banality, with ropes of pendants 
and hanging faceted drops often called lustres. When many 
lights were burning in one of these chandeliers an effect of 
splendour was produced that was not out of place in a ballroom, 
but the ^ordinary household varieties were extremely ugly and 
inartistic. The more purely domestic chandelier usually carries 
from two to six lights. The rapidly growing use of electricity 
as an illuminating medium and the preference for smaller clusters 
of lights have, however, pushed into the background an appli- 
ance which had grown extremely commonplace in design, and 
had become out of character with modern ideas of household 
decoration. 

CHANDERNAGORE, or Chandarnagar, a French settlement 
in India, with a small adjoining territory, situated on the right 
bank of the river Hugh, 20 m. above Calcutta, in 22 51' 40" N, 
and 88° 24' 50" E. Area 3 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 25,000. Chander- 
nagore has played an important part in the European history of 
Bengal. It became a permanent French settlement, in 1688, but 
did not rise to any importance till the time of Dupleix, during 
whose administration more than two thousand brick houses were 
erected in the town and a considerable maritime trade was carried 
on. In 1757 Chandernagore was bombarded by an English fleet 
under Admiral Watson and captured; the fortifications and 
houses were afterwards demolished. On peace being established 
the town was restored to the French in 1763. When hostilities 
afterwards broke out in 1794, it was again taken possession of by 
the English, and was held by them till 18 1 6, when it was a second 
time given up to the French; it has ever since remained in their 
possession. All the former commercial grandeur of Chander- 
nagore has now passed away, and at present it is little more 
than a quiet suburb of Calcutta, without any external trade. The 
European town is situated at the bottom of a beautiful reach of 
the Hugli, with clean wide thoroughfares, and many elegant 



838 CHANDLER— CHANDOS, BARONS AND DUKES OF 



residences along the river-bank. The authorities of Chanderna- 
gore are subject to the jurisdiction of the governor-general of 
Pondicherry, to whom is confided the general government of 
all the French possessions in India. 

CHANDLER, HENRY WILLIAM (1828-1889), English scholar, 
was born in London on the 31st of January 1828. In 1848 he 
entered Pembroke College, Oxford, where he was elected fellow 
in 1853. In 1867 he succeeded H. L. Mansel as Waynflete pro- 
fessor of moral and metaphysical philosophy, and in 1884 was 
appointed curator of the Bodleian library. He died by his own 
hand in Oxford on the 16th of May 1889. . He was chiefly known 
as an Aristotelian scholar, and his knowledge of the Greek com- 
mentators on Aristotle was profound. He collected a vast amount 
of material for an edition of the fragments of his favourite author, 
but on the appearance of Valentine Rose's work in 1886 he 
abandoned the idea. Two works on the bibliography of Aristotle, 
A Catalogue, of Editions of Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics and of 
Works illustrative of them printed in the ijth century (1868), and 
A Chronological Index to Editions of Aristotle's Nicomachean 
Ethics, and of Works illustrative of 'them from the Origin of Printing 
to ijqq (1878), are of great value. Chandler's collection of works 
on Aristotelian literature is now in the library of Pembroke 
College. His Practical Introduction to Greek Accentuation (1862, 
ed. min. 1877) is the standard work in English. 

CHANDLER, RICHARD (1738-1810), British antiquary, was 
born in 1738 at Elson in Hampshire, and educated at Winchester 
and at Queen's and Magdalen Colleges, Oxford. His first work 
consisted of fragments from the minor Greek poets, with notes 
(Elegiaca Graeca, 1759); and in 1763 he published a fine edition 
of the Arundelian marbles, Marmora Oxoniensia, with a Latin 
translation, and a number of suggestions for supplying thelacunae. 
He was sent by the Dilettanti Society with Nicholas Revett, 
an architect, and Pars, a painter, to explore the antiquities of 
Ionia and Greece (1763-1766); and the result of their work was 
the two magnificent folios of Ionian antiquities published in 1 769. 
He subsequently held several church preferments, including the 
rectory of Tylehurst, in Berkshire, where he died on the 9th of 
February 18 10. Other works by Chandler were Inscriptiones 
Antiquae pleraeque nondum editae (Oxford, 1774); Travels in 
Asia Minor (1775); Travels in Greece (1776); History of Ilium 
(1803), in which he asserted the accuracy of Homer's geography. 
His Life of Bishop Waynflete, lord high chancellor to Henry VI., 
appeared in 181 1. 

A complete edition (with notes by Revett) of the Travels in Asia 
Minor and Greece was published by R. Churton (Oxford, 1825), with 
an " Account of the Author." 

CHANDLER, SAMUEL (1 693-1 766), English Nonconformist 
divine, was born in 1693 at Hungerford, in Berkshire, where his 
father was a minister. He was sent to school at Gloucester, 
where he began a lifelong friendship with Bishop Butler and 
Archbishop Seeker; and he afterwards studied at Leiden. His 
talents and learning were such that he was elected fellow of the 
Royal and Antiquarian Societies, and was made D.D. of Edin- 
burgh and Glasgow. He also received offers of high preferment in 
the Church of England. These he refused, remaining to the end 
of his life in the position of a Presbyterian minister. He was 
moderately Calvinistic in his views and leaned towards Arianism. 
He took a leading part in the deist controversies of the time, and 
discussed with some of the bishops the possibility of an act of 
comprehension. From 1716 to 1726 he preached at Peckham, and 
for forty years he was pastor of a meeting-house in Old Jewry. 
During two or three years, having fallen into pecuniary distress 
through the failure of the South Sea scheme, he kept a book-shop 
in the Poultry. On the death of George II. in 1760 Chandler 
published a sermon in which he compared that king to King David. 
This view was attacked in a pamphlet entitled The History of the 
Man after God's own Heart, in which the author complained of the 
parallel as an insult to the late king, and, following Pierre Bayle, 
exhibited King David as an example of perfidy, lust and cruelty. 
Chandler condescended to reply first in a review of the tract 
(1762) and then in A Critical History of the Life of David, which is 
perhaps the best of his productions. This work was just com- 



pleted when he died, on the 8th of May 1766. He left 4 vols, of 
sermons (1768), and a paraphrase of the Epistles to the Galatians 
and Ephesians (1777), several works on the evidences of Christi- 
anity, and various pamphlets against Roman Catholicism. 

CHANDLER, ZACHARIAH (1813-1879), American politician, 
was born at Bedford, New Hampshire, on the 10th of December 
1813. In 1833 he removed to Detroit, Michigan, where he became 
a prosperous dry-goods merchant. He took a prominent part as 
a Whig in politics (serving as mayor in 1851), and, impelled by 
his strong anti-slavery views, actively furthered the work of 
the " Underground Railroad," of which Detroit was one of the 
principal " transfer " points. He was one of the organizers in 
Michigan of the Republican party, and in 1857 succeeded Lewis 
Cass in the United States Senate, serving until 1875, and at once 
taking his stand with the most radical opponents of slavery 
extension. When the Civil War became inevitable he endeavoured 
to impress upon the North the necessity of taking extraordinary 
measures for the preservation of the Union. After the fall of 
Fort Sumter he advocated the enlistment of 500,000 instead of 
75,000 men for a long instead of a short term, and the vigorous 
enforcement of confiscation measures. In July 1862 he made a 
bitter attack in the Senate on General George B. McClellan, 
charging him with incompetency and lack of " nerve." Through- 
out the war he allied himself with the most radical of the Re- 
publican faction in opposition to President Lincoln's policy, and 
subsequently became one of the bitterest opponents of President 
Johnson's plan of reconstruction. From October 1875 to March 
1877 he was secretary of the interior in the cabinet of President 
Grant, succeeding Columbus Delano (1809-1896). In 1876, as 
chairman of the national republican committee, he managed 
the campaign of Hayes against Tilden. In February 1879 he was 
re-elected to the Senate to succeed Isaac P. Christiancy (181 2- 
1890), and soon afterwards, in a speech concerning Mexican 
War pensions, bitterly denounced Jefferson Davis. He died at 
Chicago, Illinois, on the 1st of November 1879. By his extra- 
ordinary force of character he exercised a wide personal influence 
during his lifetime, but failed to stamp his personality upon any 
measure or policy of lasting importance. 

CHANDOS, BARONS AND DUKES OF. The English title of 
Chandos began as a barony in 1554, and was continued in the 
family of Brydges (becoming a dukedom in 1719) till 1789. In 
1822 the dukedom was revived in connexion with that of 
Buckingham. 

John Brydges, 1st Baron Chandos (c. 1490-1557), a son of 
Sir Giles Brydges, or Bruges (d. 151 1), was a prominent figure 
at the English court during the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI. 
and Mary. He took part in suppressing the rebellion of Sir 
Thomas Wyat in 1554, and as lieutenant of the Tower of London 
during the earlier part of Mary's reign, had the custody, not only 
of Lady Jane Grey and of Wyat, but for a short time of the 
princess Elizabeth. He was created Baron Chandos of Sudeley 
in 1554, one of his ancestors, Alice, being a grand-daughter of 
Sir Thomas Chandos (d. 1375), and he died in March 1557. The 
three succeeding barons, direct descendants of the 1st baron, 
were all members of parliament and persons of some importance. 
Grey, 5th Baron Chandos (c. 1580-1621), lord-lieutenant of 
Gloucestershire, was called the " king of the Cotswolds," owing 
to his generosity and his magnificent style of living at his 
residence, Sudeley Castle. He has been regarded by Horace 
Walpole and others as the author of some essays, Horae Sub- 
secivae. His elder son George, 6th Baron Chandos (1620-1655), 
was a supporter of Charles I. during his struggle with Parliament, 
and distinguished himself at the first battle of Newbury in 1643. 
He had six daughters but no sons, and after the death of his 
brother William in 1676 the barony came to a kinsman, Sir 
James Brydges, Bart. (1642-1714), who was English ambassador 
to Constantinople from 1680 to 1685. 

James Brydges, 1st duke of Chandos (1673-1744), son and 
heir of the last-named, had been member of parliament for 
Hereford from 1698 to 1714, and, three days after his father's 
death, was created Viscount Wilton and earl of Carnarvon. 
For eight years, from 170510 17 13, during the War of the Spanish 



CHANDOS, SIR J.— CHANG-CHOW 



839 



Succession, he was paymaster-general of the forces abroad, 
and in this capacity he amassed great wealth. In 17 19 he was 
created marquess of Carnarvon and duke of Chandos. The duke 
is chiefly remembered on account of his connexion with Handel 
and with Pope. He built a magnificent house at Canons near 
Edgware in Middlesex, and is said to have contemplated the 
construction of a private road between this place and his un- 
finished house in Cavendish Square, London. For over two 
years Handel, employed by Chandos, lived at Canons, where 
he composed his oratorio Esther. Pope, who in his Moral Essays 
(Epistle to the Earl of Burlington) doubtless described Canons 
under the guise of "Timon's Villa," referred to the duke in the 
line, "Thus gracious Chandos is belov'd at sight"; but Swift, 
less complimentary, called him " a great complier with every 
court." The poet was caricatured by Hogarth for his supposed 
servility to the duke. Chandos, who was lord-lieutenant of the 
counties of Hereford and Radnor, and chancellor of the university 
of St Andrews, became involved in financial difficulties, and after 
his death on the 9th of August 1744 Canons was pulled down. 
He was succeeded by his son Henry, 2nd duke (1708-1771), and 
grandson James, 3rd duke (1731-1789). On the death of the 
latter without sons in September 1789 all his titles, except 
that of Baron Kinloss, became extinct, although a claimant 
arose for the barony of Chandos of Sudeley. The 3rd duke's only 
daughter, Anna Elizabeth, who became Baroness Kinloss on 
her father's death, was married in 1796 to Richard Grenville, 
afterwards marquess of Buckingham; and in 1822 this nobleman 
was created duke of Buckingham and Chandos (see Buckingham, 
Dukes or). 

See G. E. C(okayne), Complete Peerage (1887-1898) ; and J. R. 
Robinson, The Princely Chandos, i.e. the 1st duke (1893). 

CHANDOS, SIR JOHN (?-i37o), one of the most celebrated 
English commanders of the 14th century. *He is found at the 
siege of Cambrai in 1337, and at the battle of Crecy in 1346. 
At the battle of Poitiers, in 1356, it was he who decided the 
day and saved the life of the Black Prince. For these services 
Edward III. made him a knight of the Garter, gave him the lands 
of the viscount of Saint Sauveur in Cotentin, and appointed 
him his lieutenant in France and vice-chamberlain of the royal 
household. In 1362 he was made constable of Aquitaine, and 
won the victories of Auray (1364) and Navaret in Spain (1367) 
over Duguesclin. He was seneschal of Poitou in 1369, and was 
mortally wounded at the bridge of Lussac near Poitiers on the 
31st of December. He died on the following day, the 1st of 
January 1370. 

See Benjamin Fillon, " John Chandos, Connetable d'Aquitaine 
et Senechal de Poitou," in the Revue des provinces de Vouest (1855). 

CHANDRAGUPTA MAURYA (reigned 321-296 B.C.), known 
to the Greeks as Sandracottus, founder of the Maurya empire 
and first paramount ruler of India, was the son of a king of 
Magadha by a woman of humble origin, whose caste he took, 
and whose name, Mura, is said to have been the origin of that of 
Maurya assumed by his dynasty. As a youth he was driven into 
exile by his kinsman, the reigning king of Magadha. In the 
course of his wanderings he met Alexander the Great, and, 
according to Plutarch (Alexander, cap. 62), encouraged him to 
invade the Ganges kingdom by enlarging on the extreme un- 
popularity of the reigning monarch. During his exile he collected 
a large force of the warlike clans of the north-west frontier, and 
on the death of Alexander attacked the Macedonian garrisons 
and conquered the Punjab. He next attacked Magadha, de- 
throned and slew the king, his enemy, with every member of 
his family, and established himself on the throne (321). The 
great army acquired from his predecessor he increased until it 
reached the total of 30,000 cavalry, 9000 elephants, and 600,000 
infantry; and with this huge force he overran all northern India, 
establishing his empire from the Arabian Sea to the Bay of 
Bengal. In 305 Seleucus Nicator crossed the Indus, but was 
defeated by Chandragupta and forced to a humiliating peace 
(303), by which the empire of the latter was still farther extended 
in the north. About six years later Chandragupta died, leaving 
his empire to his son Bindusura. 



An excellent account of the court and administrative system 
of Chandragupta has been preserved in the fragments of Megas- 
thenes, who came to Pataliputra as the envoy of Seleucus shortly 
after 303. The government was, of course, autocratic and even 
tyrannous, but it was organized on an elaborate system, army 
and civil service being adminimered by a series of boards, while 
the cities were governed by municipal commissioners responsible 
for public order and the upkeep of public works. Chandra- 
gupta himself is described as living in barbaric splendour, 
appearing in public only to hear causes, offer sacrifice, or to go 
on military and hunting expeditions, and withal so fearful of 
assassination that he never slept two nights running in the same 
room. 

See J. W. MacCrindle, Ancient India as described by Megasthenes 
and Arrian (Calcutta, 1877); V. A. Smith, Early Hist, of India 
(Oxford, 1908) ; also the articles India: History, and Inscriptions: 
Indian. 

CHANGARNIER, NICOLAS ANNE THEODULE (1793-1877), 
French general, was born at Autun on the 26th of April 1793. 
Educated at St Cyr, he served for a short time in the bodyguard 
of Louis XVIII., and entered the line as a lieutenant in January 
1815. He achieved distinction in the Spanish campaign of 1823, 
and became captain in 1825. In 1830 he entered the Royal 
Guard and was sent to Africa, where he took part in the Mascara 
expedition. Promoted commandant in 1835, he distinguished 
himself under Marshal Clausel in the campaign against Ahmed 
Pasha, bey of Constantine, and became lieutenant-colonel in 
1837. The part he took in the, expedition of Portes-de-Fer 
gained him a colonelcy, and his success against the Hajutas and 
Kabyles, the cross of the Legion of Honour. Three more years 
of brilliant service in Africa won for him the rank of marSchal 
de camp in 1840, and of lieutenant-general in 1843. In 1847 he 
held the Algiers divisional command. He visited France early 
in 1848, assisted the provisional government to establish order, 
and returned to Africa in May to succeed General Cavaignac in 
the government of Algeria. He was speedily recalled on his 
election to the general assembly for the department of the Seine, 
and received the command of the National Guard of Paris, to 
which was added soon afterwards that of the troops in Paris, 
altogether nearly 100,000 men. He held a high place and 
exercised great influence in the complicated politics of the next 
two years. In 1849 he received the grand cross of the Legion 
of Honour. An avowed enemy of republican institutions, he 
held a unique position in upholding the power of the president; 
but in January 1851 he opposed Louis Napoleon's policy, was 
in consequence deprived of his double command, and at the 
coup d'etat in December was arrested and sent to Mazas, until 
his banishment from France by the decree of the 9th of January 
1852. He returned to France after the general amnesty, and 
resided in his estate in the department of Saone-et-Loire. In 
1870 he held no command, but was present with the headquarters, 
and afterwards with Bazaine in Metz. He was employed on an 
unsuccessful mission to Prince Frederick Charles, commanding 
the German army which besieged Metz, and on the capitulation 
became a prisoner of war. At the armistice he returned to Paris, 
and in 1871 was elected to the National Assembly by four depart- 
ments, and sat for the Somme. He took an active part in politics, 
defended the conduct of Marshal Bazaine, and served on the 
committee which elaborated the monarchical constitution. When 
the comte de Chambord refused the compromise, he moved 
the resolution to extend the executive power for ten years to 
Marshal MacMahon. He was elected a life senator in 1875. He 
died in Paris on the 14th of February 1877. 

CHANG-CHOW, a town of China, in the province of Fu-kien, 
on a branch of the Lung Kiang, 35 m. W. of Amoy. It is 
surrounded by a wall 45 m. in circumference, which, however, 
includes a good deal of open ground. The streets are pave d with 
granite, but are very dirty. The river is crossed by a curious 
bridge, 800 ft. long, constructed of wooden planks supported on 
twenty-five piles of stones about 30 ft. apart. The city is a centre 
of the silk-trade, and carries on an extensive commerce in different 
directions. Brick-works and sugar-factories are among its chief 



840 



CHANG-CHUN— CHANNEL ISLANDS 



industrial establishments. Its population is estimated at about 
1,000,000. 

CHANG CHUN, KIU (1148-1227), Chinese Taoist sage and 
traveller, was born in 1148. In 1219 he was invited by Jenghiz 
Khan, founder of the Mongol empire and greatest of Asiatic 
conquerors, to visit him. Jenghi# letter of invitation, dated the 
15th of May 1219 (by present reckoning), has been preserved, 
and is among the curiosities of history; here the terrible warrior 
appears as a meek disciple of wisdom, modest and simple, 
almost Socratic in his self-examination, alive to many of the 
deepest truths of life and government. Chang Chun obeyed this 
summons; and leaving his home in Shantung (February 1220) 
journeyed first to Peking. Learning that Jenghiz had gone far 
west upon fresh conquests, the sage stayed the winter in Peking. 
In February 1221 he started again and crossed eastern Mongolia 
to the camp of Jenghiz' brother Ujughen, near Lake Bor or Buyur 
in the upper basin of the Kerulun-Amur. Thence he travelled 
south-westward up the Kerulun, crossed the Karakorum region 
in north-central Mongolia, and so came to the Chinese Altai, 
probably passing near the present Uliassutai. After traversing 
the Altai he visited Bishbalig, answering to the modern Urumtsi, 
and moved along the north side of the Tian Shan range to lake 
Sairam, Almalig (or Kulja), and the rich valley of the Hi. We 
then trace him to the Chu, over this river to Talas and the 
Tashkent region, and over the Jaxartes (or Syr Daria) to Samar- 
kand, where he halted for some months. Finally, through the 
" Iron Gates " of Termit, over the Oxus, and by way of Balkh 
and northern Afghanistan, Qiang Chun reached Jenghiz' camp 
near the Hindu Kush. Returning home he followed much the 
same course as on his outward route : certain deviations, however, 
occur, such as a visit to Kuku-khoto. He was back in Peking 
by the end of January 1224. From the narrative of his ex- 
pedition (the Si yu ki, written by his pupil and companion Li 
Chi Chang) we derive some of the most faithful and vivid pictures 
ever drawn of nature and man between the Great Wall of China 
and Kabul, between the Aral and the Yellow Sea: we may 
particularly notice the sketches of the Mongols, and of the 
people of Samarkand and its neighbourhood; the account of 
the fertility and products of the latter region, as of the Hi valley, 
at or near Almalig-Kulja; and the description of various great 
mountain ranges, peaks and defiles, such as the Chinese Altai, 
the Tian Shan, Mt Bogdo-ola (?), and the Iron Gates of Termit. 
There is, moreover, a noteworthy reference to a land apparently 
identical with the uppermost valley of the Yenisei. After his 
return Chang Chun lived at Peking till his death on the 23rd of 
July 1227. By order of Jenghiz some of the former imperial 
garden grounds were made over to him, for the foundation of a 
Taoist monastery. 

See E. Bretschneider, Mediaeval Researches from Eastern Asiatic 
Sources, vol. i. pp. 35-108, where a complete translation of the 
narrative is given, with a valuable commentary; C. R. Beazley 
Dawn of Modern Geography, iii. 539. (C. R. B.) 

CHANGE (derived through the Fr. from the Late Lat. cambium, 
cambiare, to barter; the ultimate derivation is probably from 
the root which appears in the Gr. KafXTrrav, to bend), properly 
the substitution of one thing for another, hence any alteration 
or variation, so applied to the moon's passing from one phase to 
another. The use of the word for a place of commercial business 
has usually been taken to be a shortened form of Exchange {q.v.) 
and so is often written 'Change. The New English Dictionary 
points out that " change " appears earlier than " exchange " 
in this sense. " Change " is particularly used of coins of lower 
denomination given in substitution for those of larger denomina- 
tion or for a note, cheque, &c, and also for the balance of a sum 
paid larger than that which is due. A further application is that 
in bell-ringing, of the variations in order in which a peal of bells 
may be rung. The term usually excludes the ringing of the bells 
according to the diatonic scale in which they are hung (see Bell) . 
It is from a combination of these two meanings that the thieves' 
slang phrase " ringing the changes " arises; it denotes the 
various methods by which wrong change may be given or 
extracted, or counterfeit coin passed. 



CHANGELING, the term used of a child substituted or changed 
for another, especially in the case of substitutions popularly 
supposed to be through fairy agency. There was formerly a 
widespread superstition that infants were sometimes stolen 
from their cradles by the fairies. Any specially peevish or weakly 
baby was regarded as a changeling, the word coming at last to 
be almost synonymous with imbecility. It was thought that 
the elves could only effect the exchange before christening, and 
in the highlands of Scotland babies were strictly watched till 
then. Strype states that in his time midwives had to take an 
oath binding themselves to be no party to the theft or exchange 
of babies. The belief is referred to by Shakespeare, Spenser 
and other authors. Pennant, writing in 1796, says: "In this 
very century a poor cottager, who lived near the spot, had a 
child who grew uncommonly peevish; the parents attributed 
this to the fairies and imagined it was a changeling. They took 
the child, put it in a cradle, and left it all night beneath the 
" Fairy Oak " in hopes that the tylwydd tig or fairy family 
would restore their own before morning. When morning came 
they found the child perfectly quiet, so went away with it, quite 
confirmed in their belief " (Tour in Scotland, 1796, p. 257). 

See W. Wirt Sikes, British Goblins (1880). 

CHANGOS, a tribe of South American Indians who appear 
to have originally inhabited the Peruvian coast. A few of them 
still live on the coast of Atacama, northern Chile. They are a 
dwarfish race, never exceeding 5 ft. in height. Their sole occupa- 
tion is fishing, and in former times they used boats of inflated 
sealskins, lived in sealskin huts, and slept on heaps of dried 
seaweed. They are a hospitable and friendly people, and never 
resisted the whites. 

CHANGRA, or Kanghari (anc. Gangra; called also till the 
time of Caracalla, Germanicopolis, after the emperor Claudius), 
the chief town of a sanjak of the same name in the Kastamuni 
vilayet, Asia Minor, situated in a rich, well- watered valley; 
altitude 2500 ft. The ground is impregnated with salt, and 
the town is, unhealthy. Pop. (1894) 15,632, of whom 1086 are 
Christians (Cuinet). Gangra, the capital of the Paphlagonian 
kingdom of Deiotarus Philadelphus, son of Castor, was taken 
into the Roman province of Galatia on his death in 6-5 B.C. 
The earlier town, the name of which signified " she-goat," was 
built on the hill behind the modern city, on which are the ruins 
of a late fortress; while the Roman city occupied the site of the 
modern. In Christian times Gangra was the metropolitan see 
of Paphlagonia. In the 4th century the town was the scene of 
an important ecclesiastical synod. 

Synod of Gangra. — Conjectures as to the date of this synod 
vary from 341 to 376. All that can, be affirmed with certainty 
is that it was held about the middle of the 4th century. The 
synodal letter states that twenty-one bishops assembled to take 
action concerning Eustathius (of Sebaste?) and his followers, 
who contemned marriage, disparaged the offices of the church, 
held conventicles of their own, wore a peculiar dress, denounced 
riches, and affected especial sanctity. The synod condemned 
the Eustathian practices, declaring however, with remarkable 
moderation, that it was not virginity that was condemned, but 
the dishonouring of marriage; not poverty, but the disparage- 
ment of honest and benevolent wealth; not asceticism, but 
spiritual pride; not individual piety, but dishonouring the 
house of God. The twenty canons of Gangra were declared 
ecumenical by the council of Chalcedon, 451. 

See Mansi ii. pp. 1095-1122; Hardouin i. pp. 530-540; Hefele 
2nd ed., i. pp. 777 sqq. (English trans, ii. pp. 325 sqq.). 

CHANNEL ISLANDS (French lies Normandes), a group of 
islands in the English Channel, belonging (except the lies' Chausey ) 
to Great Britain. (For map, see England, Section VI.) They 
lie between 48° 50' and 49° 45' N., and i° 50' and 2° 45' W., 
along the French coast of Co ten tin (department of Manche), 
at a distance of 4 to 40 m. from it, within the great rectangular 
bay of which the northward horn is Cape La Hague. The greater 
part of this bay is shallow, and the currents among the numerous 
groups of islands and rocks are often dangerous to navigation. 
The nearest point of the English coast to the Channel Islands 



CHANNEL ISLANDS 



8 4 x 



is Portland Bill, a little over 50 m. north of the northernmost 
outlier of the islands. The total land area of the islands is about 
75 sq. m. (48,083 acres), and the population in 1901 was 95,618. 
The principal individual islands are four: — Jersey (area 45 
jq. m., pop. 52,576), Guernsey (area 24-5 sq. m., pop. 40,446), 
Alderney (area 3-06 sq. m., pop. 2062), and Sark (area nearly 
2 sq. m., pop. 504). Each of these islands is treated in a separate 
article. The chief town and port of Jersey is St Helier, and of 
Guernsey St Peter Port; a small town on Alderney is called 
St Anne. Regular communication by steamer with Guernsey 
and Jersey is provided on alternate days from Southampton and 
Weymouth, by steamers of the London & South-Western and 
Great Western railway companies of England. Railway com- 
munications within the islands are confined to Jersey. Regular 
steamship communications are kept up from certain French 
ports, and locally between the larger islands. In summer the 
islands, especially Jersey, Guernsey and Sark, are visited by 
numerous tourists, both from England and from France. 

The islands fall physically into four divisions. The northern- 
most, lying due west of Cape La Hague, and separated therefrom 
by the narrow Race of Alderney, includes that island, Burhou 
and Ortach, and numerous other islets west of it, and west again 
the notorious Casquets, and angry group of jagged rocks, on the 
largest of which is a powerful lighthouse. Doubtful tradition 
places here the wreck of the "White Ship," in which William, 
son of Henry I., perished in 1120; in 1744 the "Victory," a 
British man-of-war, struck on one of the rocks, and among 
calamities of modern times the wreck of the" Stella," a passenger 
vessel, in 1899, may be recalled. The second division of islands 
is also the most westerly; it includes Guernsey with a few islets 
to the west, and to the east, Sark, Herm, Jethou (inhabited 
islands) and others. The strait between Guernsey and Herm 
is called Little Russel, and that between Herm and Sark Great 
Russel. Sark is famous ior its splendid cliffs and caves, while 
Herm possesses the remarkable phenomenon of a shell-beach, or 
shore, half-a-mile in length, formed wholly of small shells, 
which accumulate in a tidal eddy formed at the north of the 
island. To the south-east of these, across the channel called La 
Deroute, lies Jersey, forming, with a few attendant islets, of 
which the Ecrehou to the north-east are the chief, the third 
division. The fourth and southernmost division falls into two 
main subdivisions. The Minquiers, the more western, are a 
collection of abrupt rocks, the largest of which, Maitresse He, 
affords a landing and shelter for fishermen. Then eastern sub- 
division, the lies Chausey, lies about 9 m. west by north of 
Granville (to which commune they belong) on the French coast, 
and belongs to France. These rocks are close set, low and 
curiously regular in form. On Grande He, the only permanently 
inhabited island (pop. 100), some farming is carried on, and 
several of the islets are temporarily inhabited by fishermen. 
There is also a little granite-quarrying, and seaweed-burning 
employs many. 

None of the islands is mountainous, and the fine scenery for 
which they are famous is almost wholly coastal. In this respect 
each main island has certain distinctive characteristics. Bold 
cliffs are found on the south of Alderney; in Guernsey they 
alternate with lovely bays; Sark is specially noted for its 
magnificent sea-caves, while the coast scenery of Jersey is on 
the whole more gentle than the rest. 

Geology. — Geologically, the Channel Islands are closely related 
to the neighbouring mainland of Normandy. With a few exceptions, 
to be noted later, all the rocks are of pre-Cambrian, perhaps in part of 
Archean age. They consist of massive granites, gneisses, diorites, 
porphyrites, schists and phyllites, all of which are traversed by 
dykes and veins. In Jersey we find in the north-west corner a 
granitic tract extending from Grosnez to St Mary and St John, 
beyond which it passes into a small granulitic patch. South of the 
granites is a schistose area, by St Ouen and St Lawrence, and reach- 
ing to St Aubin's Bay. Granitic masses again appear round St Bre- 
lade's Bay. The eastern half of the island is largely occupied by 
porphyrites and similar rocks (hornstone porphyry) with rhyolites 
and devitrified obsidians; some of the latter contain large spheru- 
lites with a diameter of as much as 24 in. ; these are well exposed in 
Bouley Bay; a complex igneous and intrusive series of rocks lies 
around St Helier. In the north-east corner of the island a con- 



glomerate, possibly of Cambrian age, occurs between Bouley Bay 
and St Catherine's Bay. Tracts of blown-sand cover the ground 
for some distance north of St Clement's Bay and again east of 
St Ouen's Bay. In the sea off the latter bay a submerged forest 
occurs. The northern half of Guernsey is mainly dioritic, the 
southern half, below St Peter, is occupied by gneisses. Several 
patches of granite and granulite fringe the western coast, the largest 
of these is a hornblende granite round Rocquaine Bay. Horn- 
blende gneiss from St Sampson and quartz diorite from Capelles, 
Corvee and elsewhere are transported to England for road metal. 
Sark is composed almost wholly of hornblende-schists and gneisses 
with hornblendic granite at the north end of the island, in Little 
Sark and in the middle of Brechou. Dykes of diabase and diorite 
are abundant. Alderney consists mainly of hornblende granite and 
granulite, which are covered on the east by two areas of sandstone 
which may be of Cambrian age. An enstatite-augite-diorite is sent 
from Alderney for road-making. Besides the submerged forest on 
the coast of Jersey already mentioned, there are similar occurrences 
near St Peter Port and St Sampson's harbour, and in Vazon Bay 
in Guernsey. Raised beaches are to be seen at several points in the 
islands. 

Climate. — The climate is mild and very pleasant. In Jersey 
the mean temperature for twenty years is found to be — in January 
(the coldest month) 42-1° F., in August (the hottest) 63 , mean 
annual 51-7°. In Guernsey the figures are, for January 42-5°, 
for August 59-7°, mean annual 49-5°. The mean annual rainfall 
for twenty-five years in Jersey is 34-21 in., and in Guernsey 38-64 
in. The average amount of sunshine in Jersey is considerably 
greater than in the most favoured spots on the south coast of 
England; and in Guernsey it is only a little less than in Jersey. 
Snow and frost are rare, and the seasons of spring and autumn 
are protracted. Thick sea-fogs are not uncommon, especially 
in May and June. 

Flora and Fauna.— The flora of the islands is remarkably rich, 
considering their extent, nearly 2000 different species of plants 
having been counted throughout the group. Of timber properly 
speaking there is little, but the evergreen oak, the elm and the 
beech are abundant. Wheat is the principal grain in cultivation; 
but far more ground is taken up with turnips and potatoes, 
mangold, parsnip and carrot. The tomato ripens as in France, 
and the Chinese yam has been successfully grown. There is a 
curious cabbage, chiefly cultivated in Jersey, which shoots up 
into a long woody stalk from 10 to 15 ft. in height, fit for walking- 
sticks or palisades. Grapes and peaches come to perfection in 
greenhouses without artificial heat; and not only apples and 
pears but oranges and figs can be reared in the open air. The 
arbutus ripens its fruit, and the camellia clothes itself with 
blossom, as in more southern climates; the fuchsia reaches a 
height, of 15 or 20 ft., and the magnolia attains the dimensions 
of a tree. Of the flowers, both indigenous and exotic, that 
abound throughout the islands, it is sufficient to mention the 
Guernsey lily with its rich red petals, which is supposed to have 
been brought from Japan; 

The number of the species of the mammalia is little over 
twenty, and several of these have been introduced by man. 
There is a special breed of horned cattle, and each island has its 
own variety, which is carefully kept from all intermixture. The 
animals are small and delicate, and marked by a peculiar yellow 
colour round the eyes and within the ears. The red deer was once 
indigenous, and the black rat is still common in Alderney, Sark 
and Herm. The list of birds includes nearly 200 species, nearly 
100 of which are permanent inhabitants of the islands. There 
are few localities in the northern seas which are visited by a 
greater variety of fish, and the coasts abound in crustacea, 
shell-fish and zoophytes. 

Government. — For the purposes of government the Channel 
Islands (excluding the French Chauseys) are divided into two 
divisions: — (1) Jersey, and (2) the bailiwick of Guernsey, which 
includes Alderney, Sark, Herm and Jethou with the island of 
Guernsey. The constitutions of each division are peculiar and 
broadly similar, but differing in certain important details; they 
may therefore be considered together for the sake of comparison. 
Until 1854 governors were appointed by the crown; now a 
separate military lieutenant-governor is appointed for each 
division on the recommendation of the war office after consulta- 
tion with the home office. The other crown officials are the 



8 4 2 



CHANNEL ISLANDS 



bailiff (bailli) or chief magistrate, the procureur du roi, represent- 
ing the attorney-general, and the avocat du roi, or in Guernsey 
the contrdle, representing the solicitor-general. In Jersey the 
vicomte is also appointed by the crown, in the position of a high 
sheriff (and coroner); but his counterpart in Guernsey, the 
prSvdt, is not so appointed. The bailiff in each island is president 
of the royal court, which is composed of twelve jurats, elected for 
life, in Jersey by the ratepayers of each parish, in Guernsey by 
the Elective States, a body which also elects the prevdl, who, 
with the jurats, serves upon it. The rest of the body is made up 
of the rectors of the parishes, the douzaines, or elected parish 
councils (" dozens," from the original number of their members) 
of the town parish of St Peter Port, the four cantons, and the 
county parishes, and certain other officials. The royal court 
administers justice (but in Jersey there is a trial by jury for 
criminal cases), and in Guernsey can pass temporary ordinances 
subject to no higher body. It also puts forward projets de lot 
for the approval of the Deliberative States. Alderney and Sark 
have a separate legal existence with courts dependent on the 
royal court of Guernsey. In both Jersey and Guernsey the chief 
administrative bodyis the Deliberative States. The Jersey States 
is composed of the lieutenant-governor (who has a veto on the 
deliberation of any question, but no vote), the bailiff, jurats, 
parish rectors, parish constables and deputies, the procureur 
and avocat, with right to speak but no vote, and the vicomte, 
with right of attendance only. Besides the veto of the lieutenant- 
governor, the bailiff has the power to dissent from any measure, 
in which case it is referred to the privy council. In Guernsey the 
States consists of the bailiff, jurats, eight out of ten rectors, the 
procureur and deputies; while the lieutenant-governor is always 
invited and may speak if he attends. By both States local 
administration is carried on (largely through committees) ; and 
relations with the British parliament are maintained through the 
privy council. Acts of parliament are transmitted to the islands 
by an order in council to be registered in the rolls of the royal 
court, and are not considered to be binding until this is done; 
moreover, registration may be held over pending discussion by 
the States if any act is considered to menace the privileges of 
the islands. The right of the crown to legislate by order in council 
is held to be similarly limited. In cases of encroachment on 
property, a remarkable form of appeal of very ancient origin 
called Clameur de Haro survives (see Haro, Clameur de). The 
islands are in the diocese of Winchester, and there is a dean 
in both Jersey and Guernsey, who is also rector of a parish. 

These peculiar constitutions are of local development, the 
history of which is obscure. The bailiff was originally assisted 
in his judicial work by itinerant justices; their place was later 
taken by the elected jurats; later still the practice of summoning 
the States to assist in the passing of Ordinances was established 
by the bailiff and jurats, and at last the States claimed the 
absolute right of being consulted. This was confirmed to them 
in 1771. 

It is characteristic of these islands that there should be 
compulsory service in the militia. In Jersey and Alderney every 
man between the ages of sixteen and forty-five is liable, but in 
Jersey after ten years' service militiamen are transferred to the 
reserve. In Guernsey the age limit is from sixteen to thirty- 
three, and the obligation is extended to all who are British 
subjects, and draw income from a profession practised in the 
island. Garrisons of regular troops are maintained in all three 
islands. Taxation is light in the islands, and pauperism is 
practically unknown. 

In 1904 the revenue of Jersey was £70,191, and its expenditure 
£69,658; the revenue of Guernsey was £79,334, and the expenditure 
£43>3^5- The public debt in the respective islands was £322,070 
and £195,794. In Jersey the annual revenues from crown rights 
(principally seigneurial dues, houses and lands and tithes) amount 
to about £2700, and about £360 is remitted to the paymaster-general. 
In Guernsey these revenues, in which the principal item is fines on 
transference of property (treiziemes or fees), amount to about £4500, 
and about £1000 is remitted. In Alderney the revenues (chiefly from 
harbour dues) amount to about £1400. 

In Jersey the English gold and silver coinage are current, but there 
is a local copper coinage and local one-pound notes are issued. 



Guernsey has also such notes, and its copper coinage consists of 
pence, halfpence, two-double and one-double (one-eighth of a penny) 
pieces. A Guernsey pound is taken as equal to 24 francs, and 
English and French currency pass equally throughout the islands. 

Industry. — The old Norman system of land-tenure has sur- 
vived, and the land is parcelled out among a great number of 
small proprietors; holdings ranging from 5 to 25 acres as a rule. 
The results of this arrangement seem to be favourable in the 
extreme. Every corner of the ground is carefully and intelli- 
gently cultivated, and a considerable proportion is allotted to 
market-gardening. The cottages are neat and comfortable, 
the hedges well-trimmed, and the roads kept in excellent repair. 
There is a considerable export trade in agricultural produce and 
stock, including vegetables and fruit, in fish (the fisheries 
forming an important industry) and in stone. There is no 
manufacture of importance. The inhabitants share in common 
the right of collecting and burning seaweed (called vraic) for 
manure. The cutting of the weed (vraicking) became a cere- 
monial occasion, taking place at times fixed by the government, 
and connected with popular festivities. 

Language.— The language spoken in ordinary life by the 
inhabitants of the islands is in great measure the same as the old 
Norman French. The use of the patois has decreased naturally 
in modern times. Modern French is the official language, used 
in the courts and states, and English is taught in the parochial 
schools, and is familiar practically to all. The several islands 
have each its own dialect, differing from that of the others 
in vocabulary and idiom; differences are also observable in 
different localities within the same island, as between the north 
and the south of Guernsey. None of the dialects has received 
much literary cultivation, though Jersey is proud of being the 
birthplace of one of the principal Norman poets, Wace, who 
flourished in the 12 th century. 

History. — The original ethnology and pre-Christian history 
of the Channel Islands are largely matters of conjecture and 
debate. Of early inhabitants abundant proof is afforded by the 
numerous megalithic monuments — cromlechs, kistvaens and 
maenhirs — still extant. But little trace has been left of Roman 
occupation, and such remains as have been discovered are mainly 
of the portable description that affords little proof of actual 
settlement, though there may have been an unimportant garrison 
here. The constant recurrence of the names of saints in the 
place-names of the islands, and the fact that pre-Christian names 
do not occur, leads to the inference that before Christianity was 
introduced the population was very scanty. It may be con- 
sidered to have consisted originally of Bretons (Celts), and to 
have received successively a slight admixture of Romans and 
Legionaries, Saxons and perhaps Jutes and Vandals. Chris- 
tianity may have been introduced in the 5th century. Guernsey 
is said to have been visited in the 6th century by St Sampson of 
Dol (whose name is given to a small town and harbour in the 
island), St Marcou or Marculfus and St Magloire, a. friend and 
fellow-evangelist of St Sampson, who founded monasteries at 
Sark and at Jersey, and died in Jersey in 5 7 5 . Another evangelist 
of this period was St Helerius, whose name is borne by the chief 
town of Jersey, St Helier. In his life it is stated that the popula- 
tion of the island when he reached it was only 30. In 933 the 
islands were made over to William, duke of Normandy (d. 943), 
and after the Norman conquest of England their allegiance shifted 
between the English crown and the Norman coronet according to 
the vicissitudes of war and policy. During the purely Norman 
period they had been enriched with numerous ecclesiastical 
buildings, some of which are still extant, as the chapel of Rozel 
in Jersey. 

In the reign of John of England the future of the islands was 
decided by their attachment to the English crown, in spite of the 
separation of the duchy of Normandy. To John it has been usual 
to ascribe a document, at one time regarded by the islanders as 
their Magna Carta; but modern criticism leaves little doubt 
that it is not genuine. An unauthenticated " copy " of uncertain 
origin alone has been discovered, and there is little proof of 
there ever having been an original. The reign of Edward I. was 



CHANNING 



843 



full of disturbance; and in 1279 Jersey and Guernsey received 
from the king, by letters patent, a public seal as a remedy for the 
dangers and losses which they had incurred by lack of such a 
certificate. Edward II. found it necessary to instruct his 
collectors not to treat the islanders as foreigners: his successor, 
Edward III., fully confirmed their privileges, immunities and 
customs in 1341 ; and his charter was recognized by Richard II. 
in 1378. In 1343 there was a descent of the French on Guernsey; 
the governor was defeated, and Castle Cornet besieged. In 1372 
there was another attack on Guernsey, and in 1374 and 1404 the 
French descended on Jersey. None of these attempts, however, 
resulted in permanent settlement. Henry V. confiscated the 
alien priories which had kept up the same connexion with Nor- 
mandy as before the conquest, and conferred them along with the 
regalities of the islands on his brother, the duke of Bedford. 
During the Wars of the Roses, Queen Margaret, the consort of 
Henry VI., made an agreement with Pierre de Breze, comte de 
Maulevrier, the seneschal of Normandy, that if he afforded 
assistance to the king he should hold the islands independently 
of the crown. A force was accordingly sent to take possession of 
Mont Orgueil. It was captured and a small part of the island 
subjugated, and here Maulevrier remained as governor from 1460 
to 1465; but the rest held out under Sir Philip de Carteret, 
seigneur of St Ouen, and in 1467 the vice-admiral of England, 
Sir Richard Harliston, recaptured the castle and brought the 
foreign occupation to an end. In 1482-1483 Pope Sixtus IV., at 
the instance of King Edward IV., issued a bull of anathema 
against all who molested the islands; it was formally registered 
in Brittany in 1484, and in France in i486; and in this way the 
islands acquired the right of neutrality, which they retained till 
1689. In the same reign (Edward IV.) Sark was taken by the 
French, and only recovered in the reign of Mary, by the strategy 
(according to tradition) of landing from a vessel a coffin nomin- 
ally containing a body for burial, but in reality filled with arms. 
By a charter of 1494, the duties of the governors of Jersey were 
defined and their power restricted; and the educational interests 
of the island were furthered at the same time by the foundation 
of two grammar schools. The religious establishments in the 
islands were dissolved, as in England, in the reign of Henry VIII. 
The Reformation was heartily welcomed in the islands. The 
English liturgy was translated into French for their use. In the 
reign of Mary there was much religious persecution ; and in that of 
Elizabeth Roman Catholics were maltreated in their turn. In 
1568 the islands were attached to the see of Winchester, being 
finally separated from that of Coutances, with which they had 
long been connected, with short intervals in the reign of John, 
when they had belonged to the see of Exeter, and that of Henry 
VI., when they had belonged to Salisbury. 

The Presbyterian form of church government was adopted 
under the influence of refugees from the persecution of Protestant- 
ism on the continent. It was formally sanctioned in St Helier and 
St Peter Port by Queen Elizabeth; and in 1603 King James 
enacted that the whole of the islands " should quietly enjoy 
their said liberty." During his reign, however, disputes arose. 
An Episcopal party had been formed in Jersey, and in 161 9 
David Bandinel was declared dean of the island. A body of 
canons which he drew up agreeable to the discipline of the Church 
of England was accepted after considerable modification by the 
people of his charge; but the inhabitants of Guernsey maintained 
their Presbyterian practices. Of the hold which this form of 
Protestantism had got on the minds of the people even in Jersey 
abundant proof is afforded by the general character of the worship 
at the present day. 

In the great struggle between king and parliament, Presbyterian 
Guernsey supported the parliament; in Jersey, however, there 
were at first parliamentarian and royalist factions. Sir Philip de 
Carteret, lieutenant-governor, declared for the king, but Dean 
Bandinel and Michael Lempriere, a leader of the people, headed 
the parliamentary party. They received a commission for the 
apprehension of Carteret, who established himself in Elizabeth 
Castle; but after some fighting had taken place he died in the 
castle in August 1643. Meanwhile in Guernsey Sir Peter Osborne, 



the governor, was defying the whole island and maintaining 
himself in Castle Cornet. A parliamentarian governor, Leonard 
Lydcott, arrived in Jersey immediately after Sir Philip de 
Carteret's death. But the dowager Lady Carteret was holding 
Mont Orgueil; George Carteret, Sir Philip's nephew, arrived 
from St Malo to support the royalist cause, and Lydcott and 
Lempriere presently fled to England. George Carteret estab- 
lished himself as lieutenant-governor and bailiff. Bandinel was 
imprisoned in Mont Orgueil, and killed himself in trying to 
escape. Jersey was now completely royalist. In 1646 the prince 
of Wales, afterwards Charles II., arrived secretly at Jersey, and 
remained over two months at Elizabeth Castle. He went on to 
France, but returned in 1649, having been proclaimed king by 
George Carteret, and at Elizabeth Castle he signed the declara- 
tion of his claims to the throne on the 29th of October. In 1651, 
when Charles had fled to France again after the battle of 
Worcester, parliamentarian vessels of war appeared at Jersey. 
The islanders, weary of the tyrannical methods of their governor, 
now Sir George Carteret, offered little resistance. On the 15th of 
December the royalist remnant yielded up Elizabeth Castle; 
and at the same time Castle Cornet, Guernsey, which had been 
steadily held by Osborne, capitulated. In each case honourable 
terms of surrender were granted. Both islands had suffered 
severely from the struggle, and the people of Guernsey, appealing 
to Cromwell on the ground of their support of his cause, com- 
plained that two-thirds of the land was out of cultivation, and 
that they had lost " their ships, their traffic and their trading." 
After the Restoration there was considerable improvement, and 
in the reign of James II. the islanders got a grant of wool for the 
manufacture of stockings — 4000 tods 1 of wool being annually 
allowed to Jersey, 2000 to Guernsey, 400 to Alderney and 200 to 
Sark. Alderney, which had been parliamentarian, was granted 
after the Restoration to the Carteret family; and it continued to 
be governed independently till 1825. 

By William of Orange the neutrality of the islands was 
abolished in 1689, and during the war between England and 
France (1778-1783) there were two unsuccessful attacks on 
Jersey, in 1779 and 1781, the second, under Baron de Rullecourt, 
being famous for the victory over the invaders due to the bravery 
of the young Major Peirson, who fell when the French were on the 
point of surrender. During the revolutionary period in France 
the islands were the home of many refugees. In the 1 8th century 
various attempts were made to introduce the English custom- 
house system; but proved practically a failure, and the islands 
throve on smuggling and privateering down to 1800. 

Authorities. — Heylin, Relation of two Journeys (1656); P.Falle, 
Account of the Island of Jersey (1694; notes, &c, by E. Durell, 
Jersey, 1837); J. Duncan, History of Guernsey (London, 1841); 
P. le Geyt, Sur les constitutions, les lois et les usages de celle He [Jersey], 
ed. R. P. Marett (Jersey, 1846-1847); F. B. Tupper, Chronicles of 
Castle Cornet, Guernsey (2nd ed. London, 1851), and History of 
Guernsey and its Bailiwick (Guernsey, 1854); S. E. Hoskins, 
Charles II. in the Channel Islands (London, 1854), and other works; 
Delacroix, Jersey, ses anliquites, &c. (Jersey, 1859); T. Ie Cerf, 
L'archipel des lies Normandes (Paris, 1863) ; G. Dupont, Le Cotentin 
et ses ties (Caen, 1870-1885); J. P. E. Havet, Les Cours royales des 
lies Normandes (Paris, 1878); E. Pegot-Ogier, Histoire des lies de 
la Manche (Paris, 1881); C. Noury, Geologie de Jersey (Paris and 
Jersey, 1886) ; D. T. Ansted and R. G. Latham, Channel Islands 
(1865; 3rd ed., rev. by E. T. Nicolle, London, 1893), the principal 
general work of reference; Sir E. MacCulloch, Guernsey Folklore, 
ed. Edith F. Carey (London, 1903); E. F. Carey, Channel Islands 
(London, 1904). 

CHANNING, WILLIAM ELLERY (1780-1842), American 
divine and philanthropist, was born in Newport, Rhode Island, 
on the 7th of April 1780. His maternal grandfather was William 
Ellery, a signer of the Declaration of Independence; his mother, 
Lucy Ellery, was a remarkable woman; and his father, William 
Channing, was a prominent lawyer in Newport. Channing had as 
a child a refined delicacy of feature and temperament, and seemed 
to have inherited from his father simple and elegant tastes, 
sweetness of temper, and warmth cf affection, and from his 
mother that strong moral discernment and straightforward 
rectitude of purpose and action which formed so striking a feature 
1 A tod generally equalled 28 lb. 



844 



CHANNING 



of his character. From his earliest years he delighted in the 
beauty of the scenery of Newport, and always highly estimated 
its influence upon his spiritual character. His father was a strict 
Calvinist, and Dr Samuel Hopkins, one of the leaders of the old 
school Calvinists, was a frequent guest in his father's house. 
He was, even as a child, he himself says, " quite a theologian, 
and would chop logic with his elders according to the fashion of 
that controversial time." He prepared for college in New London 
under the care of his uncle, the Rev. Henry Channing, and in 
1794, about a year after the death of his father, entered Harvard 
College. Before leaving New London he came under religious 
influences to which he traced the beginning of his spiritual life. 
In his college vacations he taught at Lancaster, Massachusetts, 
and in term time he stinted himself in food that he might need 
less exercise and so save time for study,— an experiment which 
undermined his health, producing acute dyspepsia. From his 
college course he thought that he got little good, and said " when 
I was in college, only three books that I read were of any moment 
to me: . . . Ferguson on Civil Society, . . . Hutcheson's 
Moral Philosophy, and Price's Dissertations. Price saved me 
from Locke's philosophy." 

After graduating in 1798, he lived at Richmond, Virginia, as 
tutor in the family of David Meade Randolph, United States 
marshal for Virginia. Here he renewed his ascetic habits and 
spent much time in theological study, his mind being greatly 
disturbed in regard to Trinitarian teachings in general and 
especially prayer to Jesus. He returned to Newport in 1800 
" a thin and pallid invalid," spent a year and a half there, and 
in 1802 went to Cambridge as regent (or general proctor) in 
Harvard; in the autumn of 1802 he began to preach, having 
been approved by the Cambridge Association. On the 1st of 
June 1803, having refused the more advantageous pastorate of 
Brattle Street church, he was ordained pastor of the Federal 
Street Congregational church in Boston. At this time it seems 
certain that his theological views were not fixed, and in 1808, 
when he preached a sermon at the ordination of the Rev. John 
Codman (1782-1847), he still applied the title " Divine Master " 
to Jesus Christ, and used such expressions as " shed for souls " of 
the blood of Jesus, and " the Son of God himself left the abodes 
of glory and expired a victim of the cross." But his sermon 
preached in 181 9 at Baltimore at the ordination of the Rev. 
Jared Sparks was in effect a powerful attack on Trinitarianism, 
and was followed in 18 19 by an article in The Christian Disciple, 
" Objections to Unitarian Christianity Considered," and in 1820 
by another, " The Moral Argument against Calvinism " — an 
excellent evidence of the moral (rather than the intellectual) 
character of Unitarian protest. In 1814 he had married a rich 
cousin, Ruth Gibbs, but refused to make use of the income from 
her property on the ground that clergymen were so commonly 
accused of marrying for money. 

He was now entering on his public career. Even in 1810, in a 
Fast Day sermon, he warned his congregation of Bonaparte's 
ambition; two years later he deplored " this country taking part 
with the oppressor against that nation which has alone arrested 
his proud career of victory"; in 1814 he preached a thanks- 
giving sermon for the overthrow of Napoleon; and in 1816 he 
preached a sermon on war which led to the organization of the 
Massachusetts Peace Society. His sermon on " Religion, a 
Social Principle," helped to procure the omission from the state 
constitution of the third article of Part I., which made compulsory 
a tax for the support of religious worship. In 182 1 he delivered 
the Dudleian lecture on the " Evidences of Revealed Religion " 
at Harvard, of whose corporation he had been a member since 
1813; he had received its degree of S.T.D. in 1820. In August 
1821 he undertook a journey to Europe, in the course of which 
he met in England many distinguished men of letters, especially 
Wordsworth and Coleridge. Both of these poets greatly in- 
fluenced him personally and by their writings, and he prophesied 
that the Lake poets would be one of the greatest forces in a 
coming spiritual reform. Coleridge wrote of him, " He has the 
fove of wisdom and the wisdom of love." 

On his return to America in August 1823; Dr Channing resumed 



his duties as pastor, but with a more decided attention than 
before to literature and public affairs, especially after receiving 
as colleague, in 1824, the Rev. Ezra Stiles Gannett. In 1830, 
because of his wife's bad health, Channing went to the West 
Indies. Negro slavery, as he saw it there, and as he had seen it 
in Richmond, more than thirty years before, so strongly im- 
pressed him that he began to write his book Slavery (1835). 
In this he insists that " not what is profitable, but what is right " 
is " the first question to be proposed by a rational being "; that 
slavery ought to be discussed " with a deep feeling of responsi- 
bility, and so done as not to put in jeopardy the peace of the slave- 
holding states "; that " man cannot be justly held and used as 
property "; that the tendency of slavery is morally, intellectu- 
ally, and domestically, bad; that emancipation, however, 
should not be forced on slave-holders by governmental inter- 
ference, but by an enlightened public conscience in the South 
(and in the North), if for no other reason, because " slavery 
should be succeeded by a friendly relation between master and 
slave; and to produce this the latter must see in the former his 
benefactor and deliverer." He declined to identify himself 
with the Abolitionists, whose motto was " Immediate Emancipa- 
tion " and whose passionate agitation he thought unsuited to 
the work they were attempting. The moderation and temperance 
of his presentation of the anti-slavery cause naturally resulted in 
some misunderstanding and misstatement of his position, such as 
is to be found in Mrs Chapman's Appendix to the Autobiography 
of Harriet Martineau, where Channing is represented as actually 
using his influence on behalf of slavery. In 1837 he published 
Thoughts on the Evils of a Spirit of Conquest, and on Slavery: A 
Letter on the Annexation of Texas to the United States, addressed 
to Henry Clay, and arguing tnat the Texan revolt from Mexican 
rule was largely the work of land-speculators, and of those who 
resolved " to throw Texas open to slave-holders and slaves "; 
that the results of annexation must be war with Mexico, embroil- 
ing the United States with England and other European powers, 
and at home the extension and perpetuation of slavery, not alone 
in Texas but in other territories which the United States, once 
started at conquest, would force into the Union. But he still 
objected to political agitation by the Abolitionists, preferring 
" unremitting appeals to the reason and conscience," and, even 
after the prominent part he took in the meeting in Faneuil Hall, 
called to protest against the murder of Elijah P. Lovejoy, he 
wrote to The Liberator, counselling the Abolitionists to " disavow 
this resort to force by Mr Lovejoy." Channing's pamphlet 
Emancipation (1840) dealt with the success of emancipation 
in the West Indies, as related in Joseph John Gurney's Familiar 
Letters to Henry Clay of Kentucky, describing a Winter in the 
West Indies (1840), and added his own advice " that we should 
each of us bear our conscientious testimony against slavery," 
and that the Free States " abstain as rigidly from the use of 
political power against Slavery in the States where it is estab- 
lished, as from exercising it against Slavery in foreign com- 
munities," and should free themselves " from any obligation 
to use the powers of the national or state governments in any 
manner whatever for the support of slavery." In 1842 he pub- 
lished The Duty of the Free States, or Remarks Suggested by the 
Case of the Creole, a careful analysis of the letter of complaint from 
the American to the British government, and a defence of the 
position taken by the British government. On the 1st of August 
1842 he delivered at Lenox, Massachusetts, an address celebrat- 
ing the anniversary of emancipation in the British West Indies. 
Two months later, on the 2nd of October 1842, he died at 
Bennington, Vermont. 

Physically Channing was short and slight; his eyes were un- 
naturally large; his voice wonderfully clear, and like his face, 
filled with devotional spirit. He was not a great pastor, and 
lacked social tact, so that there were not many people who 
became his near friends; but by the few who knew him well, 
he was almost worshipped. As a preacher Channing was often 
criticised for his failure to deal with the practical everyday 
duties of life. But his sermons are remarkable for their rare 
simplicity and gracefulness of style as well as for the thought 



CHANSONS DE GESTE 



845 



that they express. The first open defence of Unitarians was 
not based on doctrinal differences but on the peculiar nature 
of the attack on them made in June 181 5 by the conservatives 
in the columns of The Panoplist, where it was stated that Uni- 
tarians were " operating only in secret, . . . guilty of hypocritical 
concealment of their sentiments." His chief objection to the 
doctrine of the Trinity (as stated in his sermon at the ordination 
of the Rev. Jared Sparks) was that it was no longer used philo- 
sophically, as showing God's relation to the triple nature of 
man, but that it had lapsed into mere Tritheism. To the name 
" Unitarian " Channing objected strongly, thinking " unity " 
as abstract a word as " trinity " and as little expressing the 
close fatherly relation of God to man. It is to be noted that 
he strongly objected to the growth of " Unitarian orthodoxy " 
and its increasing narrowness. His views as to the divinity 
of Jesus were based on phrases in the Gospels which to his mind 
established Christ's admission of inferiority to God the Father, — 
for example, " Knoweth no man, neither the Son, but the 
Father "; at the same time he regarded Christ as " the sinless 
and spotless son of God, distinguished from all men by that 
infinite peculiarity — freedom from moral evil." He believed 
in the pre-existence of Jesus, and that it differed from the pre- 
existence of other souls in that Jesus was actually conscious 
of such pre-existence, and he reckoned him one with God the 
Father in the sense of spiritual union (and not metaphysical 
mystery) in the same way that Jesus bade his disciples " Be ye 
one, even as I am one." Bunsen called him " the prophet in the 
United States for the presence of God in mankind." Channing 
believed in historic Christianity and in the story of the resurrec- 
tion, " a fact which comes to me with a certainty I find in few 
ancient histories." He also believed in the miracles of the 
Gospels, but held that the Scriptures were not inspired, but 
merely records of inspiration, and so saw the possibility of error 
in the construction put upon miracles by the ignorant disciples. 
But in only a few instances did he refuse full credence of the 
plain gospel narrative of miracles. He held, however, that the 
miracles were facts and not " evidences " of Christianity, and 
he considered that belief in them followed and did not lead up to 
belief in Christianity. His character was absolutely averse from 
controversy of any sort, and in controversies into which he was 
forced he was free from any theological odium and continually 
displayed the greatest breadth and catholicity of view. The 
differences in New England churches he considered were 
largely verbal, and he said that " would Trinitarians tell us what 
they mean, their system would generally be found little else 
than a mystical form of the Unitarian doctrine." 

His opposition to Calvinism was so great that even in 181 2 
he declared " existence a curse " if Calvinism be true. Possibly 
his boldest and most elaborate defence of Unitarianism was 
his sermon on Unitarianism most favourable to Piety, preached in 
1826, criticizing as it did the doctrine of atonement by the 
sacrifice of an " infinite substitute "; and the Election Sermon 
of 1830 was his greatest plea for spiritual and intellectual 
freedom. 

Channing's reputation as ' an author was probably based 
largely on his publication in The Christian Examiner of Remarks 
on the Character and Writings of John Milton (1826), Remarks on 
the Life and Character of Napoleon Bonaparte (1827-1828), and 
an Essay on the Character and Writings of Fenelon (1829). An 
Essay on Self -Culture (1838) was an address introducing the 
Franklin Lectures delivered in Boston September 1838. Chan- 
ning was an intimate friend of Horace Mann, and his views on 
the education of children are stated, by no less an authority 
than Elizabeth Palmer Peabody, to have anticipated those of 
Froebel. His Complete Works have appeared in various editions 
(5 vols., Boston, 1841; 2 vols., London, 1865; 1 vol., New 
York, 1875). 

Among members of his family may be mentioned his two 
nephews William Henry (1810-1884), son of his brother Francis 
Dana, and William Ellery, commonly known as Ellery (1818- 
1901), son of his brother Walter, a Boston physician (1 786-1876). 
The former, whose daughter married Sir Edwin Arnold, the 



English poet, became a Unitarian pastor ( for some time in 
America, and also in England, where he died; he was deeply 
interested in Christian Socialism, and was a constant writer, 
translating Jouffroy's Ethics (1840), and assisting in editing the 
Memoirs of Margaret Fuller (1852) ; and he wrote the biography 
of his uncle (see 0. B. Frothingham's Memoir, 1886). Ellery 
Channing married Margaret Fuller's sister (1842), and besides 
critical essays and poems published an intimate sketch of 
Thoreau in 1873. 

See the Memoir by William Henry Channing (3 vols., London, 
1848; republished in one volume, New York, 1880); Elizabeth 
Palmer Peabody, Reminiscences of the Rev. William Ellery Channing, 
D.D. (Boston, 1880), intimate but inexact; John White Chadwick, 
William Ellery Channing, Minister of Religion (Boston, 1903); and 
William M. Salter, " Channing as a Social Reformer" {Unitarian 
Review, March 1888). (R. We.) 

CHANSONS DE GESTE, the name given to the epic chronicles 
which take so prominent a place in the literature of France from 
the nth to the 15th century. Gaston Paris defined a chanson 
de geste as a song the subject of which is a series of historical 
facts or gesta. These facts form the centre around which are 
grouped sets of poems, called cycles, and hence the two terms 
have in modern criticism become synonymous for the epic 
family to which the hero of the particular group or cycle belongs. 
The earliest chansons de geste were founded on the fusion of the 
Teutonic spirit, under a Roman form, into the new Christian 
and French civilization. It seems probable that as early as the 
9th century epic poems began to be chanted by the itinerant 
minstrels who are known as jongleurs. It is conjectured that 
in a base Latin fragment of the 10th century we possess a transla- 
tion of a poem on the siege of Girona. Gaston Paris dates from 
this lost epic the open expression of what he calls " the epic 
fermentation" of France. But the earliest existing chanson 
de geste is also by far the noblest and most famous, the Chanson 
de Roland; the conjectural date of the composition of this poem 
has been placed between the years 1066 and 1095. That the 
author, as has been supposed, was one of the conquerors of 
England, it is perhaps rash to assert, but undoubtedly the poem 
was composed before the First Crusade, and the writer lived at 
or near the sanctuary of Mont Saint-Michel. The Chanson de 
Roland stands at the head of modern French literature, and its 
solidity and grandeur give a dignity to the whole class of poetry 
of which it is the earliest and by far the noblest example. But 
it is in the crowd of looser and later poems, less fully character- 
ized, less steeped in the individuality of their authors, that we 
can best study the form of the typical chanson de geste. These 
epics sprang from the soil of France; they were national and 
historical; their anonymous writers composed them spon- 
taneously, to a common model, with little regard to the artificial 
niceties of style. The earlier examples, which succeed the 
Roland, are unlike that great work in having no plan, no system 
of composition. They are improvisations which wander on at 
their own pace, whither accident may carry them. This mass of 
medieval literature is monotonous, primitive and superficial. 
As Leon Gautier has said, in the rudimentary psychology of 
the chansons de geste, man is either entirely good or entirely 
bad. There are no fine shades, no observation of character. 
The language in which these poems are composed is extremely 
simple, without elaboration, without ornament. Everything 
is sacrificed to the telling of a story by a narrator of little skill, 
who helps himself along by means of a picturesque, but almost 
childish fancy, and a primitive sentiment of rhythm. Two great 
merits, however, all the best of these poems possess, force and 
lucidity; and they celebrate, what they did much to create, that 
unselfish elevation of temper which we call the spirit of chivalry. 

Perhaps the most important cycle of chansons de geste was 
that which was collected around the name of Charlemagne, and 
was known as the Geste du roi. A group of this cycle dealt with 
the history of the mother of the emperor, and with Charlemagne 
himself down to the coming of Roland. To this group belong 
Bertha Greatfoot and Aspremont, both of the 12th century, and 
a variety of chansons dealing with the childhood of Charlemagne 
and of Ogier the Dane. A second group deals with the struggle 



846 



CHANT— CHANTARELLE 



of Charlemagne with his rebellious vassals. This is what has 
been denned as the Feudal Epic; it includes Girars de Viane 
and Ogier the Dane, both of the 13th century, or the end of the 
12 th. A third group follows Charlemagne and his peers to the 
East. It is in the principal of these poems, The Pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem, that Alexandrine verse first makes its appearance in 
French literature. This must belong to the beginning of the 
1 2th century. A fourth group, antecedent to the Spanish war, 
is of the end of the 12th century and the beginning of the 13th; 
it includes Aiquin, Fierabras and Otinel. The fifth class discusses 
the war in Spain, and it is to this that Roland belongs; there are 
different minor epics dealing with the events of Roncevaux, and 
independent chansons of Gui de Bourgogne, Gaidon and Anse'is 
de Carthage. The Gesle du Roi comprises a sixth and last group, 
proceeding with events up to the death of Charlemagne; this 
contains Huon de Bordeaux and a vast number of poems of 
minor originality and importance. 

Another cycle is that of Duke William Shortnose, La Geste de 
Guillaume. This includes the very early and interesting De- 
parture of the Aimeri Children, Aliscans and Rainoart. It is 
thought that this cycle, which used to be called the Geste de 
Garin de Monglane, is less artificial than the others; it deals 
with the heroes of the South who remained faithful in their 
vassalage to the throne. The poems belonging to this cycle are 
extremely numerous, and some of them are among the earliest 
which survive. These chansons find their direct opposites in 
those which form the great cycle of La Geste de Doon de Mayence, 
sometimes called " la faulse geste," because it deals with the 
feats of the traitors, of the rebellious family of Ganelon. This 
is the geste of the Northmen, always hostile to the Carlovingian 
dynasty. It comprises some of the most famous of the chansons, 
in particular Parise la duchesse and The Four Sons of Aymon. 
Several of its sections are the production of a known poet, 
Raimbert of Paris. From this triple division of the main body 
of the chansons de geste into La Geste du Roi, La Geste de Guil- 
laume and La Geste de Doon, are excluded certain poems of minor 
importance, — some provincial, such as Amis and Amiles and 
Garin, some dealing with the Crusades, such as Antioche, and 
some which are not connected with any existing cycle, such as 
Ciperis de Vignevaux; most of this last category, however, are 
works of the decadence. 

The analysis which is here sketched is founded on the latest 
theories of Leon Gautier, who has given the labour of a lifetime 
to the investigation of this subject. The wealth of material is 
baffling to the ordinary student; of the medieval chansons de 
geste many hundreds of thousands of lines have been preserved. 
The habit of composing became in the 14th century, as has been 
said, no longer an art but a monomania. Needless to add that 
a very large proportion of the surviving poems have never yet 
been published. All the best of the early chansons de geste are 
written in ten-syllable verse, divided into stanzas or laisses of 
different length, united by a single assonance. Rhyme came 
in with the 13th century, and had the effect in languid bards of 
weakening the narrative; the sing-song of it led at last to the 
abandonment of verse in favour of plain historical prose. The 
general character of the chansons de geste, especially of those 
of the 1 2th century, is hard, coarse, inflexible, like the march 
of rough men stiffened by coats of mail. There is no art and 
little grace, but a magnificent display of force. These poems 
enshrine the self -sufficiency of a young and powerful people; 
they are full of Gallic pride, they breathe the spirit of an in- 
domitable warlike energy. All their figures belong to the same 
social order of things, and all illustrate the same fighting 
aristocracy. The moving principle is that of chivalry, and what 
is presented is, invariably, the spectacle of the processional life 
of a medieval soldier. The age described is a disturbed one; 
the feudal anarchy of Europe is united, for a moment,- in defend- 
ing western civilization against the inroads of Asia, against " the 
yellow peril." But it is a time of transition in Europe also, and 
Charlemagne, the immortal but enfeebled emperor, whose beard 
is whiter than lilies, represents an old order of things against 
which the rude barons of the North are perpetually in successful 



revolt. The loud cry of the dying Ronald, as E. Quinet said, 
rings through the whole poetical literature of medieval France; 
it is the voice of the individuality of the great vassal, who, in 
the decay of the empire, stands alone with himself and with 
his sword. 

Authorities. — Leon Gautier, Les Epopees francaises (4 vols., 
1878-1894); Gaston Paris, La Litterature francaise au moyen age 
(1890) ; Paul Meyer, Recherches sur V epopee francaise (1867) ; 
G. Paris, Histoire poetique de Charlemagne (1865); A. Longnon, Les 
Quatre Fits Aimon, Sec. (1879). (E. G.) 

CHANT (derived through the Fr. from the Lat. cantare, to 
sing; an old form is " chaunt "), a song or melody, particularly 
one sung according to the rules of church service-books. For 
an account of the chant or cantus firmus of the Roman Church 
see Plain-song. In the English church " chants " are the tunes 
set to the unmetrical verses of the psalms and canticles. The 
chant consisted of an " intonation " followed by a reciting note 
of indefinite length; a " mediation " closed the first part of the 
verse, leading to a second reciting note; a " termination " closed 
the second part of the verse. In the English chant the " intona- 
tion " disappeared. Chants are " single," if written for one 
verse only, " double," if for two. " Quadruple " chants for four 
verses have also been written. 

CHANTABUN, or Chantabdri, the principal town of the 
Siamese province of the same name, on the E. side of the Gulf 
of Siam, in 102 6' E., 12° 38' N. Pop. about 5000. The town 
lies about 12 m. from the sea on a river which is navigable for 
boats and inside the bar of which there is good anchorage for 
light-draft vessels. The trade is chiefly in rubies and sapphires 
from the mines of the Krat and Pailin districts, and in pepper, 
of which about 500 tons are exported annually. Cardamoms 
and rosewood are also exported. In 1905 Chantabun was made 
the headquarters of a high commissioner with jurisdiction ex- 
tending over the coast districts from the Nam Wen on the East 
to Cape Liant on the West, which were thus united to form a 
provincial division (Monton). In 1893 Chantabun was occupied 
by a French force of four hundred men, a step taken by France 
as a guarantee for the execution by Siam of undertakings entered 
into by the treaty of that year. The occupation, which was 
merely military and did not affect the civil government, lasted 
until January 1905, when, in accordance with the provisions of 
the Franco-Siamese treaty of 1904, the garrison of occupation 
was withdrawn. Chantabun has been since the 17th century, 
and still is, a stronghold of the Roman Catholic missionaries, 
and the Christian element amongst the population is greater 
here than anywhere else in Siam. 

CHANTADA, a town of north-western Spain, in the province 
of Lugo, on the left bank of the Rio de Chantada, a small right- 
hand tributary of the river Mino, and on the main road from 
Orerse, 18 m. S. by W., to Lugo, 28 m. N. by E. Pop. (1900) 
1 5,003. Chantada is the chief town of the fertile region between 
the Mino and the heights of El Faro, which mark the western 
border of the province. Despite the lack of railway communica- 
tion, it has a thriving .trade in grain, flax, hemp, and dairy 
produce. 

CHANTAGE (a Fr. word from chanter, to sing, slang for a 
criminal making an avowal under examination), a demand for 
money backed by the threat of scandalous revelations, the 
French equivalent of " blackmail." 

CHANTARELLE, an edible fungus, known botanically as 
Cantharellus cibarius, found in woods in summer. It is golden 
yellow, somewhat inversely conical in shape and about 2 in. 
broad and high. The cap is flattened above with a central 
depression and a thick lobed irregular margin. Running down 
into the stem from the cap are a number of shallow thick gills. 
The substance of the fungus is dry and opaque with a peculiar 
smell suggesting ripe apricots or plums. The flesh is whitish 
tinged with yellow. The chantarelle is sold in the markets on 
the continent of Europe, where it forms a regular article of food, 
but seems little known in Britain though often plentiful in the 
New Forest and elsewhere. Before being cooked they should be 
allowed to dry, and then thrown into boiling water. They mav 



CHANTAVOINE— CHANTREY 



847 



then be stewed in butter or oil, or cut up jmall and stewed with 
meat. No fungus requires more careful preparation. 

See M. C. Cooke, British Edible Fungi, (1891), pp. 104-105. 

CHANTAVOINE, HENRI (1850- ), French man of letters, 
was born at Montpellier on the 6th of August 1850, and was 
educated at the Ecole Normale Superieure. After teaching in 
the provinces he moved, in 1876, to the Lycee Charlemagne in 
Paris, and subsequently became professor of rhetoric at the 
Lycee Henri IV. and maitre de conferences at the Ecole Normale 
at Sevres. He was associated with the Nouvclle Revue from its 
foundation in 1879, and he joined the Journal des debats in 1884. 
His poems include Poemes sinceres (1877), Satires contemporaines 
(1881), Ad memoriam (1884), Au fil des jours (1889). 

CHANTILLY, a town of northern France, in the department of 
Oise, 25 m. N. of Paris on the Northern railway to St Quentin. 
Pop. (1906) 4632. It is finely situated to the north of the forest 
of Chantilly and on the left bank of the river Nonette, and is one 
of the favourite Parisian resorts. Its name was long associated 
with the manufacture, which has now to a great extent decayed, 
of lace and blonde; it is still more celebrated for its chateau and 
its park (laid out originally by A. Le Notre in the second half of 
the 17th century), and as the scene of the great annual races of 
the French Jockey Club. The chateau consists of the palace 
built from 1876 to 1885 and of an older portion adjoining it 
known as the chatelet. The old castle must have been in existence 
in the 13th century, and in the reign of Charles VI. the lordship 
belonged to Pierre d'Orgemont, chancellor of France. In 1484 
it passed to the house of Montmorency, and in 1632 from 
that family to the house of Conde. Louis II., prince de Conde, 
surnamed the Great, was specially attached to the place, and did 
a great deal to enhance its beauty and splendour. Here he 
enjoyed the society of La Bruyere, Racine, Moliere, La Fontaine, 
Boileau, and other great men of his time; and here his steward 
Vatel killed himself in despair, because of a hitch in the prepara- 
tions for the reception of Louis XIV. The stables close to the 
racecourse were built from 17 19 to 1735 by Louis-Henri, duke 
of Bourbon. Of the two splendid mansions existing at that period 
known as the grand chateau and the chatelet, the former was 
destroyed about the time of the Revolution, but the latter, 
built for Anne de Montmorency by Jean Bullant, still remains 
as one of the finest specimens of Renaissance architecture in 
France. The chateau d'Enghien, facing the entrance to the 
grand chateau, was built in 1770 as a guest-house. On the death 
in 1830 of che duke of Bourbon, the last representative of the 
house of Conde, the estate passed into the hands of Henri, due 
d'Aumale, fourth son of Louis Philippe. In 1852 the house of 
Orleans was declared incapable of possessing property in France, 
and Chantilly was accordingly sold by auction. Purchased by 
the English bankers, Coutts & Co., it passed back into the hands 
of the due d'Aumale, in 1872. By him a magnificent palace, 
including a fine chapel in the Renaissance style, was erected on 
the foundations of the ancient grand chateau and in the style 
of the chatelet. It is quadrilateral in shape, consisting of four 
unequal sides flanked by towers and built round a courtyard. 
The whole group of buildings as well as the pleasure-ground 
behind them, known as the Parterre de la Voliere, is surrounded 
by fosses supplied with water from the Nonette. On the terrace 
in front of the chateau there is a bronze statue of the constable 
Anne de Montmorency. The due d'Aumale installed in the 
chatelet a valuable library, specially rich in incunabula and 16th 
century editions of classic authors, and a collection of the paint- 
ings of the great masters, besides many other objects of art. 
By a public act in 1886 he gave the park and chateau with its 
superb collections to the Institute of France in trust for the 
nation, reserving to himself only a life interest; and when he 
died in 1897 the Institute acquired full possession. 

CHANTREY, SIR FRANCIS LEGATT (1782-1841), English 
sculptor, was born on the 7th of April 1782 at Norton near 
Sheffield, where his father, a carpenter, cultivated a small farm. 
His father died when he was eight years of age; and his mother 
having married again, his profession was left to be chosen by his 
friends. In his sixteenth year he was on the point of being 



apprenticed to a, grocer in Sheffield, when, having seen some 
wood-carving in a shop-window, he requested to be made a carver 
instead, and was accordingly placed with a Mr Ramsey, wood- 
carver in Sheffield. In this situation he became acquainted with 
Raphael Smith, a distinguished draftsman in crayon, who gave 
him lessons in painting; and Chan trey, eager to commence his 
course as an artist, procured the cancelling of his indentures, and 
went to try his fortune in Dublin and Edinburgh, and finally 
(1802) in London. Here he first obtained employment as an 
assistant wood-carver, but at the same time devoted himself 
to portrait-painting, bust-sculpture, and modelling in clay. He 
exhibited pictures at the Academy for some years from 1804, 
but from 1807 onwards devoted himself mainly to sculpture. 
The sculptor Nollekens showed particular zeal in recognizing 
his merits. In 1807 he married his cousin, Miss Wale, who had 
some property of her own. His first imaginative work in sculp ture 
was the model of the head of Satan, which was exhibited at the 
Royal Academy in 1808. He afterwards executed for Greenwich 
hospital four colossal busts of the admirals Duncan, Howe, 
Vincent and Nelson; and so rapidly did his reputation spread 
that the next bust which he executed, that of Home Tooke, 
procured him commissions to the extent of £12,000. From this 
period he was almost uninterruptedly engaged in professional 
labour. In 1819 he visited Italy, and became acquainted with 
the most distinguished sculptors of Florence and Rome. He was 
chosen an associate (181 5) and afterwards a member (1818) 
of the Royal Academy^ received the degree of M.A. from 
Cambridge, and that of D.C.L. from Oxford, and in 1835 
was knighted. He died after an illness of only two hours' 
duration on the 25th of November 1841, having for some years 
suffered from disease of the heart, and was buried in a tomb 
constructed by himself in the church of his native village. 

The works of Chantrey are extremely numerous. The principal 
are the statues of Washington in the State-house at Boston, 
U.S.A.; of George III. in the Guildhall, London; of George IV. 
at Brighton; of Pitt in Hanover Square, London; of James 
Watt in Westminster Abbey and in Glasgow; of Roscoe and 
Canning in Liverpool; of Dalton in Manchester; of Lord 
President Blair and Lord Melville in Edinburgh, &c. Of his eques- 
trian statues the most famous are those of Sir Thomas Munro 
in Calcutta, and the duke of Wellington in front of the London 
Exchange. But the finest of Chantrey's works are his busts, 
and his delineations of children. The figures of two children 
asleep in each other's arms, which form a monumental design in 
Lichfield cathedral, have always been lauded for beauty, sim- 
plicity and grace. So is also the statue of the girlish Lady Louisa 
Russell, represented as standing on tiptoe and fondling a dove 
in her bosom. Both these works appear, in design, to have 
owed something to Stothard; for Chantrey knew his own 
scantiness of ideal invention or composition, and on system 
sought aid from others for such attempts. In busts, his leading 
excellence is facility — a ready unconstrained air of life, a prompt 
vivacity of ordinary expression. Allan Cunningham and Weekes 
were his chief assistants, and were indeed the active executants 
of many works that pass under Chantrey's name. Chantrey 
was a man of warm and. genial temperament, and is said to have 
borne ? noticeable though commonplace resemblance to the 
usual portraits of Shakespeare. 

Chantrey Bequest. — By the will dated the 31st of December 
1840, Chantrey (who had no children) left his whole residuary 
personal estate after the decease or on the second marriage of his 
widow (less certain specified annuities and bequests) in trust for 
the president and trustees of the Royal Academy (or in the event 
of the dissolution of the Royal Academy, to such society as might 
take its place), the income to be devoted to the encouragement of 
British fine art in painting and sculpture only, by " the purchase 
of works of fine art of the highest merit . . . that can be obtained." 
The funds might be allowed to accumulate for not more than five 
years; works by British or foreign artists, dead or living, might be 
acquired, so long as such works were entirely executed within the 
shores of Great Britain, the artists having been in residence there 
during such execution and completion. The prices to be paid 



8 4 8 



CHANT ROYAL 



were to be " liberal," and no sympathy for an artist or his family 
was to influence the selection or the purchase of works, which 
were to be acquired solely on the ground of intrinsic merit. No 
commission or orders might be given: the works must be finished 
before purchase. Conditions were made as to the exhibition of 
the works, in the confident expectation that as the intention of 
the testator was to form and establish a " public collection of 
British Fine Art in Painting and Sculpture," the government or 
the country would provide a suitable gallery for their display; 
and an annual sum of £300 and £50 was to be paid to the president 
of the Royal Academy and the secretary respectively, for the 
discharge of their duties in carrying out the provisions of the 
will. 

Lady Chantrey died in 1875, and two years later the fund 
became available for the purchase of paintings and sculptures. 
The capital sum available amounted to £105,000 in 3 % Consols, 
which (since reduced to 25%) produces an available annual 
income varying from £2500 to £2100. Galleries in the Victoria 
and Albert Museum at South Kensington were at first adopted 
as the depository of the works acquired, until in 1898 the Royal 
Academy arranged with the treasury, on behalf of the govern- 
ment, for the transference of the collection to the National 
Gallery of British Art, which had been erected by Sir Henry 
Tate at Millbank. It was agreed that the " Tate Gallery " should 
be its future home, and that " no power of selection or elimination 
is claimed on behalf of the trustees and director of the National 
Gallery " (Treasury Letter, 18054-98, 7th December 1898) in 
respect of the pictures and sculptures which were then to be 
handed over and which should, from time to time, be sent to 
augment the collection. Inasmuch as it was felt that the pro- 
vision that all works must be complete to be eligible for purchase 
militated against the most advantageous disposition of the fund 
in respect of sculpture, in the case of wax models or plaster casts 
before being converted into marble or bronze, it was sought in 
the action of Sir F. Leighton v. Hughes (tried by Mr Justice 
North, judgment May 7th, 1888, and in the court of appeal, 
before the master of the rolls, Lord Justice Cotton, and Lord 
Justice Fry, judgment June 4th, 1889 — the master of the rolls 
dissenting) to allow of sculptors being commissioned to complete 
in bronze or marble a work executed in wax or plaster, such 
" completion " being more or less a mechanical process. The 
attempt, however, was abortive. 

A growing discontent with the interpretation put by the 
Royal Academy upon the terms of the will as shown in the works 
acquired began to find expression more than usually forcible and 
lively in the press during the year 1903, and a debate raised in the 
House of Lords by the earl of Lytton led to the appointment of a 
select committee of the House of Lords, which sat from June to 
August 1904. The committee consisted of the earls of Carlisle, 
Lytton, and Crewe, and Lords Windsor, Ribblesdale, Newton, 
and Killanin, and the witnesses represented the Royal Academy 
and representative art institutions and art critics. The report 
(ordered to be printed on the 8th of August 1904) made certain 
recommendations with a view to the prevention of certain former 
errors of administration held to have been sustained, but dis- 
missed other charges against the Academy. In reply thereto a 
memorandum was issued by the Royal Academy (February 
1905, ordered to be printed on the 7th of August 1905 — Paper 
166) disagreeing with certain recommendations, but allowing 
others, either intact or in a modified form. 

Up to 1905 inclusive 203 works had been bought — all except 
two from living painters — at a cost of nearly £68,000. Of these, 
175 were in oil-colours, 12 in water-colours, and 16 sculptures 
(10 in bronze and 6 marble). 

See The Administration of the Chantrey Bequest, by D. S. MacColl 
(l6mo, London, 1904), a highly controversial publication by the 
leading assailant of the Royal Academy ; Chantrey and His Bequest, 
by Arthur Fish, a complete illustrated record of the purchases, &c. 
(London, 1904) ; The Royal Academy, its Uses and Abuses, by H. J. 
Laidlay (London, 1898), controversial; Report from the Select Com- 
mittee of the House of Lords on the Chantrey Trust; together with the 
Proceedings of the Committee, Minutes of Evidence and Appendix 
(Wyman & Sons, 1904), and Index (separate publication, 1904). 



CHANT ROYAL, one of the fixed forms of verse invented by 
the ingenuity of the poets of medieval France. It is composed 
of five strophes, identical in arrangement, of eleven verses each, 
and of an envoi of five verses. All the strophes are written on the 
five rhymes exhibited in the first strophe, the entire poem, 
therefore, consisting of sixty lines in the course of which five 
rhymes are repeated. It has been conjectured that the chant 
royal is an extended ballade, or rather a ballade conceived upon a 
larger scale; but which form preceded the other appears to be 
uncertain. On this point Henri de Croi, who wrote about these 
forms of verse in his Art el science de rhetorique (1493), throws no 
light. He dwells, however, on the great dignity of what he calls 
the " Champt Royal," and says that those who defy with success 
the ardour of its rules deserve crowns and garlands for their 
pains. Etienne Pasquier (1529-1615) points out the fact that the 
Chant Royal, by its length and the rigidity of its structure, is 
better fitted than the ballade for solemn and pompous themes. 
In Old French, the most admired chants royal are thoseof Clement 
Marot; his Chant royal chrestien, with its refrain 
" Sante au corps, et Paradis a l'ame," 

was celebrated. Theodore de Banville defines the chant royal as 
essentially belonging to ages of faith, when its subjects could be 
either the exploits of a hero of royal race or the processional 
splendours of religion. La Fontaine was the latest of the French 
poets to attempt the chant royal, until it was resuscitated in 
modern times. 

This species of poem was unknown in English medieval litera- 
ture and was only introduced into Great Britain in the last 
quarter of the 19th century. The earliest chant royal in English 
was that published by Edmund Gosse in 1877; it is here 
given to exemplify the structure and rhyme-arrangement of tht 
form : — 

The Praise of Dionysus 

" Behold, above the mountains there is light, 
A streak of gold, a line of gathering fire, 
And the dim East hath suddenly grown bright 
With pale aerial flame, that drives up higher 
The lurid mists which all the night long were 
Breasting the dark ravines and coverts bare; 
Behold, behold! the granite gates unclose, 
And down the vales a lyric people flows, 
Who dance to music, and in dancing fling 
Their frantic robes to every wind that blows, 
And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing. 

Nearer they press, and nearer still in sight, 
Still dancing blithely in a seemly choir; 
Tossing on high the symbol of their rite, 
The cone-tipp'd thyrsus of a god's desire; 
Nearer they come, tall damsels flushed and fair, 
With ivy circling their abundant hair, 
Onward, with even pace, in stately rows, 
With eye that flashes, and with cheek that glows, 
And all the while their tribute-songs they bring, 
And newer glories of the past disclose 
And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing. 

The pure luxuriance of their limbs is white, 
And flashes clearer as they draw the nigher, 
Bathed in an air of infinite delight, 
Smooth without wound of thorn, or fleck of mire, 
Borne up by song as by a trumpet's blare, 
Leading the van to conquest, on they fare, 
Fearless and bold, whoever comes or goes, 
These shining cohorts of Bacchantes close, 
Shouting and shouting till the mountains ring, 
And forests grim forget their ancient woes, 
And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing. 

And youths there are for whom full many a night 

Brought dreams of bliss, vague dreams that haunt and tire 

Who rose in their own ecstasy bedight, 

And wandered forth through many a scourging briar, 

And waited shivering in the icy air, 

And wrapped the leopard-skin about them there, 

Knowing for all the bitter air that froze, 

The time must come, that every poet knows, 

When he shall rise and feel himself a king, 

And follow, follow where the ivy grows, 

And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing. 



CHANTRY— CHAPBOOK 



849 



But oh! within the heart of this great flight, 
Whose ivory arms hold up the golden lyre? 
What form is this of more than mortal height? 
What matchless beauty, what inspired ire? 
The brindled panthers know the prize they bear, 
And harmonize their steps with tender care ; 
Bent to the morning, like a living rose, 
The immortal splendour of his face he shows; 
And, where he glances, leaf and flower and wing 
Tremble with rapture, stirred in their repose, 
And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing. 

Envoi. 
Prince of the flute and ivy, all thy foes 
Record the bounty that thy grace bestows, 
But we, thy servants, to thy glory cling, 
And with no frigid lips our songs compose, 
And deathless praises to the Vine-God sing." 

In the middle ages the chant royal was largely used for the 
praise of the Virgin Mary. Eustache Deschamps (1340-1410) 
distinguishes these Marian chants royaux, which were called 
" serventois," by the absence of an envoi. These poems are first 
mentioned by Rutebeuf, a Irouvere of the 13th century. The 
chant royal is practically unknown outside French and English 
literature. (E. G.) 

CHANTRY (Fr. chanterie, from chanter, to sing; Med. Lat. can- 
tuaria), a small chapel built out from a church, endowed in pre- 
Ref ormation times for the express purpose of maintaining priests 
for the chan ting of masses for the soul of the founder or of some one 
named by him. It generally contained the tomb of the founder, 
and, as the officiator or mass-priest was often unconnected with 
the parochial clergy, had an entrance from the outside. The 
word passed through graduations of meaning. Its first sense was 
singing or chanting. Then it meant the endowment funds, next 
the priests, and then the church or chapel itself. 

CHANUTE, a city of Neosho county, Kansas, U.S.A., 1 m. 
from the Neosho river, and about 120 m. S.S.W. of Kansas city. 
Pop. (1890) 2826; (1900) 4208, of whcm 210 were foreign-born 
and 171 were negroes; (1910 census) 9272. Chanute is served 
by the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe and the Missouri, Kansas 
& Texas railways, the former having large repair shops. The 
city is in the Kansas-Oklahoma oil and gas field, and is 
surrounded by a fine farming and dairying region, in which 
special attention is given to the raising of small fruit; oil, gas, 
cement rock and brick shale are found in the vicinity. Among 
the city's manufactures are refined oil, Portland cement, vitrified 
brick and tile, glass, asphalt, ice, cigars, drilling machinery, and 
flour. The municipality owns and operates the waterworks, 
a natural gas plant, and an electric lighting plant. Four towns 
• — New Chicago, Tioga, Chicago Junction and Alliance — were 
started here about the same time (1870). In 1872 they were 
consolidated, and the present name was adopted in honour of 
Octave Chanute (b. 1832), the civil engineer and aeronautist 
(see Flight and Flying), then the engineer of the Lawrence, 
Leavenworth & Galveston railway (now part of the Atchison 
system). Chanute was incorporated as a city of the third class 
in 1873, and its charter was revised in 1888. Natural gas and 
oil were found here in 1899, and Chanute became one of the 
leaders of the Kansas independent refineries in their contest 
with the Standard 0:1 Company. 

CHANZY, ANTOINE EUGENE ALFRED (1823-1883), French 
general, was born at Nouart (Ardennes) on the 18th of March 
1823. The son of a cavalry officer, he was educated at the naval 
school at Brest, but enlisted in the artillery, and, subsequently 
passing through St Cyr, was commissioned in the Zouaves in 
1843. He saw a good deal of fighting in Algeria, and was pro- 
moted lieutenant in 1848, and captain in 1851. He became 
chef de bataillon'm 1856, and served in the Lombardy campaign 
of 1859, being present at Magenta and Solferino. He took part 
in the Syrian campaign of 1860-61 as a lieutenant-colonel; and 
as colonel commanded the 48th regiment at Rome in 1864. 
He returned to Algeria as general of brigade, assisted to quell 
the Arab insurrection, and commanded the subdivisions of Bel 
Abbes and Tlemcen in 1868. Although he had acquired a good 
professional reputation, he was in bad odour at the war office 



on account of suspected contributions to the press, and at the 
outbreak of the Franco- German War he was curtly refused a 
brigade command. After the revolution, however, the govern- 
ment of national defence called him from Algeria, made him 
a general of division, and gave him command of the XVI. corps 
of the army of the Loire. (For the operations of the Orleans 
campaign which followed, see Franco-German War.) The 
Loire army won the greatest success of the French during the 
whole war at Coulmiers, and followed this up with another 
victorious action at Patay; in both engagements ■ General 
Chanzy's corps took the most brilliant part. After the second 
battle of Orleans and the separation of the two wings of the 
French army, Chanzy was appointed to command that in the 
west, designated the second army of the Loire. His enemies, 
the grand duke of Mecklenburg, Prince Frederick Charles, and 
General von der Tann, all regarded Chanzy as their most for- 
midable opponent. He displayed conspicuous moral courage 
and constancy, not less than technical skill, in the fighting from 
Beaugency to the Loire, in his retreat to Le Mans, and in 
retiring to Laval behind the Mayenne. As Gambetta was 
the soul, Chanzy was the strong right arm of French resistance 
to the invader. He was made a grand officer of the Legion of 
Honour, and was elected to the National Assembly. At the 
outbreak of the Commune, Chanzy, then at Paris, fell into the 
hands of the insurgents, by whom he was forced to give his 
parole not to serve against them. It was said that he would 
otherwise have been appointed instead of MacMahon to command 
the army of Versailles. A ransom of £40,000 was also paid by 
the government for him. In 1872 he became a member of the 
committee of defence and commander of the VII. army corps, 
and in 1873 was appointed governor of Algeria, where he re- 
mained for six years. In 1875 he was elected a life senator, in 
1878 received the grand cross of the Legion of Honour, and in 
1879, without his consent, was nominated for the presidency of 
the republic, receiving a third of the total votes. For two years 
he was ambassador at St Petersburg, during which time he 
received many tokens of respect, not only from the Russians, 
but also from the German emperor, William I., and Prince 
Bismarck. He died suddenly, while commanding the VI. army 
corps (stationed nearest to the German frontier) , at Chalons-sur- 
Marne, on the 4th of January 1883, only a few days after Gam- 
betta, and his remains received a state funeral. He was the 
author of La Deuxieme Armie de la Loire (1872). Statues of 
General Chanzy have been erected at Nouart and Le Mans. 

CHAOS, in the Hesiodic theogony, the infinite empty space, 
which existed before all things (Tkeog. 116, 123). It is not, 
however, a mere abstraction, being filled with clouds and dark- 
ness; from it proceed Erebus and Nyx (Night), whose children 
are Aether (upper air) and Hemera (Day). In the Orphic 
cosmogony the origin of all goes back to Chronos, the personi- 
fication of time, who produces Aether and Chaos. In the Aristo- 
phanic parody (Birds, 691) the winged Eros in conjunction with 
gloomy Chaos brings forth the race of birds. The later Roman 
conception (Ovid, Metam. i. 7) makes Chaos the original 
undigested, amorphous mass, into which the architect of the 
world introduces order and harmony, and from which individual 
forms are created. In the created world (cosmos, order of the 
universe) the word has various meanings: — the universe; 
the space between heaven and earth; the under- world and its 
ruler. Metaphorically it is used for the immeasurable darkness, 
eternity, and the infinite generally. In modern usage " chaos " 
denotes a state of disorder and confusion. 

CHAPBOOK (from the O. Eng. chap, to buy and sell), the 
comparatively modern name applied by booksellers and biblio- 
philes to the little stitched tracts written for the common people 
and formerly circulated in England, Scotland and the American 
colonies by itinerant dealers or chapmen, consisting chiefly of 
vulgarized versions of popular stories, such as Tom Thumb, 
Jack the Giant Killer, Mother Shiplon, and Reynard the Fox — 
travels, biographies and religious treatises. Few of the older 
chapbooks exist. Samuel Pepys collected some of the best and 
had them bound into small quarto volumes, which he called 



8 5 o 



CHAPE— CHAPELAIN 



Vulgaria ; also four volume of a smaller size, which he lettered 
Penny Witticisms, Penny Merriments, Penny Compliments and 
Penny Godlinesses. The early chapbooks were the direct 
descendants of the black-letter tracts of Wynkyn de Worde. It 
was in France that the printing-press first began to supply 
reading for the common people. At the end of the 15th century 
there was a large popular literature of farces, tales in verse and 
prose, satires, almanacs, &c, stitched together so as to contain 
a few leaves, and circulated by itinerant booksellers, known as 
colporteurs. Most early English chapbooks are adaptations or 
translations of these French originals, and were introduced into 
England early in the 16th century. The chapbooks of the 17th 
century present us with valuable illustrations of the manners 
of the time; one of the best known is that containing the story 
of Dick Whittington. Others which had a great vogue are Jack 
the Giant Killer, Little Red Riding Hood, and Mother Shipton. 
Those of the 18th century are far inferior in every way, both as 
regards the literature and the printing; and unfortunately it 
is these which form the bulk of what is now known to us in 
collections as chapbooks. They have never exercised any great 
influence in England nor received much attention, owing no 
doubt to their poor literary character. In France, on the other 
hand, their French equivalents have been the object of close and 
systematic study, and L'Histoire des livres popidaires ou de la 
literature du colportage by Charles Nisard (1854) goes deeply into 
the subject. Amongst English books may be mentioned Notices 
of Fugitive Tracts and Chapbooks, by J. O. Halliwell-Phillipps 
(1849); Chapbooks of the 18th Century, by John Ashton (1882), 
and some reprints by the Villon Society in 1885. The word " chap- 
book " has not been noticed earlier than 1824, when Dibdin, the 
celebrated bibliographer, described a work as being "a chapbook, 
printed in rather a neat black-letter." 

CHAPE (from the Fr. chape, a hood, cope or sheath), a cover 
or metal plate, such as the cap upon the needle in the compass, 
also the transverse guard of a sword which protects the hand. 
From the original meaning comes the use of the word as a support 
or catch to attach one thing to another, as the hook on a belt 
to which the sword is fastened. The word is also used for the tip 
of a fox's brush. 

CHAPEL, a place of religious worship, 1 a name properly applied 
to that of a Christian religious body, but sometimes to any small 
temple of pagan worship (Lat. sacellum). The word is derived 
through the O. Fr. chapele, modern chapelle, from the Late Lat. 
capelle or cappella, diminutive of cappa, a cape, particularly that 
of a monk. This word was transferred to any sanctuary con- 
taining relics, in the early history of the Frankish Church, 
because the cloak of St Martin, cappa brevior Sancti Martini, 
one of the most sacred relics of the Frankish kings, was carried 
in a sanctuary or shrine wherever the king went; and oaths were 
taken on it (see Ducange, Glossarium, s.v. Capella). Such a 
sanctuary was served by a priest, who was hence called capellanus, 
from which is derived the English " chaplain " (q.v.). The strict 
application of the word to a sanctuary containing relics was 
extended to embrace any place of worship other than a church, 
and it was synonymous, therefore, with " oratory " (oralorium), 
especially one attached to a palace or to a private dwelling-house. 
The celebrated Sainte Chapelle in Paris, attached to what is now 
the Palais de Justice, well illustrates the early and proper mean- 
ing of the word. It was built (consecration, 1248) by St Louis 
of France to contain the relic of the Crown of Thorns, ransomed 
by the king from the Venetians, who held it in pawn from the 
Latin emperor of the East, John of Brienne, lately dead. The 
chapel served as the sanctuary of the relic lodged in the 
upper chapel, and the whole building was attached as the place 
of worship to the king's palace. This, the primary meaning, 
survives in the chapels usually placed in the aisles of cathedrals 
and large churches. They were originally built either to contain 
relics of a particular saint to whom they were dedicated, or 
the tomb of a particular family. 

1 The only other English sense is that of a printer's workshop, or 
the body of compositors in it, who are presided over by a " father 
of the chapel." 



In the Church of England the word is applied to a private 
place of worship, attached either to the palaces of the sovereign, 
" chapels royal," or to the residence of a private person, to a 
college, school, prison, workhouse, &c. Further, the word has 
particular legal applications, though in each case the building 
might be and often is styled a church. These are places of 
worship supplementary to a parish church, and may be either 
" chapels of ease," to ease or relieve the mother-church and serve 
those parishioners who may live far away, " parochial chapels," 
the " churches " of ancient divisions of a very large and widely 
scattered parish, or " district chapels," those of a district of a 
parish divided under the various church building acts. A " free 
chapel " is one founded by the king and by his authority, and 
visited by him and not by the bishop. A "proprietary chapel" 
is one that belongs to a private person. They are anomalies 
to the English ecclesiastical law, have no parish rights, and can 
be converted to other than religious purposes, but a clergyman 
may be licensed to perform duty in such a place of worship. In 
the early and middle part of the 19th century such proprietary- 
chapels were common, but they have practically ceased to exist. 
" Chapel" was early and still is in England the general name of 
places of worship other than those of the established Church, 
but the application of "church" to all places of worship without 
distinction of sect is becoming more and more common. The 
word " chapel " was in this restricted sense first applied to places 
of worship belonging to the Roman Church in England, and was 
thus restricted to those attached to foreign embassies, or to those 
of the consorts of Charles I. and II. and James II., who were 
members of that church. The word is still frequently the general 
term for Roman Catholic churches in Great Britain and always 
so in Ireland. The use of " chapel " as a common term for all 
Nonconformist places of worship was general through most of the 
19th century, so that " church and chapel " was the usual phrase 
to mark the distinction between members of the established 
Church and those of Nonconformist bodies. Here the widened 
use of " church " noticed above has been especially marked. 
Most of the recent buildings for worship erected by Noncon- 
formist bodies will be found to be styled Wesleyan, Congrega- 
tional, &c, churches. It would appear that while the word 
" chapel " was not infrequent in the early history of Noncon- 
formity, " meeting-house " was the more usual term. 

From the* architectural point of view the addition of chapels 
to a cathedral or large church assumes some historical importance 
in consequence of the changes it involved in the plan. It was 
the introduction of the apsidal chapels in the churches of France 
which eventually led to the chevet or cluster of eastern'chapels 
in many of the great cathedrals, and also sometimes to the 
extension of the transept so as to include additional apsidal 
chapels on the east side. In France, and to a certain extent in 
Italy, the multiplication of chapels led to their being placed on 
tha north and south side of the aisles, and in some cases, as at 
Albi in France, to the suppression of the aisles and the instalment 
of the chapels in their place. The chapels of the colleges at 
Oxford and Cambridge are sometimes of large dimensions and 
architecturally of great importance, that of Christ Church being 
actually the cathedral of Oxford; among others may be mentioned 
the chapel of Merton College, and the new chapel of Exeter 
College, both in Oxford, and the chapel of King's College, 
Cambridge, which is roofed over with perhaps the finest fan- vault 
in England. (See Vault, Plate II., fig. 19.) 

CHAPELAIN, JEAN (1595-1674), French poet and man of 
letters, the son of a notary, was born in Paris on the 4th of 
December 1595. His father destined him for his own profession; 
but his mother, who had known Ronsard, had determined 
otherwise. At an early age Chapelain began to qualify himself 
for literature, learning, under Nicolas Bourbon, Greek and Latin, 
and teaching himself Italian and Spanish. Having finished his 
studies, he was engaged for a while in teaching Spanish to a 
young nobleman. He was then appointed tutor to the two sons 
of a M. de la Trousse, grand provost of France. Attached for 
the next seventeen years to the family of this gentleman, the 
administration of whose fortune was wholly in his hands, he 



CHAPEL-EN-LE-FRITH— CHAPLAIN 



851 



seems to have published nothing during this period, yet to have 
acquired a great reputation as a probability. His first work 
given to the public was a preface for the Adone of Marini, who 
printed and published that notorious poem at Paris. This was 
followed by an excellent translation of Mateo Aleman's novel, 
Guzman de Aljarache, and by four extremely indifferent odes, 
one of them addressed to Richelieu. The credit of introducing 
the law of the dramatic unities into French literature has been 
claimed for many writers, and especially for the Abbe d'Aubignac, 
whose Pratique du theatre appeared in 1657. The theory had 
of course been enunciated in the Art poetique of J. C. Scaliger 
in 1561, and subsequently lay other writers, but there is no doubt 
that it was the action of Chapelain that transferred it from the 
region of theory to that of actual practice. In a conversation 
with Richelieu in about 1632, reported by the abbe d'Olivet, 
Chapelain maintained that it was indispensable to maintain the 
unities of time, place and action, and it is explicitly stated that 
the doctrine was new to the cardinal and to the poets who were 
in his pay. French classical drama thus owes the riveting of its 
fetters to Chapelain. Rewarded with a pension of a thousand 
crowns, and from the first an active member of the newly- 
constituted Academy, Chapelain drew up the plan of the grammar 
and dictionary the compilation of which was to be a principal 
function of the young institution, and at Richelieu's command 
drew up the Sentiments de VAcademie sur le Cid. In 1656 he 
published, in a magnificent form, the first twelve cantos of his 
celebrated epic La Pucelle, 1 on which he had been engaged during 
twenty years. Six editions of the poem were disposed of in 
eighteen months. But this was the end of the poetic reputation 
of Chapelain, " the legist of Parnassus." Later the slashing 
satire of Boileau (in this case fairly master of his subject) did 
its work, and Chapelain (" Le plus grand poete Francais qu' ait 
jamais itt et du plus solide jugement," as he is called in Colbert's 
list) took his place among the failures of modern art. 

Chapelain's reputation as a critic survived this catastrophe, 
and in 1663 he was employed by Colbert to draw up an account 
of contemporary men of letters, destined to guide the king in 
his distribution of pensions. In this pamphlet, as in his letters, 
he shows to far greater advantage than in his unfortunate epic. 
His prose is incomparably better than his verse; his criticisms 
are remarkable for their justice and generosity; his erudition 
and kindliness of heart are everywhere apparent; the royal 
attention is directed alike towards the author's firmest friends 
and bitterest enemies. To him young Racine was indebted 
not only for kindly and seasonable counsel, but also for that 
pension of six hundred livres which was so useful to him. The 
catholicity of his taste is shown by his De la lecture des vieux 
Tomans (pr. 1870), in which he praises the chansons de geste, 
forgotten by his generation. Chapelain refused many honours, 
and his disinterestedness in this and other cases makes it necessary 
to receive with caution the stories of Menage and Tallemant des 
Reaux," who assert that he was in his old age a miser, and that 
a considerable fortune was found hoarded in his apartments 
when he died on the 22nd of February 1674. 

there is a very favourable estimate of Chapelain's merits as a 
critic in George Saintsbury's History of Criticism, ii. 256-261. 
An analysis of La Pucelle is given in pp. 23-79 of Robert Southey's 
Joan of Arc. See also Les Lettres de Jean Chapelain (ed. P. Tanuzey 
de Larroque, 1880-1882); Lettres inedites . . . a, P. D. Huet (1658- 
1673, ed. by L. G. Pellissier, 1894); Julien Duchesne, Les Poemes 
epiques du XVII" sie.de (1870) ; the abbe A. Fabre, Les Ennemis de 
Chapelain (1888), Chapelain et nos deux premieres Academies (1890) ; 
and A. Muehlan, Jean Chapelain (1893). 

CHAPEL-EN-LE-FRITH, a market town in the High Peak 
parliamentary division of Derbyshire, England, 20 m. S.E. of 
Manchester, on the London & North-Western and Midland 
railways. Pop. (1901) 4626. It lies in an upland valley of the 
Peak district, the hills of which rise above 1200 ft. in its im- 
mediate vicinity. There are paper- works and ironworks, and 

1 The last twelve cantos of La Pucelle were edited (1882) from the 
MS. with corrections and a preface in the author's autograph, in the 
Bibliotheque Nationale, by H. Herluison. Another edition, by E. de 
Molenes (2 volis.), «-as published in 1892. 



brewing is carried on. The foundation of the church of St 
Thomas of Canterbury is attributed to the foresters of the royal 
forest or frith of the Peak early in the 13th century; and from 
this the town took name. After the defeat of the Scottish forces 
at Preston by Cromwell in 1648, it is said that 1500 prisoners 
were confined in the church at Chapel-en-le-Frith. 

CHAPEL HILL, a town of Orange county, North Carolina, 
U.S.A., about 28 m. N.W. of Raleigh. Pop. (1900) 1099; (1910) 
1 149. It is served by a branch of the Southern railway, connect- 
ing at University, 10 m. distant, with the Greensboro & Goldsboro 
division. The town is best known as the seat of the University 
of North Carolina (see North Carolina), whose campus contains 
48 acres. There are cotton and knitting mills and lumber interests 
of some importance. Chapel Hill was settled late in the 18th 
century, and was first incorporated in 1851. 

CHAPELLE ARDENTE (Fr. "burning chapel"), the chapel 
or room in which the corpse of a sovereign or other exalted 
personage lies in state pending the funeral service. The name is 
in allusion to the many candles which are lighted round the 
catafalque. This custom is first chronicled as occurring at the 
obsequies of Dagobert I. (602-638). 

CHAPERON, originally a cap or hood (Fr. chape) worn by 
nobles and knights of the Garter in full dress, and after the i6tb 
century by middle-aged ladies. The modern use of the word is 
of a married or elderly lady (cf. " duenna ") escorting or protect- 
ing a young and unmarried girl in public places and in society. 

CHAPLAIN, strictly one who conducts service in a chapel 
(q.v.), i.e. a priest or minister without parochial charge who is 
attached for special duties to a sovereign or his representatives 
(ambassadors, judges, &c), to bishops, to the establishments of 
nobles, &c, to institutions (e.g. parliament, congress, colleges, 
schools, workhouses, cemeteries), or to the army and the navy. 
In some cases a parish priest is also appointed to a chaplaincy, 
but in so far as he is a chaplain he has no parochial duties. Thus 
a bishop of the English Church appoints examining chaplains 
who conduct the examination of candidates for holy orders; 
such officials generally hold ordinary benefices also. The British 
sovereign has 36 " Chaplains in Ordinary," who perform service 
at St James's in rotation, as well as " Honorary Chaplains " 
and " Chaplains of the Household." There are also royal chap- 
lains in Scotland and Ireland. The Scottish chaplains in ordinary 
are on the same basis as those in England, but the Irish chaplains 
are attached to the household of the lord-lieutenant. The Indian 
civil service appoints a number of clergymen of the Church of 
England and the Church of Scotland. These clergymen are 
known as Chaplains, and are subject to the same conditions as 
other civil servants, being eligible for a retiring pension after 23 
years of service. Chaplains are also appointed under the foreign 
office to embassies, legations, consulates, &c. 

Workhouse chaplains are appointed by overseers and guardians 
on the direction of the Local Government Board, to which alone 
such chaplains are responsible. Prison chaplains are appointed 
by the home secretary. 

In the British army there are two kinds of chaplains, permanent 
and occasional! The former, described as Chaplains to the Forces, 
hold commissions, serving throughout the empire except in 
India: they include a Chaplain-General who ranks as a major- 
general, and four classes of subordinate chaplains who rank 
respectively as colonels, lieutenant-colonels, majors and captains. 
There are about 100 in all. Special chaplains (Acting Chaplains 
for Temporary Service) may be appointed by a secretary of state 
under the Army Chaplains Act of 1868 to perform religious 
service for the army in particular districts. The permanent 
chaplains may be Church of England, Roman Catholic, or 
Presbyterian; Wesleyans (if they prefer not to accept com- 
missions) may be appointed Acting Chaplains. The Church of 
England chaplains report to the chaplain-general, while other 
chaplains report to the War Office direct. In the navy, chaplains 
are likewise appointed but do not hold official rank. They must 
have a special ecclesiastical licence from the archbishop of 
Canterbury. In 1909 a Chaplains' Department of the Territorial 
Force was formed; there is no denominational restriction. 



8 5 2 



CHAPLIN— CHAPMAN, G. 



In the armies and navies of all Christian countries chaplains 
are officially appointed, with the single exception of France, 
where the office was abolished on the separation of Church and 
State. In the army of the United States of America chaplains 
are originally appointed by the president, and subsequently are 
under the authority of the secretary of war, who receives recom- 
mendations as regards transfer from department commanders. 
By act of Congress, approved in April 1904, the establishment of 
chaplains was fixed at 57 (15 with the rank of major), 12 for the 
artillery corps and 1 each for the cavalry and infantry regiments. 
There is no distinction of sect. In the U.S. navy the chaplains 
are 24 in number, of whom 13 rank as lieutenants, 7 as com- 
manders, 4 as captains. 

In the armies of Roman Catholic countries there are elaborate 
regulations. Where the chaplains are numerous a chaplain- 
major is generally appointed, but in the absence of special sanction 
from the pope such officer has no spiritual jurisdiction. Moreover, 
chaplains must be approved by the ordinary of the locality. In 
Austria there are Roman Catholic, Greek Church, Jewish and 
Mahommedan chaplains. The Roman Catholic chaplains are 
classed as parish priests, curates and assistants, and are subject 
to an army Vicar Apostolic. In war, at an army headquarters 
there are a " field-rabbi," a " military imam," an evangelical 
minister, as well as the Roman Catholic hierarchy. By a decree 
of the Sacred Congregation of Propaganda (May 15, 1906), the 
archbishop of Westminster is the ecclesiastical superior of all 
commissioned Roman Catholic chaplains in the British army and 
navy, and he is empowered to negotiate with the civil authorities 
concerning appointments. 

In Germany, owing to the fact that there are different religions 
in the different states, there is no uniform system. In Prussia 
there are two Feldprobsle (who are directly under the war 
minister), one Lutheran, one Roman Catholic. The latter is a 
titular bishop, and has sole spiritual authority over soldiers. 
There are also army corps and divisional chaplains of both 
faiths. Bavaria and Saxony, both Roman Catholic states, have 
no special spiritual hierarchy; in Bavaria, the archbishop of 
Munich and Freysing is ex officio bishop of the army. 

The origin of the office of capellanus or cappellanus in the 
medieval church is generally traced (see Du Cange, Gloss, med. 
et infim. Latin.) to the appointment of persons to watch over 
the sacred cloak (cappa or capella) of St Martin of Tours, which 
was preserved as a relic by the French monarchs. In time of war 
this cloak was carried with the army in the field, and was kept 
in a tent which itself came to be known as a cappella or capella. 
It is also suggested that the capella was simply the tent or canopy 
which the French kings erected over the altar in the field for the 
worship of the soldiers. However this may be, the name capel- 
lanus was generally applied to those who were in charge of sacred 
relics: such officials were also known as custodes, martyrarii, 
cubicularii. Thus we hear of a custos palatinae capellae who was 
in charge of the palace chapel relics, and guarded them in the 
field; the chief of these custodes was sometimes called the archi- 
capellanus. From the care of sacred relics preserved in royal 
chapels, &c. (sacella or capellae), the office of capellanus naturally 
extended its scope until it covered practically that of the modern 
court chaplain, and was officially recognized by the Church. 
These clerics became the confessors in royal and noble houses, 
and were generally chosen from among bishops and other high 
dignitaries. The arch-chaplain not only received jurisdiction 
within the royal household, but represented the authority of the 
monarch in religious matters, and also acquired more general 
powers. In France the arch-chaplain was grand-almoner, and 
both in France and in the Holy Roman Empire was also high 
chancellor of the realm. The office was abolished in France at the 
Revolution in 1789, revived by Pius IX. in 1857, and again 
abolished on the fall of the Second Empire. 

The Roman Catholic Church also recognizes a class of beneficed 
chaplains, supported out of " pious foundations " for the specific 
duty of saying, or arranging for, certain masses, or taking part in 
certain services. These chaplains are classified as follows: — 
Ecclesiastical, if the foundation has been recognized officially 



as a benefice; Lay, if this recognition has not been obtained; 
Mercenary, if the person who has been entrusted with the duty 
of performing or procuring the desired celebration is a layman 
(such persons also are sometimes called " Lay Chaplains ") ; 
Collative, if it is provided that a bishop shall collate or confer the 
right to act upon the accepted candidate, who otherwise could 
not be recognized as an ecclesiastical chaplain. There are 
elaborate regulations governing the appointment and conduct 
of these chaplains. 

Other classes of chaplains are: — (1) Parochial or Auxiliary 
Chaplains, appointed either by a parish priest (under a provision 
authorized by the Council of Trent) or by a bishop to take over 
certain specified duties which he is unable to perform; (2) 
Chaplains of Convents, appointed by a bishop: these must be 
men of mature age, should not be regulars unless secular priests 
cannot be obtained, and are not generally to be appointed for 
life; (3) Pontifical Chaplains, some of whom (known as Private 
Chaplains) assist the pontiff in the celebration of Mass; others 
attached directly to the pope are honorary private chaplains 
who occasionally assist the private chaplains, private clerics of 
the chapel, common chaplains and supernumerary chaplains. 
The common chaplains were instituted by Alexander VII., 
and in 1907 were definitely allowed the title " Monsignore " by 
Pius X. 

CHAPLIN, HENRY (1841- ), English statesman, second 
son of the Rev. Henry Chaplin, of Blankney, Lincolnshire, was 
educated at Harrow and Christ Church, Oxford, and first entered 
parliament in 1868 as Conservative member for Mid-Lincolnshire. 
He represented this constituency (which under the Redistribution 
Act of 1885 became the Sleaford division) till 1906, when he was 
defeated, but in 1907 returned to the House of Commons as 
member for Wimbledon at a by-election. In 1876 he married a 
daughter of the 3rd duke of Sutherland, but lost his wife in 
1 88 1. Outside the House of Commons he was a familiar figure 
on the Turf, winning the Derby with Hermit in 1867; and in 
politics from the first the " Squire of Blankney " took an active 
interest in agricultural questions, as a popular and typical 
representative of the English "country gentleman" class. 
Having filled the office of chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster 
in Lord Salisbury's short ministry of 1885-1886, he became 
president of the new Board of Agriculture in 1889, with a seat 
in the cabinet, and retained this post till 1892. In the Conserva- 
tive cabinet of 1895-1900 he was president of the Local Govern- 
ment Board, and was responsible for the Agricultural Rates Act 
of 1896; but he was not included in the ministry after its 
reconstruction in 1 900. Mr Chaplin had always been an advocate 
of protectionism, being in this respect the most prominent 
inheritor of the views of Lord George Bentinck; and when in 
1903 the Tariff Reform movement began under Mr Chamber- 
lain's leadership, he gave it his enthusiastic support, becoming a 
member of the Tariff Commission and one of the most strenuous 
advocates in the country of the new doctrines in opposition 
to free trade. 

CHAPMAN, GEORGE (? 1559-1634), English poet and 
dramatist, was born near Hitchin. The inscription on the 
portrait which forms the frontispiece of The Whole Works of 
Homer states that he was then (1616) fifty-seven years of age. 
Anthony a Wood (Athen. Oxon. ii. 575) says that about 1574 he 
was sent to the university, " but whether first to this of Oxon, or 
that of Cambridge, is to me unknown; sure I am that he 
spent some time in Oxon, where he was observed to be most 
excellent in the Latin and Greek tongues, but not in logic or 
philosophy." Chapman's first extant play, The Blind Beggar 
of Alexandria, was produced in 1596, and two years later Francis 
Meres mentions him in Palladis Tamia among the " best for 
tragedie " and the " best for comedie." Of his life between 
leaving the university and settling in London there is no account. 
It has been suggested, from the detailed knowledge displayed 
in The Shadow of Night of an incident in Sir Francis Vere's 
campaign, that he saw service in the Netherlands. There are 
frequent entries with regard to Chapman in Henslowe's diary for 
the years 1 598-1 599, but his dramatic activity slackened during 



CHAPMAN, G. 



853 



the following years, when his attention was chiefly occupied by his 
Homer. In 1604 he was imprisoned with John Marston for his 
share in Eastward Ho, in which offence was given to the Scottish 
party at court. Ben Jonson voluntarily joined the two, who 
were soon released. Chapman seems to have enjoyed favour 
at court, where he had a patron in Prince Henry, but in 1605 
Jonson and he were for a short time in prison again for " a play." 
Beaumont, the French ambassador in London, in a despatch of 
the 5th of April 1608, writes that he had obtained the prohibition 
of a performance of Biron in which the queen of France was 
represented as giving Mademoiselle de Verneuil a box on the 
ears. He adds that three of the actors were imprisoned, but that 
the chief culprit, the author, had escaped (Raumer, Briefe aus 
Paris, 1831, ii. 276). Among Chapman's patrons was Robert 
Carr, earl of Somerset, to whom he remained faithful after his 
disgrace. Chapman enjoyed the friendship and admiration of 
his great contemporaries. John Webster in the preface to The 
White Devil praised " his full and heightened style," and Ben 
Jonson told Drummond of Hawthornden that Fletcher and Chap- 
man " were loved of him." These friendly relations appear to 
have been interrupted later, for there is extant in the Ashmole 
MSS. an " Invective written by Mr George Chapman against 
Mr Ben Jonson." Chapman died in the parish of St Giles 
in the Fields, and was buried on the 12th of May 1634 in the 
churchyard. A monument to his memory was erected by Inigo 
Jones. (M. Br.) 

Chapman, his first biographer is careful to let us know, " was 
a person of most reverend aspect, religious and temperate, 
qualities rarely meeting in a poet "; he had also certain other 
merits at least as necessary to the exercise of that profession. 
He had a singular force and solidity of thought, an admirable 
ardour of ambitious devotion to the service of poetry, a deep and 
burning sense at once of the duty implied and of the dignity 
inherent in his office; a vigour, opulence, and loftiness of phrase, 
remarkable even in that age of spiritual strength, wealth and 
exaltation of thought and style; a robust eloquence, touched 
not unfrequently with flashes of fancy, and kindled at times 
into heat of imagination. The main fault of his style is one more 
commonly found in the prose than in the verse of his time, — 
a quaint and florid obscurity, rigid with elaborate rhetoric and 
tortuous with labyrinthine illustration; not dark only to the 
rapid reader through closeness and subtlety of thought, like 
Donne, whose miscalled obscurity is so often " all glorious 
within," but thick and slab as a witch's gruel with forced and 
barbarous eccentricities of articulation. As his language in the 
higher forms of comedy is always pure and clear, and sometimes 
exquisite in the simplicity of its earnest and natural grace, the 
stiffness and density of his more ambitious style may perhaps 
be attributed to some pernicious theory or conceit of the dignity 
proper to a moral and philosophic poet. Nevertheless, many of 
the gnomic passages in his tragedies and allegoric poems are of 
singular weight and beauty; the best of these, indeed, would not 
discredit the fame of the very greatest poets for sublimity of 
equal thought and expression: witness the lines chosen by 
Shelley as the motto for a poem, and fit to have been chosen as 
the motto for his life. 

The romantic and sometimes barbaric grandeur of Chapman's 
Homer remains attested by the praise of Keats, of Coleridge 
and of Lamb ; it is written at a pitch of strenuous and laborious 
exaltation, which never flags or breaks down, but never flies 
with the ease and smoothness of an eagle native to Homeric 
air. From his occasional poems an expert and careful hand 
might easily gather a noble anthology of excerpts, chiefly 
gnomic or meditative, allegoric or descriptive. The most 
notable examples of his tragic work are comprised in the series 
of plays taken, and adapted sometimes with singular licence, 
from the records of such part of French history as lies between 
the reign of Francis I. and the reign of Henry IV., ranging in date 
of subject from the trial and death of Admiral Chabot to the 
treason and execution of Marshal Biron. The two plays bearing 
as epigraph the name of that famous soldier and conspirator are 
a storehouse of lofty thought and splendid verse, with scarcely 



a flash or sparkle of dramatic action. The one play of Chapman's 
whose popularity on the stage survived the Restoration is 
Bussy d'Ambois (d'Amboise), — a tragedy not lacking in violence 
of action or emotion, and abounding even more in sweet and sub- 
lime interludes than in crabbed and bombastic passages. His 
rarest jewels of thought and verse detachable from the context 
lie embedded in the tragedy of Caesar and Pompey, whence the 
finest of them were first extracted by the unerring and unequalled 
critical genius of Charles Lamb. In most of his tragedies the 
lofty and labouring spirit of Chapman may be said rather to 
shine fitfully through parts than steadily to pervade the whole; 
they show nobly altogether as they stand, but even better by 
help of excerpts and selections. But the excellence of his best 
comedies can only be appreciated by a student who reads them 
fairly and fearlessly through, and, having made some small 
deductions on the score of occasional pedantry and occasional 
indecency, finds in All Fools, Monsieur d'Olive, The Gentleman 
Usher, and The Widow's Tears a wealth and vigour of humorous 
invention, a tender and earnest grace of romantic poetry, which 
may atone alike for these passing blemishes and for the lack of 
such clear-cut perfection of character and such dramatic pro- 
gression of interest as we find only in the yet higher poets of the 
English heroic age. 

So much it may suffice to say of Chapman as an original 
poet, one who held of no man and acknowledged no master, but 
from the birth of Marlowe well-nigh to the death of Jonson held 
on his own hard and haughty way of austere and sublime ambi- 
tion, not without kindly and graceful inclination of his high 
grey head to salute such younger and still nobler compeers as 
Jonson and Fletcher. With Shakespeare we should never have 
guessed that he had come at all in contact, had not the keen 
intelligence of William Minto divined or rather discerned him 
to be the rival poet referred to in Shakespeare's sonnets with a 
grave note of passionate satire, hitherto as enigmatic as almost 
all questions connected with those divine and dangerous poems. 
This conjecture Professor Minto fortified by such apt collocation 
and confrontation of passages that we may now reasonably accept 
it as an ascertained and memorable fact. 

The objections which a just and adequate judgment may 
bring against Chapman's master-work, his translation of Homer, 
may be summed up in three epithets: it is romantic, laborious, 
Elizabethan. The qualities implied by these epithets are the 
reverse of those which should distinguish a translator of Homer; 
but setting this apart, and considering the poems as in the main 
original works, the superstructure of a romantic poet on the 
submerged foundations of Greek verse, no praise can be too 
warm or high for the power, the freshness, the indefatigable 
strength and inextinguishable fire which animate this exalted 
work, and secure for all time that shall take cognizance of English 
poetry an honoured place in its highest annals for the memory 
of Chapman. (A. C. S.) 

Chapman's works include: — 2iad vvktos: The Shadow of Night: 
Containing two Poeticall Hymnes . . . (1594), the second of which 
deals with Sir Francis Vere's campaign in the Netherlands; Ovid's 
Banquet of Sence. A Coronet for his Mistresse Philosophie; and 
His Amorous Zodiacke with a translation of a Latine coppie, written 
by a Fryer, Anno Dom. 1400 (1595, 2nd ed. 1639), a collection of 
poems frequently quoted from in England's Parnassus (1600) ; " De 
Guiana, carmen epicum," a poem prefixed to Lawrence Keymis's 
A Relation of the second voyage to Guiana (1596) ; Hero and Leander. 
Begun by Christopher Marloe; and finished by George Chapman 
(1598); The Blinde begger of Alexandria, most pleasantly discoursing 
his variable humours . . . (acted 1596, printed 1598), a popular 
comedy; A Pleasant Comedy entituled An Humerous dayes Myrth 
(identified by Mr Fleay with the " Comodey of Umero " noted by 
Henslowe on the nth of May 1597; printed 1599); Al Fooles, A 
Comedy (paid for by Henslowe on the 2nd of July 1599, its original 
name being " The World runs on wheels " ; printed 1605) ; The Gentle- 
man Usher (c. 1601, pr. 1606), a comedy; Monsieur d'Olive (1604, 
pr. 1606), one of his most amusing and successful comedies; East- 
ward Hoe (1605), written in conjunction with Ben Jonson and 
John Marston, an excellent comedy of city life; Bussy d'Ambois, 1 A 

1 Chapman's source in this piece remains undetermined. It cannot 
be the Historia sui temporis of Jacques de Thom, for the 4th volume 
of his work, which relates the story, was not published until 1609 
(see Koeppel, p. 14). 



8 5 4 



CHAPMAN— CHAPTAL 



Tragedie (1604, pr. 1607, 1608, 1616, 1641, &c), the scene of which 
is laid in the court of Henry III.; The Revenge of Bussy d'Ambois. 
A Tragedie (pr. 1613, but probably written much earlier) ; The 
Conspiracie, And Tragedie of Charles Duke of Byron, Marshall of 
France. . .in two plays (1607 and 1608; pr. 1608 and 1625); 
May-Day, A witty Comedie (pr. 161 1; but probably acted as early 
as 1601); The widdowes Teares. A Comedie (pr. 1612; produced 
perhaps as early as 1605) ; Caesar and Pompey: A Roman Tragedy, 
declaring their warres. Out of whose events is evicted this Proposition. 
Only a just man is a freeman (pr. 1631), written, says Chapman in 
the dedication, " long since," but never staged. 

The Tragedy of Alphonsus Emperour of Germany (see the edition 
by Dr Karl Elye; Leipzig, 1867) and Revenge for Honour (1654) l 
both bear Chapman's name on the title-page, but his authorship has 
been disputed. In The Ball (lie. 1632; pr. 1639), a comedy, and 
The Tragedie of Chabot Admirall of France (lie. 1635; pr. 1639) he 
collaborated with James Shirley. The memorable Masque of the two 
Honourable Houses or Inns of Court; the Middle Temple and Lyn- 
coln's Inne, was performed at court in 1613 in honour of the marriage 
of the Princess Elizabeth. 

The Whole Works of Homer: Prince of Poets. In his Iliads and 
Odysseys . . . appeared in 1616, and about 1624 he added The Crowne 
of all Homers works Batrachomyomachia or the Battaile of Frogs and 
Mise. His Hymns and Epigrams. But the whole works had been 
already published by instalments. Seaven Bookes of the Iliades of 
Homer had appeared in 1598, Achilles Shield in the same year, 
books i.-xii. about 1609; in i6u The Iliads of Homer, Prince of 
Poets . . . ; and in 1614 Twenty-four Bookes of Homer's Odisses 
were entered at Stationers' Hall. In 1609 he addressed to Prince 
Henry Enthymiae Raptus; or the Teares of Peace, and on the death 
of his patron he contributed An Epicede, or Funerall Song (1612). 
A paraphrase of Petrarchs Seven Penitentiall Psalms (1612), a poem 
in honour of the marriage of Robert Carr, earl of Somerset, and 
Frances, the divorced countess of Essex, indiscreetly entitled 
Andromeda Liberata . . . (1614), a translation of The Georgicks of 
Hesiod (1618), Pro Vere Auturnni Lachrymae (1622), in honour of 
Sir Horatio Vere, A justification of a Strange Action of Nero . . . also 
. . . the fifth Salyre of Jtivenall (1629), and Eugenia . . . (1614), 
an elegy on Sir William Russell, complete the list of his separately 
published works. 

Chapman's Homer was edited in 1857 by the Rev. Richard Hooper ; 
and a reprint of his dramatic works appeared in 1873. The standard 
edition of Chapman is the Works, edited by R. H. Shepherd (1874- 
1875), the third volume of which contains an " Essay on the Poetical 
and Dramatic works of George Chapman, ' ' by Mr Swinburne, printed 
separately in 1875. The selection of his plays (1895) for the Mermaid 
Series is edited by Mr W. L. Phelps. For the sources of the plays 
see Emil Koeppel, " Anellen Studien zu den Dramen George Chap- 
man's, Philip Massinger's und John Ford's " in Quellen und For- 
schungen zur Sprach und Kulturgeschichte (vol. 82, Strassburg, 1897). 
The suggestion of W. Minto (see Characteristics of the English Poets, 
1885) that Chapman was the " rival poet " of Shakespeare's sonnets 
is amplified in Mr A. Acheson's Shakespeare and the Rival Poet 1903). 
Much satire in Chapman's introduction is there applied to Shake- 
speare. For other criticisms of his translation of Homer see Matthew 
Arnold, Lectures on translating Homer (1861), and Dr A. Lohff, 
George Chapman' s Ilias-Uber setzung (Berlin, 1903). (M. Br.) 

CHAPMAN (from O. Eng. ceap, and Mid. Eng. cheap, to barter, 
cf . " Cheapside " in London, and Ger. Kaufmann) , one who buys 
or sells, a trader or dealer, especially an itinerant pedlar. The 
word " chap," now a slang term, meant originally a customer. 

CHAPONE, HESTER (1727-1801), English essayist, daughter 
of Thomas Mulso, a country gentleman, was born at Twywell, 
Northamptonshire, on the 27th of October 1727. She was a 
precocious child, and at the age of nine wrote a romance 
entitled The Loves of Amoret and Melissa. Hecky Mulso, 
as she was familiarly called, developed a beautiful voice, which 
earned her the name of " the linnet." While on a visit to 
Canterbury she made the acquaintance of the learned Mrs 
Elizabeth Carter, and soon became one of the admirers of the 
novelist Samuel Richardson. She was one of the little court 
of women who gathered at North End, Fulham; and in Miss 
Susannah Highmore's sketch of the novelist reading Sir Charles 
Grandison to his friends Miss Mulso is the central figure. She 
corresponded with Richardson on " filial obedience " in letters 
as long as his own, signing herself his " ever obliged and affec- 
tionate child." She admired, however, with discrimination, 
and in the words of her biographer (Posthumous Works, 1807, 
p. 9) " her letters show with what dignity, tempered with proper 
humility, she could maintain her own well-grounded opinion." 
In 1 760 Miss Mulso, with her father's reluctant consent, married 

1 This play appears to have been issued in 1653 with the title 
TheParracide, or Revenge for Honour as the work of Henry Glathorne. 



the attorney, John Chapone, who had been befriended by 
Richardson. Her husband died within a year of her marriage. 
Mrs Chapone remained in London visiting various friends. 
She had already made small contributions to various periodicals 
when she published, in 1772, her best known work, Letters on 
the Improvement of the Mind. This book brought her numerous 
requests from distinguished persons to undertake the education 
of theirchildren. She died on the 25th of December 1801. 

See The Posthumous Works of Mrs Chapone, containing her corre- 
spondence with Mr Richardson; a series of letters to Mrs Elizabeth 
Carter . . . together with an account of her life and character drawn 
up by her own family (1807). 

CHAPPE, CLAUDE (1763-1805), French engineer, was born 
at Brulon (Sarthe) in 1763. He was the inventor of an optical 
telegraph which was widely used in France until it was super- 
seded by the electric telegraph. His device consisted of an 
upright post, on the top of which was fastened a transverse bar, 
while at the ends of the latter two smaller arms moved on pivots. 
The position of these bars represented words or letters; and by 
means of machines placed at intervals such that each was 
distinctly visible from the next, messages could be conveyed 
through. 50 leagues in a quarter of an hour. The machine was 
adopted by the Legislative Assembly in 1792, and in the follow- 
ing year Chappe was appointed ingenieur-teUgraphe; but the 
originality of his invention was so much questioned that he 
was seized with melancholia and (it is said) committed suicide 
at Paris in 1805. 

His elder brother, Ignace Urbain Jean Chappe (1760-1829), 
took part in the invention of the telegraph, and with a younger 
brother, Pierre Francois, from 1805 to 1823 was administrator 
of the telegraphs, a post which was also held by two other 
brothers, Rene and Abraham, from 1823 to 1830. Ignace was 
the author of a Histoire de la telegraphie (1824). An uncle, Jean 
Chappe d'Auteroche (17 28-1 769), was an astronomer who 
observed two transits of Venus, one in Siberia in 1761, and the 
other in 1769 in California, where he died. 

CHAPPELL, WILLIAM (1809-1888), English writer on music, 
a member of the London musical firm of Chappell & Co. , was born 
on the 20th of November 1809, eldest son of Samuel Chappell (d. 
1834), who founded the business. William Chappell is particu- 
larly noteworthy for his starting the Musical Antiquarian 
Society in 1840, and his publication of the standard work Popular 
Music of the Olden Time (1855-1859) — an expansion of a collec- 
tion of " national English airs " made by him in 1838-1840. 
The modern revival of interest in English folk-songs owes much 
to this work, which has since been re-edited by Professor H. E. 
Wooldridge (1893). W. Chappell died on the 20th of August 
1888. His brother, Thomas Patey Chappell (d. 1902), meanwhile 
had largely extended the publishing business, and had started 
(1859) the Monday and Saturday Popular Concerts at St James's 
Hall, which were successfully managed by a younger brother, 
S. Arthur Chappell, till they came to an end towards the close 
of the century. 

CHAPRA, or Chupra, a town of British India, the adminis- 
trative headquarters of Saran district in Bengal, near the left 
bank of the river Gogra, just above its confluence witji the 
Ganges; with a railway station on the Bengal & North- Western 
line towards Oudh. Pop. (1901) 45,901, showing a decrease of 
21% in the decade. There are a government high school, a 
German Lutheran mission, and a public library endowed by 
a former maharaja of Hatwa. Chapra is the centre of trade in 
indigo and saltpetre, and conducts a large business by water as 
well as by rail. 

CHAPTAL, JEAN ANTOINE CLAUDE, Comte de Chante- 
loup (1 756-1832), French chemist and statesman, was born at 
Nogaret, Lozere, on the 4th of June 1756. The son of an 
apothecary, he studied chemistry at Montpellier, obtaining his 
doctor's diploma in 1777, when he repaired to Paris. In 1781 
the States of Languedoc founded a chair of chemistry for him 
at the school of medicine in Montpellier, where he taught the 
doctrines of Lavoisier. The capital he acquired by the death 
of a wealthy uncle he employed in the establishment of chemical 



CHAPTER— CHAR-A-BANC 



855 



works for the manufacture of the mineral acids, alum, white-lead, 
soda and other substances. His labours in the cause of applied 
science were at length recognized by the French government, 
which presented him with letters of nobility, and the cordon of 
the order of Saint Michel. During the Revolution a publication 
by Chaptal, entitled Dialogue entre un Montagnard et un Girondin, 
caused him to be arrested; but being speedily set at liberty 
through the intermission of his friends, he undertook, in 1793, 
the management of the saltpetre works at Grenelle. In the 
following year he went to Montpellier, where he remained till 
1797, when he returned to Paris. After the coup d'etat of the 18th 
of Brumaire (November 9, r 799) he was made a councillor of state 
by the First Consul, and succeeded Lucien Bonaparte as minister 
of the interior, in which capacity he established a chemical 
manufactory near Paris, a school of arts, and a society of indus- 
tries; he also reorganized the hospitals, introduced the metrical 
system of weights and measures, and otherwise greatly 
encouraged the arts and sciences. A misunderstanding between 
him and Napoleon (who conferred upon him the title of comte de 
Chanteloup) occasioned Chaptal's retirement from office in 1804; 
but before the end of that year he was again received into favour 
by the emperor, who bestowed on him the grand cross of the 
Legion of Honour, and made him treasurer to the conservative 
senate. On Napoleon's return from Elba, Chaptal was made 
director-general of commerce and manufactures and a minister 
of state. He was obliged after the downfall of the emperor to 
withdraw into private life; and his name was removed from the 
list of the peers of France until 1819. In 1816, however, he was 
nominated a member of the Academy of Sciences by Louis XVIII. 
Chaptal was especially a popularizer of science, attempting to 
apply to industry and agriculture the discoveries of chemistry. 
In this way he contributed largely to the development of modern 
industry. He died at Paris on the 30th of July 1832. 

His literary works exhibit both vigour and perspicuity of style; 
he wrote, in addition to various articles, especially in the Annates 
de chimie, Elemens de chimie (3 vols., 1790; new ed., 1796-1803); 
Traite du salpitre et des goudrons (1796); Tableau des principaux 
sets terreux (1798); Essai sur le perfectionnement des arts chimiques 
en France (1800); Art de faire, de gouverner, et de perfectionner les 
vins (1 vol., 1801; new ed., 1819); Traite theorique et pratique sur 
la culture de la vigiie, &c. (2 vols., 1801 ; new ed., 181 1); Essai sur 
le blanchiment (1801); La Chimie appliquee aux arts (4 vols., 1806); 
Art de la teinture du colon en rouge (1807); Art du teinturier et du 
degraisseur (1800); De V Industrie francaise (2 vols., 1819); Chimie 
appliquee a V agriculture (2 vols., 1823; new ed., 1829). 

CHAPTER (a shortened form of chapiter, a word still used in 
architecture for a capital; derived from O. Fr. chapitre, Lat. 
capitellum, diminutive of caput, head), a principal division or 
section of a book, and so applied to acts of parliament, as forming 
" chapters " or divisions of the legislation of a session of parlia- 
ment. The name " chapter " is given to the permanent body 
of the canons of a cathedral or collegiate church, presided over, 
in the English Church, by the dean, and in the Roman communion 
by the provost or the dean, and also to the body of the members 
of a religious order. This may be a " conventual " chapter of 
the monks of a particular monastery, " provincial " of the 
members of the order in a province, or " general " of the whole 
order. This ecclesiastical use of the word arose from the custom 
of reading a chapter of Scripture, or a head (capitulum) of the 
regula, to the assembled canons or monks. The transference 
from the reading to the assembly itself, and to the members 
constituting it, was easy, through such phrases as convenire 
ad capitulum. The title " chapter " is similarly used of the 
assembled body of knights of a military or other order. (See 
also Canon; Cathedral; Dean). 

CHAPTER-HOUSE (Lat. capitolium, Ital. capitolo, Fr. chapitre, 
Ger. Kapitelhaus) , the chamber in which the chapter or heads 
of the monastic bodies (see Abbey and Cathedral) assembled 
to transact business. They are of various forms; some are 
oblong apartments, as Canterbury, Exeter, Chester, Gloucester, 
&c. ; some octagonal, as Salisbury, Westminster, Wells, Lincoln, 
York, &c. That at Lincoln has ten sides, and that at Worcester 
is circular; most are vaulted internally and polygonal externally, 
and some, as Salisbury, Wells, Lincoln, Worcester, &c, depend 



on a single slight vaulting shaft for the support of the massive 
vaulting. They are often provided with a vestibule, as at West- 
minster, Lincoln, Salisbury and are almost exclusively English. 

CHAPU, formerly an important maritime town of China, in 
the province of Cheh-kiang, 50 m. N.W. of Chen-hai, situated 
in one of the richest and best cultivated districts in the country. 
It is the port of Hang-chow, with which it has good canal com- 
munication, and it was formerly the only Chinese port trading 
with Japan. The town has a circuit of about 5 m. exclusive of 
the suburbs that lie along the beach; and the Tatar quarter is 
separated from the rest by a wall. It was captured and much 
injured by the British force in 1842, but was abandoned im- 
mediately after the engagement. The sea around it has now 
silted up, though in the middle of the 19th century it was 
accessible to the light-draught ships of the British fleet. 

CHAR (Salvelinus),a. fish of the family Salmonidae, represented 
in Europe, Asia and North America. The best known and most 
widely distributed species, the one represented in British and 
Irish lakes, is S. alpinus, a graceful and delicious fish, covered 
with very minute scales and usually dark olive, bluish or purplish 
black above, with or without round orange or red spots, pinkish 
white or yellowish pink to scarlet or claret red below. When the 
char go to sea, they assume a more silvery coloration, similar to 
that of the salmon and sea trout; the red spots become very 
indistinct and the lower parts are almost white. The very young 
are also silvery on the sides and white below, and bear n to 15 
bars, or parr-marks, on the side. This fish varies much according 
to localities; and the difference in colour, together with a few 
points of doubtful constancy, have given rise to the establishment 
of a great number of untenable so-called species, as many as 
seven having been ascribed to the British and Irish fauna, viz. 
S. alpinus, nivalis, killinensis, willoughbyi, perisii, colii and grayi, 
the last from Lough Melvin, Ireland, being the most distinct. 
S. alpinus varies much in size according to the waters it inhabits, 
remaining dwarfed in some English lakes, and growing to 2 ft. 
or more in other localities. In other parts of Europe, also, various 
local forms have been distinguished, such as the " omble 
chevalier " of the lakes of Switzerland and Savoy (S. umbla), the 
" Sabling " of the lakes of South Germany and Austria (S. sal- 
velinus), the " kullmund " of Norway (S. carbonarius) , &c, 
while the North American S. parkei, alipes, slagnalis, arcturus, 
areolus, oquassa and marstoni may also be regarded as varieties. 
Taken in this wide sense, 5. alpinus has a very extensive distribu- 
tion. In central Europe, in the British islands and in the greater 
part of Scandinavia it is confined to mountain lakes, but farther 
to the north,in both the Old World and the New,it lives in the sea 
and ascends rivers to spawn. In Lapland, Iceland, Greenland 
and other parts of the arctic regions, it ranks among the com- 
monest fishes. The extreme northern point at which char 
have been obtained is 82 34' N. (Victoria lake and Floeberg 
Beach, Arctic America). It reaches an altitude of 2600 ft. in the 
Alps and 6000 ft. in the Carpathians. 

The American brook char, S. fontinalis, is a close ally of S. 
alpinus, differing from it in having fewer and shorter gill-rakers, 
a rather stouter body, the back more or less barred or marbled 
with dark olive or black, and the dorsal and caudal fins mottled 
or barred with black. Many local varieties of colour have been 
distinguished. Sea-run individuals are often nearly plain bright 
silvery. It is a small species, growing to about 18 in. abundant in 
all clear, cold streams of North America, east of the Mississippi, 
northward to Labrador. The fish has been introduced into other 
parts of the United States, and also into Europe. 

Another member of the same section of Salmonidae is the Great 
Lake char of North America, S. namaycush, one of the largest 
salmonids, said to attain a weight of 100 lb. The body is very 
elongate and covered with extremely small scales. The colour 
varies from grey to black, with numerous round pale spots, 
which may be tinged with reddish; the dorsal and caudal fins 
reticulate with darker. This fish inhabits the Great Lakes 
regions and neighbouring parts of North America. 

CHAR-A-BANC (Fr. for " benched carriage "), a largeformof 
wagonette-like vehicle for passengers, but with benched seats 



8 5 6 



CHARACTER— CHARCOT 



arranged in rows, looking forward, commonly used for large 
parties, whether as public conveyances or for excursions. 

CHARACTER (Gr. xapa/crV, from xo-PO-tt&v, to scratch), a 
distinctive mark (spelt " caracter " up to the 16th century, with 
other variants); so applied to symbols of notation or letters of 
the alphabet; more figuratively, the distinguishing traits of 
anything, and particularly the moral and mental qualities of an 
individual human being, the sum of those qualities which dis- 
tinguish him as a personality. From the latter usage "a 
character" becomes almost identical with " reputation "; and 
in the sense of " giving a servant a character," the word involves 
a written testimonial. For the law relating to servants' char- 
acters see Master and Servant. A further development 
is the use of " character " to mean an " odd or eccentric person "; 
or of a " character actor," to mean an actor who plays a highly- 
coloured strange part. The word is also used as the name of a 
form of literature, consisting of short descriptions of types of 
character. Well-known examples of such " characters " are 
those of Theophrastus and La Bruyere, and in English, of Joseph 
Hall (1574-1656) and Sir Thomas Overbury. 

CHARADE, a kind of riddle, probably invented in France 
during the 18th century, in which a word of two or more syllables 
is divined by guessing and combining into one word (the answer) 
the different syllables, each of which is described, as an inde- 
pendent word, by the giver of the charade. Charades may be 
either in prose or verse. Of poetic charades those by W. Mack- 
worth Praed are well known and excellent examples, while the 
following specimens in prose may suffice as illustrations. " My 
first, with the most rooted antipathy to a Frenchman, prides 
himself, whenever they meet, upon sticking close to his jacket; 
my second has many virtues, nor is its least that it gives its name 
to my first; my whole may I never catch!" "My first is 
company; my second shuns company; my third collects com- 
pany; and my whole amuses company." The solutions are 
Tar-tar and Co-nun-drum. The most popular form of this 
amusement is the acted charade, in which the meaning of the 
different syllables is acted out on the stage, the audience being 
left to guess each syllable and thus, combining the meaning of 
all the syllables, the whole word. A brilliant example of the 
acted charade is described in Thackeray's Vanity Fair. 

CHARCOAL, the blackish residue consisting of impure carbon 
obtained by removing the volatile constituents of animal and 
vegetable substances; wood gives origin to wood-charcoal; 
sugar to sugar-charcoal; bone to bone-charcoal (which, however, 
mainly consists of calcium phosphate) ; while coal gives " coke " 
and " gas-carbon." The first part of the word charcoal is of 
obscure origin. The independent use of " char," meaning to 
scorch, to reduce to carbon, is comparatively recent, and must 
have been taken from " charcoal," which is quite early. The 
New English Dictionary gives as the earliest instance of " char " 
a quotation dated 1679. Similarly the word " chark " or " chak," 
meaning the same as " char," is also late, and is probably due 
to a wrong division of the word " charcoal," or, as it was often 
spelled in the 16th and 17th centuries, " charkole " and " charke- 
coal." No suggestions for an origin of " char " are satisfactory. 
It may be a use of the word " chare," which appears in " char- 
woman," the American " chore "; in all these words it means 
" turn," a turn of work, a job, and " charcoal " would have to 
mean " turned coal," i.e. wood changed or turned to coal, a 
somewhat forced derivation, for which there is no authority. 
Another suggestion is that it is connected with " chirk " or 
"chark," an old word meaning " to make a grating noise." 

Wood-charcoal. — In districts where there is an abundance of 
wood, as in the forests of France, Austria and Sweden, the 
operation of charcoal-burning is of the crudest description. The 
method, which dates back to a very remote period, generally 
consists in piling billets of wood on their ends so as to form a 
conical pile, openings being left at the bottom to admit air, with 
a central shaft to serve as a flue. The whole is covered with turf 
of moistened soil. The firing is begun at the bottom of the flue, 
and gradually spreads outwards and upwards. The success of 
the operation— both as to the intrinsic value of the product and 



its amount — depends upon the rate of the combustion. Under 
average conditions, 100 parts of wood yield about 60 parts by 
volume, or 25 parts by weight, of charcoal. The modern process 
of carbonizing wood — either in small pieces or as sawdust — in 
cast iron retorts is extensively practised where wood is scarce, 
and also by reason of the recovery of valuable by-products 
(wood spirit, pyroligneous acid, wood- tar), which the process 
permits. The question of the temperature of the carbonization 
is important; according to J. Percy, wood becomes brown at 
220 C., a deep brown-black after some time at 280°, and an easily 
powdered mass at 310 . Charcoal made at 300 is brown, soft 
and friable, and readily inflames at 380 ; made at higher 
temperatures it is hard and brittle, and does not fire until heated 
to about 700 . One of the most important applications of wood- 
charcoal is as a constituent of gunpowder (q.v.). It is also used 
in metallurgical operations as a reducing agent, but its application 
has been diminished by the introduction of coke, anthracite 
smalls, &c. A limited quantity is made up into the form of 
drawing crayons; but the greatest amount is used as a fuel. 

The porosity of wood-charcoal explains why it floats on the 
surface of water, although it is actually denser, its specific gravity 
being about 1-5. The porosity also explains the property of 
absorbing gases and vapours; at Ordinary temperatures ammonia 
and cyanogen are most readily taken up; and Sir James Dewar 
has utilized this property for the preparation of high vacua at 
low temperatures. This character is commercially applied in 
the use cf wood-charcoal as a disinfectant. The fetid gases 
produced by the putrefaction and waste of organic matter enter 
into the pores of the charcoal, and there meet with the oxygen 
previously absorbed from the atmosphere; oxidation ensues, 
and the noxious effluvia are decomposed. Generally, however, 
the action is a purely mechanical one, the gases being only 
absorbed. Its pharmacological action depends on the same 
property; it absorbs the gases of the stomach and intestines 
(hence its use in cases of flatulence), and also liquids and solids. 
Wood-charcoal has also the power of removing colouring matters 
from solutions, but this property is possessed in a much higher 
degree by animal-charcoal. 

Animal-charcoal or bone black is the carbonaceous residue 
obtained by the dry distillation of bones; it contains only about 
10% of carbon, the remainder being calcium and magnesium 
phosphates (80%) and other inorganic material originally present 
in the bones. It is generally manufactured from the residues 
obtained in the glue (q.v.) and gelatin (q.v.) industries. Its 
decolorizing power was applied in 181 2 by Derosne to the 
clarification of the syrups obtained in sugar- refining; but its 
use in this direction has now greatly diminished, owing to the 
introduction of more active and easily managed reagents. It is 
still used to some extent in laboratory practice. The decoloriz- 
ing power is not permanent, becoming lost after using for some 
time; it may be revived, however, by washing and reheating. 

Lampblack or soot is the familiar product of the incomplete 
combustion of oils, pitch, resins, tallow, &c. It is generally 
prepared by burning pitch residues (see Coal-tar) and condensing 
the product. Thus obtained it is always oily, and, before using 
as a pigment, it must be purified by ignition in closed crucibles 
(see Carbon). 

CHARCOT, JEAN MARTIN (1825-1803), French physician, 
was born in Paris on the 29th of November 1825. In 1853 he 
graduated as M.D. of Paris University, and three years later was 
appointed physician of the Central Hospital Bureau. In i860 
he became professor of pathological anatomy in the medical 
faculty of Paris, and in 1862 began that famous connexion with 
the Salp6triere which lasted to the end of his life. He was elected 
to the Academy of Medicine in 1873, and ten years afterwards 
became a member of the Institute. His death occurred suddenly 
on the 1 6th of August 1893 at Morvan, where he had gone for a 
holiday. Charcot, who was a good linguist and well acquainted 
with the literature of his own as well as of other countries, excelled 
as a clinical observer and a pathologist. His work at the 
SalpStriere exerted a great influence on the development of the 
science of neurology, and his classical Legons sur les maladies du 



CHARD— CHARENTE 



*57 



systcme nerveux, the first series of which was published in 
1873, represents an enormous advance in the knowledge and 
discrimination of nervous diseases. He also devoted much 
attention to the study of obscure morbid conditions like 
hysteria, especially in relation to hypnotism (q.v.) ; indeed, it is 
in connexion with his investigation into the phenomena and 
results of the latter that his name is popularly known. In addition 
to his labours on neurological and even physiological problems 
he made many contributions to other branches of medicine, his 
published works dealing, among other topics, with liver and 
kidney diseases, gout and pulmonary phthisis. As a teacher 
he was remarkably successful, and always commanded an 
enthusiastic band of followers. 

CHARD, JOHN ROUSE MERRIOTT (1847-1897), British 
soldier, was born at Boxhill, near Plymouth, on the 21st of 
December 1847, and in 1868 entered the Royal Engineers. In 
1878 Lieutenant Chard was ordered to South Africa to take 
part in the Zulu War, and was stationed at the small post of 
Rorke's Drift to protect the bridges across the Buffalo river, 
and some sick men and stores. Here, with Lieutenant Gonville 
Bromhead (1856-1891) and eighty men of the 2nd 24th Foot, 
he heard, on the 22nd of January 1879, of the disaster of Isandhl- 
wana from some fugitives who had escaped the slaughter. 
Believing that the victorious Zulus would attempt to cross into 
Natal, they prepared, hastily, to hold the Drift until help 
should come. They barricaded and loopholed the old church 
and hospital, and improvised defences from wagons, mealie 
sacks and bags of Indian corn. Early in the afternoon they were 
attacked by more than 3000 Zulus, who, after hours of desperate 
hand-to-hand fighting, carried the outer defences, an inner low 
wall of biscuit boxes, and the hospital, room by room. The 
garrison then retired to the stone kraal, and repulsed attack 
after attack through the night. The next morning relieving 
forces appeared, and the enemy retired. The spirited defence 
of Rorke's Drift saved Natal from a Zulu invasion, and Chard's 
and Bromhead's gallantry was rewarded with the V.C. and 
immediate promotion to the rank of captain and brevet-major. 
On Chard's return to England he became a popular hero. From 
1893-1896 he commanded the Royal Engineers at Singapore, 
and was made a colonel in 1897. He died the same year at 
Hatch-Beauchamp, near Taunton, on the 1st of November. 

CHARD, a market town and municipal borough in the Southern 
parliamentary division of Somersetshire, England, 1425 m. W. 
by S. of London by the London & South Western railway. 
Pop. (1901) 4437. It stands on high ground within 1 m. of the 
Devonshire border. Its cruciform parish church of St Mary 
the Virgin is Perpendicular of the 15th century. A fine east 
window is preserved. The manufactures include linen, lace, 
woollens, brassware and ironware. Chard is governed by a 
mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 councillors. Area, 444 acres. 

Chard (Cerdre, Cherdre, Cherde) was commercial in origin, 
being a trade centre near the Roman road to the west. There 
are two Roman villas in the parish. There was a British camp 
at Neroche in the neighbourhood. The bishop of Bath held 
Chard in 1086, and his successor granted in 1234 the first charter 
which made Chard a free borough, each burgage paying a rent 
of 1 2d. Trade in hides was forbidden to non-burgesses. This 
charter was confirmed in 1253, 1280 and 1285. Chard is said 
to have been incorporated by Elizabeth, as the corporation seal 
dates from 1570, but no Elizabethan charter can be found. 
It was incorporated by grant of Charles I. in 1642, and Charles 
II. gave a charter in 1683. Chard was a mesne borough, the 
first overlord being Bishop Joceline, whose successors held it 
(with a brief interval from 1545 to 1552) until 1801, when it was 
sold to Earl Poulett. Parliamentary representation began in 
1312, and was lost in 1328. A market on Monday and fair on the 
25th of July were granted in 1253, and confirmed in 1642 and 
1683, when two more fair days were added (November 2 and 
May 3), the market being changed to Tuesday. The market day 
is now Monday, fairs being held on the first Wednesday in May, 
August and November, for corn and cattle only, their medieval 
importance as centres of the cloth trade having departed. 



CHARD IN, JEAN SIMEON (1699-1779), French genre painter, 
was born in Paris, and studied under Pierre Jacques Cazes 
(1676-1754), the historical painter, and Noel Nicolas Coypel. 
He became famous for his still-life pictures and domestic 
interiors, which are well represented at the Louvre, and for 
figure-painting, as in his Le BinidicM (1740). 

CHARDIN, SIR JOHN (1643-1713), French traveller, was 
born at Paris in 1643. His father, a wealthy jeweller, gave him 
an excellent education, and trained him in his own art; but 
instead of settling down in the ordinary routine of the craft, 
he set out in company with a Lyons merchant named Raisin 
in 1665 for Persia and India, partly on business and partly to 
gratify his own inclination. After a highly successful journey, 
during which he had received the patronage of Shah Abbas II. 
of Persia, he returned to France in 1670, and there published 
in the following year Ricit du Couronnement du roi de Perse 
Soliman III. Finding, however, that his Protestant profession 
cut him off from all hope of honours or advancement in his 
native country, he set out again for Persia in August 1671. 
This second journey was much more adventurous than the first, 
as instead of going directly to his destination, he passed by 
Smyrna, Constantinople, the Crimea, Caucasia, Mingrelia and 
Georgia, and did not reach Ispahan till June 1673. After four 
years spent in researches throughout Persia, he again visited 
India, and returned to Europe by the Cape of Good Hope in 
1677. The persecution of Protestants in France led him, in 
1681, to settle in London, where he was appointed jeweller to 
the court, and received from Charles II. the honour of knighthood. 
In 1683 he was sent to Holland as representative of the English 
East India Company; and in 1686 he published the first part 
of his great narrative — The Travels of Sir John Chardin into 
Persia and the East Indies, &c. (London). Sir John died in 
London in 1713, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, where 
his monument bears the inscription Nomen sibi fecit eundo. 

It was not till 171 1 that the complete account of Chardin's travels 
appeared, under the title of Journal du voyage du chevalier Chardin, 
at Amsterdam. The Persian portion is to be found in vol. ii. of 
Harris's Collection, and extracts are reprinted by Pinkerton in vol. ix. 
The best complete reprint is by Langles (Paris, 1811). Sir John 
Chardin's narrative has received the highest praise from the most 
competent authorities for its fulness, comprehensiveness and fidelity; 
and it furnished Montesquieu, Rousseau, Gibbon and Helvetius 
with most important material. 

CHARENTE, an inland department of south-western France, 
comprehending the ancient province of Angoumois, and incon- 
siderable portions of Saintonge, Poitou, Marche, Limousin and 
Perigord. It is bounded N. by the departments of Deux-Sevres 
and Vienne, E. by those of Vienne and Dordogne, S. by Dordogne 
and W. by Charente-Inferieure. Area 2305 sq. m. Pop. (1906) 
3S J >733- The department, though it contains no high altitudes, 
is for the most part of a hilly nature. The highest points, many 
of which exceed 1000 ft., are found in the Confolentais, the 
granite region of the extreme north-east, known also as the 
Terres Froides. In the Terres Chaudes, under which name 
the remainder of the department is included, the levels vary 
in general between 300 and 650 ft., except in the western plains 
— the Pays-Bas and Champagne — where they range from 40 to 
300 ft. A large part of Charente is thickly wooded, the principal 
forests lying in its northern districts. The department, as its 
name indicates, belongs mainly to the basin of the river Charente 
(area of basin 3860 sq. m.; length of river 225 m.), the chief 
affluents of which, within its borders, are the Tardoire, the 
Touvre and the Ne. The Confolentais is watered by the Vienne, 
a tributary of the Loire, while the arrondissement of Barbezieux 
in the south-west belongs almost wholly to the basin of the 
Gironde. 

The climate is temperate but moist, the rainfall being highest 
in the north-east. Agriculturally, Charente is prosperous. More 
than half its surface is arable land, on the greater part of which 
cereals are grown. The potato is an important crop. The 
vine is predominant in the region of Champagne, the wine 
produced being chiefly distilled into the famous brandy to which 
the town of Cognac gives its name. The best pasture is found 



8 5 8 



CHARENTE-INFERIEURE— CHARES 



in the Confolentais, where horned cattle are largely reared. 
The chief fruits are chestnuts, walnuts and cider-apples. The 
poultry raised in the neighbourhood of Barbezieux is highly 
esteemed. Charente has numerous stone quarries, and there 
are peat workings and beds of clay which supply brick and 
tile-works and earthenware manufactories. Among the other 
industries, paper-making, which has its chief centre at Angouleme, 
is foremost. The most important metallurgical establishment 
is the large foundry of naval guns at Ruelle. Flour-mills and 
leather-works are numerous. There are also many minor 
industries subsidiary to paper-making and brandy-distilling, 
and Angouleme manufactures gunpowder and confectionery. 
Coal, salt and timber are prominent imports. Exports include 
paper, brandy, stone and agricultural products. The depart- 
ment is served chiefly by the Orleans and Ouest-Etat railways, 
and the Charente is navigable below Angouleme. Charente is 
divided into the five arrondissements of Angouleme, Cognac, 
Ruffec, Barbezieux and Confolens (29 cantons, 426 communes). 
It belongs to the region of the XII. army corps, to the province 
of the archbishop of Bordeaux, and to the academic (educational 
division) of Poitiers. Its court of appeal is at Bordeaux. 

Angouleme (the capital), Cognac, Confolens, Jarnac and La 
Rochefoucauld (q.v.) are the more noteworthy places in the de- 
partment. Barbezieux and Ruffec, capitals of arrondissements 
and agricultural centres, are otherwise of little importance. The 
department abounds in churches of Romanesque architecture, 
of which those of Bassac, St Amant-de-Boixe (portions of which 
are Gothic in style), Plassac and Gensac-la-Pallue may be 
mentioned. There are remains of a Gothic abbey church at 
La Couronne, and Roman remains at St Cybardeaux, Brossac 
and Chassenon (where there are ruins of the Gallo-Roman town 
of Cassinomagus). 

CHARENTE-INFERIEURE, a -maritime department of south- 
western France, comprehending the old provinces of Saintonge 
and Aunis, and a small portion of Poitou, and including the 
islands of Re, Oleron, Aix and Madame. Area, 2791 sq. m. 
Pop. (1906) 453,793. It is bounded N. by Vendee, N.E. by 
Deux-Sevres, E. by Charente, S.E. by Dordogne, S.W. by 
Gironde and the estuary of the Gironde, and W. by the Bay of 
Biscay. Plains and low hills occupy the interior; the coast is 
flat and marshy, as are the islands (R6, Aix, Oleron) which lie 
opposite to it. The department takes its name from the river 
Charente, which traverses it during the last 61 m. of its course 
and drains the central region. Its chief tributaries are on the 
right the Boutonne, on the left the Seugne. The climate is 
temperate and, except along the coast, healthy. There are 
several sheltered bays on the coast, and several good harbours, 
the chief of which are La Rochelle, Rochefort and Tonnay- 
Charente, the two latter some distance up the Charente. Royan 
on the north shore of the Gironde is an important watering-place 
much frequented for its bathing. 

The majority of the inhabitants of Charente-Inferieure live 
by agriculture. The chief products of the arable land are wheat, 
oats, maize, barley and the potato. Horse and cattle-raising is 
carried on and dairying is prosperous. A considerable quantity 
of wine, most of which is distilled into brandy, is produced. 
The department has a few peat-workings, and produces freestone, 
lime and cement; the salt-marshes of the coast are important 
sources of mineral wealth. Glass, pottery, bricks and earthen- 
ware are prominent industrial products. Ship-building, brandy- 
distilling, iron-founding and machine construction are also 
carried on. Oysters and mussels are bred in the neighbourhood 
of La Rochelle and Marennes, and there are numerous fishing 
ports along the coast. 

The railways traversing the department belong to the 
Ouest-Etat system, except one section of the Paris-Bordeaux 
line belonging to the Orleans Company. The facilities of the 
department for internal communication are greatly increased 
by the number of navigable streams which water it. The 
Charente, the Sevre Niortaise, the. Boutonne, the Seudre and 
the Gironde furnish 142 m. of navigable waterway, to which 
must be added the 56 m. covered by the canals of the coast. 



There are 6 arrondissements (40 cantons, 481 communes), cog- 
nominal with the towns of La Rochelle, Rochefort, Marennes, 
Saintes, Jonzac and St Jean d'Angely — La Rochelle being 
the chief town of the department. The department forms the 
diocese of La Rochelle, and is attached to the 18th military 
region, and in educational matters to the academie of Poitiers. 
Its court of appeal is at Poitiers. 

La Rochelle, St Jean d'Angely, Rochefort and Saintes (q.v.) are 
the principal towns. Surgeres and Aulnay possess fine specimens 
of the numerous Romanesque churches. Pons has a graceful 
chateau of the 15th and 16th centuries, beside which there rises 
a fine keep of the 12th century. 

CHARENTON-LE-PONT, a town of northern France in the 
department of Seine, situated on the right bank of the Marne, at 
its confluence with the Seine, 1 m. S.E. of the fortifications of 
Paris, of which it is a suburb. Pop. (1906) 18,034. It derives 
the distinctive part of its name from the stone bridge of ten 
arches which crosses the Marne and unites the town with Alfort- 
ville, well known for its veterinary school founded in 1766. It 
has always been regarded as a point of great importance for the 
defence of the capital, and has frequently been the scene of 
sanguinary conflicts. The fort of Charenton on the left bank 
of the Marne is one of the older forts of the Paris defence. In the 
1 6th and 17 th centuries Charenton was the scene of the ecclesi- 
astical councils of the Protestant party, which had its principal 
church in the town. At St Maurice adjoining Charenton is the 
famous Hospice de Charenton, a lunatic asylum, the foundation 
of which dates from 1641. Till the time of the Revolution it was 
used as a general hospital, and even as a prison, but from 1802 
onwards it was specially appropriated to the treatment of lunacy. 
St Maurice has two other national establishments, one for the 
victims of accidents in Paris (asile national Vacassy), the other 
for convalescent working-men (asile national de Vincennes). 
Charenton has a port on the- Canal de St Maurice, beside the 
Marne, and carries on boat-building and the manufacture of 
tiles and porcelain. 

CHARES, Athenian general, is first heard of in 366 B.C. as 
assisting the Phliasians, who had been attacked by Argos and 
Sicyon. In 361 he visited Corcyra, where he helped the 
oligarchs to expel the democrats, a policy which led to the 
subsequent defection of the island from Athens. In 357, Chares 
was appointed to the command in the Social War, together with 
Chabrias, after whose death before Chios he was associated with 
Iphicrates and Timotheus (for the naval battle in the Hellespont, 
see Timotheus). Chares, having successfully thrown the blame 
for the defeat on his colleagues, was left sole commander, but 
receiving no supplies from Athens, took upon himself to join the 
revolted satrap Artabazus. A complaint from the Persian king, 
who threatened to send three hundred ships to the assistance of 
the confederates, led to the conclusion of peace (355) between 
Athens and her revolted allies, and the recall of Chares. In 349, he 
was sent to the assistance of Olynthus (q.v.) against Philip II. of 
Macedon, but returned without having effected anything; in the 
following year, when he reached Olynthus, he found it already 
in the hands of Philip. In 340 he was appointed to the command 
of a force sent to aid Byzantium against Philip, but the inhabit- 
ants, remembering his former plunderings and extortions, refused 
to receive him. In 338 he was defeated by Philip at Amphissa, 
and was one of the commanders at the disastrous battle of 
Chaeroneia. Lysicles, one of his colleagues, was condemned 
to death, while Chares does not seem to have been even accused. 
After the conquest of Thebes by Alexander (335), Chares is said 
to have been one of the Athenian orators and generals whose 
surrender was demanded. Two years later he was living at. 
Sigeum, for Arrian (Anabasis i. 12) states that he went from there 
to pay his respects to Alexander. In 332 he entered the service 
of Darius and took over the command of a Persian force in 
Mytilene, but capitulated on the approach of a Macedonian fleet 
on condition of being allowed to retire unmolested. He is last 
heard of at Taenarum, and is supposed to have died at Sigeum. 
Although boastful and vain-glorious, Chares was not lacking in 
personal courage, and was among the best Athenian general? 



CHARES— CHARING CROSS 



859 



of his time. At the best, however, he was " hardly more than an 
ordinary leader of mercenaries " (A. Holm). He openly boasted 
of his profligacy, was exceedingly avaricious, and his bad faith 
became proverbial. 

Diod. Sic. xv. 75, 95, xvi. 7, 21, 22, 85-88; Plutarch, Phocion, 14; 
Theopompus, ap. Athenaeum, xii. p. 532; A. Schafer, Demosthenes 
und seine Zeit (1885); A. Holm, History of Greece (Eng. trans., 
1896), voi. iii. 

CHARES, of Lindus in Rhodes, a noted sculptor, who fashioned 
for the Rhodians a colossal bronze statue of the sun-god, the cost 
of which was defrayed by selling the warlike engines left behind 
by Demetrius Poliorcetes, when he abandoned the siege of the 
city in 303 B.C. (Pliny, Nat. Hist, xrxiv. 41). The colossus was 
seventy cubits (105 ft.) in height; and its fingers were larger than 
many statues. The notion that the legs were planted apart, so 
that ships could sail between them, is absurd. The statue was 
thrown down by an earthquake after 56 years; but the remains 
lay for ages on the spot. 

CHARES, of Mytilene, a Greek belonging to the suite of 
Alexander the Great. He was appointed court-marshal or 
introducer of strangers to the king, an office borrowed from the 
Persian court. He wrote a history of Alexander in ten books, 
dealing mainly with the private life of the king. The fragments 
are chiefly preserved in Athenaeus. 

See Scriptores Rerum Alexandra (pp. 1 14-120) in the Didot edition 
of Arrian, 

CHARGE (through the Fr. from the Late Lat. carricare, to 
load in a carrus or wagon; cf. " cargo "), a load; from this, its 
primary meaning, also seen in the word " charger," a large dish, 
come the uses of the word for the powder and shot to load a fire- 
arm, the accumulation of electricity in a battery, the necessary 
quantity of dynamite or other explosive in blasting, and a device 
borne on an escutcheon in heraldry. " Charge " can thus mean 
a burden, and so a care or duty laid upon one, as in " to be in 
charge " of another. With a transference to that which lays such 
a duty on another, " charge " is used of the instructions given by 
a judge to a jury, or by a bishop to the clergy of his diocese. In 
the special sense of a pecuniary burden the word is used of the 
price of goods, of an encumbrance on property, and of the 
expenses of running a business. Further uses of the word are of 
the violent, rushing attack of cavalry, or of a bull or elephant, or 
football player; hence " charger " is a horse ridden in a charge, 
or more loosely a horse ridden by an officer, whether of infantry 
or cavalry. 

CHARGE D'AFFAIRES (Fr. for " in charge of business "), the 
title of two classes of diplomatic agents. (1) Charges d'affaires 
(ministres charges d'affaires), who were placed by the reglement 
of the congress of Vienna in the 4th class of diplomatic agents, 
are heads of permanent missions accredited to countries to which, 
for some reason, it is not possible or not desirable to send agents 
of a higher rank. They are distinguished from these latter by the 
fact that their credentials are addressed by the minister for 
foreign affairs of the state which they are to represent to the 
minister for foreign affairs of the receiving state. Though still 
occasionally accredited, ministers of this class are now rare. 
They have precedence over the other class of charges d'affaires. 
(2) Charges d'affaires per interim, or charge's des affaires, are those 
who are presented as such, either verbally or in writing, by heads 
of missions of the first, second or third rank to the minister for 
foreign affairs of the state to which they are accredited, when 
they leave their post temporarily, or pending the arrival of their 
successor. It is usual to appoint a counsellor or secretary of 
legation charge d'affaires. Some governments are accustomed 
to give the title of minister to such charges d'affaires, which 
ranks them with the other heads of legation. Essentially 
charges d'affaires do not differ from ambassadors, envoys or 
ministers resident. They represent their nation, and enjoy the 
same privileges and immunities as other diplomatic agents 
(see Diplomacy). 

CHARGING ORDER, in English law, an order obtained from 
a court or judge by a judgment creditor under the Judgment 
Acts 1838 and 1840, by which the property of the judgment 



debtor in any stocks or funds stands charged with the payment 
of the amount for which judgment shall have been recovered, 
with interest. A charging order can only be obtained in respect 
of an ascertained sum, but this would include a sum ordered to be 
paid at a future date. An order can be made on stock standing 
in the name of a trustee in trust for the judgment debtor, or* on 
cash in court to the credit of the judgment debtor, but not on 
stock held by a debtor as a trustee. The application for a charg- 
ing order is usually made by motion to a divisional court, though 
it may be made to a judge. The effect of the order is not that of 
a contract to pay the debt, but merely of an instrument of charge 
on the shares, signed by the debtor. An interval of six months 
must elapse before any proceedings are taken to enforce the 
charge, but, if necessary, a stop order on the fund and the divi- 
dends payable by the debtor can be obtained by the creditor 
to protect his interest A solicitor employed to prosecute any 
suit, matter or proceeding in any court, is entitled, on declaration 
of the court, to a charge for his costs upon the property recovered 
or preserved in such suit or proceeding. (See Rules of the 
Supreme Court, o. xlix.) 

CHARIBERT (d. 567), king of the Franks, was the son of 
Clotaire I. On Clotaire's death in 561 his estates were divided 
between his sons, Charibert receiving Paris as his capital, 
together with Rouen, Tours, Poitiers, Limoges, Bordeaux and 
Toulouse. Besides his wife, Ingoberga, he had unions with 
Merofleda, a wool-carder's daughter, and Theodogilda, the 
daughter of a neatherd. He was one of the most dissolute of 
the Merovingian kings, his early death in 567 being brought on 
by his excesses. (C. Pf.) 

CHARIDEMUS, of Oreus in Euboea, Greek mercenary leader. 
About 367 B.C. he fought under the Athenian general Iphicrates 
against Amphipolis. Being ordered by Iphicrates to take the Amphi- 
politan hostages to Athens, he allowed them to return to their own 
people, and joined Cotys, king of Thrace, against Athens. Soon 
afterwards he fell into the hands of the Athenians and accepted 
the offer of Timotheus to re-enter their service. Having been 
dismissed by Timotheus (362) he joined the revolted satraps 
Memnon and Mentor in Asia, but soon lost their confidence, and 
was obliged to seek the protection of the Athenians. Finding, 
however, that he had nothing to fear from the Persians, he again 
joined Cotys, on whose murder he was appointed guardian to his 
youthful son Cersobleptes. In 357, on the arrival of Chares with 
considerable forces, the Chersonese was restored to Athens. The 
supporters of Charidemus represented this as due to his efforts, 
and, in spite of the opposition of Demosthenes, he was honoured 
with a golden crown and the franchise of the city. It was further 
resolved that his person should be inviolable. In 351 he com- 
manded the Athenian forces in the Chersonese against Philip II. 
of Macedon, and in 349 he superseded Chares as commander in 
the Olynthian War. He achieved little success, but made him- 
self detested by his insolence and profligacy, and was in turn 
replaced by Chares. After Chaeroneia the war party would 
have entrusted Charidemus ' with the command against Philip, 
but the peace party secured the appointment of Phocion. He 
was one of those whose surrender was demanded by Alexander 
after the destruction of Thebes, but escaped with banishment. 
He fled to Darius III., who received him with distinction. But, 
having expressed his dissatisfaction with the preparations made 
by the king just before the battle of Issus im), he was put to 
death. 

See Diod. Sic. xvii. 30; Plutarch, Phocion, 16, 17; Arrian, 
Anabasis, i. 10; Quintus Curtius iii. 2; Demosthenes, Contra 
Aristocratem; A. Schafer, Demosthenes und seine Zeit (1885). 

CHARING CROSS, the locality about the west end of the 
Strand and the north end of Whitehall, on the south-east side 
of Trafalgar Square, London, England. It falls within the 
bounds of the city of Westminster. Here Edward I. erected 
the last of the series of crosses to the memory of his queen, 
Eleanor (d. 1290). It stood near the present entrance to Charing 

1 According to some authorities, this is a second Charidemus, the 
first disappearing from history after being superseded by Chares in 
the Olynthian war. 



86o 



CHARIOT— CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



Cross station of the South-Eastern & Chatham railway, in the 
courtyard of which a fine modern cross has been erected within 
a few feet of the exact site. A popular derivation of the name 
connected it with Edward's " dear queen " (chere reine), and a 
village of Cherringe or Charing grew up here later, but the true 
origin of the name is not known. There is a village of Charing 
in Kent, and the name is connected by some with that of a 
Saxon family, Cerring. 

CHARIOT (derived from an O. Fr. word, formed from char, a 
car), in antiquity, a conveyance (Gr. apixa, Lat. currus) used in 
battle, for the chase, in public processions and in games. The 
Greek chariot had two wheels, and was made to be drawn by two 
horses; if a third or, more commonly, two reserve horses were 
added, they were attached on each side of the main pair by a 
single trace fastened to the front of the chariot, as may be seen 
on two prize vases in the British Museum from the Panathenaic 
games at Athens. On the monuments there is no other sign of 
traces, from the want of which wheeling round must have been 
difficult. Immediately on the axle {afav, axis), without springs 
of any kind, rested the basket or body (5ld>pos) of the chariot, 
which consisted of a floor to stand on, and a semicircular guard 
round the front about half the height of the driver. It was 
entirely open at the back, so that the combatant might readily 
leap to the ground and up again as was necessary. There was no 
seat, and generally only room for the combatant and his charioteer 
to stand in. The pole (pvfi6s,iemo) was probably attached to the 
middle of the axle, though it appears to spring from the front 
of the basket; at the end of the pole was the yoke (f vyov, jugum), 
which consisted of two small saddles fitting the necks of the horses, 
and fastened by broad bands round the chest. Besides this the 
harness of each horse consisted of a bridle and a pair of reins, 
mostly the same as in use now, made of leather and ornamented 
with studs of ivory or metal. The reins were passed through 
rings attached to the collar bands or yoke, and were long enough 
to be tied round the waist of the charioteer in case of his having 
to defend himself. The wheels and body of the chariot were 
usually of wood, strengthened in places with bronze or iron; the 
wheels had from four to eight spokes and tires of bronze or iron. 
This description applies generally to the chariots of all the nations 
of antiquity; the differences consisted chiefly in the mountings. 
The chariots of the Egyptians and Assyrians, with whom the 
bow was the principal arm of attack, were richly mounted with 
quivers full of arrows, while those of the Greeks, whose character- 
istic weapon was the spear, were plain except as regards mere 
decoration. Among the Persians, again, and more remarkably 
among the ancient Britons, there was a class of chariot having 
the wheels mounted with sharp, sickle-shaped blades, which cut 
to pieces whatever came in their way. This was probably an 
invention of the Persians; Cyrus the younger employed these 
chariots in large numbers. Among the Greeks and Romans, on 
the other hand, the chariot had passed out of use in war before 
historical times, and was retained only for races in the public 
games, or for processions, without undergoing any alteration 
apparently, its form continuing to correspond with the descrip- 
tion of Homer, though it was lighter in build, having to carry 
only the charioteer. On two Panathenaic prize vases in the 
British Museum are figures of racing bigae, in which, contrary 
to the description given above, the driver is seated with his feet 
resting on a board hanging down in front close to the legs of his 
horses. The biga itself consists of a seat resting on the axle, with 
a rail at each side to protect the driver from the wheels. The 
chariot was unsuited to the uneven soil of Greece and Italy, and 
it is not improbable that these nations had brought it with them 
as part of their original habits from their former seats in the 
East. In the remains of Egyptian and Assyrian art there are 
numerous representations of chariots, from which it may be 
seen with what richness they were sometimes ornamented. The 
" iron " chariots in use among the Jews appear to have been 
chariots strengthened or plated with metal, and no doubt were 
of the form above described, which prevailed generally among 
the other ancient nations. (See also Cajriuage.) 

The chief authorities are J. C. Ginzrot, Die Wagen und Fahrwerke 



der Griechen und R'&mer (1817); C. F. Grashof, tiber das Fuhrwerk 
bei Homer und Hesiod (1846) ; W. Leaf in Journal of Hellenic Studies, 
v.; E. Buchholz, Die homerischen Realien (1871-1885); W. Helbig, 
Das homerische Epos aus den Denkmdlern erldutert (1884), and 
the article " Currus " in Daremberg and Saglio, Dictionnaire des 
Antiquitis. 

CHARISIUS, FLAVIUS SOSIPATER, Latin grammarian, 
flourished about the middle of the 4th century a.d. He was 
probably an African by birth, summoned to Constantinople to 
take the place of Euanthius, a learned commentator on Terence. 
The Ars Grammatica of Charisius, in five books, addressed to his 
son (not a Roman, as the preface shows), has come down to us 
in a mutilated condition, the beginning of the first, part of the 
fourth, and the greater part of the fifth book having been lost. 
The work, which is merely a compilation, is valuable as contain- 
ing excerpts from the earlier writers on grammar, who are in 
many cases mentioned by name — Q. Remmius Palaemon, C. 
Julius Romanus, Cominianus. 

The best edition is by H. Keil, Grammatici Latini, i. (1857); see 
also article by G. Gotz in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, iii. 2 
(1899) ; Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. trans.), 
§ 419, 1. 2; Frohde, in Jahr.f. Philol., 18 Suppl. (1892), 567-672. 

CHARITON, of Aphrodisias in Caria, the author of a Greek 
romance entitled The Loves of Chaereas and Callirrhoe, probably 
flourished in the 4th century a.d. The action of the story, 
which is to a certain extent historical, takes place during the time 
of the Peloponnesian War. Opinions differ as to the merits of the 
romance, which is an imitation of Xenophon of Ephesus and 
Heliodorus. 

Editions by J. P. D'Orville (1783), G. A. Hirschig (1856) and 
R. Hercher (1859); there is an (anonymous) English translation 
(1764) ; see also E. Rohde, Der griechische Roman (1900). 

CHARITY AND CHARITIES. The word " charity," or love, 
represents the principle of the good life. It stands for a mood 
or habit of mind and an endeavour. From it, as a habit of mind, 
springs the social and personal endeavour which in the widest 
sense we may call charity. The two correspond. Where the 
habit of mind has not been gained, the endeavour fluctuates 
and is relatively purposeless. In so far as it has been gained, 
the endeavour is founded on an intelligent scrutiny of social 
conditions and guided by a definite purpose. In the one case 
it is realized that some social theory must be found by us, if 
our action is to be right and consistent; in the other case no 
need of such a theory is felt. This article is based on the assump- 
tion that there are principles in charity or charitable work, and 
that these can be ascertained by a study of the development 
of social conditions, and their relation to prevalent social aims 
and religious or philosophic conceptions. It is assumed also 
that the charity of the religious life, if rightly understood, cannot 
be inconsistent with that of the social life. 

Perhaps some closer definition of charity is necessary. The words 
that signify goodwill towards the community and its members are 
primarily words expressive of the affections of family life in the 
relations existing between parents, and between parent and child. 
As will beseen, the analogies underlying such phrases as " God the 
Father," " children of God," " brethren," have played a great part 
in the development of charitable thought in pre-Christian as well 
as in Christian days. The germ, if we may say so, of the words 
<£iXia, ayain], amor, love; amicitia, friendship, is the sexual or the 
parental relation. With the realization of the larger life in man the 
meaning of the word expands. Caritas, or charity, strikes another 
note — high price, and thus dearness. It is charity, indeed, expressed 
in mercantile metaphor; and it would seem that it was associated 
in thought with the word x^P's. which has also a commercial mean- 
ing, but signifies as well favour, gratitude, grace, kindness. Partly 
thus, perhaps, it assumed and suggested a nobler conception; and 
sometimes, as, for instance, in English ecclesiastical documents, it 
was spelt charitas. 'Kyhirri, which in the Authorized Version of the 
Bible is translated charity, was used by St Paul as a translation of 
the Hebrew word hesed, which in the Old Testament is in the same 
version translated " mercy " — as in Hosea vi. 6, " I desired mercy, 
and not sacrifice." This word represents the charity of kind- 
ness and goodness, as distinguished from almsgiving. Almsgiving, 
sedaqah, is translated by the word 'ihermoavvT) in the Septuagint, and 
in the Authorized Version by the word " righteousness." It repre- 
sents the deed or the gift which is due — done or made, not spon- 
taneously, but under a sense of religious obligation. In the earlier 
Christian period the word almsgiving has this meaning, and was in 
that sense applied to a wide range of actions and contracts, from 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



861 



a gift to a beggar at a church door to a grant and a tenure of land. 
It also, in the word almoner, represented the fulfilment of the 
religious obligation with the aid of an agent or delegate. The words 
charity or love (caritas or ayawri), on the other hand, without losing 
the tone with which the thought of parental or family love inspires 
them, assume a higher meaning. In religious thought they imply 
an ideal life, as represented by such expressions as " love (agape) 
of God." This on the ore side; and on the other an ideal social 
relation, in such words as " love of man." Thus in the word 
" charity " religious and social associations meet; and thus regarded 
the word means a disciplined and habitual mood in which the mind 
is considerate of the welfare of others individually and generally, 
and devises what is for their real good, and in which the intelligence 
and the will strive to fulfil the mind's purpose. Charity thus has 
no necessary relation to relief or alms. To give a lecture, or to nurse 
a sick man who is not in want or " poor, ' may be equally a deed 
of charity; though in fact charity concerns itself largely with the 
classes usually called " the poor," and with problems of distress and 
relief. Relief, however, is not an essential part of charity or charit- 
able work. It is one of many means at its disposal. If the world 
were so poor that no one could make a gift, or so wealthy that no one 
needed it, charity — the charity of life and of deeds — would remain. 

The history of charity is a history of many social and religious 
theories, influences and endeavours, that have left their mark 
alike upon the popular and the cultivated thought of the present 
day. The inconsistencies of charitable effort and argument 
may thus in part be accounted for. To understand the problem 
of charity we have therefore (i) to consider the stages of charit- 
able thought— the primitive, pagan, Greek and Roman, Jewish 
and Christian elements, that make up the modern consciousness 
in regard to charity, and also the growth of the habit of " charity " 
as representing a gradually educated social instinct. (2) We 
have also to consider in their relation to charity the results of 
recent investigations of the conditions of social life. (3) At 
each stage we have to note the corresponding stage of practical 
administration in public relief and private effort — for the division 
between public or " poor-law " relief and charity which prevails 
in England is, comparatively speaking, a novelty, and, generally 
speaking, the work of charity can hardly be appreciated or 
understood if it be considered without reference to public 
relief. (4) As to the present day, we have to consider practical 
suggestions in regard to such subjects as charity and economic 
thought, charity organization, friendly visiting and almonership, 
co-operation with the poor-law, charity and thrift, parochial 
management, hospitals and medical relief, exceptional distress 
and the " unemployed," the utilization of endowments and their 
supervision, and their adaptation to new needs and emergencies. 
(5) We have also throughout to consider charitable help in 
relation to classes of dependants, wl o appear early in the history 
of the question — widows and orphans, the sick and the aged, 
vagrants and wayfarers. 

First in the series come the charities of the family and of 
hospitality; then the wider charities of religion, the charities 
of the community, and of individual donors and of mutual help. 
These gradually assumed importance in communities which 
consisted originally of self-supporting classes, within which 
widows and orphans, for instance, would be rather provided for, 
in accordance with recognized class obligations, than relieved. 
Then come habitual almsgiving, the charitable endowment, and 
the modern charitable institution and association. But through- 
out the test of progress or decadence appears to be the condition 
of the family. The family is the source, the home and the 
hearthstone of charity. It has been created but slowly, and 
there is naturally a constant tendency to break away from its 
obligations and to ignore and depreciate its utility. Yet the 
family, as we now have it, is itself the outcome of infinite thought 
working through social instinct, and has at each stage of its 
development indicated a general advance. To it, therefore, 
constant reference must be made. 

Part I. — Primitive Charity 

The study of early communities has brought to light the history 
of the development of the family. " Marriage in its lowest 
phases is by no means a matter of affection or companionship " ; 
and only very slowly has the position of both parents been 
recognized as implying different but correlative responsibilities 



towards their child. Only very slowly, also, has the morality 
necessary to the making of the family been won. Charity at 
earlier stages is hardly recognized as a virtue, nor infanticide 
as an evil. Hospitality — the beginning of a larger social life — 
is non-existent. The self-support of the community is secured 
by marriage, and when relations fail marriage becomes a pro- 
vision against poverty. Then by the tribal system is created 
another safeguard against want. But apart also from these 
methods of maintenance, at a very early stage there is charitable 
relief. The festivals of the solstices and equinoxes, and of 
the seasons, are the occasions for sacrifice and relief; and, as 
Christmas customs prove, the instinct to give help or alms at 
such festival periods still remains. Charity is concerned prim- 
arily with certain elemental forces of social life: the relation 
between these primitive instincts and impulses that still influence 
charity should not, therefore, be overlooked. The basis of 
social life is also the basis of charitable thought and action. 

The savage is the civilized man in the rough. " The lowest races 
have," Lord Avebury writes, " no institution of marriage." Many 
have no word for " dear " or " beloved." The child belongs to the 
tribe rather than to the parent. In these circumstances a problem 
of charity such as the following may arise: — " Am I to starve, while 
my sister has children whom she can sell?" a question asked of 
Burton by a negro. From the point of view of the tribe, an able- 
bodied man would be more valuable than dependent children, and 
the relationship of the larger family of brothers and sisters would 
be a truer claim to help than that of mother and child. Subsequently 
the child is recognized as related, not to the father, but to the 
mother, and there is " a kind of bond which lasts for life between 
mother and child, although the father is a stranger to it." Slowly 
only is the relative position of both parents, with different but cor- 
relative responsibilities, recognized. The first two steps of charity 
have then been made: the social value of the bond between the 
mother, and then between the father, and the child has been recog- 
nized. Until this point is reached the morality necessary to the 
making of the family is wanting, and for a long time afterwards it 
is hardly won. The virtue of chastity — the condition precedent to 
the higher family life — is unrecognized. Indeed, the set of such 
religious thought as there may be is against it. Abstract conceptions, 
even in the nobler races, are lacking. The religion of life is vaguely 
struggling with its animality, and that which it at last learns to rule 
it at first worships. In these circumstances there is little charity 
for the child and little for the stranger. " There is," Dr Schwein- 
furth wrote in his Heart of Africa, " an utter want of wholesome 
intercourse between race and race. For any member of a tribe that 
speaks one dialect to cross the borders of a tribe that speaks another 
is to make a venture at the hazard of his life." The religious obliga- 
tions that fostered and sanctified family life among the Greeks and 
Romans and Jews are unknown. Much later in development comes 
charity for the child, with the abhorrence of infanticide — against 
which the Jewish-Christian charity of 2000 years ago uttered its 
most vigorous protests. If the child belonged primarily to the tribe 
or state, its maintenance or destruction was a common concern. 
This motive influenced the Greeks, who are historically nearer the 
earlier forms of social life than ourselves. For the common good they 
exposed the deformed child; but also " where there were too many, 
for in our state population has a limit," as Aristotle says, " the babe 
or unborn child was destroyed." And so, to lighten their own 
responsibilities, parents were wont to do in the slow years of the 
degradation of the Roman empire, though the interest of the state 
then required a contrary policy. The transition to our present 
feeling of responsibility for child-life has been very gradual and 
uncertain, through the middle ages and even till the 18th century. 
Strictly it may be said that all penitentiaries and other similar 
institutions are concrete protests on behalf of a better family life. 
The movement for the care of children in the 1 8th century naturally 
and instinctively allied itself with the penitentiary movement. The 
want of regard for child-life, when the rearing of children becomes 
a source of economic pressure, suggests why in earlier stages of 
civilization all that charitable apparatus which we now think neces- 
sary for the assistance of children is wanting, even if the need, so far 
as it does arise, is not adequately met by the recognized obligations 
of the clan-family or brotherhood. 

In the case of barbarous races charity and self-support may be 
considered from some other points of view. Self-support is secured 
in two ways — by marriage and by slavery. " For a man or woman 
to be unmarried after the age of thirty is unheard of " (T. H. Lewin, 
Wild Races of South-East India). On the other hand, if any one is 
without a father, mother or other relative, and destitute of the 
necessaries of life, he may sell himself and become a slave. Thus 
slavery becomes a provision for poverty when relations fail. The 
clan-family may serve the same purpose. David Livingstone de- 
scribes the formation of the clan-family among the Bakuena. ' ' Each 
man, by virtue of paternity, is chief of his own children. They build 
huts round his. . . . Near the centre of each circle of huts is a spot 



862 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



called a ' kotla,' with a fireplace; here they work, eat, &c. A poor 
man attaches himself to the ' kotla ' of a rich one, and is considered 
a child of the latter." Thus the clan-family is also a poor-relief 
association. 

Studies in folklore bring to light many relations between the 
charity of the old world and that of our own day. 

In regard to the charity of the early community, we may take 
the 8th century B.C. as the point of departure. The Odyssey 
(about 800 B.C.) and Hesiod (about 700 B.C.) are 
Theeariy r0U g n iy p ara ll e l with Amos (816-775), an d represent 
munUy. two streams of thought that meet in the early Christian 
period. The period covered by the Odyssey seems to 
merge into that of Hesiod. We take the former first, dealing 
with the clan-family and the phratry, which are together the 
self-maintaining unit of society, with the general relief of the 
poor, with hospitality, and with vagrancy. In Hesiod we find 
the customary law of charity in the earlier community definitely 
stated, and also indications of the normal methods of neighbourly 
help which were in force in country districts. First of the family 
and brotherhood, or phratry. The family (Od. viii. 582) included 
alike the wife's father and the daughter's husband. It was thus 
a clanlike family. Out of this was developed the phratry or 
brotherhood, in which were included alike noble families, peasants 
and craftsmen, united by a common worship and responsibilities 
and a common customary law {themis). Zeus, the god of social 
life, was worshipped by the phratry. He was the father of the 
law {themis). He was god of host and guest. Society was thus 
based on law, the brotherhood and the family. The irresponsible 
man, the man worthy of no respect or consideration, was one 
who belonged to no brotherhood, was subject to no customary 
law, and had no hearth or family. The phratry was, and became 
afterwards still more, " a natural gild." Outside the self- 
sustaining phratry was the stranger, including the wayfarer and 
the vagrant; and partly merged in these classes was the beggar, 
the recognized recipient of the alms of the community. To 
change one's abode and to travel was assumed to be a cause of 
reproach (II. ix. 648). The " land-louper " was naturally sus- 
pected. On the other hand, a stranger's first thought in a new 
country was whether the inhabitants were wild or social (Skcuoi), 
hospitable and God-fearing (Od. xiii. 201). Hospitality thus 
became the first public charity; Zeus sent all strangers and 
beggars, and it was against all law (de/jus) to slight them. Out 
of this feeling — a kind of glorified almsgiving — grew up the 
system of hospitality in Greek states and also in the Roman 
world. The host greeted the stranger (or the suppliant). An 
oath of friendship was taken by the stranger, who was then 
received with the greeting, Welcome (xatpe), and water was 
provided for ablution, and food and shelter. In the larger 
house there was a guests' table. In the hut he shared the peasant's 
meal. The custom bound alike the rich and the poor. On parting 
presents were given, usually food for the onward journey, 
sometimes costly gifts. The obligation was mutual, that the 
host should give hospitality, and that the guest should not abuse 
it. From early times tallies were exchanged between them as 
evidence of this formal relationship, which each could claim 
again of the other by the production of the token. And further, 
the relationship on either side became hereditary. Thus indi- 
viduals and families and tribes remained linked in friendship 
and in the interchange of hospitalities. 

Under the same patronage of Zeus and the same laws of 
hospitality were vagrants and beggars. The vagrant and loafer 
are sketched in the Odyssey — the vagrant who lies glibly that he 
may get entertainment, and the loafer who prefers begging to 
work on a farm. These and the winter idlers, whom Hesiod 
pictures — a group known to modern life — prefer at that season 
to spend their time in the warmth of the village smithy, or at a 
house of common resort (Keaxv) — a common lodging-house, 
we might say — where they would pass the night. Apparently, 
as in modern times, the vagrants had organized their own system 
of entertainment, and, supported by the public, were a class for 
whom it was worth while to cater. The local or public beggars 
formed a still more definite class. Their begging was a recognized 
means of maintenance; it was a part of the method of poor 



relief. Thus of Penelope it was said that, if Odysseus' tale were 
true, she would give him better clothes, and then he might beg 
his bread throughout the country-side. Feasts, too, and alms- 
giving were nearly allied, and feasts have always been one resource 
for the relief of the poor. Thus naturally the beggars frequented 
feasts, and were apparently a recognized and yet inevitable 
nuisance. They wore, as part of their dress, scrips or wallets 
in which they carried away the food they received, as later 
Roman clients carried away portions of food in baskets (sportula) 
from their patron's dinner. Odysseus, when he dresses up as a 
beggar, puts on a wallet as part of his costume. Thus we find 
a system of voluntary relief in force based on a recognition of the 
duty of almsgiving as complete and peremptory as that which we 
shall notice later among the Jews and the early Christians. We 
are concerned with country districts, and not with towns, and, 
as social conditions that are similar produce similar methods 
of administration, so we find here a general plan of relief similar 
to that which was in vogue in Scotland till the Scottish Poor Law 
Act of 1845. 

In Hesiod the fundamental conceptions of charity are more 
clearly expressed. He has, if not his ten, at least his four 
commandments, for disobedience to which Zeus will punish the 
offender. They are: Thou shalt do no evil to suppliant or guest; 
thou shalt not dishonour any woman of the family; thou shalt 
not sin against the orphan; thou shalt not be unkind to aged 
parents. 

The laws of social life are thus duty to one's guest and duty to 
one's family; and chastity has its true place in that relation, as the 
later Greeks, who so often quote Hesiod (cf. the so-called Economics 
of Aristotle), fully realized. Also the family charities due to the 
orphan, whose lot is deplored in the Iliad (xxii. 490), and to the aged 
are now clearly enunciated. But there is also in Hesiod the duty to 
one's neighbour, not according to the " perfection " of " Cristes 
lore," but according to a law of honourable reciprocity in act and 
intent. " Love him who loves thee, and cleave to him who cleaveth 
to thee : to him who would have given, give ; to him who would not 
have given, give not." The groundwork of Hesiod's charity outside 
the family is neighbourly help (such as formed no small part of old 
Scottish charity in the country districts) ; and he put his argument 
thus : Competition, which is a kind of strife, " lies in the roots of the 
world and in men." It is good, and rouses the idle " handless " man 
to work. On one side are social duty (Sluri) and work, done briskly 
at the right season of the year, which brings a full barn. On the other 
side are unthrift and hunger, and relief with the disgrace of begging; 
and the relief, when the family can do no more, must come from 
neighbours, to whose house the beggar has to go with his wife and 
children to ask for victual. Once they may be helped, or twice, 
and then they will be refused. It is better, Hesiod tells his brother, 
to work and so pay off his debts and avoid hunger (see Erga, 391, 
&c, and elsewhere). Here indeed is a problem of to-day as it 
appeared to an early Greek. The alternatives before the idler — so 
far as his own community is concerned- — are labour with neighbourly 
help to a limited extent, or hunger. 

Hesiod was a farmer in Boeotia. Some 530 years afterwards a 
pupil of Aristotle thus describes the district and its community of 
farmers. " They are," he says, " well to do, but simple in their 
way of life. They practise justice, good faith, and hospitality. 
To needy townsmen and vagabonds they give freely of their sub- 
stance; for meanness and covetousness are unknown to them." 
The charitable method of Homeric and Hesiodic days still continued. 

Part II.— Charity among the Greeks 

Society in a Greek state was divided into two parts, citizens 
and slaves. The citizens required leisure for education, war 
and government. The slaves were their ministers 
and servants to enable them to secure this leisure. ~^ eareek 
We have therefore to consider, on the one hand, the 
position of the family and the clan-family, and the maintenance 
of the citizen from public funds and by public and private 
charities; and on the other hand the condition of the slaves, 
and the relation between slavery and charity. 

The slaves formed the larger part of the population. The 
census of Attica, made between 317 and 307 B.C., gives their 
numbers at 400,000 out of a population of about 500,000; and 
even if this be considered excessive, the proportion of slaves 
to citizens would certainly be very large. The citizens with their 
wives and children formed some 1 2 % of the community. Thus, 
apart from the resident aliens, returned in the census at 10.000, 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



863 



and their wives and children., we have two divisions of society: 
the citizens, with their own organization of relief and charities; 
and the slaves, permanently maintained by reason of their 
dependence on individual members of the civic class. Thus, 
there is no poverty but that of the poor citizens. Poverty is 
limited to them. The slaves — that is to say, the bulk of the 
labouring population — are provided for. 

From times relatively near to Hesiod's we may trace the growth 
and influence of the clan-family as the centre of customary 
charity within the community, the gradual increase of a class of 
poor either outside the clan-family or eventually independent 
of it, and the development of a new organization of relief in- 
troduced by the state to meet newer demands. We picture the 
early state as a group of families, each of which tends to form 
in time a separate group or clan. At each expansion from the 
family to the clan the members of the clan retain rights and have 
to fulfil duties which are the same as, or similar to, those which 
prevailed in the family. Thus, in Attica the clan-families 
(genos) and the brotherhoods (phr atria) were " the only basis of 
legal rights and obligations over and above the natural family." 
The clan-family was " a natural guild," consisting of rich and 
poor members — the well-born or noble and the craftsman alike. 
Originally it would seem that the land was divided among the 
families of the clan by lot and was inalienable. Thus with the 
family was combined the means of supporting the family. On 
the other hand, every youth was registered in his phratry, and 
the phratry remained till the reforms of Cleisthenes (509 B.C.) 
a political, and even after that time a social, organization of 
importance. 

First, as to the family — the mother and wife, and the father.- 
Already before the age of Plato and Xenophon (450-350 B.C.) 
we find that the family has suffered a slow decline. The wife, 
according to later Greek usage, was married as a child, hardly 
educated, and confined to the house, except at some festival or 
funeral. But with the decline came criticism and a nobler 
conception of family life. " First, then, come laws regarding 
the wife," writes the author of the so-called Economics of Aris- 
totle, and the law, " thou shalt do no wrong; for, if we do no 
wrong, we shall not be wronged." This is the " common law," 
as the Pythagoreans say, " and it implies that we must not wrong 
the wife in the least, but treat her with the reverence due to a 
suppliant, or one taken from the altar." The sanctity of marriage 
is thus placed among the " commandments " of Hesiod, beside 
the duty towards the stranger and the orphan. These and other 
references to the Pythagoreans suggest that they, possibly in 
common with other mystics, preached the higher religion of 
marriage and social life, and thus inspired a deeper social feeling, 
which eventually allied itself with the Christian movement. 

Next, as to parents and children: the son was under an obliga- 
tion to support his father, subject, after Solon's time, to the 
condition that he had taught him a trade; and after Solon's 
time the father had no claim for support from an illegitimate 
son. " The possession of children," it was said (Arist. Econ.), 
" is not by nature for the public good only, but also for private 
advantage. For what the strong may gain by their toii for the 
weak, the weak in their old age receive from the strong . . . Thus 
is the nature of each, the man and the woman, prearranged by the 
Divine Being for a life in common." Honour to parents is " the 
first and greatest and oldest of all debts " (Plato, Laws, 717). 
The child has to care for the parent in his old age. " Nemesis, 
the minister of justice (5ki)), is appointed to watch over all these 
things." And "if a man fail to adorn the sepulchre of his dead 
parents, the magistrates take note of it and inquire " (Xen. 
Mem. ii. 14). The heightened conception of marriage implies 
a fuller interpretation of the mutual relations of parent and child 
as well; both become sacred. 

Then as to orphans. Before Solon's time (594 b.c.) the property 
of any member of the clan-family who died without children 
went to the clan; and after his time, when citizens were permitted 
to leave their property by will, the property of an intestate fell 
to the clan. This arrangement carried with it corresponding 
duties. Through the clan-family provision was made for orphans. 



Any member of the clan had the legal right to claim an orphan 
member in marriage; and, if the nearest agnate did not marry 
her, he had to give her a dowry proportionate to the amount of 
his own property. Later, there is evidence of a growing sense of 
responsibility in regard to orphans. Hippodamus (about 443 
B.C.), in his scheme of the perfected state (Arist. Pol. 1268), 
suggested that there should be public magistrates to deal with 
the affairs of orphans (and strangers) ; and Plato, his contempor- 
ary, writes of the duty of the state and of the guardian towards 
them very fully. Orphans, he proposes (Laws, 927), should be 
placed under the care of public guardians. "Men should have 
a fear of the loneliness of orphans . . . and of the souls of the 
departed, who by nature take a special care of their own children. 
... A man should love the unfortunate orphan (boy or girl) 
of whom he is guardian as if he were his own child; he should 
be as careful and diligent in the management of the orphan's 
property as of his own — or even more careful still." 

To relieve the poverty of citizens and to preserve the citizen- 
hood were objects of public policy and of charity. In Crete and 
Sparta the citizens were wholly supported out of the public 
resources. In Attica the system was different. The citizens 
were aided in various ways, in which, as often happens, legal 
or official and voluntary or private methods worked on parallel 
lines. The means were (1) legal enactment for release of debts; 
(2) emigration; (3) the supply of corn; (4) poor relief for the 
infirm, and relief for the children of those fallen in war; (5) 
emoluments; (6) voluntary public service, separate gifts and 
liberality; (7) loan societies. 

(1) In 594 B.C. the labouring class in Attica were overwhelmed 
with debts and mortgages, and their persons pledged as security. 
Only by a sharp reform was it possible to preserve them from 
slavery. This Solon effected. He annulled their obligations, 
abolished the pledge of the person, and gave the labourers the 
franchise (but see under Solon). Besides the laws above men- 
tioned, he gave power to the Areopagus to inquire from what sources 
each man obtained the necessaries of life, and to punish those who 
did not work. His action and that of his successor, Peisistratus 
(560 B.C.), suggest that the class of poor (axopoi) was increasing, 
and that by the efforts of these two men the social decline of the 
people was avoided or at least postponed. Peisistratus lent the poor 
money that they might maintain themselves in husbandry. He wished, 
it is said (Arist. Ath. Pol. xvi.), to enable them to earn a moderate 
living, that they might be occupied with their own affairs, instead 
of spending their time in the city or neglecting their work in order 
to visit it. As rent for their land they paid a tenth of the produce. 

(2) Akin to this policy was that of emigration. Athenians, .selected 
in some instances from the two lowest political classes, emigrated, 
though still retaining their rights of citizenship. In 570-565 B.c 
Salamis was annexed and divided into lots and settled, and latei 
Pericles settled more than 2750 citizens in the Chersonese and else- 
where — practically a considerable section of the whole body cf 
citizens. " By this means," says Plutarch, " he relieved the state 
of numerous idle agitators and assisted the necessitous." In other 
states this expedient w r as frequently adopted. 

(3) A third method was the supply of corn at reduced rates— a 
method similar to that adopted, as we shall see, at Rome, Constan- 
tinople and elsewhere. The maintenance of the mass of the people 
depended on the corn fleets. There were public granaries, where 
large stores were laid up at the public expense. A portion of all 
cargoes of corn was retained at Athens and in other ways importa- 
tion was promoted. Exportation was forbidden. Public donations 
and distributions of corn were frequent, and in times of scarcity rich 
citizens made large contributions with that object. The distributions 
were made to adult citizens of eighteen years of age and upwards 
whose names were on the registers. 

(4) In addition to this there was a system of public relief for those 
who were unable to earn a livelihood on account of bodily defects 
and infirmities. The qualification was a property test. The pro- 
perty of the applicant had to be shown to be of a value of not more 
than three minae (say £12). Socrates, it may be noted, adopts the 
same method of estimating his comparative poverty (Xen. Econ. 2. 
6), saying that his goods would realize about five minae (or about 
twenty guineas). The senate examined the case, and the ecclesia 
awarded the bounty, which amounted to 1 or 2 obols a day, rather 
more than i«d. or 3d. — out-door relief, as we might say, amounting 
at most to about is. 9d. a week. There was also a fund for the 
maintenance of the children of those who had fallen in war, up to the 
age of eighteen. 

(5) But the main source of support was the receipt of emoluments 
for various public services. This was not relief, though it produced 
in the course of time the effect of relief. It was rather the Athenian 
method of supporting a governing class of citizens. 



864 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



The inner political history of Athens is the history of the extension 
of the franchise to the lower classes of citizens, with the privileges 
of holding office and receiving emoluments. In early times, either 
by Solon (q.v.) or previously, the citizens were classified on the 
basis of property. The rich retained the franchise and the right 
of holding office; the middle classes obtained the franchise; the 
fourth or lowest class gained neither. By the reforms of Cleis- 
thenes (509 B.C.) the clan-family and the phratry were set aside for 
the deme or parish, a geographical division superseding the social. 
Finally, about 478 B.C., when all had acquired the franchise, the 
right to hold office also was obtained by the third class. These 
changes coincided with a period of economic progress. The rate of 
interest was high, usually 12%; and in trading and bottomry the 
returns were much higher. A small capital at this interest soon 
produced comparative wealth ; and simultaneously prices were 
falling. Then came the reaction. " After the Peloponnesian war " 
(432-404 B.C.), writes Professor Jebb, " the wealth of the country 
ceased to grow, as population had ceased to grow about 50 years 
sooner. The rich went on accumulating: the poor, having no means 
of enriching themselves by enterprise, were for the most part occu- 
pied in watching for some chance of snatching a larger share of the 
stationary total." Thus the poorer classes in a time of prosperity 
had won the power which they were able to turn to their own account 
afterwards. A period of economic pressure followed, coupled with a 
decline in the population ; no return to the land was feasible, nor 
was emigration; the people had become town-folk inadaptable to 
new uses ; decreasing vitality and energy were marked by a new 
temper, the " pauper " temper, unsettled, idle and grasping, and 
political power was utilized to obtain relief. The relief was forth- 
coming, but it was of no avail to stop the general decline. The state, 
it might almost be said, in giving scope to the assertion of the spirit 
of dependence, had ruined the self-regarding energy on which both 
family and state alike depended. The emoluments were diverse. 
The number of citizens was not large ; the functions in which citizens 
could take part were numerous; and when payment was forth- 
coming the poorer citizens pressed in to exercise their rights (cf. 
Arist. Pol. 1293 a). All Athenian citizens could attend the public 
assembly or ecclesia. Probably the attendance at it varied from 
a few hundred to 5000 persons. In 395 B.C. the payment for attend- 
ance was fixed at 3 obols, or little more than 4|d. a day — for the 
system of payment had probably been introduced a few years before 
(but see Ecclesia and refs.). A juror or dicast would receive 
the same sum for attendance, and the courts or juries often consisted 
of 500 persons. If the estimate (Bockh, Public Economy of Athens, 
Eng. trans, pp. 109, 117) holds good that in the age of Demosthenes 
(384-323 B.C.) the member of a poor family of four free persons could 
live (including rent) on about 3-3d. or between 2 and 3 obols a day, 
the pay of the citizen attending the assembly or the court would at 
least cover the expenses of subsistence. On the other hand, it would 
be less than the pay of a day labourer, which was probably about 
4. obols or 6d. a day. In any case many citizens — they numbered 
in all about 20,000 — in return for their participation in political 
duties would receive considerable pecuniary assistance. Attending 
a great public festival also, the citizen would receive 2 obols or 3d. 
a day during the festival days ; and there were besides frequent 
public sacrifices, with the meal or feast which accompanied them. 
But besides this there were confiscations of private property, which 
produced a surplus revenue divisible among the poorer citizens. 
(Some hold that there were confiscations in other Greek states, but 
not in Athens.) In these circumstances it is not to be wondered 
that men like Isocrates should regret that the influence of the 
Areopagus, the old court of morals and justice in Athens, had dis- 
appeared, for it " maintained a sort of censorial police over the lives 
and habits of the citizens; and it professed to enforce a tutelary 
and paternal discipline, beyond that which the strict letter of the 
law could mark out, over the indolent, the prodigal, the undutiful, 
and the deserters of old rite and custom." 

(6) In addition to public emoluments and relief there was much 
private liberality and charity. Many expensive public services 
were undertaken honorarily by the citizens under a kind of civic 
compulsion. Thus in a trial about 425 B.C. (Lysias, Or. 19. 57) a 
citizen submitted evidence that his father expended more than 
£2000 during his life in paying the expenses of choruses at festivals, 
fitting out seven triremes for the navy, and meeting levies of income 
tax to meet emergencies. Besides this he had helped poor citizens 
by portioning their daughters and sisters, had ransomed some, and 
paid the funeral expenses of others (cf. for other instances Plutarch's 
Cimon, Theophrastus, Eth., and Xen. Econ.). 

(7) There were also mutual help societies (?pacoi). Those for 
relief would appear to have been loan societies (cf. Theoph. Eth.), 
one of whose members would beat up contributions to help a friend, 
who would afterwards repay the advance. 

The criticisms of Aristotle (384-321 B.C.) suggest the direction 
to which he looked for reform. He (Pol. 1320 a) passes a very un- 
favourable judgment on the distribution of public money to the 
poorer citizens. The demagogues (he does not speak of Athens 
particularly) distributed the surplus revenues to the poor, who 
received them all at the same time; and then they were in want 
again. It was only, he argued, like pouring water through a sieve. 
It were better to see to it that the greater number were not so entirely 



destitute, for the depravity of a democratic government was due to 
this. The problem was to contrive how plenty (anropia, not poverty, 
diropia) should become permanent. His proposals are adequate aid 
and voluntary charity. Public relief should, he urges, be given in 
large amounts so as to help people to acquire small farms or start 
in business, and the well-to-do (tviropot) should in the meantime 
subscribe to pay the poor for their attendance at the public assem- 
blies. (This proves, indeed, how the payments had become poor 
relief.) He mentions also how the Carthaginian notables divided 
the destitute amongst them and gave them the means of setting 
to work, and the Tarentines (kolvo. iroio&'i-es) shared their property 
with the poor. (The Rhodians also may be mentioned (Strabo xiv. 
c. 652), amongst whom the well-to-do undertook the relief of the 
poor voluntarily.) The later word for charitable distribution was 
a sharing (kouhovIo., Ep. Rom. xv. 26), which would seem to indicate 
that after Aristotle's time popular thought had turned in that 
direction. But the chief service rendered by Aristotle — a service 
which covered indeed the whole ground of social progress — was to 
show that unless the purpose of civil and social life was carefully 
considered and clearly realized by those who desired to improve its 
conditions, no change for the better could result from individual 
or associated action. 

Two forms of charity have still to be mentioned: charity 
to the stranger and to the sick. It will be convenient to consider 
both in relation to the whole classical period. 

With the growth of towns the administration of hospitality 
was elaborated. 

(1) There was hospitality between members of families bound 
by the rites of host and guest. The guest received as a right only 
shelter and fire. Usually he dined with the host the first -the 
day, and if afterwards he was fed provisions were supplied stranger. 
to him. There were large guest-chambers (ttviiv) or small 
guest-houses, completely isolated on the right or left of the principal 
house; and here the guest was lodged. (2) There were also, e.g. at 
Hierapolis (Sir W. M. Ramsay's Phrygia, ii. 97), brotherhoods 
'of hospitality (£ewH Tcnirripeloi, bearers of the sign), which made 
hospitality a duty, and had a common chest and Apollo as their 
tutelary god. (3) There were inns or resting-places (Karayiiyia) 
for strangers at temples (Thuc. iii. 68; Plato, Laws, 953 a) and 
places of resort (\koxv) at or near the temples for the entertain- 
ment of strangers — for instance, at a temple of Asclepius at Epi- 
daurus (Pausanias ii. 174); and Pausanias argues that they were 
common throughout the country. Probably also at the temples 
hospitable provision was made for strangers. The evidence at 
present is not perhaps sufficiently complete, but, so far as it goes, 
it tends to the conclusion that in pre-Christian times hospitality 
was provided to passers-by and strangers in the temple buildings, 
as later it was furnished in the monasteries and churches. (4) There 
were also in towns houses for strangers (iecwv) provided at the 
public cost. This was so at Megara; and in Crete strangers had a 
place at the public meals and a dormitory. Xenophon suggested 
that it would be profitable for the Athenian state to establish inns 
for traders (Karaywyia i-q/ibaia} at Athens. Thus, apart from the 
official hospitality of the proxenus or " consul," who had charge of 
the affairs of foreigners, and the hospitality which was shown to 
persons of distinction by states or private individuals, there was in 
Greece a large provision for strangers, wayfarers and vagrants based 
on the charitable sentiment of hospitality. Among the Romans 
similar customs of private and public hospitality prevailed; and 
throughout the empire the older system was altered, probably very 
slowly. In Christian times (cf. Ramsay above) Pagan temples were 
(about a.d. 408) utilized for other purposes, including that of hos- 
pitality to strangers. 

Round the temples, at first probably village temples, the 
organization of medical relief grew up. Primitive medicine is 
connected with dreams, worship, and liturgical The sick. 
" pollution," punishment and penitence, and an 
experimental practice. Finally, systematic observation and 
science (with no knowledge of chemistry and little of physiology^ 
assert themselves, and a secular administration is created by 
the side of the older religious organization. 
' Sickness among primitive races is conceived to be a material 
substance to be extracted, or an evil spirit to be driven away by 
incantation. Religion and medicine are thus at the beginning 
almost one and the same thing. In Anatolia, in the groups of 
villages (cf. Ramsay as above, i. 101) under the theocratic govern- 
ment of a central Upbv or temple, the god Men Karou was the 
physician and saviour (o-wnjp and aoi^aiv) of his people. Priests, 
prophets and physicians were his ministers. He punished wrong- 
doing by diseases which he taught the penitent to cure. So else- 
where pollution, physical or moral, was chastened by disease and 
loss of property or children, and further ills were avoided by sacrifice 
and expiation and public warning. In the temple and out of this 
phase of thought grew up schools of medicine, in whose practice 
dreams and religious ritual retained a place. The newer gods, 
Asclepius and Apollo, succeeded the older local divinities; and 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



865 



the " sons. " of Asclepius became a profession, and the temple with 
its adjacent buildings a kind of hospital. There were many temples 
of Asclepius in Greece and elsewhere, placed generally in high and 
salubrious positions. After ablution the patient offered sacrifices, 
repeating himself the words of the hymn that was chanted. Then, 
when night came on, he slept in the temple. In the early dawn he 
was to dream " the heavenly dream " which would suggest his cure; 
but if he did not dream; relations and others — officials at the temple 
— might dream for him. At dawn the priests or sons of Asclepius 
came into the temple and visited the sick, so that, in a kind of 
drama, where reality and appearance seemed to meet, the patients 
believed that they saw the god himself. The next morning the 
prescription and treatment were settled. At hand in the inn or 
guest-chambers of the temple the patient could remain, sleeping 
again in the temple, if necessary, and carrying out the required 
regimen. In the temple were votive tablets of cases, popular and 
awe-inspiring, and records and prescriptions, which later found 
their way into the medical works of Galen and others. At the 
temple of Asclepius at Epidaurus was an inn (naTaytiyiov) with 
four courts and colonnades, and in all 160 rooms. (Cf. Pausanias 
ii. 171; and Report, Archaeol. in Greece, R. C. Bosanquet, 1899, 
1900.) 

At three centres more particularly, Rhodes, Cnidos and Cos, 
were the medical schools of the Asclepiads. If one may judge 
from an inscription at Athens, priests of Asclepius attended the 
poor gratuitously. And years afterwards, in the nth century, 
when there was a revival of medicine, we find (Daremberg, La 
Mtdecine: histoire et doctrines) at Salerno the Christian priest as 
doctor, a simple and less palatable pharmacy for the poor than 
for the rich, and gratuitous medical relief. 

Besides the temple schools and hospitals there was a secular 
organization of medical aid and relief. States appointed trained 
medical men as physicians, and provided for them medical 
establishments (larpeta, " large houses with large doors full of 
light ") for the reception of the sick, and for operations there 
were provided beds, instruments, medicines, &c. At these places 
also pupils were taught. A lower degree of medical establishment 
was to be found at the barbers' shops. Out-patients were seen 
at the iatreia. They were also visited at home. There were 
doctors' assistants and slave doctors. The latter, apparently, 
attended only slaves (Plato, Laws, 720); they do "a great 
service to the master of the house, who in this manner is relieved 
of the care of his slaves." It was a precept of Hippocrates that 
if a physician came to a town where there were sick poor, he 
should make it his first duty to attend to them; and the state 
physician attended gratuitously any one who applied to him. 
There were also travelling physicians going rounds to heal 
children and the poor. These methods continued, probably all 
of them, to Christian times. 

It has been argued that medical practice was introduced into 
Italy by the Greeks. But the evidence seems to show that there 
was a quite independent Latin tradition and school of medicine 
(Rene Brian, " Medecine dans le Latium et a. Rome," Rev. 
Archiol., 1885). In Rome there were consulting-rooms and 
dispensaries, and houses in which the sick were received. 
Hospitals are mentioned by Roman writers in the 1st century 
a.d. There were infirmaries — detached buildings — for sick 
slaves; and in Rome, as at Athens, there were slaves skilled in 
medicine. In Rome also for each regio there was a chief physician 
who attended to the poorer people. 

Slavery was so large a factor in pre-Christian and early 
Christian society that a word should be said on its relation 
„. v to charity. Indirectly it was a cause of poverty 

and social degradation. Thus in the case of Athens, 
with the achievement of maritime supremacy the number of 
slaves increased greatly. Manual arts were despised as un- 
becoming to a citizen, and the slaves carried on the larger part 
of the agricultural and industrial work of the community; and 
for a time — until after the Peloponnesian War (404 B.C.) — 
slavery was an economic success. But by degrees the slave, it 
would seem, dispossessed the citizen and rendered him unfit 
for competition. The position of the free artisan thus became 
akin to that of the slave (Arist. Pol. 1260 a, &c), and slavery 
became the industrial method of the country. Though Greeks, 
Romans, Jews and Christians spent money in ransoming 
individual slaves and also enfranchised many, no general abolition 
v. 28 



of slavery was possible. At last through economic changes the 
new status of coloni, who paid as rent part of the produce of the 
land they tilled, superseded the status of slavery (cf. above; 
the system turned to account by Peisistratus). But this result 
was only achieved much later, when a new society was being 
created, when the slaves from the slave prisons (ergastula) of 
Italy joined its invaders, and the slave-owner or master, as ^ne 
may suppose, unable any longer to work the gangs, let them 
become coloni. 

In Greece the feeling towards the slave became constantly 
more humane. Real slavery, Aristotle said, was a cast of mind, 
not a condition of life. The slave was not to be ordered about, 
but to be commanded and persuaded like a child. The master 
was under the strongest obligation to promote his welfare. In 
Rome, on the other hand, slavery continued to the end a massive, 
brutal, industrial force — a standing danger to the state. But 
alike in Greece and Rome the influence of slavery on the family 
was pernicious. The pompous array of domestic slaves, the 
transfer of motherly duties to slave nurses, the loss of that 
homely education which for most people comes only from the 
practical details of life — all this in later Greece and Italy, and 
far into Christian times, prevented that permanent invigoratioa 
and reform of family life which Jewish and Christian influence* 
might otherwise have produced. 

Part III. — Charity in Roman Times 

The words that suggest most clearly the Roman attitude 
towards what we call charity are liberalitas, beneficentia anil 
pietas. The two former are almost synonymous (Cicero, De 
Offic. i. 7, 14). Liberality lays stress on the mood — that of the 
liber, the freeborn, and so in a sense the independent and superior; 
beneficence on the deed and its purpose (Seneca, De Bene}, vi. 10). 
The conditions laid down by Cicero, following Panaetius the Stoic 
(185-112 B.C.) are three: not to do harm to him whom one would 
benefit, not to exceed one's means, and to have regard to merit. 
The character of the person whom we would benefit should bo 
considered, his feelings towards us, the interest of the community, 
our social relations in life, and services rendered in the past. 
The utility of the deed or gift graded according to social relation- 
ship and estimated largely from the point of view of ultimate 
advantage to the doer or donor seems to predominate in the 
general thought of the book, though (cf. Aristotle, Eth. viii. 3) 
the idea culminates in the completeness of friendship where " all 
things are in common." Pietas has the religious note which the 
other words lack, loving dutifulness to gods and home and 
country. Not " piety " only but " pity " derive from it: thus 
it comes near to our " charity." Both books, the De Officii* 
and the De Beneficiis, represent a Roman and Stoical revision 
of the problem of charity and, as in Stoicism generally, there 
seems to be a half-conscious attempt to feel the way to a new 
social standpoint from this side. 

As from the point of view of charity the well-being of the 
community depends upon the vigour of the deep-laid elemental 
life within it, so in passing to Roman times we consider 
the family first. The Roman family was unique in its tj^t!' 
completeness, and by some of its conditions the world 
has long been bound. The father alone had independent authority 
(sui juris), and so long as he lived all who were under his power — 
his wife, his sons, and their wives and children, and his unmarried 
daughters — could not acquire any property of their own. Failing 
father or husband, the unmarried daughters were placed under 
the guardianship of the nearest male members of the family. 
Thus the family, in the narrower sense in which we commonly 
use the word, as meaning descendants of a common father 01 
grandfather, was, as it were, a single point of growth in a larger 
organism, the gens, which consisted of all those who shared a 
common ancestry. 

The wife, though in law the property of her husband, held a 
position of honour and influence higher than that of the Greek 
wife, at least in historic times. She seems to come nearer to the 
ideal of Xenophon : " the good wife should be the mistress of every- 
thing within the house." ' A house of his own and the blessing 
of children appeared to the Roman citizen as the end and essence 



866 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



of life " (Mommsen, Hist. Rome). The obligation of the father to 
the sons was strongly felt. The family, past, present and future, 
was conceived as one and indivisible. Each succeeding generation 
had a right to the care of its predecessor in mind, body and estate. 
The training of the sons was distinctly a home and not a school 
training. Brought up by the father and constantly at his side, they 
learnt spontaneously the habits and traditions of the family. The 
home was their school. By their father they were introduced into 
public life, and though still remaining under his power during his 
lifetime, they became citizens, and their relation to the state was 
direct. The nation was a nation of yeomen. Only agriculture and 
warfare were considered honourable employments. The father and 
sons worked outdoors on the farm, employing little or no slave 
labour; the wife and daughters indoors at spinning and weaving. 
The drudgery of the household was done by domestic slaves. The 
father was the working head of a toiling household. Their chief 
gods were the same as those of early Greece — Zeus-Diovis and 
Hestia- Vesta, the goddess of the hearth and home. Out of this 
solid, compact family Roman society was built, and so long as the 
family was strong attachment to the service of the state was intense. 
The res publica, the common weal, the phrase and the thought, meet 
one at every turn; and never were citizens more patient and 
tenacious combatants on their country's behalf. The men were 
soldiers in an unpaid militia and were constantly engaged in wars 
with the rivals of Rome, leaving home and family for their cam- 
paigns and returning to them in the winter. With a hardness and 
closeness inconsistent with — indeed, opposed to — the charitable 
spirit, they combined the strength of character and sense of justice 
without which charity becomes sentimental and unsocial. In the 
development of the family, and thus, indirectly, in the development 
of charity, they stand for settled obligation and unrelenting duty. 

Under the protection of the head of the family " in dependent 
freedom " lived the clients. They were in a middle position 
between the freemen and the slaves. The relation between 
patron and client lasted for several generations; and there were 
many clients. Their number increased as state after state was 
conquered, and they formed the plebs, in Rome the plebs urbana, 
the lower orders of the city. 

In relation to our subject the important factors are the family, 
the plebs and slavery. 

Two processes were at work from an early date, before the first 
agrarian law (486 B.C.): the impoverishment of the plebs and 
the increase of slavery. The former led to the annona civica, or 
the free supply of corn to the citizens, and to the sp'ortula or the 
organized food-supply for poor clients, and ultimately to the 
alimentarii pueri, the maintenance of children of citizens by 
voluntary and imperial bounty. The latter (slavery) was the 
standing witness that, as self-support was undermined, the task 
of relief became hopeless, and the impoverished citizen, as the 
generations passed, became in turn dependant, beggar, pauper 
and slave. 

The great patrician families — " an oligarchy of warriors and 
slaveholders " — did not themselves engage in trade, but, entering 
on large speculations, employed as their agents their clients, 
liberlini or freedmen, and, later, their slaves. The constant 
wars, for which the soldiers of a local militia were eventually 
retained in permanent service, broke up the yeomanry and very 
greatly reduced their number. Whole families of citizens be- 
came impoverished, and their lands were in consequence sold to 
the large patrician families, members of which had acquired 
lucrative posts, or prospered in their speculations, and assumed 
possession of the larger part of the land, the ager publicus, 
acquired by the state through conquest. The city had always 
been the centre of the patrician families, the patron of the trading 
liberlini and other dependants. To it now flocked as well the 
metoeci, the resident aliens from the conquered states, and the 
poorer citizens, landless and unable for social reasons to turn to 
trade. There was thus in Rome a growing multitude of aliens, 
dispossessed yeomen and dependent clients. Simultaneously 
slavery increased very largely after the second Punic War 
(202 B.C.). Every conquest brought slaves into the market, for 
whom ready purchasers were found. The slaves took the place 
of the freemen upon the old family estates, and the free country 
people became extinct. Husbandry gave place to shepherding. 
The estates were thrown into large domains (latifundia) , managed 
by bailiffs and worked by slaves, often fettered or bound by 
chains, lodged in cells in houses of labour (ergastula), and some- 
times cared for when ill in infirmaries {valetudinaria). In Crete 



and Sparta the slaves toiled that the mass of citizens might have 
means and leisure. In Rome the slave class was organized for 
private and not for common ends. In Athens the citizens were 
paid for their services; at Rome no offices were paid. Thus 
the citizen at Rome was, one might almost say, forced into a 
dependence on the public corn, for as the large properties 
swallowed up the smaller, and the slave dispossessed the citizen, 
a population grew up unfit for rural toil, disinclined to live by 
methods that pride considered sordid, unstable and pleasure- 
loving, and yet a serious political factor, as dependent on the 
rich for their enjoyments as they were on their patrons or the 
prefect of the corn in the city for their food. 

It is estimated, from extremely difficult and uncertain data, that 
the population of Rome in the time of Augustus was about 1,200,000 
or 1,500,000. At that time the plebs urbana numbered 320,000. If 
this be multiplied by three, to give a low average of dependants, 
wives and children, this section of the population would number 
960,000. The remainder of the 1,500,000, 540,000, would consist of 
(a) slaves, and (b) those, the comparatively few, who would be 
members of the great clan-families (gentes). Proportionately to 
Attica this seems to allow too small a- population of slaves. But 
however this be, we may picture the population of Rome as consist- 
ing chiefly of a few patrician families ministered to by a very large 
number of slaves, and a populace of needy citizens, in whose ranks it 
was profitable for an outsider to find a place in order that he might 
participate in the advantages of state maintenance. 

In Rome the clan-family became the dominant political factor. 
As in England and elsewhere in the middle ages, and even in 
later times, the family, in these circumstances, assumes 
an influence which is out of harmony with the common The 
good. The social advantage of the family lies in its C Mca. 
self-maintenance, its home charities, and its moral 
and educational force, but if its separate interests are made 
supreme, it becomes uncharitable and unsocial. In Rome this 
was the line of development. The stronger clan-families crushed 
the weaker, and became the " oligarchy of warriors and slave-, 
holders." In the same spirit they possessed themselves of 
the ager publicus. The land obtained by the Romans by right 
of conquest was public. It belonged to the state, and to a yeo- 
man state it was the most valuable acquisition. At first part of 
it was sold and part was distributed to citizens without property 
and destitute (cf . Plutarch, Tib. Gracchus) . At a very early date, 
however, the patrician families acquired possession of much of 
it and held it at a low rental, and thus the natural outlet for a 
conquering farmer race was monopolized by one class, the richer 
clan-families. This injustice was in part remedied by the 
establishment of colonies, in which the emigrant citizens received 
sufficient portions of land. But these colonies were comparatively 
few, and after each conquest the rich families made large pur- 
chases, while the smaller proprietors, whose services as soldiers 
were constantly required, were unable to attend to their lands 
or to retain possession of them. To prevent this (367 B.C.) 
the Licinian law was passed, by which ownership in land was 
limited to 500 jugera, about 312 acres. This law was ignored, 
however, and more than two centuries later the evil, the double 
evil of the dispossession of the citizen farmer and of slavery, 
reached a crisis. The slave war broke out (134 B.C.) and (133 B.C.) 
Tiberius Gracchus made his attempt to re-endow the Roman 
citizens with the lands which they had acquired by conquest. 
He undertook what was essentially a charitable or philanthropic 
movement, which was set on foot too late. He had passed through 
Tuscany, and seen with resentment and pity the deserted 
country where the foreign slaves and barbarians were now 
the only shepherds and cultivators. He had been brought up 
under the influence of Greek Stoical thought, with which, almost 
in spite of itself, there was always associated an element of pity. 
The problem which he desired to solve, though larger in scale, 
was essentially the same as that with which Solon and Peisis- 
tratus had dealt successfully. At bottom the issue lay between 
private property, considered as the basis of family life for the 
great bulk of the community, with personal independence, and 
pauperism, with the annona or slavery. In 133 B.C. Tiberius 
Gracchus became tribune. To expand society on the lines of 
private property, he proposed the enforcement of " the Licinian 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



867 



Rogations "; the rich were to give up all beyond their rightful 
312 acres, and the remainder was to be distributed amongst 
the poor. The measure was carried by the use of arbitrary 
powers, and followed by the death of Tiberius at the hands of 
the patricians, the dominant clan-families. In 132 B.C. Caius 
Gracchus took up his brother's quarrel, and adopting, it would 
seem, a large scheme of political and social reform, proposed 
measures for emigration and for relief. The former failed; the 
latter apparently were acceptable to all parties, and continued 
in force long after C. Gracchus had been slain (121 B.C.). Already, 
at times, there had been sales of corn at cheap prices. Now, by 
the lex jrumentaria he gave the citizens — those who had the 
Roman franchise — the right to purchase corn every month from 
the public stores at rather more than half-price, 65 asses or about 
3.3d. the peck. This, the fatal alternative, was accepted, and 
henceforth there was no possibility of a reversion to better social 
conditions. 

The provisioning of Rome was, like that of Athens, a public 
service. There were public granaries (267 B.C.), and there was 
a quaestor to supervise the transit of the corn from Sicily and, 
later, from Spain and Africa, and an elaborate administration 
for collecting and conveying it. The lex Jrumentaria of Caius was 
followed by the lex Octavira, restricting the monthly sale to citizens 
settled in Rome, and to 5 modii (ij bushels). According to 
Polybius, the amount required for the maintenance of a slave 
was 5 modii a month, and of a soldier 4. Hence the allowance, 
if continued at this rate, was practically a maintenance. The 
lex Clodia (58 B.C.) made the corn gratuitous to the plebs 
urbana. 

Julius Caesar (5 B.C.) found the number of recipients to be 320,000, 
and reduced them to 150,000. In Augustus's time they rose to 
200,000. There seems, however, to be some confusion as to the 
numbers. From the Ancyranum Monumentum it appears that the 
plebs urbana who received Augustus's dole of 60 denarii (37s. 6d.) 
in his eighth consulship numbered 320,000. And (Suet. Caes. 41) 
it seems likely that in Caesar's time the lists of the recipients were 
settled by lot; further, probably only those whose property was 
worth less than 400,000 sesterces (£3541) were placed on the lists. 
It is probable, therefore, that 320,000 represents a maximum, 
reduced for purposes of administration to a smaller number (a) by 
a property test, and {b) by some kind of scrutiny. The names of 
those certified to receive the corn were exposed on bronze tablets. 
They were then called aerarii. They had tickets {tesserae) for pur- 
poses of identification, and they received the corn or bread in the 
time of the republic at the temple of Ceres, and afterwards at steps 
in the several (14) regions or wards of Rome. Hence the bread was 
called panis gradilis. In the middle of the 2nd century there were 
state bakeries, and wheaten loaves were baked for the people perhaps 
two or three times a week. In Aurelian's time (a.d. 270) the flour 
was of the best, and the weight of the loaf (one undo) was doubled. 
To the gifts of bread were added pork, oil and possibly wine; 
clothes also — white tunics with long sleeves — were distributed. 
In the period after Constantine (cf. Theod. Code, xiv. ig) three 
classes received the bread — the palace people {palatini), soldiers 
{militares), and the populace {populares). No distribution was per- 
mitted except at the steps. Each class had its own steps in the 
several wards. The bread at one step could not be transferred to 
another step. Each class had its own supply. There were arrange- 
ments for the exchange of stale loaves. Against misappropriation 
there were (law of Valentinian and Valens) severe penalties. If a 
public prosecutor {actor), a collector of the revenue {procurator), or 
the slave of a senator obtained bread with the cognizance of the 
clerk, or by bribery, the slave, if his master was not a party to the 
offence, had to serve in the state bakehouse in chains. If the master 
were involved, his house was confiscated. If others who had not the 
right obtained the bread, they and their property were placed at 
the service of the bakery {pistrini exercitio subjugari). If they were 
poor {pauperes) they were enslaved, and the delinquent client was 
to be put to death. 

The right to relief was dependent on the right of citizenship. 
Hence it became hereditary and passed from father to son. 
It was thus in the nature of a continuous endowed charity, like the 
well-known family charity of Smith, for instance, in which a 
large property was left to the testator's descendants, of whom 
it was said that as a result no Smith of that family could fail to be 
poor. But the annona civica was an endowed charity, affecting 
not a single family, but the whole population. Later, when 
Constantinople was founded, the right to relief was attached to 
new houses as a premium on building operations. Thus it 



belonged not to persons only, but also to houses, and became a 
species of " immovable " property, passing to the purchaser of 
the house or property, as would the adscript slaves. The bread 
followed the house {aedes sequantur annonae). If, on the transfer 
of a house, bread claims were lost owing to the absence of 
claimants, they were transferred to the treasury (fisci viribus 
vindicentur) . But the savage law of Valentinian, referred to 
above, shows to what lengths such a system was pushed. Early 
in its history the annona civica attracted many to Rome in the 
hope of living there without working. For the 400 years since 
the lex Clodia was enacted constant injury had been done by it, 
and now (a.d. 364) people had to be kept off the civic bounty as 
if they were birds of prey, and the very poor man (pauperrimus), 
who had no civic title to the food, if he obtained it by fraud, 
was enslaved. Thus, in spite of the abundant state relief, there 
had grown up a class of the very poor, the Gentiles of the state, 
who were outside the sphere of its ministrations. The annona 
civica was introduced not only into Constantinople, but also 
into Alexandria, with baleful results, and into Antioch. When 
Constantinople was founded the corn-ships of Africa sailed there 
instead of to Rome. On charitable relief, as we shall see, the 
annona has had a long-continued and fatal influence. 

1. If the government considers itself responsible for provisioning 
the people it must fix the price of necessaries, and to meet distress 
or popular clamour it will lower the price. It becomes thus a large 
relief society for the supply of corn. In a time of distress, when the 
corn laws were a matter of moment in England, a similar system was 
adopted in the well-known Speenhamland scale (1795), by which a 
larger or lesser allowance was given to a family according to its size 
and the prevailing price of corn. A maintenance was thus provided 
for the able-bodied and their families, at least in part, without any 
equivalent in labour; though in England labour was demanded of 
the applicant, and work was done more or less perfunctorily. In 
amount the Roman dole seems to have been equivalent to the 
allowance provided for a slave, but the citizen received it without 
having to do any labour task. He received it as a statutory right. 
There could hardly be a more effective method for degrading his 
manhood and denaturalizing his family. He was also a voter, and 
the alms appealed to his weakness and indolence; and the fear of 
displeasing him and losing his vote kept him, socially, master of the 
situation, to his own ruin. If in England now relief were given to 
able-bodied persons who retained their votes, this evil would also 
attach to it. 

2. The system obliged the hard-working to maintain the idlers, 
while it continually increased their number. The needy teacher 
in Juvenal, instead of a fee, is put off with a tessera, to which, not 
being a citizen, he has no right. " The foreign reapers," it was said, 
" filled Rome's belly and left Rome free for the stage and the circus." 
The freeman had become a slave — " stupid and drowsy, to whom 
days of ease had become habitual, the games, the circus, the theatre, 
dice, eating-houses and brothels." Here are all the marks of a 
degraded pauperism. 

3. The system led the way to an ever more extensive slavery. 
The man who could not live on his dole and other scrapings had the 
alternative of becoming a slave. " Better have a good master than 
live so distressfully "; and " If I were free I should live at my own 
risk; now I live at yours," are the expressions suggestive of the 
natural temptations of slavery in these conditions. The escaped 
slaves returned to " their manger." The annona did not prevent 
destitution. It was a half-way house to slavery. 

4. The effect on agriculture, and proportionally on commerce 
generally, was ruinous. The largest corn-market, Rome, was with- 
drawn from the trade — the market to which all the necessaries of 
life would naturally have gravitated; and the supply of corn was 
placed in the hands of producers at a few centres where it could be 
grown most cheaply — Sicily, Spain and Africa. The Italian farmer 
had to turn his attention to other produce — the cultivation of the 
olive and the vine, and cattle and pig rearing. The greater the ex- 
tension of the system the more impossible was the regeneration of 
Rome. The Roman citizen might well say that he was out of 
work, for, so far as the land was concerned, the means of obtaining 
a living were placed out of his reach. While not yet unfitted for 
the country by life in the town, he at least could not " return to the 
land." 

5. The method was the outcome of distress and political hopeless- 
ness. Yet the rich also adopted it in distributing their private 
largess. Cicero {De Off. ii. 16) writes as though he recognized its 
evil; but though he expresses his disapprobation of the popular 
shows upon which the aediles spent large sums, he argues that some- 
thing must be done _" if the people demand it, and if good men, 
though they do not wish it, assent to it." Thus in a guarded manner 
he approves a distribution of food— a free breakfast in the streets 
of Rome. One bad result of the annona was that it encouraged a 
special and ruinous form of charitable munificence. . 



868 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



The sportuld was a form of charity corresponding to the annona 
civica. Charity and poor relief run on parallel lines, and when 
the one is administered without discrimination, little 
sportula. discrimination will usually be exercised in the other. 
It was the charity of the patron of the chiefs of the 
clan-iamilies to their clients. Between them it was natural that 
a relation, partly hospitable, partly charitable, should grow up. 
The clients who attended the patron at his house were invited 
to dine at his table. The patron, as Juvenal describes him, 
dined luxuriously and in solitary grandeur, while the guests put 
up with what they could get; or, as was usual under the empire, 
instead of the dinner (coena recta) a present of food was given at 
the outer vestibule of the house to clients who brought with them 
baskets (sportula) to carry off their food, or even charcoal stoves 
to keep it warm. There was endless trickery. The patron (or 
almoner who acted for him) tried to identify the applicant, 
fearing lest he might get the dole under a false name; and at each 
mansion was kept a list of persons, male and female, entitled to 
receive the allowance. " The pilferer grabs the dole " (sportulam 
furunculus capiat) was a proverb. The sportula was a charity 
sufficiently important for state regulation. Nero (a.d. 54) 
reduced it to a payment in money (100 quadrantes, about is.). 
Domitian (a.d. 81) restored the custom of giving food. Subse- 
quently both practices — gifts in money and in food — appear to 
have been continued. 

In these conditions the Roman family steadily decayed. Its 
"old discipline" was neglected; and Tacitus (a.d. 75), in his 
dialogue on Oratory, wrote (c. xxviii.) what might be called its 
epitaph. Of the general decline the laws of Caesar and Augustus 
to encourage marriage and to reward the parents of large families 
are sufficient evidence. 

The destruction of the working-class family must have been 
finally achieved by the imperial control of the collegia. 

In old Rome there were corporations of craftsmen for common 
worship, and for the maintenance of the traditions of the craft. 
The These corporations were ruined by slave labour, and 

collegia. becoming secret societies, in the time of Augustus were 
suppressed. Subsequently they were reorganized, and 
gave scope for much friendliness. They often existed in connexion 
with some great house, whose chief was their patron and whose 
household gods they worshipped. The gilds of the poor, or rather 
of the lower orders {collegia tenuiorum), consisted of artisans and 
others, and slaves also, who paid monthly contributions to a common 
fund to meet the expenses of worship, common meals, and funerals. 
They were not in Italy, it would seem (J. P. Waltzing, £tudes histor. 
sur les corporations professionnelles chez les Romains, i. 145, 300), 
though they may have been in Asia Minor and elsewhere, societies 
for mutual help generally. They were chiefly funeral benefit societies. 
Under Severus (a.d. 192) the collegia were extended and more 
closely organized as industrial bodies. They were protected and 
controlled, as in England in the 15th century the municipalities 
affected the cause of the craft gilds and ended by controlling them. 
Industrial disorder was thus prevented; the government were able 
to provide the supplies required in Rome and the large cities with 
less risk and uncertainty; and the workmen employed in trade, 
especially the carrying trade, became almost slaves. In the 2nd 
century, and until the invasions, there were three groups of collegia: 
(1) those engaged in various state manufactures; (2) those engaged 
in the provision trade; and (3) the free trades, which gradually 
lapsed into a kind of slavery. If the members of these gilds fled they 
were brought back by force. Parents had to keep to the trade to 
which they belonged; their children had to succeed them in it. 
A slave caste indeed had been formed of the once free workmen. 

As a charitable protest against the destruction of children, 

in the midst of a broken family life, and increasing dependence 

and poverty, a special institution was founded (to use 

meatartt. *-^ e Scottish word) for the " alimentation " of the 

children of citizens, at first by voluntary charity and 

afterwards by imperial bounty. 

Nerva and Trajan adopted the plan. Pliny (Ep. vii. 18) refers 
to it. There was a desire to give more lasting and certain help 
than an allotment of food to parents. A list of children, whose 
names were on the relief tables at Rome, was accordingly drawn 
up, and a special service for their maintenance established. Two 
instances are recorded in inscriptions — one at Veleia, one at Bene- 
ventum. The emperor lent money for the purpose at a low per- 
centage — 2 J or 5 % as against the usual 10 or 12. At Veleia his loan 
amounted to 1,044,000 sesterces — about £8156, and 51 of the local 
landed proprietors mortgaged land, valued at 13 or 14 million 



sesterces, as security for the debt. The interest on the emperor's 
money at 5 % was paid into the municipal treasury, and out of it the 
children were relieved. The figures seem small; at Veleia 300 
children were assisted, of whom 36 were girls. The annual interest 
at 5 % amounted to nearly £408, which divided among 300 gives 
about 27s. a head. The figures suggest that the money served as a 
charitable supplementation of the citizens' relief in direct aid of 
the children. Apparently the scheme was widely adopted. Curators 
of high position were the patrons; procurators acted as inspectors 
over large areas; and quaestores alimentarii undertook the local 
management. Antoninus Pius (a.d. 138), and Marcus Aurelius 
(a.d. 160), and subsequently Severus (a.d. 192) established these 
bursaries for children in the names of their wives. In the 3rd century 
the system fell into disorder. There were large arrears of payments, 
and in the military anarchy that ensued it came to an end. It is of 
special interest, as indicating a new feeling of responsibility towards 
children akin to the humane Stoicism of the Antonines, and an 
attempt to found, apart from temples or collegia, what was in the 
nature of a public endowed charity. 

Part IV. — Jewish and Christian Charity 
With Christianity two elements came into fusion, the Jewish 
and the Greco-Roman. To trace this fusion and its results it is 
necessary to describe the Jewish system of charity, and to com- 
pare it with that of the early Christian church, to note the theory 
of love or friendship in Aristotle as representing Greek thought, 
and of charity in St Paul as representing Christian thought, and 
to mark the Roman influences which moulded the administration 
of Ambrose and Gregory and Western Christianity generally. 

In the early history of the Hebrews we find the family, clan- 
family and tribe. With the Exodus (probably about 1390 B.C.) 
comes the law of Moses (cf . Kittel, Hist, of the Hebrews, 
Eng. trans, i. 244), the central and permanent element charity. 
of Jewish thought. We may compare it to the 
" commandments " of Hesiod. There is the recognition of the 
family and its obligations: " Honour thy father and mother "; 
and honour included help and support. There is also the law 
essential to family unity: " Thou shalt not commit adultery "; 
and as to property there is imposed the regulation of desire: 
" Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house." Maimonides 
(A.D.1135), true to the old conception of the family (x. 16), calls 
the support of adult children, " after one is exempt from support- 
ing them," and the support of a father or mother by a child, 
" great acts of charity; since kindred are entitled to the first 
consideration. " To relief of the stranger the Decalogue makes no 
reference, but in the Hebraic laws it is constantly pressed; and 
the Levitical law (xix. 18) goes further. It first applies a new 
standard to social life: " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
self." This thought is the outcome of a deep ethical fervour — 
the element which the Jews brought into the work of charity. 
In Judges and Joshua, the " Homeric " books of the Old Testa- 
ment, the Hebrews appear as a passionately fierce and cruel 
people. Subsequently against their oppression of the poor the 
prophets protested with a vehemence as great as the evil was 
intense; and their denunciations remained part of the national 
literature, a standing argument that life without charity is 
nothing worth. Thus schooled and afterwards tutored into 
discipline by the tribulation of the exile (587 B.C.), they turned 
their fierceness into a zeal, which, as their literature shows, was 
as fervent in ethics as it was in religion and ceremonial. In the 
services at the synagogues, which supplemented and afterwards 
took the place of the Temple, the Commandments were constantly 
repeated and the Law and the Prophets read; and as the Jews 
of the Dispersion increased in number, and especially after the 
destruction of Jerusalem, the synagogues became centres of social 
and charitable co-operation. Thus rightly would a Jewish rabbi 
say, " On three things the world is stayed: on the Thorah (or 
the law), and on worship, and on the bestowal of kindness." 
Also there was on the charitable side an indefinite power of 
expansion. Rigid in its ceremonial, there it was free. Within 
the nation, as the Prophets, and after the exile, as the Psalms 
show, there was the hope of a universal religion, and with it of a 
universally recognized charity. St Paul accentuated the pro- 
hibitive side of the law and protested against it; but, even while 
he 'was so doing, stimulated by the Jewish discipline, he was 
moving unfettered towards new conceptions of charity and life — 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



869 



charity as the central word of the Christian life, and life as a 
participation in a higher existence — the " body of Christ." 

To mark the line of development, we could compare — 1. The 
family among the Jews and in the early Christian church; 
2. The sources of relief and the tithe, the treatment of the poor 
and their aid, and the assistance of special classes of poor; 3. 
The care of strangers; and, lastly, we would consider the 
theory of almsgiving, friendship or love, and charity. 

1. As elsewhere, property is the basis of the family. Wife and 
children are the property of the father. But the wife is held 
in high respect. In the post-exilian period the virtuous wife 
is represented as laborious as a Roman matron, a " lady bounti- 
ful" to the poor, and to her husband wife and friend alike. 
Monogamy without concubinage is now the rule — is taken for 
granted as right. There is no " exposure of children." The 
slaves are kindly treated, as servants rather than slaves — though 
in Roman times and afterwards the Jews were great slave- 
traders. The household is not allowed to eat the bread of 
idleness. " Six days," it was said, " must [not mayest] thou 
work." " Labour, if poor; but find work, if rich." " Whoever 
does not teach his son business or work, teaches him robbery." 
In Job xxxi., a chapter which has been called " an inventory of 
late Old Testament morality," we find the family life developed 
side by side with the life of charity. In turn are mentioned the 
relief of the widow, the fatherless and the stranger — the classifi- 
cation of dependents in the Christian church ; and the whole 
chapter is a justification of the homely charities of a good family. 
" The Jewish religion, more especially in the old and orthodox 
form, is essentially a family religion " (C. G. Montefiore, Religion 
of Ancient Hebrews). 

In the early documents of the Church the fifth commandment 
is made the basis of family life (cf. Eph. vi. 1; A post. Const. 
ii. 32, iv. n — if we take the first six books of the Apost. Const. 
as a composite production before a.d. 300, representing Judaeo- 
Christian or Eastern church thought). But two points are 
prominent. Duties are insisted on as reciprocal (cf. especially 
St Paul's Epistles), as, e.g. between husband and wife, parent 
and child, master and servant. Charity is mutual; the family 
is a circle of reciprocal duties and charities. This implies a 
principle of the greatest importance in relation to the social 
utility of charity. Further reference will be made to it later. 
Next the " thou shalt love thy neighbour '" is translated from 
its position as one among many sayings to the chief place as a 
rule of life. In the Didache or Teaching of the Twelve Apostles 
(Jewish-Christian, c. 90-120 a.d.) the first commandment in " the 
way of life " is adapted from St Matthew's Gospel thus: " First, 
thou shalt love God who made thee; secondly, thy neighbour 
as thyself; and all things whatsoever thou wouldst not have 
done to thee, neither do thou to another." A principle is thus 
applied which touches all social relations in which the " self " 
can be made the standard of judgment. Of this also later. To 
touch on other points of comparison: the earlier documents 
seem to ring with a reiterated cry for a purer family life (cf. the 
second, the negative, group of commandments in the Didache, 
and the judgment of the apocalyptic writings, such as the 
Revelations of Peter, &c); and, sharing the Jewish feeling, the 
riper conscience of the Christian community formulates and 
accepts the injunction to preserve infant life at every stage. 
It advocates, indeed, the Jewish purity of family life with a 
missionary fervour, and it makes of it a condition of church 
membership. The Jewish rule of labour is enforced (A p. Const. 
ii. 63). If a stranger settle (Didache, xii. 3) among the brother- 
hood, " let him work and eat." And the father (Constit. iv. n) 
is to teach the children " such trades as are agreeable and 
suitable to their need." And the charities to the widow, the 
fatherless, are organized on Jewish lines. 

2. The sources of relief among the Jews were the three gifts of 
corn: (1) the corners of the field (cf. Lev. xix. &c), amounting 
to a sixtieth part of it; (2) the gleanings, a definite minimum 
dropped in the process of reaping (Maimonides, Laws of the 
Hebrews relating to the Poor, iv. 1); (3) corn overlooked and 
left behind. So it was with the grapes and with all crops that 



were harvested, as opposed, e.g. to figs, that were gathered from 
time to time. These gifts were divisible three times in the day, 
so as to suit the convenience of the poor (Maim. ii. 17), and the 
poor had a right to them. They are indeed a poor-rate paid in 
kind such as in early times would naturally spring up among an 
agricultural people. Another gift " out of the seed of the 
earth," is the tithe. In the post-exilian period the septenniad 
was in force. Each year a fiftieth part of the produce (Maim. 
vi. 2, and Deut. xviii. 4) was given to the priest (the class which 
in the Jewish state was supported by the community). Of the 
remainder one-tenth went to the Levite, and one-tenth in three 
years of the septennium was retained for pilgrimage to Jerusalem, 
in two given to the poor. In the seventh year " all things were 
in common." Supplementing these gifts were alms to all who 
asked; " and he who gave less than a tenth of his means was a 
man of evil eye " (Maim. vii. 5). All were to give alms, even 
the poor themselves who were in receipt of relief. Refusal 
might be punished with stripes at the hand of the Sanhedrim. 
At the Temple alms for distribution to the worthy poor were 
placed by worshippers in the cell of silence; and it is said that 
in Palestine at meal times the table was open to all comers. As 
the synagogues extended, and possibly after the fall of Jerusalem 
(a.d. 70) , the collections of alms was further systematized. There 
were two collections. In each city alms of the box or chest 
(kupha) were collected for the poor of the city on each Sabbath 
eve (later, monthly or thrice a year), and distributed in money 
or food for seven days. Two collected, three distributed. Three 
others gathered and distributed daily alms of the basket 
(tamchui). These were for strangers and wayfarers — casual 
relief " for the poor of the whole world." In the Jewish syna- 
gogue community from early times the president (parnass) and 
treasurer were elected annually with seven heads of the con- 
gregation (see Abraham's Jewish Life in the Middle Ages, p. 54), 
and sometimes special officers for the care of the poor. A staff 
of almoners was thus forthcoming. In addition to these collec- 
tions were the pruta given to the poor before prayers (Maim. x. 
15), and moneys gathered to help particular cases (cf. Jewish 
Life, p. 3 2 2) by circular letter. There were also gifts at marriages 
and funerals; and fines imposed for breach of the communal 
ordinances were reserved for the poor. The distinctive feature 
of the Jewish charity was the belief that " the poor would not 
cease out of the land," and that therefore on charitable grounds 
a permanent provision should be made for them — a poor-rate, in 
fact, subject to stripes and distraint, if necessary (Maim. vii. 10; 
and generally cf. articles on " Alms " and " Charity " in the 
Jewish Encyclopaedia). 

If we compare this with the early church we find the following 
sources of relief: (1) The Eucharistic offerings, some consumed at 
the time, some carried home, some reserved for the absent (see 
Hatch, Early Church, p. 40). The ministration, like the Eucharist, 
was connected with the love feast, and was at first daily (Acts ii. 
42, vi. 1, and the Didache). (2) Freewill offerings and first-fruits 
and voluntary tithes {Ap. Con. ii. 25) brought to the bishop and 
used for the poor — orphans, widows, the afflicted and strangers 
in distress, and for the clergy, deaconesses, &c. (3) Collections 
in churches on Sundays and week-days, alms-boxes and gifts to 
the poor by worshippers as they entered church; also collections 
for special purposes (cf. for Christians at Jerusalem). Apart from 
" the corners," &c, the sources of relief in the Christian and Jewish 
churches are the same. The separate Jewish tithe for the poor, 
which (Maim. vi. 11, 13) might be used in part by the donor as 
personal charity, disappears. A voluntary tithe remains, in part 
used for the poor. We do not hear of stripes and distraint, but in 
both bodies there is a penitential system and excommunication 
(cf. Jewish Life, p. 52), and in both a settlement of disputes within 
the body (Clem. Horn. iii. 67). In both, too, there is the abundant 
alms provided in the belief of the permanence of poverty and the duty 
of giving to all who ask. As to administration in the early church 
(Acts vi. 3), we find seven deacons, the number of the local Jewish 
council; and later there were in Rome seven ecclesiastical relief 
districts, each in charge of a deacon. The deacon acted as the 
minister of the bishop (Ep. Clem, to Jam. xii.), reporting to him 
and giving as he dictated (Ap. Con. ii. 30, 31). He at first combined 
disciplinary powers with charitable. The presbyters also (Polycarp, 
Ad Phil. 6, a.d. 69-155), forming (Hatch, p. 69) a kind of bishop's 
council, visited the sick, &c. The bishop was president and treasurer. 
The bishop was thus the trustee of the poor. By reason of the 
churches' care of orphans, responsibilities of trusteeship also 



870 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



devolved on him. The temples were in pagan times depositories of 
money. Probably the churches were also. 

3. Great stress is laid by the Jews on the duty of gentleness 
to the poor (Maim. x. 5). The woman was to have first attention 
(Maim. vi. 13). If the applicant was hungry he was to be fed, 
and then examined to learn whether he was a deceiver (Maim, 
vii. 6). Assistance was to be given according to the want — ■ 
clothes, household things, a wife or a husband — and according 
to the poor man's station in life. For widows and orphans the 
" gleanings " were left. Both are the recognized objects of 
charity (Maim. x. 16, 17). " The poor and the orphan were to be 
employed in domestic affairs in preference to servants." The 
dower was a constant form of help. The ransoming of slaves 
took precedence of relief to the poor. The highest degree of 
alms-deed (Maim. x. 7) was " to yield support to him who is 
cast down, either by means of gifts, or by loan, or by commerce, 
or by procuring for him traffic with others. Thus his hand 
becometh strengthened, exempt from the necessity of soliciting 
succour from any created being." 

If we compare the Christian methods we find but slight 
difference. The absoluteness of " Give to him that asketh " 
is in the Didache checked by the " Woe to him that receives: 
for if any receives having need, he shall be guiltless, but he that 
has no need shall give account, . . . and coming into distress 
... he shall not come out thence till he hath paid the last 
farthing." It is the duty of the bishop to know who is most 
worthy of assistance (Ap. Con. ii. 3, 4); and " if any one is in 
want by gluttony, drunkenness, or idleness, he does not deserve 
assistance, or to be esteemed a member of the church." The 
widow assumes the position not only of a recipient of alms, but 
a church worker. Some were a private charge, some were 
maintained by the church. The recognized " widow " was 
maintained: she was to be sixty years of age (cf. 1 Tim. v. 9 and 
A p. Con. iii. 1), and was sometimes tempted to become a bedes- 
woman and gossipy pauper, if one may judge from the texts. 
Remarriage was not approved. Orphans were provided for by 
members of the churches. The virgins formed another class, as, 
contrary to the earlier feeling, marriage came to be held a state 
of lesser sanctity. They too seem to have been also, in part at 
least, church workers. Thus round the churches grew up new 
groups of recognized dependents; but the older theory of charity 
was broad and practical — akin to that of Maimonides. " Love 
all your brethren, performing to orphans the part of parents, to 
widows that of husbands, affording them sustenance with all 
kindliness, arranging marriages for those who are in their prime, 
and for those who are without a profession the means of necessary 
support through employment: giving work to the artificer and 
alms to the incapable " (Ep. Clem, to James viii.). 

4. The Jews in pre-Christian and Talmudic times supported 
the stranger or wayfarer by the distribution of food (tamchui) ; 
the strangers were lodged in private houses, and there were inns 
provided at which no money was taken (cf. Jewish Life, p. 314). 
Subsequently, besides these methods, special societies were 
formed " for the entertainment of the resident poor and of 
strangers." There were commendatory letters also. These con- 
ditions prevailed in the Christian church also. The Xenodocheion, 
coming by direct succession alike from Jewish and Greek pre- 
cedents, was the first form of Christian hospital both for strangers 
and for members of the Christian churches. In the Christian 
community the endowment charity comes into existence in the 
4th century, among the Jews not till the 13th. The charities 
of the synagogue without separate societies sufficed. 

We may now compare the conceptions of Jews and Christians 
on charity with those of the Greeks. There are two chief ex- 
areek ponents of the diverse views — Aristotle and St Paul; 
Jewish for to simplify the issues we refer to them only. 
and Thoughts such as Aristotle's, recast by the Stoic 

Christian p anae tius (185-112 B.C.), and used by Cicero in his De 
thong . officiis, became in the hands of St Ambrose arguments 
for the direction of the clergy in the founding of the medieval 
church; and in the 13th century Aristotle reasserts his influence 
through such leaders of medieval thought as St Thomas Aquinas. 



St Paul's chapters on charity, not fully appreciated and under- 
stood, one is inclined to think, have perhaps more than any other 
words prevented an absolute lapse into the materialism of alms- 
giving. After him we think of St Francis, the greatest of a group 
of men who, seeking reality in life, revived charity; but to the 
theory of charity it might almost be said that since Aristotle and 
St Paul nothing has been added until we come to the economic 
and moral issues which Dr Chalmers explained and illustrated. 

The problem turns on the conception (1) of purpose, (2) of the 
self, and (3) of charity, love or friendship as an active force in 
social life. To the Greek, or at least to Greek philosophic 
thought, purpose was the measure of goodness. To have no 
purpose was, so far as the particular act was concerned, to be 
simply irrational: and the less definite the purpose the more 
irrational the act. This conception of purpose was the touch- 
stone of family and social life, and of the civic life also. In no 
sphere could goodness be irrational. To say that it was without 
purpose was to say that it was without reality. So far as the 
actor was concerned, the main purpose of right action was the 
good of the soul (i/'ux 1 ?) 5 and by the soul was. meant the better 
self, " the ruling part " acting in harmony with every faculty 
and function of the man. With faculties constantly trained and 
developed, a higher life was gradually developed in the soul. 
We are thus, it might be said, what we become. The gates of 
the higher life are within us. The issue is whether we will open 
them and pass in. 

Consistent with this is the social purpose. Love or friendship 
is not conceived by Aristotle except in relation to social life. 
Society is based on an interchange of services. This interchange 
in one series of acts we call justice; in another friendship or 
love. A man cannot be just unless he has acquired a certain 
character or habit of mind;1 and hence no just man will act 
without knowledge, previous deliberation and definite purpose. 
So also will a friend fulfil these conditions in his acts of love or 
friendship. In the love existing between good men there is 
continuance and equality of service; but in the case of bene- 
factor and benefited, in deeds of charity, in fact, there is no such 
equality. The satisfaction is on one side but often not on the 
other. (The dilemma is one that is pressed, though not satisfac- 
torily, in Cicero and Seneca.) The reason for this will be found, 
Aristotle suggests, in the feeling of satisfaction which men 
experience in action. We realize ourselves in our deeds — throw 
ourselves into them, as people say; and this is happiness. 
What we make we like: it is part of us. On the other hand, 
in the person benefited there may be no corresponding action, 
and in so far as there is not, there is no exchange of service or the 
contentment that arises from it. The " self " of the recipient 
is not drawn out. On the contrary, he may be made worse, 
and feel the uneasiness and discontent that result from this. 
In truth, to complete Aristotle's argument, the good deed on one 
side, as it represents the best self of the benefactor, should on the 
other side draw out the best self of the person benefited. And 
where there is not ultimately this result, there is not effective 
friendship or charity, and consequently there is no personal or 
social satisfaction. The point may be pushed somewhat further. 
In recent developments of charitable work the term " friendly 
visitor " is applied to persons who endeavour to help families 
in distress on the lines of associated charity. It represents the 
work of charity in one definite light. So far as the relation is 
mutual, it cannot at the outset be said to exist. The charitable 
friend wishes to befriend another; -but at first there may be no 
reciprocal feeling of friendship on the other's part — indeed, 
such a feeling may never be created. The effort to reciprocate 
kindness by becoming what the friend desires may be too painful 
to make. Or the two may be on different planes, one not really 
befriending, but giving without intelligence, the other not really 
endeavouring to change his nature, but receiving help solely 
with a view to immediate advantage. The would-be befriender 
may begin " despairing of no man," expecting nothing in return; 
but if, in fact, there is never any kind of return, the friendship 
actually fails of its purpose, and the " friend's " satisfaction is 
lost, except in that he may " have loved much." In any case, 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



871 



according to this theory friendship, love and charity represent 
the mood from which spring social acts, the value of which will 
depend on the knowledge, deliberation and purpose with which 
they are done, and accordingly as they acquire value on this 
account will they give lasting satisfaction to both parties. 

St Paul's position is different. He seems at first sight to ignore 
the state and social life. He lays stress on motive force rather 
than on purpose. He speaks as an outsider to the state, though 
technically a citizen. His mind assumes towards it the external 
Judaic position, as though he belonged to a society of settlers 
(irdpoocot) . Also, as he expects the millennium, social life and 
its needs are not uppermost in his thoughts. He considers charity 
in relation to a community of fellow-believers — drawn together 
in congregations. His theory springs from this social base, though 
it over-arches life itself. He is intent on creating a spiritual 
association. He conceives of the spirit (irvevixa) as " an imma- 
terial personality." It transcends the soul (\pvxh), and is the 
Christ life, the ideal and spiritual life. Christians participate 
in it, and they thus become part of " the body of Christ," 
which exists by virtue of love — love akin to the ideal life, £71x70}. 
The word represents the love that is instinct with reverence, 
and not love (4>i\la) which may have in it some quality of passion. 
This love is the life of " the body of Christ." Therefore no act 
done without it is a living act — but, on the contrary, must be 
dead — an act in which no part of the ideal life is blended. On the 
individual act or the purpose no stress is laid. It is assumed that 
love, because it is of this intense and exalted type, will find the 
true purpose in the particular act. And, when the expectation of 
the millennium passed away, the theory of this ideal charity 
remained as a motive force available for whatever new conditions, 
spiritual or social, might arise. Nevertheless, no sooner does this 
charity touch social conditions, than the necessity asserts itself 
of submitting to the limitations which knowledge, deliberation 
and purpose impose. This view had been depreciated or ignored 
by Christians, who have been content to rely upon the strength 
of their motives, or perhaps have not realized what the Greeks 
understood, that society was a natural organism (Arist. Pol. 
1253A), which develops, fails or prospers in accordance with 
definite laws. Hence endless failure in spite of some success. 
For love, whether we idealize it as kyairr] or consider it a social 
instinct as 4>CKla, cannot be love at all unless it quickens the 
intelligence as much as it animates the will. It cannot, except 
by some confusion of thought, be held to justify the indulgence 
of emotion irrespective of moral and social results. Yet, though 
this fatal error may have dominated thought for a long time, it 
is hardly possible to attribute it to St Paul's theory of charity 
when the very practical nature of Judaism and early Christianity 
is considered. In his view the misunderstanding could not arise. 
And to create a world or " body " of men and women linked to- 
gether by love, even though it be outside the normal life of the 
community, was to create a new form of religious organization, 
and to achieve for it (so far as it was achieved) what, mutatis 
mutandis, Aristotle held to be the indispensable condition of 
social life, friendship (<£iXta), " the greatest good of states," 
for " Socrates and all the world declare," he wrote, that " the 
unity of the state " is " created by friendship " (Arist. Pol. ii. 
1262 b). 

It should, however, be considered to what extent charity in the 
Christian church was devoid of social purpose. (1) The Jewish con- 
ceptions of charity passed, one might almost say, in their complete- 
ness into the Christian church. Prayer, the petition and the purging 
of the mind, fasting, the humiliation of the body, and alms, as part of 
the same discipline, the submissive renunciation of possessions— all 
these formed part of the discipline that was to create the religious 
mood. Alms henceforth become a definite part of the religious 
discipline and service. Humility and poverty hereafter appear as 
yoked virtues, and many problems of charity are raised in regard to 
them. The non-Christian no less than the Christian world appreciated 
more and more the need of self-discipline (4o-k7)ctis) ; and it seems 
as though in the first two centuries A.D. those who may have thought 
of reinvigorating society searched for the remedy rather in the 
preaching and practice of temperance than in the application of 
ideas that were the outcome of the observation of social or economic 
conditions. Having no object of this kind as its mark, almsgiving 
took the place of charity, and, as Christianity triumphed, the family 



life, instead of reviving, continued to decay, while the virtues of 
the discipline of the body, considered apart from social life, became 
an end in themselves, and it was desired rather to annihilate instinct 
than to control it. Possibly this was a necessary phase in a move- 
ment of progress, but however that be, charity, as St Paul understood 
it, had in it no part. (2) But the evil went farther. Jewish religious 
philosophy is not elaborated as a consistent whole by any one writer. 
It is rather a miscellany of maxims; and again and again, as in much 
religious thought, side issues assume the principal place. The 
direct effect of the charitable act, or almsgiving, is ignored. Many 
thoughts and motives are blended. The Jews spoke of the poor 
as the means of the rich man's salvation. St Chrysostom empha- 
sizes this: " If there were no poor, the greater part of your sins 
would not be removed: they are the healers of your wounds" 
(Horn, xiv,, Timothy, &c, St Cyprian on works and alms). Alms 
are the medicine of sin. And the same thought is worked into the 
penitential system. Augustine speaks of " penance such as fasting, 
almsgiving and prayer for breaches of the Decalogue " (Reichel, 
Manual of Canon Law, p. 23) ; and many other references might be 
cited. " Pecuniary penances (lb. 154), in so far as they were re- 
laxations of, or substitutes for, bodily penances, were permitted 
because of the greater good thereby accruing to others " (and in 
this case they were — a.d. 1284 — legally enforceable under English 
statute law). The penitential system takes for granted that the 
almsgiving is good for others and puts a premium on it, even though in 
fact it were done, not with any definite object, but really for the 
good of the penitent. Thus almsgiving becomes detached from 
charity on the one side and from social good on the other. Still further 
is it vulgarized by another confusion of thought. It is considered 
that the alms are paid to the credit of the giver, and are realized 
as such by him in the after- world; or even that by alms present 
prosperity may be obtained, or at least evil accident avoided. Thus 
motives were blended, as indeed they now are, with the result that 
the gift assumed a greater importance than the charity, by which 
alone the gift should have been sanctified, and its actual effect 
was habitually overlooked or treated as only partially relevant. 

(3) The Christian maxim of "loving(dYd?nj) one's neighbour as one's 
self " sets a standard of charity. Its relations are idealized accord- 
ing as the " self " is understood; and thus the good self becomes 
the measure of charity. In this sense, the nobler the self the com- 
pleter the charity; and the charity of the best men, men who 
love and understand their neighbours best, having regard to their 
chief good, is the best, the most effectual charity. Further, if in 
what we consider " best " we give but a lesser place to social purpose 
or even allow it no place at all, our "self" will have no sufficient 
social aim and our charity little or no social result. For this " self," 
however, religion has substituted not St Paul's conception of the 
spirit (irvevtia), but a soul, conceived as endowed with a substantial 
nature, able to enjoy and suffer quasi-material rewards and punish- 
ments in the after-life; and in so far as the safeguard of this soul 
by good deeds or almsgiving has become a paramount object, the 
purpose of charitable action has been translated from the actual 
world to another sphere. Thus, as we have seen, the aid of the poor 
has been considered not an object in itself, but as a means by which 
the almsgiver effects his own ulterior purpose and " makes God his 
debtor." The problem thus handled raises the question of reward 
and also of punishment. Properly, from the point of view of charity, 
both are excluded. We may indeed act from a complexity of 
motives and expect a complexity of rewards, and undoubtedly a 
good act does refresh the " self," and may as a result, though not as 
a reward, win approval. But in reality reward, if the word be used 
at all, is according to purpose; and the only reward of a deed lies 
in the fulfilment of its purpose. In the theory of almsgiving which 
we are discussing, however, act and reward are on different planes. 
The reward is on that of a future life ; the act related to a distressed 
person here and now. The interest in the act on the doer's part lies 
in its post-mortal consequences to himself, and not either wholly 
or chiefly in the act itself. Nor, as the interest ends with the act 
— the giving — can the intelligence be quickened by it. The 
questions " How? by whom? with what object? on what plan? 
with what result?" receive no detailed consideration at all. Two 
general results follow. In so far as it is thus practised, almsgiving 
is out of sympathy with social progress. It is indeed alien to it. 
Next also the self-contained, self-sustained poverty that will have 
no relief and does without it, is outside the range of its thought and 
understanding. On the other hand, this almsgiving is equally in- 
capable of influencing the weak and the vicious ; and those who are 
suffering from illness or trouble it has not the width of vision to 
understand nor the moral energy to support so that they shall not 
fall out of the ranks of the self-supporting. It believes that " the 
poor " will not cease out of the land. And indeed, however great 
might be the economic progress of the people, it is not likely that 
the poor will cease, if the alms given in this spirit be large enough in 
amount to affect social conditions seriously one way or the other. 
When we measure the effects of charity, this inheritance of 
divided thought and inconsistent counsels must be given its full 
weight. 

The sub-apostolic church was a congregation, like a synagogue, 
the centre of a system of voluntary and personal relief, connected 



«7^ 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



with the congregational meals (or ay&cKtu) and the Eucharist, 
and under the supervision of no single officer or bishop. Out 

of this was developed a system of relief controlled by 
Uationof' a bishop, who was assisted chiefly by deacons or 
the parish presbyters, while the aycurcu, consisting of offerings 
aad laid before the altar, still remained. Subsequently 

cJharhJes. tne mea l was separated from the sacrament, and 

became a dole of food, or poor people's meal — e.g. in 
St Augustine's time in western Africa — and it was not allowed 
to be served in churches (a.d. 391). As religious asceticism 
became dominant, the sacrament was taken fasting; it appeared 
unseemly that men and women should meet together for such 
purposes, and the a'ydircu fell out of repute. Simultaneously 
it would seem that the parish (irapouda) became from a con- 
gregational settlement a geographical area. 

The organization of relief at Rome illustrates both a type of 
administration and a transition. St Gregory's reforms (a.d. 590) 
largely developed it. The first factor in the transition was the 
church fund of the second period of Christianity, about a.d. 150 
to after 208 (Tertullian, Apol. 39). It served as a friendly fund, 
was supported by voluntary gifts, and was used to succour and 
to bury the poor, to help destitute and orphaned children, 
old household slaves and those who suffered for the faith. This 
fund is quite different from the collegia tenuiorum or funeratica 
of the Romans, which were societies to which the members paid 
stipulated sums at stated periods, for funeral benefits or for com- 
mon meals (J. P. Waltzing, Corporations professionnelles chez 
les Romains, i. 313). It represents the charitable centre round 
which the parochial system developed. That system was 
adopted probably about the middle of the 3rd century, but in 
Rome the diaconate probably remained centralized. At the 
end of the 4th century Pope Anastasius had founded deaconries 
in Rome, and endowed them largely " to meet the frequent 
demands of the diaconate." Gregory two hundred years later 
reorganized the system. He divided the fourteen old " regions " 
into seven ecclesiastical districts and thirty " titles " (or parishes). 
The parishes were under the charge of sixty-six priests; the 
districts were eleemosynary divisions. Each was placed under 
the charge of a deacon, not (Greg. Ep. xi. and xxviii.) under the 
priests (presbyteri titularii). Over the deacons was an archdeacon. 
It was the duty of the deacons to care for the poor, widows, 
orphans, wards, and old people of their several districts. They 
inquired in regard to those who were relieved, and drew up under 
the guidance of the bishop the register of poor (matricula). 
Only these received regular relief. In each district was an 
hospital or office for alms, of which the deacon had charge, 
assisted by a steward (or oeconomus). Here food was given and 
meals were taken, the sick and poor were maintained, and orphan 
or foundling children lodged. The churches of Rome and of 
other large towns possessed considerable estates, " the patrimony 
of the patron saints," and to Rome belonged estates in Sicily 
which had not been ravaged by the invaders, and they continued 
to pay to it their tenth of corn, as they had done since Sicily 
was conquered. Four times a year (Milman, Lat. Christ, ii. 117) 
the shares of the (1) clergy and papal officers, (2) churches and 
monasteries, and (3) " hospitals, deaconries and ecclesiastical 
wards for the poor," were calculated in money and distributed; 
and the first day in every month St Gregory distributed to the 
poor in kind corn, wine, cheese, vegetables, bacon, meal, fish 
and oil. The sick and infirm were superintended by persons 
appointed to inspect every street. Before the pope sat down to his 
own meal a portion was separated and sent out to the hungry at 
his door. The Roman plebs had thus become the poor of Christ 
(pauperes Christi), and under that title were being fed by civica 
annona and sportula as their ancestors had been; and the deacon- 
ries had superseded the " regions " and the " steps " from which 
the corn had been distributed. The hospitium was now part of a 
common organization of relief, and the sick were visited according 
to Jewish and early Christian precedent. How far kindly Romans 
visited the sick of their day we do not know. Alms and the 
annona were now, it would seem, administered concurrently; 
and there was a system of poor relief independent of the churches 



and their alms (unless these, organized, as in Scottish towns, 
on the ancient ecclesiastical lines, were paid wholly or in part to a 
central diaconate fund) . Much had changed, but in much Roman 
thought still prevailed. 

On lines similar to these the organization of poor relief in the 
middle ages was developed. In the provinces in the later empire 
the senate or ordo decurionum were responsible for the public 
provisioning of the towns (Fustel de Coulanges, La Gaule romaine, 
p. 251), and no doubt the care of the poor would thus in some 
measure devolve on them in times of scarcity or distress. On 
the religious side, on the other hand, the churches would probably 
be constant centres of almsgiving and relief; and then, further, 
when the Roman municipal system had decayed, each citizen 
(as in Charlemagne's time, 742-814) was required to support his 
own dependants — a step suggestive of much after-history. 

The change in sentiment and method could hardly be more 
strongly marked than by a comparison of " the Teaching " with 
St Ambrose's (334-397)^ " Duties of the Clergy " (De Officiis Mini- 
strorum). For the old instinctive obedience to a command there is 
now an endeavour to find a reasoned basis for charitable action. 
Pauperism is recognized. " Never was the greed of beggars greater 
than it is now. . . . They want to empty the purses of the poor, 
to deprive them of the means of support. Not content with a little, 
they ask for more. . . . With lies about their lives they ask for 
further sums of money." " A method in giving is necessary." But 
in the suggestions made there is little consistency. Liberality is 
urged as a means of gaining the love of the people; a new and a 
false issue is thus raised. The relief is neither to be " too freely given 
to those who are unsuitable, nor too sparingly bestowed upon the 
needy." Everywhere there is a doctrine of the mean reflected 
through Cicero's De Officiis, the doctrine insufficiently stated, as 
though it were a mean of quantity, and not that rightly tempered 
mean which is the harmony of opposing moods. The poor are not 
to be sent away empty. Those rejected by the church are not to 
be left to the " outer darkness " of an earlier Christianity. They 
must be supplied if they are in want. The methodic giver is " hard 
towards none, but is free towards all." Consequently none are 
refused, and no account is taken of the regeneration that may spring 
up in a man from the effort towards self-help which refusal may 
originate. Thus after all it appears that method means no more 
than this — to give sometimes more, sometimes less, to all needy 
people. In the small congregational church of early Christianity, 
each member of which was admitted on the conditions of strictest 
discipline, the common alms of the faithful could hardly have done 
much harm within the body, even though outside they created and 
kept alive a horde of vagrant alms-seekers and pretenders. Now 
in this department at least the church had become the state, and 
discipline and a close knowledge of one's fellow-Christians no longer 
safeguarded the alms. From Cicero is borrowed the thought of 
" active help," which " is often grander and more noble," but the 
thought is not worked out. . From the social side the problem is not 
understood or even stated, and hence no principle of charity or of 
charitable administration is brought to light in the investigation. 
Still there are rudiments of the economics of charity in the praise of 
Joseph, who made the people buy the corn, for otherwise " they 
would have given up cultivating the soil; for he who has the use 
of what is another's often neglects his own." Perhaps, as St Augus- 
tine inspired the theology of the middle ages, we may say that St 
Ambrose, in the mingled motives, indefiniteness, and kindliness of this 
book, stands for the charity of the middle ages, except in so far as 
the movement which culminated in the brotherhood of St Francis 
awakened the intelligence of the world to wider issues. 

In Constantinople the pauperism seems to have been extreme. 
The corn supplies of Africa were diverted there in great part 
when it became the capital of the empire. This must have 
left to Rome a larger scope for the development of the civic- 
religious administration of relief. St Chrysostom's sermons give 
no impression of the rise of any new administrative force, alike 
sagacious and dominant. The appeal to give alms is constant, 
but the positive counsel on charitable work is nil. The people 
had the annona civica, and imperial gifts, corn, allowances 
(solaria) from the treasury granted for the poor and needy, 
and an annual gift of 50 gold pounds (rather more than £1400) 
for funerals. Besides these there were many institutions, and 
the begging and the almsgiving at the church doors. " The land 
could not support the lazy and valiant beggars." There were 
public works provided for them; if they refused to work on 
them they were to be driven away. The sick might visit the 
capital, but must be registered and sent back (a.d. 382); the 
sturdy beggar was condemned to slavery. So little did alms 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



873 



effect. And in the East monasticism seems to have produced 
no firmness of purpose such as led to the organization of the 
church and of charitable relief under St Gregory. 

Another movement of the Byzantine period was the establish- 
men t of the endowed charity. The Jewish synagogue long served 
as a place for the reception of strangers — a religious £evo8oxtiov. 
Probably the strangers referred to in " the Teaching " were so 
entertained. The table of the bishop and a room in his house 
served as the guest-chamber, for which afterwards a separate 
building was instituted. In the East the Jewish charitable 
inn first appears, and there took place the earliest extension of 
institutions. There was probably a demand for an elaboration 
of institutions as social changes made themselves felt in the 
churches. We have seen this in the case of the ayairrj. Similar 
changes would affect other branches of charitable work. The 
hospital (hospitalium, fcvoboxeiov) is denned as a " house of 
God in which strangers who lack hospitality are received " 
(Suicerus, Thesaur.), a home separated from the church; and 
round the church, out of the primitive £tvo8oxtiov of early 
Christian times and the entertainment of strangers at the houses 
of members of the community, would grow up other similar 
charities. In a.d. 321 licence was given by Constantine to leave 
property to the Church. The churches were thus placed in the 
same position as pagan temples, and though subsequently 
Valentinian (a.d. 379) withdrew the permission on account 
of the shameless legacy-hunting of the clergy, in that period 
much must have been done to endow church and charitable 
institutions. In the same period grew to its height the passion 
for monasticism. This affected the parish and the endowed 
charity alike. Under its influence the deacon as an almoner 
tends to disappear, except where, as in Rome, there is an elabor- 
ate system of relief. Nor does it seem that deaconesses, widows, 
and virgins continued to occupy their old position as church 
workers and alms-receivers. Naturally when marriage was 
considered " in itself an evil, perhaps to be tolerated, but still 
degrading to human nature," and (a.d. 385) the marriage of 
the clergy was prohibited, men, except those in charge of parishes, 
and women would join regular monastic bodies; the deacon, 
as almoner, would disappear, and the " widows " and virgins 
would become nuns. Thus there would grow up a large body 
of men and women living segregated in institutions, and forming 
a leisured class able to superintend institutional charities. And 
now two new officers appear, the eleemosynarius or almoner 
and the oeconomus or steward (already an assistant treasurer 
to the bishop), who superintend and distribute the alms and 
manage the property of the institution. (In the first six books 
of the A post. Constit., a.d. 300, these officers are not mentioned.) 
In these circumstances the hospitium or hospital (i;tvwv, Karayiji- 
yvov) assumes a new character. It becomes in St Basil's hands 
(a.d. 330-379) a resort not only for those who " visit it from 
time to time as they pass by, but also for those who need some 
treatment in illness." And round St Basil at Caesarea there 
springs up a colony of institutions. Four kinds principally are 
mentioned in the Theodosian code : (1) the guest-houses (few- 
SoxcTa); (2) the poor-houses (tttux^) , where the poor (mendici) 
were housed and maintained (the irrooxfiov was a general term 
also applied to all houses for the poor, the aged, orphans and 
sick) ; (3) there were orphanages (6p<j>avoTpo4>t£a.) for orphans 
and wards; and (4) there were houses for infant children (/3pe<£o- 
Tpo(j>ua). Thus a large number of endowed charities had grown 
up. This new movement it is necessary to consider in connexion 
with the law relating to religious property and bequests, in its 
bearing on the rule of the monasteries, and in its effect on the 
family. 

The sacred property (res sacra) of Roman law consisted of things 
dedicated to the gods by the pontiff with the approval of the civil 
authority, in turn, the people, the senate and the emperor. Things 
so consecrated were inalienable. Apart from this in the empire, 
the municipalities as they grew up were considered "juristic persons " 
who were entitled to receive and hold property. In a similar position 
were authorized collegia, amongst which were the mutual aid societies 
referred to above. Christians associated in these societies would 
leave legacies to them. Thus (VV. M. Ramsay, Cities and Bishoprics 



of Phrygia, I. i. 119) an inscription mentions a bequest (possibly by 
a Christian) to the council (trvviSpiov) of the presidents of the dyers 
in purple for a ceremonial, on the condition that, if the ceremony 
be neglected, the legacy shall become the property of the gild for 
the care of nurslings; and in the same way a bequest is left in Rome 
(Orelli 4420) for a memorial sacrifice, on the condition that, if it be 
not performed, double the cost be paid to the treasury of the corn- 
supply (fisco stationis annonae). No unauthorized collegia could 
receive a legacy. " The law recognized no freedom of association." 
Nor could any private individual create a foundation with separate 
property of its own. Property could only be left to an authorized 
juristic person, being a municipality or a collegium. But as the 
problem of poverty was considered from a broader standpoint, there 
was a desire to deal with it in a more permanent manner than by 
the annona civica. The pueri alimenlarii (see above) were considered 
to hold their property as part of the fiscus or property of the state. 
Pliny (Ep. vii. 18), seeking a method of endowment, transferred 
property in land to the steward of public property, and then took 
it back again subject to a permanent charge for the aid of children 
of freemen. By the law of Constantine and subsequent laws no 
such devices were necessary. Widows or deaconesses, or virgins 
dedicated to God, or nuns (a.d. 455), could leave bequests to a 
church or memorial church (martyrum), or to a priest or a monk, or 
to the poor in any shape or form, in writing or without it. Later 
(A.D. 475) donations of every kind, " to the person of any martyr, 
or apostle, or prophet, or the holy angels," for building an oratory 
were made valid, even if the building were promised only and not 
begun; and the same rule applied to infirmaries (vooonontio) and 
poor-houses (7TTux«a) — the bishop or steward being competent 
to appear as plaintiff in such cases. Later, again (a.d. 528), contri- 
butions of 50 solidi (say about £19, 10s.) to a church, hostel (£tvo- 
Soxeiov), &c, were made legal, though not registered; while larger 
sums, if registered, were also legalized. So (a.d. 529) property 
might be given for " churches, hostels, poor-houses, infant and 
orphan homes, and homes for the aged, or any such community " 
(consortium), even though not registered, and such property was 
free from taxation. The next year (530) it was enacted that pre- 
scription even for 100 years did not alienate church and charitable 
property. The broadest interpretation was allowed. If by will 
a share of an estate was left " to Christ our Lord," the church of the. 
city or other locality might receive it as heir; " let these, the law 
says, belong to the holy churches, so that they may become the 
alimony of the poor." It was sufficient to leave property to the poor 
(Corpus Juris Civilis, ed. Krueger, 1877, ii. 25). The bequest was 
legal. It went to the legal representative of the poor — the church. 
Charitable property was thus church property. The word " alms " 
covered both. It was given to pious uses, and as a kind of public 
institution " shared that corporate capacity which belonged to all 
ecclesiastical institutions by virtue of a general rule of law." On 
a pia causa it was not necessary to confer a juristic personality. 
Other laws preserved or regulated alienation (a.d. 477, a.d. 530), 
and checked negligence or fraud in management. The clergy had 
thus become the owners of large properties, with the coloni and 
slaves upon the estates and the allowances of civic corn (annona 
civica) ; and (a.d. 357) it was stipulated that whatever they acquired 
by thrift or trading should be used for the service of the poor and 
needy, though what they acquired from the labour of their slaves 
in the labour houses (ergastula) or inns (tabernae) might be considered 
a profit of religion (religionis lucrum). 

Thus grew up the system of endowed charities, which with 
certain modifications continued throughout the middle ages, 
and, though it assumed different forms in connexion with gilds 
and municipalities, in England it still retains, partially at least, 
its relation to the church. It remained the system of institutional 
relief parallel to the more personal almsgiving of the parish. 

Monasticism, in acting on men of strong character, endowed 
them with a double strength of will, and to men like St Gregory 
it seemed to give back with administrative power the relentless 
firmness of the Roman. In the East it produced the turbulent 
soldiery of the church, in the West its missionaries; and each 
mission-monastery was a centre of relief. But whatever the 
services monasticism rendered, it can hardly be said to have 
furthered true charity from the social standpoint, though out of 
regard to some of its institutional work we may to a certain degree 
qualify this judgment. The movement was almost of necessity 
in large measure anti-parochial, and thus out of sympathy with 
the charities of the parish, where personal relations with the poor 
at their homes count for most. 

The good and evil of it may be weighed. Monasticism working 
through St Augustine helped the world to realize the mood of love 
as the real or eternal life. Of the natural life of the world and its 
responsibilities, through which that mood would have borne its 
completest fruit, it took but little heed, except in so far as, by 
creating a class possessed of leisure, it created able scholars, lawyers 



b 7 4 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



and. administrators, and disciplined the will of strong men. It had 
no power to stay the social evils of the day. Unlike the friars, at 
their best the monks were a class apart, not a class mixed up with 
the people. So were their charities. The belief in poverty as a 
fixed condition — irretrievable and ever to be alleviated without 
any regard to science or observation, subjected charity to a per- 
petual stagnation. Charity requires belief in growth, in the sharing 
of life, in the utility and nobility of what is done here and now for 
the hereafter of this present world. Monasticism had no thought 
of this. It was based on a belief in the evil of matter; and from 
that root could spring no social charity. Economic difficulties also 
fostered monasticism. Gold was appreciated in value, and neces- 
saries were expensive, and the cost of maintaining a family was great. 
It was an economy to force a son or a brother into the church. The 
population was decreasing; and in spite of church feeling Marjorian 
(a.d. 461) had to forbid women from taking the veil before forty, and 
to require the remarriage of widows, subject to a large forfeit of 
property (Hodgkin, Italy and her Invaders, ii. 420). Monasticism 
was inconsistent with the social good. As to the family — like the 
moderns who depreciate thrift and are careless of the life of the 
family, the monks, believing that marriage was a lower form of 
morality, if not indeed, as would at times appear, hardly moral at 
all, could feel but little enthusiasm for what is socially a chief source 
of health to the community and a well-spring of spontaneous charit- 
able feeling. By the sacerdotal-monastic movement the moralizing 
force of Christianity was denaturalized. Among the secular clergy 
the falsity of the position as between men and women revealed 
itself in relations which being unhallowed and unrecognized became 
also degrading. But worse than all, it pushed charity from its 
pivot. For this no monasteries or institutions, no domination of 
religious belief, could atone. The church that with so fine an in- 
tensity of purpose had fostered chastity and marriage was betraying 
its trust. It was out of touch with the primal unit of social life, the 
child-school of dawning habits and the loving economy of the home. 
It produced no treatise on economy in the older Greek sense of the 
word. The home and its associations no longer retained their pre- 
eminence. In the extreme advocacy of the celibate state, the 
honourable development of the married life and its duties were 
depreciated and sometimes, one would think, quite forgotten. 
• We may ask, then, What were the results of charity at the 
close of the period which ends with St Gregory and the founding of 
the medieval church? — for if the charity is reflected in the social 
good the results should be manifest. Economic and social 
conditions were adverse. With lessened trade the middle class 
was decaying (Dill, Roman Society in the Last Century of the 
Western Empire, p. 204) and a selfish aristocracy rising up. Muni- 
cipal responsibility had been taxed to extinction. The public 
service was corrupt. The rich evaded taxation, the poor were 
oppressed by it. There were laws upon laws, endeavours to 
underpin the framework of a decaying society. Society was 
bankrupt of skill — and the skill of a generation has a close bearing 
on its charitable administration. While hospitals increased, 
medicine was unprogressive. There were miserable years of 
famine and pestilence, and constant wars. The care of the 
poorer classes, and ultimately of the people, was the charge of the 
church. The church strengthened the feeling of kindness for 
those in want, widows, orphans and the sick. It lessened the 
degradation of the " actresses," and, co-operating with Stoic 
opinion, abolished the slaughter of the gladiatorial shows. It 
created a popular " dogmatic system and moral discipline," 
which paganism failed to do; but it produced no prophet of 
charity, such as enlarged the moral imagination of the Jews. 
It ransomed slaves, as did paganism also, but it did not abolish 
slavery. Large economic causes produced that great reform. 
The serf attached to the soil took the place of the slave. The 
almsgiving of the church by degrees took the place of annona and 
sportula, and it may have created pauperism. But dependence on 
almsgiving was at least an advance on dependence founded on a 
civic and hereditary right to relief. As the colonus stood higher 
than the slave, so did the pauper, socially at any rate, free to 
support himself, exceed the colonus. Bad economic conditions 
and traditions, and a bad system of almsgiving, might enthral 
him. But the way, at least, was open; and thus it became 
possible that charity, working in alliance with good economic 
traditions, should in the end accomplish the self-support of society, 
the independence of the whole people. 

Part V. — Medieval Charity and its Development 
It remains to trace the history of thought and administration 
in relation to (1) the development of charitable responsibility in 



the parish, and the use of tithe and church property for poor 
relief; and (2) the revision of the theory of charity, with which 
are associated the names of St Augustine (354-430), St Benedict 
(480-542), St Bernard (1001-1153), St Francis (1182-1226), and 
St Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274). (3) There follows, in reference 
chiefly to England, a sketch of the dependence of the poor under 
feudalism, the charities of the parish, the monastery and the 
hospital — the medieval system of endowed charity; the rise of 
gild and municipal charities; the decadence at the close of the 
1 5th century, and the statutory endeavours to cope with economic 
difficulties which, in the 16th century, led to the establishment of 
statutory serfdom and the poor-laws. New elements affect the 
problem of charity in the 17th and 18th centuries; but it is not 
too much to say that almost all these headings represent phases 
of thought or institutions which in later forms are interwoven 
with the charitable thought and endeavours of the present day. 
Naturally, two methods of relief have usually been prominent : 
relief administered locally, chiefly to residents in their own 
homes, and relief administered in an institution. At The parish 
the time of Charlemagne (742-814) the system of and 
relief was parochial, consisting principally of assistance cj> arltab, <> 
at the home. After that time, except probably in re '' ef ' 
England, the institutional method appears to have predominated, 
and the monastery or hospital in one form or another gradually 
encroached on the parish. 

The system of parochial charity was the outcome, apparently, 
of three conditions : the position and influence of the bishop, the 
eleemosynary nature of the church funds, and the need of some 
responsible organization of relief. It resulted in what might almost 
be called an ecclesiastical poor-law. The affairs of a local church 
or congregation were superintended by a bishop. To deal with the 
outlying districts he detached priests for religious work and, as in 
Rome and (774) Strassburg, deacons also for the administration 
of relief. Originally all the income of the church or congregation 
was paid into one fund only, of which the bishop had charge, and 
this fund was available primarily for charitable purposes. Church 
property was the patrimony of the poor. In the 4th centurv (IV. 
Council of Carthage, 398) the names of the clergy were entered on 
a list {matricula or canon), as were also the names of the poor, and 
both received from the church their daily portion (cf. Ratzinger, 
Geschichte der kirchlichen Armenpflege, p. 117). There were no 
expenses for building. Before the reign of Constantine (306) very 
few churches were built (Ratzinger, p. 120). Thus the early church 
as has been said, was chiefly a charitable society. By degrees the 
property of the church was very largely increased by gifts and 
bequests, and in the West before St Gregory's time the division 
of it for four separate purposes — the support of the bishop, of the 
clergy, and of the poor, and for church buildings— still further 
promoted decentralization. Apart from any special gifts, there was 
thus created a separate fund for almsgiving, supervised by the bishop, 
consisting of a fourth of the church property, the oblations (mostly 
used for the poor), and the tithe, which at first was used for the 
poor solely. The organization of the church was gradually extended. 
The church once established in the chief city of a district would 
become in turn the mother church of other neighbourhoods, and the 
bishop or priest of the mother church would come to exercise super- 
vision over them and their parishes. 

In France, which may serve as a good illustration, in the 4th cen- 
tury (Ratzinger, p. 181) the civic organization was utilized for a 
further change. The Roman provinces were divided into large 
areas, civitates, and these were adopted by the church as bishop's 
parishes or, as we should call them, dioceses; and the chief city 
became the cathedral city. The bishop thus became responsible 
in Charlemagne's time both for his own parish — that of the mother 
church — and for the supervision of the parishes in the civitas, and 
so for the sick and needy of the diocese generally. He had to take 
charge of the poor in his own parish personally, keep the list of the 
poor, and houses for the homeless. The other parishes were at first, 
or in some measure, supported from his funds, but they acquired 
by degrees tithe and property of their own and were endowed by 
Charlemagne, who gave one or more manses or lots of land (cf. 
Fustel de Coulanges, Hist, des institutions politiques de Vancienne 
France, p. 360) for the support of each parish priest. The priests 
were required to relieve their own poor so that they should not stray 
into other cities (II. Counc. Tours, 567), and to provide food and 
lodging for strangers. The method was indeed elaborated and 
became, like the Jewish, that contradiction in terms — a compulsory 
system of charitable relief. The payment of tithe was enforced by 
Charlemagne, and it became a legal due (Counc. Frankfort, 794; 
Arelat. 794). At the same time two other conditions were enforced. 
Each person (unusquisque fidelium nostrorum or omnes cives) was 
to keep his own family, i.e. all dependent on him — all, that is, upon 
his freehold estate {allodium), and no one was to presume to give 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



8 75 



relief to able-bodied beggars unless they were set to work (Charlem. 
Co-pit. v. 10). Thus we find here the germ of a poor-law system. 
As in the times of the annona civica, slavery, feudalism, or statutory 
serfdom, the burthen of the maintenance of the poor fell only in 
part on charity. Only those who could not be maintained as 
members of some "family" were properly entitled to relief, and 
in these circumstances the officially recognized clients of the church 
consisted of the gradually decreasing number of free poor and those 
who were tenants of church lands. 

Since 817 there has been no universally binding decision of the 
church respecting the care of the poor (Ratzinger, p. 236). So long 
ago did laicization begin in charity. In the wars and confusion of 
the 9th and 10th centuries the poorer freemen lapsed still further 
into slavery, or became coloni or bond servants; and later they 
passed under the feudal rule. Thus the church's duty to relieve them 
became the masters' obligation to maintain them. Simultaneously 
the activity of the clergy, regular and secular alike, dwindled. They 
were exhorted to increase their alms. The revenues and property 
of " the poor " were largely turned to private or partly ecclesiastical 
purposes, or secularized. Legacies went wholly to the clergy, but 
only the tithe of the produce of their own lands was used for relief ; 
and of the general tithe, only a third or fourth part was so applied. 
Eventually to a large extent, but more elsewhere than in England 
(Ratzinger, pp. 246, 269), the tithe itself was appropriated by nobles 
or even by the monasteries; and thus during and after the 10th 
century a new organization of charity was created on non-parochial 
methods of relief. Alms, with prayer and fasting, had always been 
connected with penance. But the character of the penitential 
system had altered. By the 7th century private penance had super- 
seded the public and congregational penance of the earlier church 
[Diet. Christian Antiquities, art. " Penitence "). To the penalties 
of exclusion from the sacraments or from the services of the church 
or from its communion was coupled, with other penitential discipline, 
an elaborate penitential system, in which about the 7th century the 
redemption of sin by the " sacrifice " of property, payments of 
money fines, &c, was introduced. (Cf. for instance Cone. Elberti: — 
Labbeus i. 969 (a.d. 305), with Cone. Berghamstedense, Wilkins, 
Cone. p. 60 (a.d. 696), and the Penitential (p. 115) and Canons 
(a.d. 960), p. 236.) The same sin committed by an overseer (prae- 
positus paganus) was compensated by a fine of 100 solidi; in the 
case of a colonus by a fine of 50. So amongst the ways of penitence 
were entered in the above-mentioned Canons, to erect a church, and 
if means allowed, add to it land ... to repair the public roads . . . 
" to distribute," to help poor widows, orphans and strangers, redeem 
slaves, fast, &c. — a combination of " good deeds "which suggests a line 
of thought such as ultimately found expression in the definition of 
charities in the Charitable Uses Act of Queen Elizabeth. The con- 
fessor, too, was " spiritualis medicus," and much that from the point 
of view of counsel would now be the work of charity would in his 
hands be dealt with in that capacity. For lesser sins (cf. Bede (673- 
735), Horn. 34, quoted by Ratzinger) the penalty was prayer, fasting 
and alms; for the greater sins — murder, adultery and idolatry — to 
give up all. Thus while half-converted barbarians were kept in 
moral subjection by material penances, the church was enriched 
by their gifts; and these tended to support the monastic and 
institutional methods which were in favour, and to which, on the 
revival of religious earnestness in the nth century, the world looked 
for the reform of social life. 

To understand medieval charity it is necessary to return 
to St Augustine. According to him, the motive of man in his 
Medieval legitimate effort to assert himself in life was love or 
revision of desire (amor or cupido). "All impulses were only 
tl,e theory evo hitions of this typical characteristic " (Harnack, 
History of Dogma (trans.), v. iii.); and this was so 
alike in the spiritual and the sensuous life. Happiness thus 
depended on desire; and desire in turn depended on the 
regulation of the will; but the will was regulated only by grace. 
God was the spiritualis substantia; and freedom was the identity 
of the will with the omnipotent unchanging nature. This 
highest Being was " holiness working on tKe will in the form of 
omnipotent love." This love was grace—" grace imparting itself 
in love." Love (caritas — charity) is identified with justice; and 
the will, the goodwill, is love. The identity of the will with the 
will of God was attained by communion with Him. The after- 
life consummated by sight this communion, which was here 
reached only by faith. Such a method of thought was entirely 
introspective, and it turned the mind " wholly to hope, asceticism 
and the contemplation of God in worship." "Where St Augus- 
tine indulges in the exposition of practical piety he has no theory 
at all of Christ's work." To charity on that side he added 
nothing. In the nth century there was a revival of piety, which 
had amongst its objects the restoration of discipline in the 
monasteries and a monastic training for the secular clergy. 



To this Augustinian thought led the way. " Christianity was 
asceticism and the city of God " (Harnack vi. 6). A new religious 
feeling took possession of the general mind, a regard and adora- 
tion of the actual, the historic Christ. Of this St Bernard was 
the expositor. " Beside the sacramental Christ the image of the 
historical took its place, — majesty in humility, innocence in 
penal suffering, life in death." The spiritual and the sensuous 
were intermingled. Dogmatic formulae fell into the background. 
The picture of the historic Christ led to the realization of the 
Christ according to the spirit (Kara iryeD/xa). Thus St Bernard 
carried forward Augustinian thought; and the historic Christ 
became the " sinless man, approved by suffering, to whom the 
divine grace, by which He lives, has lent such power that His 
image takes shape in other men and incites them to corresponding 
humility and love." 

Humility and poverty represented the conditions under 
which alone this spirit could be realized; and the poverty must 
be spiritual, and therefore self-imposed (" wilful," as it was 
afterwards called). This led to practical results. Poverty was 
not a social state, but a spiritual; and consequently the poor 
generally were not the pauperes Christi, but those who, like the 
monks, had taken vows of poverty. From these premisses 
followed later the doctrine that gifts to the church were not 
gifts to the poor, as once they had been, but to the religious 
bodies. The church was not the church of the poor, but of the 
poor in spirit. But the immediate effect was the belief for a time, 
apparently almost universal, that the salvation of society would 
come from the monastic orders. By their aid, backed by the 
general opinion, the secular clergy were brought back to celibacy 
and the monasteries newly disciplined. But charity could not 
thus regain its touch of life and become the means of raising 
the standard of social duty. 

Next, one amongst many who were stirred by a kindred 
inspiration, St Francis turned back to actual life and gave a new 
reality to religious idealism. For him the poor were once again 
the pauperes Christi. To follow Christ was to' adopt the life of 
" evangelical poverty," and this was to live among the poor the 
life of a poor man. The follower was to work with his hands (as 
the poor clergy of the early church had done and the clergy of 
the early English church were exhorted to do) ; he was to receive 
no money; he was to earn the actual necessaries of life, though 
what he could jnot earn he might beg. To ask for this was a right, 
so long as he was bringing a better life into the world. All in 
excess of this he gave to the poor. He would possess no property, 
buildings or endowments, nor was his order to do so. The fulness 
of his life was in the complete realization of it now, without the 
cares of property and without any fear of the future. Having a 
definite aim and mission, he was ready to accept the want that 
might come upon him, and his life was a discipline to enable him 
to suffer it if it came. To him humility was the soul making 
itself fit to love; and poverty was humility expanded from a 
mood to a life, a life not guarded by seclusion, but spent amongst 
those who were actually poor. The object of life was to console 
the poor— those outside all monasteries and institutions — the 
poor as they lived and worked. The movement was practically 
a lay movement, and its force consisted in its simplicity and 
directness. Book learning was disparaged: life was to be the 
teacher. The brothers thus became observant and practical, 
and afterwards indeed learned, and their learning had the same 
characteristics. Their power lay in their practical sagacity, 
in their treatment of life, outside the cloister and the hospital, 
at first hand. They knew the people because they settled 
amongst them, living just as they did. This was their method 
of charity. 

The inspiration that drew St Francis to this method was 
the contemplation of the life of Christ. But it was more than 
this. The Christ was to him, as to St Bernard, an ideal, whose 
nature passed into that of the contemplating and adoring 
beholder, so that, as he said, " having lost its individuality, of 
itself the creature could no longer act." He had no impulse 
but the Christ impulse. He was changed. His identity was 
merged in that of Christ. And with this came the conception of a 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



gracious and finely ordered charity, moving like the natural 
world in a constant harmonious development towards a definite 
end. The mysticism was intense, but it was practical because it 
was intense. In that lay the strength of the movement of the 
true Franciscans, and in those orders that, whether called 
heretical or not, followed them — Lollards and others. Religion 
thus became a personal and original possession. It became 
individual. It was inspired by a social endeavour, and for the 
world at large it made of charity a new thing. 

St Thomas Aquinas took up St Bernard's position. Re- 
nunciation of property, voluntary poverty, was in his view 
also a necessary means of reaching the perfect life; and the 
feeling that was akin to this renunciation and prompted it was 
charity. " All perfection of the Christian life was to be attained 
according to charity," and charity united us to God. 

In the system elaborated by St Thomas Aquinas two lines of 
thought are wrought into a kind of harmony. The one stands 
for Aristotle and nature, the other for Christian tradition and 
theology. We have thus a duplicate theory of thought and action 
throughout, both rational and theologic virtues, and a duplicate 
beatitude or state of happiness correspondent to each. On the one 
hand it is argued that the good act is an act which, in relation to 
its object, wholly serves its purpose; and thus the measure of good- 
ness (Prima Secundae Summae Theolog. Q. xviii. 2) is the proportion 
between action and effect. On the other hand, the act has to satisfy 
the twofold law, human reason and eternal reason. From the point 
of view of the former the cardinal factor is desire, which, made pro- 
portionate to an end, is love {amor) ; and, seeking the good of others, 
it loses its quality of concupiscence and becomes friendly love {amor 
amicitiae). But this rational love (amor) and charity (caritas), the 
theologic virtue, may meet. All virtue or goodness is a degree of 
love (amor), if by virtue we mean the cardinafvirtues and refer to the 
rule of reason only. But there are also theologic virtues, which 
are on one side " essential," on the other side participative. As 
wood ignited participates in the natural fire, so does the individual 
in these virtues (II. II." lxii. 1). Charity is a kind of friendship 
towards God. It is received per infusionem spiritus sancti, and is 
the chief and root of the theologic virtues of faith and hope, and on 
it the rational virtues depend. They are not degrees of charity as 
they are of (amor) love, but charity gives purpose, order and quality 
to them all. In this sense the word is applied to the rational virtues 
—as, for instance, beneficence. The counterpart of charity in social 
life is pity (misericordia), the compassion that moves us to supply 
another's want (summa religionis Christianae in misericordia consistit 
quantum ad exteriora opera). It is, however, an emotion, not a virtue, 
and must be regulated like any other emotion (. . . passio est et 
non virtus. Hie autem molus potest esse secundum rationem regulatus, 
II. II." xxx. 3). Thus we pass to alms, which are the instrument of 
pity— an act of charity done through the intervention of pity. The 
act is not done in order to purchase spiritual good by a corporal 
means, but to merit a spiritual good (per effectum caritatis) through 
being in a state of charity; and from that point of view its effect 
is tested by the recipient being moved to pray for his benefactor. 
The claim of others on our beneficence is relative, according to 
consanguinity and other bonds (II. II." xxxi. 3), subject to the 
condition that the common good of many is a holier obligation 
(divinius) than that of one. Obedience and obligation to parents 
may be crossed by other obligations, as, for instance, duty to the 
church. To give alms is a command. Alms should consist of the 
superfluous — that is, of all that the individual possesses after ha has 
reserved what is necessary. What is necessary the donor should 
fix in due relation to the claims of his family and dependants, his 
position in life (dignitas), and the sustenance of his body. On the 
other hand, his gift should meet the actual necessities of the recipient 
and no more. More than this will lead to excess on the recipient's 
part (ut inde luxurietur) or to want of spirit and apathy (ut aliis 
remissio'et refrigerium sit), though allowance must be made for 
different requirements in different conditions of life, It were better 
to distribute alms to many persons than to give more than is neces- 
sary to one. In individual cases there remains the further question 
of correction — the removing of some evil or sin from another; and 
this, too, is an act of charity. 

It will be seen that though St Thomas bases his argument on a 
duplicate theory of thought, action and happiness, part natural, 
part theologic, and states fully the conditions of good action, he 
does not bring the two into unison. Logically the argument should 
follow that alms that fail in social benefit (produce remissionem et 
refrigerium, for instance) fail also in spiritual good, for the two cannot 
be inconsistent. But in regard to the former he does not press the 
importance of purpose, and, in spite of his Aristotle, he misses the 
point on which Aristotle, as a close observer of social conditions, 
insists, that gifts without purpose and reciprocity foster the depend- 
ence they are designed to meet. The proverb of the " pierced cask " 
is as applicable to ecclesiastical as to political almsgiving, as has 
often been proved by the event. The distribution of all " super- 
fluous " income in the form of alms would have the effect of a huge 



endowment, and would stereotype " the poor " as a permanent and 
unprogressive class. The proposal suggests that St Thomas con- 
templated the adoption of a method of relief which would be like 
a voluntary poor-law; and it is noteworthy that his phrase " neces- 
sary relief " forms the defining words of the Elizabethan poor-law, 
while he also lays stress on the importance of " correction," which, 
on the decline and disappearance of the penitential system, assumed 
at the Reformation a prominent position in administration in relation 
not only to " sin," but also to offences against society, such as 
idleness, &c. 

On this foundation was built up the classification of acts of 
charity, which in one shape or another has a long social tradition, 
and which St Thomas quotes in an elaborated form — the seven 
spiritual acts (consule, carpe, doce, solar e, remitte, fer, or a), 
counsel, sustain, teach, console, save, pardon, pray; and the 
seven corporal (vestio, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo) 
I clothe, I give drink to, I feed, I free from prison, I shelter, 
I assist in sickness, I bury (II. II. ae xxxii. 2). These in subse- 
quent thought became " good works," and availed for the 
after-life, bringing with them definite boons. Thus charity 
was linked to the system of indulgences. The bias of the act 
of charity is made to favour the actor. Primarily the benefit 
reverts to him. He becomes conscious of an ultimate reward 
accruing to himself. The simplicity of the deed, the spontaneity 
from which, as in a well-practised art, its freshness springs and 
its good effects result, is falsified at the outset. The thought 
that should be wholly concerned in the fulfilment of a definite 
purpose is diverted from it. The deed itself, apart from the 
outcome of the deed, is highly considered. An extreme induce- 
ment is placed on giving, counselling, and the like, but none on 
the personal or social utility of the gift or counsel. Yet the 
value of these lies in their end. No policy or science of charity 
can grow out of such a system. It can produce innumerable 
isolated acts, which may or may not be beneficent, but it cannot 
enkindle the " ordered charity." This charity is, strictly speak- 
ing, by its very nature alike intellectual and emotional. Other- 
wise it would inevitably fail of its purpose, for though emotion 
might stimulate it, intelligence would not guide it. 

There are, then, these three lines of thought. That of St 
Bernard, who invigorated the monastic movement, and helped 
to make the monastery or hospital the centre of charitable 
relief. That of St Francis, who, passing by regular and secular 
clergy alike, revived and reinvigorated the conception of charity 
and gave it once more the reality of a social force, knowing that 
it would find a freer scope and larger usefulness in the life of the 
people than in the religious aristocracy of monasteries. And 
that of St Thomas Aquinas, who, analysing the problem of 
charity and almsgiving, and associating it with definite groups 
of works, led to its taking, in the common thought, certain 
stereotyped forms, so that its social aim and purpose were 
ignored and its power for good was neutralized. 

We have now to turn to the conditions of social life in 
which these thoughts fermented and took practical shape. The 
population of England from the Conquest to the ch 
14th century is estimated at between i| and 2-| ant social 
millions. London, it is believed, had a population conditions 
of about 40,000. Other towns were small. Two or '" 
three of the larger had 4000 or 5000 inhabitants. The Eng,and ' 
only substantial building in a village, apart perhaps from the 
manor-house, was the church, used for many secular as well 
as religious purposes. In the towns the mud or wood-paved huts 
sheltered a people who, accepting a common poverty, traded 
in little more than the necessaries of life (Green, Town Life in 
the 15th Century, i. 13) . The population was stationary. Famine 
and pestilence were of frequent occurrence (Creighton, Epidemics 
in Britain, p. 19), and for the careless there was waste at harvest- 
time and want in winter. Hunger was the drill-sergeant of 
society. Owing to the hardship and penury of life infant mor- 
tality was probably very great (Blashill, Sutton in Holdernesse, 
p. 123). The 15th century was, however, " the golden age of 
the labourer." Our problem is to ascertain what was the service 
of charity to this people till the end of that century. In order 
to estimate this we have to apply tests similar to those we 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



877 



applied before to Greece and Rome and the pre-medieval 
church. 

The Family. — Largely Germanic in its origin, we may perhaps 
set down as elemental in the English race what Tacitus said of the 
Germans. They had the home virtues. They had a high regard 
for chastity, and respected and enforced the family tie. The wife 
was honoured. The men were poor, but when the actual pressure 
of their work — fighting — was removed, idle. They were born 
gamblers. Much toil fell upon the wife; but slavery was rather a 
form of tenure than a Roman bondage. As elsewhere, there was in 
England " the joint family or household " (Pollock and Maitland, 
English Law before Edward I. i. 31). Each member of the com- 
munity was, or should be, under some lord ; for the lordless man 
was, like the wanderer in Homer, who belonged to no phratry, 
suspected and dangerous, and his kinsfolk might be required to find 
a lord for him. There was personal servitude, but it was not of one 
complexion ; there were grades amongst the unfree, and the general 
advance to freedom was continuous. By the 9th century the larger 
amount of the slavery was bondage by tenure. In the reign of 
Edward I., though " the larger half of the rural population was 
unfree," yet the serf, notwithstanding the fact that he was his lord's 
chattel, was free against all save his lord. A century later (1381) 
villenage — that is payment for tenancy by service, instead of by 
quit-rent — was practically extinguished. So steady was the progress 
towards the freedom and self-maintenance of the individual and his 
family. 

The Manor. — In social importance, next to the family, comes 
the manor, the organization of which affected charity greatly on 
one side. It was " an economic unit," the estate of a lord on which 
there were associated the lord wich his demesne, tenants free of 
service, and villeins and others, tenants by service. All had the use 
of land, even the serf. The estate was regulated by a manor court, 
consisting of the lord of the manor or his representative, and the free 
tenants, and entrusted with wide quasi-domestic jurisdiction. The 
value of the estate depended on the labour available for its cultivation, 
and the cultivators were the unfree tenants. Hence the lord, through 
the manor-court, required an indemnity or fine if a child, for instance, 
left the manor; and similarly, if a villein died, his widow might have 
to remarry or pay a fine. Thus the lord reacquired a servant and 
the widow and her family were maintained. The courts, too, fixed 
prices, and thus in local and limited conditions of supply and demand 
were able to equalize them in a measure and neutralize some of the 
effects of scarcity. In this way, till the reign of Edward I., and, where 
the manor courts remained active, till much later, a self-supporting 
social organization made any systematic public or charitable relief 
unnecessary. 

The Parish and the Tithe. — The conversion of England in the 
7th century was effected by bishops, accompanied by itinerant 
priests, who made use of conventual houses as the centres of their 
work. The parochial system was not firmly established till the 
10th century (970). Then, by a law of Edgar, a man who had a 
church on his own land was allowed to pay a third of his tithe to his 
own church, instead of giving the whole of it to the minister or con- 
ventual church. Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury (667), had 
introduced the Carolingian system into England ; and, accordingly, 
the parish priest was required to provide for strangers and to keep 
a room in his house for them. Of the tithe, a third and not a fourth 
was to go to the poor with any surplus ; and in order to have larger 
means of helping them, the priests were urged to work themselves, 
according to the ancient canons of the church (cf. Labbeus, IV. 
Cone. Carthag. a.d. 398). The importance of the tithe to the poor 
is shown by acts of Richard II. and Henry IV., by which it was 
enacted that, if parochial tithes were appropriated to a monastery, 
a portion of them should be assigned to the poor of the parish. At 
a very early date (1287) quasi-compulsory charges in the nature of 
a rate were imposed on parishioners for various church purposes 
(Pollock and Maitland, i. 604), though in the 14th and 15th centuries 
a compulsory church rate was seldom made. Collections were made 
by paid collectors, especially for Hock-tide (q.v .) money — gathered for 
church purposes (Brand's Antiquities, p. 112). But there must have 
been many varieties in practice. In Somersetshire the church- 
wardens' accounts (1349 to 1560) show that the parish contributed 
nothing to the relief of the poor, and it seems probable that the 
personal charities of the parishioners, and the charities of the gild 
fellowships and of the parsonage house sufficed (Bishop Hobhouse, 
Churchwardens' Accounts, 1349-1560, Somerset Record Society). 
Many parishes possessed land, houses and cattle, and received gifts 
and legacies of all kinds. The proceeds of this property, if given 
for the use of the parish generally, might, if necessary, be available 
for the relief of the poor, but, if given definitely for their use, would 
provide doles, or stock cattle or " poor's " lands, &c. (Cf. Augustus 
Jessopp, Before the Great Pillage, p. 40; and many instances in the 
reports of the Charity Commissioners, 1818-1835.) Of the endow- 
ments for parish doles very many may have disappeared in the break- 
up of the 16th century. There were also " Parish Ales," the proceeds 
of which would be used for parish purposes or for relief. Further, 
all the greater festivals were days of feasting and the distribution 
of food; at funerals also there were often large distributions, and 
also at marriages. The faithful generally, subject to penance, were 



required to relieve the poor and the stranger. In the larger part of 
England the parish and the vill were usually coterminous. In the 
north a parish contained several vills. There were thus side by side 
the charitable relief system of the parish, which at an early date 
became a rating area, and the self-supporting system of the manor. 
The Monasteries. — As Christianity spread monasteries spread, 
and each monastery was a centre of relief. Sometimes they were 
established, like St Albans (796), for a hundred Benedictine monks 
and for the entertainment of strangers; or sometimes without any 
such special purpose, like the abbey of Croyland (reorganized 946), 
which, becoming exceeding rich from its diver sorium pauperum, 
or almonry, " relieved the whole country round so that prodigious 
numbers resorted to it." At Glastonbury, for instance (1537), 
£140 16s. 8d. was given away in doles. But documents seem to 
prove (Denton, England in Fifteenth Century, p. 245) that the 
relief generally given by monasteries was much less than is usually 
supposed. 

The general system may be described (cf. Rule, St Dunst. Cant. 
Archp. p. 42, Dugdale; J. B. Clark, The Observances, Augustinian 
Priory, Barnwell; Abbot Gasquet, English Monastic Life). The 
almonry was usually near the church of the monastery. An almoner 
was in charge. He was to be prudent and discreet in the distribution 
of his doles (portiones) and to relieve travellers, palmers, chaplains 
and mendicants (mendicantes, apparently the beggars recognized 
as living by begging, such as we have noted under other social con- 
ditions), and the leprous more liberally than others. The old and 
infirm, lame and blind who were confined to their beds he was to 
visit and relieve suitably (in competenti annona). The importunity 
of the poor he was to put up with, and to meet their need as far as 
he could. In the almonry there were usually rooms for the sick. 
The sick outside the precincts were relieved at the almoner's dis- 
cretion. Continuous relief might be given after consultation with 
the superior. All the remnants of meals and the old clothes of the 
monks were given to the almoner for distribution, and at Christmas 
he had a store of stockings and other articles to give away as 
presents to widows, orphans and poor clerks. He also provided 
the Maundy gifts and selected the poor for the washing of feet. 
He was thus a local visitor and alms distributor, not merely at the 
gate of the monastery but in the neighbourhood, and had also at 
his disposal " indoor " relief for the sick. Separate from the rest 
of the house there was also a dormitory and rooms and the kitchen 
for strangers. A hospitularius attended to their needs and novices 
waited on them. Guests who were laymen might stay on, work- 
ing in return for board and lodging (Smith's Diet. Christian Antiq., 
"Benedictine"). 

The monasteries often established hospitals; they served also as 
schools for the gentry and for the poor; and they were pioneers of 
agriculture. In the 12th century, in which many monastic orders 
were constituted, there were many lavish endowments. In the 14th 
century their usefulness had begun to wane. At the end of that 
century the larger estates were generally held in entail, with the 
result that younger sons were put into religious houses. This 
worldliness had its natural consequences. In the 15th century, 
owing to mismanagement, waste, and subsequently to the decline 
of rural prosperity, their resources were greatly crippled. In their 
relation to charity one or two points may be noted: (1) Of the small 
population of England the professed monks and nuns with the parish 
priests (Rogers, Hist. Agric. and Prices, i. 58) numbered at least 
30,000 or 40,000. This number of celibates was a standing protest 
against the moral sufficiency of the family life. On the other hand, 
amongst them were the brothers and sisters who visited the poor 
and nursed the sick in hospitals; and many who now succumb 
physically or mentally to the pressure of life, and are cared for in 
institutions, may then have found maintenance and a retreat in 
the monasteries. (2) Bound together by no common controlling 
organization, the monasteries were but so many miscellaneous 
centres of relief, chiefly casual relief. They were mostly " magni- 
ficent hostelries." (3) They stood outside the parish, and they 
weakened its organization and hampered its development. 

The Hospitals. — The revival of piety in the nth century led to 
a large increase in the number of hospitals and hospital orders.' 
To show how far they covered the field in England two instances 
may be quoted. At Canterbury (Creighton, Epidemics, p. 87) there 
were four for different purposes, two endowed by Lanfranc (1084), 
one for poor, infirm, lame and blind men and women, and one out- 
side the town for lepers. These hospitals were put under the charge 
of a priory, and endowed out of tithes payable to the secular clergy. 
Later (Henry II.), a hospital for leprous sisters was established, 
and afterwards a hospital for leprous monks and poor relations of ' 
the monks of St Augustine's. In a less populous parish, Luton 
(Cobbe, Luton Church), there were a hospital for the poor, an alms- 
house, and two hospitals, one for the sick and one for the leprous. 
The word " leper," it is evident, was used very loosely, and was 
applied to many diseases other than leprosy. There were hospitals 
for the infirm and the leprous; the disease was not considered 
contagious. The hospital in its modern sense was but slowly created. 
Thus St Bartholomew's in London was founded (1123) for a master, 
brethren and sisters, and for the entertainment of poor diseased 
persons till they got well; of distressed women big with child till 
they were able to go abroad ; and for the maintenance, until the age 



878 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



of seven, of all such children whose mothers died in the house. 
St Thomas's (rebuilt 1228) had a master and brethren and three lay 
sisters, and 40 beds for poor, infirm and impotent people, who 
had also victual and firing. There were hospitals for many special 
purposes — as for the blind, for instance. There were also many 
hospital orders in England and on the continent. They sprang up 
beside the monastic orders, and for a time were very popular: 
brothers and sisters of the Holy Ghost (1 198), sisters of St Elizabeth 
(1207-1231), Beguines and Beghards (see Beguines), knights of St 
John and others. 

The Mendicant Orders. — The Franciscans tended the sick and 
poor in the slums of the towns with great devotion — indeed, the 
whole movement tells of a splendid self-abandonment and an 
intensity of effort in the early spring of its enthusiasm, and with 
the aid of reform councils and reformations it lengthened out its 
usefulness for two centuries. 

As in the pre-medieval church, the system of relief is that 
Medieval of charitable endowments — a marked contrast to 
endowed the modern method of voluntary associations or 
charities. ra te-supported institutions. 

(1) The Church as Legatee. — The church building among the 
Teutonic races was not held by the bishop as part of what was 
originally the charitable property of the church. It was assigned 
to the patron saint of the church by the donor, who retained the 
right of administration, of which his own patronage or right of 
presentation is a relic. Subsequently, with the study of Roman 
law, the conception of the church as a persona ficta prevailed ; and 
till the larger growth of the gilds and corporations it was the only 
general legatee for charitable gifts. As these arise a large number 
of charitable trusts are created and held by lay corporations; and 
" alms " include gifts for social as well as religious or eleemosynary 
purposes. (2) Freedom from Taxation and Service. — Gifts to the 
church for charitable or other purposes were made in free, pure and 
perpetual alms (" ad tenendum in puram et perpetuam eleemosynam 
sine omni temporali servicio et consuetudine "). Land held under this 
frankalmoign was given " in perpetual alms," therefore the donor 
could not retract it; in free alms, therefore he could exact no ser- 
vices in regard to it; and in pure alms as being free from secular 
jurisdiction (cf. Pollock and Maitland). (3) Alienation and Mort- 
main. — To prevent alienation of property to religious houses, with 
the consequent loss of service to the superior or chief lords, a licence 
from the chief lord was required to legalize the alienation (Magna 
Carta, and Edw. I., De viris religiosis). Other statutes (Edw. I. 
and Rich. II.) enacted that this licence should be issued out 'of 
chancery after investigation; and the principle was applied to 
civil corporations. The necessity of this licence was one lay check 
on injurious alienation. (4) Irresponsible Administration. — Until 
after the 13th century, when the lay courts had asserted their 
right to settle disputes as to lands held in alms, the administration 
of charity was from the lay point of view entirely irresponsible. 
It was outside the secular jurisdiction; and civilly the professed 
clergy, who were the administrators, were " dead." They could 
not sue or be sued except through their sovereign — their chief, the 
abbot. They formed a large body of non-civic inhabitants free from 
the pressure and the responsibilities of civil life. (5) Control. — • 
Apart from the control of the abbot, prior, master or other head, the 
bishop was visitor, or, as we should say, inspector; and abuses 
might be remedied by the visit of the bishop or his ordinary. The 
bishop's ordinary (2 Henry V. i. 1) was the recognized visitor of all 
hospitals apart from the founder. The 'ounder and his family 
retained a right of intervention. Sometimes thus an institution 
was reorganized, or even dissolved, the property reverting to the 
founder (Dugdale, Monasticon Anglicanum, vi. 2. 715). (6) Cy-pres. 
— Charities were, especially after Henry V.'s reign, appropriated to 
other uses, either because their original purpose failed or because 
some new object had become important. Thus, for instance, a. 
college or hospital for lepers (1363) is re-established by the founder's 
family with a master and priest, quod nulli leprosi reperiebantur ; 
and a similar hospital founded in Henry I.'s time near Oxford has 
decayed, and is given by Edward III. to Oriel College, Oxford, to 
maintain a chaplain and poor brethren. Thus, apart from alienation 
pure and simple, the principle of adaptation to new uses was put in 
force at an early date, and supplied many precedents to Wolsey, 
Edward VI. and the post-Reformation bishops. The system of 
endowments was indeed far more adaptable than it would at first 
sight seem to have been. (7) The Sources of Income.— The hospitals 
were chiefly supported by rents or the produce of land; or, if 
attached to monasteries, out of the tithe of their monastic lands or 
other sources of revenue, or out of the appropriated tithes of the 
secular clergy; or they might be in part maintained by collections 
made, for instance, by a commissioner duly authorized by a formal 
attested document, in which were recounted the indulgences by 
popes, archbishops and bishops to those who became its benefactors 
(Cobbe, p. 75) ; or, in the case of leper hospitals, by a leper with a 
" clapdish," who begged in the markets; or by a proctor, in the 
case of more important institutions in towns, who " came with his 
box one day in every month to the churches and other religious 
houses, at times of service, and there received the voluntary gifts 



of the congregation " ; or they might receive inmates on payment, 
and thus apparently a frequent abuse, decayed servants of the court 
and others, were " farmed out." (8) Mode of Admission. — The 
admission was usually, no doubt, regulated by the prior or master. 
At York, at the hospital of St Nicholas for the leprous, the conditions 
of admission were: promise or vow of continence, participation in 
prayer, the abandonment of all business, the inmate's property at 
death to go to the house. This may serve as an example. The 
master was usually one of the regular clergy. (9) Decline of the 
Hospitals. — It is said that, in addition to 645 monasteries and 
90 "colleges" and many chantries, Henry VIII. suppressed no 
hospitals (Speed's Chronicle, p. 778). The numbers seem small. 
In the economic decline at the end of the 15th and beginning of the 
1 6th centuries many hospitals may have lapsed. 

In the 15th century the towns grew in importance. First the 
wool trade and then the cloth trade flourished, and the English 
developed a large shipping trade. The towns grew up 
like " little principalities "; and for the advancement mun a ^ lpat 
of trade, gilds, consisting alike of masters and workmen, charities. 
were formed, which endeavoured to regulate and then 
to monopolize the market. By degrees the corporations of the 
towns were worked in their interests, and the whole commercial 
system became restrictive and inadaptable. Meanwhile the 
towns attracted newcomers; freedom from feudal obligations 
was gained with comparative ease; and a new plebs was con- 
gregating, a population of inhabitants not qualified as burghers 
or gild members, women, sons living with their fathers, menial 
servants and apprentices. There was thus an increasing restric- 
tion imposed on trade, coupled with a growing plebs. Naturally, 
then, lay charities sprang up for members of gilds, and for 
burghers and for the commonalty. Men left estates to their gilds 
to maintain decayed members in hospitals, almshouses or other- 
wise, to educate their children, portion their daughters, and to 
assist their widows. The middle-class trader was thus in great 
measure insured against the risks of life. The gilds were one 
sign of the new temper and wants of burghers freed from feudal- 
ism. Another sign was a new standard of manners. Rules and 
saws, Hesiodic in their tone, became popular — in regard, for 
instance, to such a question as " how to enable a man to live 
on his means, and to keep himself and those belonging to him." 
The boroughs established other charities also, hospitals and alms- 
houses for the people, a movement which, like that of the gilds, 
began very early — in Italy as early as the 9th century. They 
sometimes gave outdoor relief also to registered poor (Green i. 41), 
and they had in large towns courts of orphans presided over by 
the mayor and aldermen, thus taking over a duty that previously 
had been one of conspicuous importance in the church. As early 
as 1 257 in Westphalian towns there was a rough-and-ready 
system of Easter relief of the poor; and in Frankfort in 1437 
there was a town council of almoners with a systematic pro- 
gramme of relief (Ratzinger, p. 352). Thus at the close of the 
middle ages the towns were gradually assuming what had been 
charitable functions of the church. 

While a new freedom was being attained by the labourer in 
the country and the burgher in the town, the difficulty of obtain- 
ing a sufficient supply of labour for agriculture must statutor 
have been constant, especially at every visitation of w * g " or} 
plague and famine. In accordance with a general control. 
policy of state regulation which was to control and 
supervise industry, agriculture and poor relief and to repress 
vagrancy by gaols and houses of correction, the state stepped 
in as arbiter and organizer. By Statutes of Labourers beginning 
in 1351 (25 Edw. III. 135), it aimed at enforcing a settled wage 
and restraining migration. From 1351ft endeavoured to suppress 
mendicity, and in part to systematize it in the interest of infirm 
and aged mendicants. Each series of enactments is the natural 
complement of the other. In the main their signification, from 
the point of view of charity, lies in the fact that they represent 
a persistent endeavour to prevent social unsettlement and in 
part the distress which unsettlement causes, and which vagrancy 
in some measure indicates, by keeping the people within the 
ranks of recognized dependence, the settled industry of the 
crafts and of agriculture, or forcing them back into it by fear 
of the gaol or the stocks. The extreme point of this policy was 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



879 



reached when by the laws of Edward VI. and Elizabeth the 
"rogue, vagabond or sturdy beggar" was branded with an R 
on the shoulder and handed over as a bondman for a period to any 
one who would take him. On the other hand, it was desired 
that relief should be a means of preventing migration. In any 
time of general pressure there is a desire to organize mendicity, 
to prevent the wandering of beggars, to create a kind of settled 
poor, distinguished from the rest as infirm and not able-bodied, 
and to keep these at least at home sufficiently supported by local 
and parochial relief; and this, in its simpler form all the world 
over, has in the past been by response to public begging. The 
argument may be summed up thus: We cannot have begging, 
which implies that the beggar is cared for by no one, belongs 
to no one, and therefore throws himself on the world at large. 
Therefore, if he is able-bodied he must be punished as unsocial, 
for it is his fault that he belongs to no one; or we must make 
him some one's dependant, and so keep him; or if he is infirm, 
and therefore of no service to any one — if no one will keep him — 
we must organize his mendicity, for such mendicity is justified. 
If he cannot dig for the man to whom he does or should belong, 
he must beg. Then out of the failure to organize mendicity 
— for relief of itself is no remedy, least of all casual relief — 
a poor-law springs up, which, afterwards associated with the 
provision of employment, will, it is hoped, make relief in some 
measure remedial by increasing its quantity by means of com- 
pulsory levies. This argument, which combined statutory wage 
control and statutory poor relief, seems to have been firmly 
bedded in the English legislative mind for more than two centuries , 
from 1351 till after 1600; and until 1834 these two series of laws 
effectually reduced the English labourer to a new industrial 
dependence. To people imbued with ideas of feudalism the way 
of escape from villenage seemed to be not independence, but 
a new reversion to it. 

Many elements produced the social and economic catastrophe 
of the 16th century, for the condition into which the country 
fell can hardly be considered less than a catastrophe. 
With the growing independence of the people there was 
created after the 13th century an unsettled " master- 
less " class, a residue of failure resulting from social changes, 
which was large and important enough to call for legislation. 
In the 15th century, " the golden age of the English labourer," 
the towns increased and flourished. Both town and country did 
well. At the end of the century came the decadence. The 
measure of the strain, when perhaps it had reached its lowest 
level, is indicated by the following comparison: ".The cost of 
a peasant's family of four in the early part of the 14th century 
was £3:4:9; after 1540 it was £8 " (Rogers, Hist, of Agric. and 
Prices, iv. 756). 

The cause of this has now been fairly investigated. The value 
of land in the 13th century generally depended chiefly on " the 
head of labour " retained upon it. Its fertility depended on main- 
oeuvre (manure). To keep labour upon it was therefore the aim 
of the lord or owner. The enclosing of lands for sheep began early, 
and in the time of Edward III., in the great days of the woolstaple, 
must have been extensive. So long as the demand for the exporta- 
tion of wool, and then for its consumption at home in the cloth trade, 
continued, the towns prospered, and the enclosures did not become 
a grievance. Even before the reign of Henry VII., with the decay 
of trade, the towns decayed, and their population in some cases 
diminished extraordinarily. This reacted on the country, where the 
great families had already become impoverished, and were hardly 
able to support their retainers. In Henry VIII. 's time the lands of 
the religious houses were confiscated. Worked on old lines, the 
custom of tillage remained in force on them. Accordingly, when 
these estates fell into private hands they were transferred subject 
to the condition that they should be tilled as heretofore. The con- 
dition was evaded by the new owners, and the disbandment of farm 
labourers went on apace. In England and Wales these changes, it is 
said, affected a third of the country, more than 12,000,000 acres, if 
the estimates be correct, or rather a third of the best land in the 
kingdom. With towns decaying, the effect of this must have been 
terrible. What were really " latifundia " were created, " great 
landes," " enclosures of a mile or two or thereabouts . . . destroy- 
ing thereby not only the farms and cottages within the same circuits, 
but also the towns and villages adjoining." A herdsman and his 
wite took the place of eighteen to twenty-four farm hands. The 
people thus set wandering could only join the wanderers from the 



The de- 
cadence. 



decaying towns. At the same time the economic difficulty was 
aggravated by a new patrician or commercial greed ; and once more 
the land question — the absorption of property into a few hands 
instead of its free exchange — led to lasting social demoralization. 
A few years after the alienation of the monasteries the coinage 
(!543) was debased. By this means prices were arbitrarily raised, 
and wages were increased nominally; but nevertheless the price 
of necessaries was " so enhanced " that neither " the poor labourers 
can live with their wages that is limited by your grace's laws, nor 
the artificers can make, much less sell, their wares at any reasonable 
price " (Lamond, The Commonweal of this Realm of England, p. xlvii). 
No social reformation, such as the charitable instincts of W'ycliffe, 
More, Hales, Latimer and other men suggested, was attempted, or 
at least persistently carried out. In towns the organization of labour 
had become restrictive, exclusive and inadaptable, or, judged from 
the moral standpoint, uncharitable. There had been a time of plenty 
and extravagance, of which in high quarters the famous " field of 
the cloth of gold " was typical; and probably, in accordance with 
the frequently observed law of social economics, as the advance in 
wages and their purchasing power in the earlier part of the 15th 
century had not been accompanied by a simultaneous advance in 
self-discipline and intelligent expenditure, it resulted in part in 
lessened competence and industrial ability on the part of the work- 
men, and thus in the end produced pauperism. 

The poverty of the country was very great in the reigns of 
Edward VI. and Elizabeth. Adversity then taught the people 
new manners, and households became more simple and thrifty. 
In the reign of James I., with enforced economy and thrift, a 
" slow but substantial improvement in agriculture " took place, 
and a new growth of commercial enterprise. The vigour of the 
municipalities had abated, so that in Henry VIII. 's time they 
had become the very humble servants of the government; 
and the government, on the other hand, had become strongly 
centralized — in itself a sign of the general withdrawal of self- 
sustaining activity in all administration, in the administration 
of charitable relief no less than in other departments. A system 
of endowed charities had been built up, supported chiefly by 
rents from landed property. These now had disappeared, and 
thus the means of relief, which Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth 
might have utilized at a time of general distress, had been dis- 
sipated by the acts of their predecessors. The civil independence 
of the monasteries and religious houses might have been justified, 
possibly, when they were engaged in missionary work and were 
instilling into the people the precepts of a higher moral law than 
that which was in force around them. But afterwards, as the 
ability and intelligence of the community increased, their privi- 
leges became more and more antagonistic to charity, and tended 
to create a non-social and even anti-social ecclesiastical democracy 
actuated by aims and interests in which the general good of the 
people had little or no place. There was a growing alienation 
between religious tradition and secular opinion, as Lollardism 
slowly permeated the thought of the people and led the way 
to the Reformation. While this alienation existed no national 
system of charity, civic and yet religious, could be created. But 
worse than all, the ideal of charity had been degraded. A self- 
regarding system of relief had superseded charity, and it was 
productive of nothing but alms, large or small, isolated and un- 
methodic, given with a wrong bias, and thus almost inevitably 
with evil results. Out of this could spring no vigorous co-opera- 
tive charity. Charity — not relief — indeed seemed to have left 
the world. The larger issues were overlooked. Then the property 
of the hospitals and the gilds was wantonly confiscated, though 
the poor had already lost that share in the revenues of the church 
to which at one time they were admitted to have a just claim. 
A new beginning had to be made. The obligations of charity had 
to be revived. A new organization of charitable relief had to . 
be created, and that with an empty exchequer and after a vast 
waste of charitable resources. There were signs of a new con- 
gregational and parochial energy, yet the task could not be 
entrusted to the religious bodies, divided and disunited as they 
were. In their stead it could be imposed only on some authority 
which represented the general community, such as municipalities; 
and in spite of the centralization of the government there seemed 
some hope of creating a system of relief in connexion with them. 
They were tried, and, very naturally, failed. In the poverty of 
the time it seemed that the poor could be relieved only by a 



88o 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



compulsory rate, and the administration of statutory relief 
naturally devolved on the central government — the only vigorous 
administrative body left in the country. The government might 
indeed have adopted the alternative of letting the industrial 
difficulties of the country work themselves out, but they had 
inherited a policy of minute legislative control, and they continued 
it. Revising previous statutes, they enacted the Poor Law, 
which still remains on the statute book. It could be no remedy 
for social offences against charity and the community. But in 
part at least it was successful. It helped to conceal the failure 
to find a remedy. 

Part VI. — After the Reformation 
During the Reformation, which extended, it should be under- 
stood, from the middle of the 14th century to the reign of James I., 
The t ^ le groundwork of the theory of charity was being 

Reform*- recast. The old system and the narrow theory on which 
Hon theory £t had come to depend were discredited. The recoil 
of charity. j g startling. To a very large extent charitable ad- 
ministration had been in the hands of men and women who, as 
an indispensable condition to their participation in it, took 
the vows of obedience, chastity and " wilful " poverty. Now 
this was all entirely set aside. It was felt (see Homilies on Faith 
and Good Works, &°c, a.d. 1547) that socially and morally the 
method had been a failure. The vow of obedience, it was argued, 
led to a general disregard of the duties of civic and family life. 
Those who bound themselves by it were outside the state and 
did not serve it. In regard to chastity the Homily states the 
common opinion: " How the profession of chastity was kept, 
it is more honesty to pass over in silence and let the world judge 
of what is well known." As to wilful poverty, the regulars, it 
is urged, were not poor, but rich, for they were in possession of 
much wealth. Their property, it is true, was held in communi, 
and not personally, but nevertheless it was practically theirs, 
and they used it for their personal enjoyment; and " for all 
their riches they might never help father nor mother, nor others 
that were indeed very needy and poor, without the license of 
their father abbot" or other head. This was the negative position. 
The positive was found in the doctrine of justification — the central 
point in the discussions of the time, a plant from the garden of 
St Augustine. Justification was the personal conviction of a 
lively (or living) faith, and was defined as "a true trust and 
confidence of the mercy of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and a stedfast hope of all good things to be received at His hands." 
Without this justification there could be no good works. They 
were the signs of a lively faith and grew out of it. Apart from 
it, what seemed to be " good works " were of the nature of sin, 
phantom acts productive of nothing, " birds that were lost, 
unreal." So were the works of pagans and heretics. The 
relation of almsgiving to religion was thus entirely altered. The 
personal reward here or hereafter to the actor was eliminated. 
The deed was good only in the same sense in which the doer was 
good; it had in itself no merit. This was a great gain, quite 
apart from any question as to the sufficiency or insufficiency of 
the Protestant scheme of salvation. The deed, it was realized, 
was only the outcome of the doer, the expression of himself, 
what he was as a whole, neither better nor worse. Logically 
this led to the discipline of the intelligence and the emotions, 
and undoubtedly " justification "' to very many was only con- 
sistent with such discipline and implied it. Thus under a new 
guise the old position of charity reasserted itself. But there were 
other differences. 

The relation of charity to prayer, fasting, almsgiving and penance 
was altsred. The prayerful contemplation of the Christ was pre- 
served in the mysticism of Protestantism ; but it was dissociated 
from the " historic Christ," from the fervent idealization of whom 
St Francis drew his inspiration and his active charitable impulse. 
The tradition did not die out, however. It remained with many, 
notably with George Herbert, of whom it made, not unlike St Francis, 
a poet as well as a practical parish priest; but the absence of it 
indicated in much post-Reformation endeavour a want, if not of 
devotion, yet of intensity of feeling which may in part account for 
the fact that sectarianism in relief has since proved itself stronger 
than charity, instead of yielding to charity as its superior and its 



organizer. Fasting was parted from prayer and almsgiving. It 
was " a thing not of its own proper nature good as the love of father 
or mother or neighbour, but according to its end." Almsgiving also 
as a " work " disappeared and with it a whole series of inducements 
that from the standpoint of the pecuniary and material supply of 
relief had long been active. It was no wonder that the preachers 
advocated it in vain, and reproached their hearers with their dimin- 
ished bounty to the poor ; the old personal incentive had gone, and 
could only gradually be superseded by the spontaneous activity of 
personal religion very slowly wedding itself to true views of social 
duty and purpose. Penance, once so closely related to almsgiving, 
passed out of sight. Charity, the love of God and our neighbour, had 
two offices, it was said, " to cherish good and harmless men " and 
" to correct and punish vice without regard to persons." Correction 
as a means of discipline takes the place of penance, and it becomes 
judicial, regulating and controlling church membership by the 
authority of the church, a congregation, minister or elder ; or deal- 
ing with laziness or ill-doing through the municipality or state, in 
connexion with what now first appear, not prisons, but houses of 
correction. 

The religious life was to be democratic — not in religious 
bodies, but in the whole people; and in a new sense — in relation 
to family and social life — it was to be moral. That was the 
significance of the Reformation for charity. 

Consistently with this movement of religious activity towards 
a complete fulfilment of the duties of civic life, the older classical 
social theory, fostered by the Renaissance, assumed a _ 
new influence — the great conception of the state as a organiza- 
community bound together by charity and friendship. Hon of 
" We be not born to ourselves," it was said, " but m ^ c '/" / 
partly to the use of our country, of our parents, of our 
kinsfolk, and partly of our friends and neighbours; and therefore 
all good virtues are grafted on us naturally, whose effects be 
to do good to others, when it showeth forth the image of God 
in man, whose property is ever to do good to others " (Lamond, 
p. 14). Economic theoryalso changed. Instead of the medieval 
opinion of the " theologian or social preacher," that " trade 
could only be defended on the ground that honestly conducted 
it made no profit " (Green, ii. 71), we have a recognition of the 
advantages resulting from exchange, and individual interests, 
it is argued, are not necessarily inconsistent with those of the 
state, but are, on the contrary, a source of solid good to the whole 
community. 

Municipal laws for the suppression of the mendicity of the able- 
bodied and the organization of relief on behalf of the infirm were 
common in England and on the continent (Colmar, 1362; Nurem- 
berg, 1478 ; Strassburg, 1523 ; London, 1514). Vives (Ehrle, Beitrdge 
zur Geschichte und Reform der Armenpflege, p. 26), a Spaniard, who 
had been at the court of Henry VIII., in a book translated into 
several languages and widely read, seems to have summed up the 
thought of the time in regard to the management of the poor. 
He divided them into three classes: those in hospitals and poor- 
houses, the public homeless beggars and the poor at home. He 
would have a census taken of the number of each class in the town, 
and information obtained as to the causes of their distress. Then 
he would establish a central organization of relief under the magis- 
trates. Work was to be supplied for all, while begging was strictly 
forbidden. Non-settled poor who were able-bodied were to be sent 
to their homes. Able-bodied settled poor who knew no craft were 
to be put on some public work — the undeserving being set to hard 
labour. For others work was to be found, or they were to be assisted 
to become self-supporting. The hospitals provided with medical 
advice and necessaries were to be classified to meet the needs of the 
sick, the blind and lunatics. The poor living at home were to work 
with a view to their self-support. What they earned, if insufficient, 
might be supplemented. If a citizen found a case of distress he was 
not to help it, but to send it for inquiry to the magistrate. Children 
were to be taught. Private relief was to be obtained from the rich. 
The funds of endowed charities were to be the chief source of income ; 
if more was wanted, bequests and church collections would suffice. 
The scheme was put in force in Ypres in 1524. The Sorbonne 
approved it, and similar plans were adopted in Paris and elsewhere. 
It is in outline the scheme of London municipal charity promoted 
by Edward VI., by which the poor were classified, St Bartholomew's 
and St Thomas's hospitals appropriated for the sick, Christ's hospital 
for the children of the poor, and Bridewell for the correction of the 
able-bodied. Less the institutional arrangements and plus the 
compulsory rate, the methods are those of the Poor Relief Act of 
Queen Elizabeth of 1601. At first the attempt had been made to 
introduce state relief in reliance on voluntary alms (1 Mary 13, 
5 Eliz. 3, 1562-1563), subject to the right of assessment if alms were 
refused. But the position was anomalous. Charity is voluntary, 
and spontaneously meets the demands of distress. Such demands 
have always a tendency to increase with the supply. Hence the very 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



881 



limitations of charitable finance are in the nature of a safeguard. 
At most economic trouble can only be assuaged by relief, and it can 
only be met or prevented by economic and social reforms. If a 
compulsory rate be not enforced, as in Scotland and formerly in 
some parishes in England, a voluntary rate may be made in supple- 
mentation of the local charities. In Scotland, where the compulsory 
clauses of the Poor Relief Act of James I. were not put in force, the 
country weathered the storm without them, and the compulsory 
rate, which was extended throughout the country by the Poor Act of 
1844, came in very slowly in the 18th and 19th centuries. In 
France (1566) a similar act was passed and set aside. If a compul- 
sory rate be enforced, it is inevitable that the resources of charity, 
unless kept apart from the poor-law and administered on different 
lines from it, will diminish, and at the same time, as has happened 
often in the case of endowed charities, the interest in charitable 
administration will lapse, while the charges for poor-law relief, 
drawn without much scruple from the taxation of the community, 
will mount to millions either to meet increasing demands or to pro- 
vide more elaborate institutional accommodation. The principle 
once adopted, it was enacted (1572-1573) that the aged and infirm 
should be cared for by the overseers of the poor, a new authority; 
and in 1601 the duplicate acts were passed, that for the relief of 
the poor (43 Eliz. 2), and that for the furtherance and protection 
of endowed charities. Thus the poor were brought into the depend- 
ence of a legally recognized class, endowed with a claim for relief, 
on the fulfilment of which, after a time, they could without difficulty 
insist if they were so minded. The civic authority had indeed taken 
over the alms of the parish, and an eleemosyna civica had taken the 
place of the annona civica. It was a similar system under a different 
name. 

A phrase of Robert Cecil's (1st earl of Salisbury) indicates the 
minute domestic character of the Elizabethan legislation (D'Ewes, 
Poor Relief 674). The question (1601) was the repeal of a statute 
Acts and of tillage. Cecil says: "If in Edward I.'s time a 
statutory j aw was m ade for the maintenance of the fry of fish, 
ora. an( j j n jj enrv VII. 's for the preservation of the eggs 
of wild fowl, shall we now throw away a law of more 
consequence and import? If we debar tillage, we give scope 
to the depopulating. And then, if the poor being thrust out of 
their houses go to dwell with others, straight we catch them 
with the statute of inmates; if they wander abroad, they are 
within the danger of the statute of the poor to be whipt. So by 
this undo this "Statute, and you endanger many thousands." 
A strong central government, a local authority appointed directly 
by the government, and a network of legislation controlled the 
whole movement of economic life. On this reliance was placed 
to meet economic difficulties. The local authorities were the 
justices of the peace; and they had to carry out the statutes 
for this purpose, to assess the wages of artisans and labourers, 
and to enforce the payment of the wages they had fixed; to 
ensure that suitable provision was made for the relief of the poor 
at the expense of rates which they also fixed; and to suppress 
vagabondage. Since 23 Edw. III. there had been labour statutes, 
and in 1563 a new statute was passed, an " Act containing divers 
orders for Artificers, Labourers, Servants of Husbandry and 
Apprentices " (5 Eliz. c. 4). It recognized and upheld a social 
classification. On the one hand there was the gentleman or 
owner of property to which the act was not to apply; and on 
the other the artisan and labouring class. This class in turn was 
subdivided, and the justices were to assess their wages annually 
according to " the plenty and scarcity of the time and other 
circumstances." Persons between the ages of twelve and sixty, 
who were not apprentices or engaged in certain specified employ- 
ments, were compelled to serve in husbandry by the year " with 
any person that keepeth husbandry." The length of the day's 
work and the conditions of apprenticeship were fixed. The 
assessed rate of wages was enforceable by fine and imprisonment, 
and refusal to be apprenticed by imprisonment. Thus there 
was created a life control over labour with an industrial settle- 
ment and a wage fixed by the justices annually. There are 
differences of opinion in regard to the extent to which this act 
was enforced; and the evidence on the point is comparatively 
scanty. It was enforced thrqughout the century in which it 
was passed, and it probably continued in force generally until 
the Restoration, while subsequently it was put in operation to 
meet special emergencies, such as times of distress when some 
settlement of wages seemed desirable (cf. Rogers, v. 611; 
Hewins, English Trade and Finance, p. 82; Cunningham, Growth 



of English Industry and Commerce: Modem Times, i. 168). It 
was not repealed till 1814. 

From 1585 to 1622 there was, it is said, a slight increase in 
labourers' wages, which fluctuated from 5s. |d. to 5s. 8jd. a 
week, with a declining standard of comfort and at times great 
distress. Then there was a marked increase of wage till 1662 
and " a very marked improvement; the rate of increase being 
very nearly double that of the earlier periods," and reaching 
gs., " as the highest weekly rate for the whole period." Then 
from 1662 to 1702 there was "a slight improvement" (Hewins, 
p. 89). It would seem indeed that the stir of the times between 
1622 and 1662 may have caused a great demand for labour. 
But with the Restoration, when the assessment system was 
falling into desuetude, came the Poor Relief Act of 1662 (13 & 
14 Car. II. cap. 62), which brought in the law of settlement, and 
a settlement for relief of a very strict nature was added to the 
industrial settlement of the Artificers and Labourers Act. Thus, 
if the influence of that act, which had so long controlled labour, 
was waning, its place was now taken by an act which, though it 
had nothing to do with the assessment of wage, yet so settled the 
labourer within the bounds of his parish that he had practically 
to rely, if not upon a wage fixed by the justices, yet upon a 
customary wage limited and restricted as a result of the law of 
settlement. And the assessment by the justices, in so far as it 
may have continued, would therefore be of little or no con- 
sequence. Settlement also, like the Artificers and Lahourers Act, 
would prevent the country labourer from passing to the towns, 
or the townsmen passing to other towns. At least they would 
do so at the risk of forfeiting their right to relief if they lost their 
settlement without acquiring a new one. Hence the industrial 
control, though under another name and other conditions, 
remained in force to a large extent in practice. 

By the Artificers and Labourers Act then, in conjunction with 
other measures, the labouring classes were finally committed to 
a new bondage, when they had freed themselves from the serfdom 
of feudalism, and when the control exercised over them by the 
gild and municipality was relaxed. The statute was so enforced 
that to earn a year's livelihood would have taken a labourer not 
52 weeks, but sometimes two years, or 58 weeks, or 80 weeks, 
or 72 weeks; sometimes, however, less — 48 or 35. It followed 
that on such a system the country could only with the utmost 
good fortune free itself from the economic difficulties of the 
century, and that the need of a poor-law was felt the more as 
these difficulties persisted. A voluntary or a municipal system 
could not suffice, even as a palliative, while such statutes as 
these were in force to render labour immobile and unprogressive. 
Also, while wages were fixed by statute or order, whether chiefly 
in the interest of the employers or not, obviously any shortage 
on the wages had to be made good by the community. The 
community, by fixing the wages to be earned in a livelihood, 
made itself responsible for their sufficiency. And it is suggestive 
to find that in the year in which the Artificers and Labourers Act 
(1563) was passed, the act for the enforcement of assessments 
of poor-rate (5 Eliz. cap. 3) was also enacted. The Law of 
Settlement, to which we have referred, passed in the reign of 
Charles II., was due, it is said, to a migration of labourers 
southward from counties where less favourable statutory wages 
prevailed; but it was, in fact, only a corollary of the Artificers 
and Labourers Act of 1563 and the Poor Relief Act of 1601. 
These laws, it may be said, were the means of making the English 
labourer, until the poor-law reform of 1834, a settled but landless 
serf, supported by a fixed wage and a state bounty. By the poor- 
law it was possible to continue this state of things till, in con- 
sequence of an absolute economic breakdown, there was no 
alternative but reform. 

The philanthropic nature of the poor-law is indicated by its 
antecedents: once enacted, its bounties became a right; its 
philanthropy disappeared in a quasi-legal claim. Its object was 
to relieve the poor by home industries, apprentice children, and 
provide necessary relief to the poor unable to work. The act was 
commonly interpreted so as to include the whole of that indefinite 
class, the " poor "; by a better and more rigid interpretation it 



882 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



was, at least in the 19th century,held to apply only to the " desti- 
tute," that is, to those who required " necessary relief " — accord- 
ing to the actual wording of the statute. The economic fallacy 
of home industries founded on rate-supplied capital early declared 
itself, and the method could only have continued as long as it did 
because it formed part of a general system of industrial control. 
When in the 18th century workhouses were established, the same 
industrial fallacy, as records show, repeated itself under new 
conditions. Within the parish it resulted in the farmer paying 
the labourer as small a wage as possible, and leaving the parish 
to provide whatever he might require in addition during his 
working life and in his old age. Thus, indeed, a gigantic experi- 
ment in civic employment was made for at least two centuries on 
a vast scale throughout the country — and failed. As was natural, 
the lack of economic independence reacted on the morals of 
the people. With pauperism came want of energy, idleness and 
a disregard for chastity and the obligations of marriage. The law, 
it is true, recognized the mutual obligations of parents and grand- 
parents, children and grandchildren; but in the general poverty 
which it was itself a means of perpetuating such obligations 
became practically obsolete, while at all times they are difficult 
to enforce. Still, the fact that they were recognized implies a 
great advance in charitable thought. The act, passed at first 
from year to year, was very slowly put in force. Even before it 
was passed the poor-rate first assessed under the act of 1563 was 
felt to be " a greater tax than some subsidies," and in the time 
of Charles II. it amounted to a third of the revenue of England 
and Wales (Rogers, v. 81). 

The service of villein and cottar was, as we have now seen, in 
part superseded by what we have called a statutory wage-control, 
founded on a basis of wage supplemented by relief, provided by a 
rate-supported poor-law. But it follows .that with the decay of 
this system the poor-law itself should have disappeared, or should 
have taken some new and very limited form. Unfortunately, 
as in Roman times, state relief proved to be a popular and 
vigorous parasite that outlived the tree on which it was rooted : 
assessments of wage under the Statute of Labourers fell into 
disuse after the Restoration, it is said, and the statute was 
finally repealed in 1814, and sixty years later the act against 
illegal combinations of working men; but the serfdom of the 
poor-law, the eleemosyna civica, remained, to work the gravest 
evil to the labouring classes, and even after the reform of 1834 
greatly impeded the recovery of their independence. Neverthe- 
less, by a new law of state alms for the aged, or by statutory 
outdoor relief with, as some would wish, a regulated wage, it is 
now proposed to bring them once again under a thraldom similar 
to that from which they have so slowly emancipated themselves. 

The policy adopted by Queen Elizabeth for the relief of the 
poor (1601) included a scheme for the reorganization of voluntary 
charity as well as plans for the extension of rate-aided 
endowed re ^ e f • During the century, as we have seen, endeavours 
charities, had been made to create a system of voluntary charity. 
This it was proposed to safeguard and promote con- 
currently with the extension of the poor-rate. Accordingly, in 
the poor-law it was arranged that the overseers, the new civic 
authority, and the churchwardens, the old parochial and charit- 
able authority, should act in conjunction, and, subject to magis- 
terial approval, together " raise weekly or otherwise " the 
necessary means " by taxation of every inhabitant." The old 
charitable organization was based on endowment, and the church- 
warden was responsible for the administration of many such 
endowments. What was not available from these and other 
sources was to be raised " by taxation." The object of the new 
act was to encourage charitable gifts. 

Towards the end of the 18th century, when the administration 
of poor relief fell into confusion, many charities were lost, or were 
in danger of being lost, and many were mismanaged. In 1786 
and 1788 a committee of the House of Commons reported on the 
subject. In 1818, chiefly through the instrumentality of Lord 
Brougham, a commission of inquiry on educational charities was 
appointed, and in 1819 another commission to investigate (with 
some exceptions) all the charities for the poor in England and 



Wales. These and subsequent commissions continued their 
inquiries till 1835, when a select committee of the House of 
Commons made a strong report, advocating the establishment 
of a permanent and independent board, to inquire, to compel 
the production of accounts, to secure the safe custody of charity 
property, to adapt it to new uses on cy-pres lines, &c. A com- 
mission followed in 1849, and eventually in 1853 the first 
Charitable Trusts Act was passed, under which " The Charity 
Commissioners of England and Wales " were appointed. 

The following are details of importance: — (1) Definition. — The 
definition of the act of 1601 (Charitable Uses, 43 Eliz. 4) still holds 
good. It enumerates as charitable objects all that was once called 
" alms ": (a) " The relief of aged, impotent and poor people " — 
the normal poor; "the maintenance of sick and maimed soldiers 
and mariners " — the poor chiefly by reason of war, sometime a class 
of privileged mendicants; (V) education, " schools of learning, free 
schools and scholars in universities " ; and then (c) a group of 
objects which include general civic and religious purposes, and the 
charities of gilds and corporations; " the repair of bridges, ports, 
havens, causeways, churches, sea-banks and highways; the educa- 
tion and preferment of orphans ; the relief, stock, or maintenance for 
houses of correction; marriages of poor maids, supportation, aid, 
and help of young tradesmen, handicraftsmen, and persons de- 
cayed " ; and there follows (d) " the relief or redemption of prisoners 
or captives " ; and, lastly, (e) " the aid and ease of any poor inhabit- 
ants concerning payment of fifteens " (the property-tax of Tudor 
times), setting out of soldiers, and other taxes. The definition might 
be illustratedby the charitable bequests of the next 60, or indeed 
225, years. It is a fair summary of them. (2) Charitable Gifts. — 
A public trust and a charitable trust are, as this definition shows, 
synonymous. It is a trust which relates to public charities, and 
is not held for the benefit of private persons, e.g. relations, but for 
the common good, and, subject to the instructions of the founder, 
by trustees responsible to the community. Gifts for charitable 
purposes, other than those affected by the law of mortmain, have 
always been viewed with favour, " Where a charitable bequest is 
capable of two constructions, one of which would make it void and 
the other would make it effectual, the latter will be adopted by the 
court " (Tudor's Charitable Trusts, ed. 1906, by Bristowe, Hunt and 
Burdett, p. 167). Gifts to the poor, or widows, or orphans, in- 
definitely, or in a particular parish, were valid under the act, or for 
any purpose or institution for the aid of the " poor." Thus practi- 
cally the act covered the same field as the poor-law, though after- 
wards it was decided that, " as a rule, persons receiving parochial 
relief were not entitled to the benefit of a charity intended for the 
poor " (Tudor, p. 167). (3) Religious Differences. — In the adminis- 
tration of charities which are for the poor the broadest view is taken 
of religious differences. (4) Superstitious Uses. — The superstitious 
use is one that has for its object the propagation of the rights of 
a religion not tolerated by the law (Tudor, p. 4). Consequently, 
so far as charities were held or left subject to such rights, they 
were illegal, or became legal only as toleration was extended. Thus 
by degrees, since the Toleration Act of 1688, all charities to dis- 
senters have become legal — that is, trusts for schools, places for reli- 
gious instruction, education and charitable purposes generally. But 
bequests for masses for the soul of the donor, or for monastic orders, 
are still void. (5) Administration. — The duty of administering 
charitable trusts falls upon trustees or corporations, and under the 
term " eleemosynary corporations " are included endowed hospitals 
and colleges. Under schemes of the Charity Commissioners, where 
charities have been remodelled, besides trustees elected by corpora- 
tions, there are now usually appointed ex-officio trustees who repre- 
sent some office or institution of importance in connexion with the 
charity. (6) Jurisdiction by Chancery and Charity Commission. — The 
Court of Chancery has jurisdiction over charities, under the old 
principle that " charities are trusts of a public nature, in regard to 
which no one is entitled by an immediate and peculiar interest to 
prefer a complaint for compelling the performance by the trustees 
of their obligations." The court, accordingly, represents the crown 
as parens patriae. Now, by the Charitable Trusts Act 1853, and 
subsequent acts, a charity commission has been formed wh ; ch is 
entrusted with large powers, formerly enforced only by the Court 
of Chancery. (7) Jurisdiction by Visitor. — A further jurisdiction 
is by the " visitor," a right inherent in the founder of any eleemosy- 
nary corporation, and his heirs, or those whom he appoints, or in 
their default, the king. The object of the visitor is " to prevent all 
perverting of the charity, or to compose differences among members 
of the corporation." Formerly the bishop's ordinary was the recog- 
nized visitor (2 Henry V. 1, 1414) of hospitals, apart from the 
founder. Subsequently his power was limited (14 Eliz. c. 5, 1572) 
to hospitals for which the founders had appointed no visitors. 
Then (1601) by the Charitable Uses Act commissions were issued 
for inquiry by county juries. Now, apart from the duty of visitors, 
inquiry is conducted by the charity commissioners and the assistant 
commissioners. By subsequent acts (see below) ecclesiastical and elee- 
mosynary charities have been still further separaced and defined. (8) 
Advice. — " Trustees, or other persons concerned in the management 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



883 



of a charity, may apply to the charity commissioners for their 
opinion, advice or direction; and any person acting under such 
advice is indemnified, unless he has been guilty of misrepresentation 
in obtainingit." (9) Limitation of Charity Commissioners' Powers. — 
The commissioners cannot, however, make any order with respect 
to any charity of which the gross annual income amounts to £50 or 
upwards, except on the application (in writing) of the trustees or a 
majority of them. Their powers are thus very limited, except when 
put in motion by the trustees. If a parish is divided they can 
apportion the charities if the gross income does not exceed £20. 
(10) General Poviers of the Charity Commission. — Subject to the 
limitation of £50, &c, the charity commissioners have power (Charit- 
able Trusts Act i860) to make orders for the appointment or 
removal of trustees, or of any officer, and for the transfer, payment 
and' vesting of any real or personal estate, or " for the establishment 
of any scheme for the administration " of the charity. (11) Schemes 
and Remodelling of Charities. — Under this power charities are re- 
modelled, and small and miscellaneous charities put into one fund 
and applied to new purposes. The cy-pres doctrine is applied, by 
which if a testator leaves directions that are only indefinite^ or if the 
objects for which a charity was founded are obsolete, the charity is 
applied to some purpose, as far as possible, in accordance with 
the charitable intention of the founder. This doctrine probably 
received its widest application in the City of London Parochial 
Charities Act of 1 883. Under other acts doles have been applied to 
education and to allotments. About 380 schemes are issued in the 
course of a year. (12) Objects adopted in remodelling Charities. — 
In the remodelling of charities for the general benefit of the poor 
some one or more of thirteen objects are usually included in the 
scheme. These are subscriptions to a medical charity, to a provident 
club or coal or clothing society, to a friendly society; for nurses, for 
annuities, for outfit for service, &c. ; for emigration ; for recreation 
grounds, clubs, reading-rooms, museums, lectures; for temporary 
relief to a limited amount in each year; for clothes ; fuel, tools, 
medical aid, food, &c, or in money " in cases of unexpected loss or 
sudden destitution"; for' pensions. (13) Parochial Charities. — By 
the Local Government Act of 1892, local ecclesiastical charities, i.e. 
endowments for " any spiritual purpose that is a legal purpose " (for 
spiritual persons, church and other buildings, for spiritual uses, &c), 
are separated from parochial charities, " the benefits of v/hich are, 
or the separate distribution of the benefits of which is, confined to 
inhabitants of a single parish, or of a single ancient ecclesiastical 
parish, or not more than five neighbouring parishes." These 
charities, since the Local Government Act 1894, are under the 
supervision of the parish councils, who appoint trustees for their 
management in lieu of the former overseer or vestry trustees, or, 
under certain conditions, " additional trustees." The accounts 
have to be submitted to the parish meeting, and the names of the 
beneficiaries of dole charities published. (14) Sfficial Trustees. — 
There is also " an official trustee of charity lands," who as "bare 
trustee " may hold the land or stock of the charity managed by 
the trustees or administrators. In 1905 the stock transferred to 
the official trustees amounted to £24,820,945. (15) Audit. — The 
charity commissioners have no power of audit, but the trustees 
of every charity have to prepare a statement of accounts annually, 
and transmit it to the commission. The accounts have to be " certi- 
fied under the hand of one or more of the trustees and by the auditor 
of the charity." (16) Taxation. — In the case of rents and profits of 
lands, &c, belonging to hospitals or almshouses, or vested in trustees 
for charitable purposes, allowances are made in diminution of income- 
tax (56 Vict. 35 § 61). From the inhabited house duty any hos- 
pital charity school, or house provided for the reception or relief of 
poor persons, is exempted (House Tax Act 1808). Also there is an 
extmption from the land-tax in regard to land rents, &c, in pos- 
session of hospitals before 1693. (17) The Digest. — A digest of 
endowed charities in England and Wales was compiled in the years 
1861 to 1876. A new digest of reports and financial particulars 
has since been completed. 

The income of endowed charities in 1876 was returned at £2,198,463. 
It is now, no doubt, considerably larger than it was in 1876. Partial 
returns show that at least a million a year is now available in England 
and Wales for the assistance of the aged poor and for doles. Between 
the poor-law, which, as it is at present administered, is a permanent 
endowment provided from the rates for the support of a class of 
permanent " poor," and endowed charities, which are funds avail- 
able for the poor of successive generations, there is no great difference. 
But in their resources and administration the difference is marked. 
Local endowed charities were constantly founded after Queen 
Elizabeth's time till about 1830, and the poor-rate was at first supple- 
mentary of the local charities. When corn and fuel were dear and 
clothes very expensive, what now seem trivial endowments for food, 
fuel, coal and clothes were important assets in the thrifty manage- 
ment of a parish. But when the poor were recognized as a class of 
dependants entitled by law to relief from the community, the rate 
increased out of all proportion to the charities. A distinction then 
made itself felt between the " parish " poor and the " second " 
poor, or the poor who were not relieved from the rates, and relief 
from the rates altogether overshadowed the charitable aid. Charit- 
able endowments were ignored, ill-administered, and often were 
lost. After 1834 the poor-law was brought under the control of the 



central government. Poor relief was placed in the hands of boards 
of guardians in unions of parishes. The method of co-operation 
between poor-law and charity suggested by the acts of Queen 
Elizabeth was set aside, and, as a responsible partner in the public 
work of relief, charity was disestablished. In the parishes the 
endowed charities remained in general a disorganized medley of 
separate trusts, jealously guarded by incompetent administrators. 
To give unity to this mass of units, so long as the principles of charity 
are misunderstood or ignored, has proved an almost impossible and 
certainly an unpopular task. So far as it has been achieved, it has 
been accomplished by the piecemeal legislation of schemes cautiously 
elaborated to meet local prejudices. Active reform has been resented, 
and politicians have often accentuated this resentment. In 1894 a 
select committee was appointed to inquire whether it was desirable 
to take measures to bring the action of the Charity Commission 
mere directly under the control of parliament, but no serious griev- 
ances were substantiated. The committees' reports are of interest, 
however, as an indication of the initial difficulties of all charitable 
work, the general ignorance that prevails in regard to the elementary 
conditions that govern it, the common disregard of these principles, 
and the absence of any accepted theory or constructive policy that 
should regulate its development and its administration. 

After the Poor-Law Act of 1601 the history of the voluntary 
parochial charities in a town parish is marked by their decreasing 
amount and utility, as poor-law relief and pauperism 
increased. The act, it would seem, was not adopted Cbarli y la 
with much alacrity by the local authorities. From a tie^i60t. 
1625 to 1646 there were many years of plague and 
sickness, but in St Giles's, London, as late as 1649, the amount 
raised by the " collectors " (or overseers) was only £176. They 
disbursed this to " the visited poor " as " pensions." In 1665 
an extra levy of £600 is mentioned. In the accounts of St 
Martin's-in-the-Fields, where, as in St Giles's, gifts were received, 
the change wrought by another half-century (1714) is apparent. 
The sources of charitable relief are similar to those in all the 
Protestant churches — English, Scottish or continental: church 
collections and offertories; correctional fines, such as composi- 
tion for bastards and conviction money for swearers; and 
besides these, income from annuities and legacies, the parish 
estate, the royal bounty, and " petitions to persons of quality." 
In all £2041 was collected, but, so far as relief was concerned, 
the parish relied not on it, but on the poor-rate, which produced 
£3765. All this was collected and disbursed on their own 
authority by collectors, to orphans, " pensioners " or the " known 
or standing " poor, or to casual poor (£1818), including nurse 
children and bastards. The begging poor were numerous and 
the infant death-rate enormous, and each year three-fourths 
of those christened were " inhumanly suffered to die by the 
barbarity of nurses." The whole administration was uncharit- 
able, injurious to the community and the family, and inhuman 
to the child. If one may judge from later accounts of other 
parishes even up to 1834, usually it "remained the same, purpose- 
less and unintelligent; and it can hardly be denied that, generally 
speaking, only since the middle of the 19th century has any 
serious attention been paid to the charitable side of parochial 
work. Parallel to the parochial movement of the poor-law in 
England^ in France (about 161 7) were established the bureaux 
de bienfaisance, at first entirely voluntary institutions, then 
recognized by the state, and during the Revolution made the 
central administration for relief in the communes. 

In the 17th century in England, as in France, opinion favoured 
the establishment of large hospitals or maisons Dieu for the 
reception of the poor of different classes. In France charitable 
throughout the century there was a continuous struggle move- 
with mendicancy, and the hospitals were used as meats 
places into which offenders were summarily driven. " er 
A new humanity was, however) beginning its protest. The pitiful 
condition of abandoned children attracted sympathy in both 
countries. St Vincent de Paul established homes for the enfants 
trouvSs, followed in England by the establishment of the Found- 
ling hospital (1739). In both countries the method was applied 
inconsiderately and pushed to excess, and it affected family 
life most injuriously. Grants from parliament supported the 
foundling movement in England, and homes were opened in 
many parts of the country. The demand soon became over- 
whelming; the mortality was enormous, and the cost so large 



88 4 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



that it outstripped all financial expedients. The lesson of the 
experiment is the same as that of the poor-law catastrophe 
before 1834; only, instead of the able-bodied poor of another 
age, infants were made the object of a compassionate but 
undiscerning philanthropy. With widespread relief there came 
widespread abandonment of duty and economic bankruptcy. 
Had the poor-rates instead of charitable relief been used in the 
same way, the moral injury would have been as great, but the 
annual draft from the rates would have concealed the moral 
and postponed the economic disaster. To amend the evil, changes 
were made by which the relation between child and mother was 
kept alive, and a personal application on her part was required; 
the character of the mother and her circumstances were investi- 
gated, and assistance was only given when it would be " the 
means of replacing the mother in the course of virtue and the 
way of an honest livelihood." General reforms were also made, 
especially through the instrumentality of Jonas Hanway, to 
check infant mortality, and metropolitan parishes were required 
to provide for their children outside London. A kindred move- 
ment led to the establishment of penitentiaries (1758), of lock 
hospitals and lying-in hospitals (1749-1752). 

In Queen Anne's reign there was a new educational movement, 
" the charity school " — " to teach poor children the alphabet 
and the principles of religion," followed by the Sunday-school 
movement (1780), and about the same time (1788) by "the 
school of industry " — to employ children and teach them to be 
industrious. In 1844 the Ragged School Union was estab- 
lished, and until the Education Act of 1870 continued its volun- 
tary educational work. As an outcome of these movements, 
through the efforts of Miss Mary Carpenter and many others, 
in 1854-1855 industrial and reformatory schools were established, 
to prevent crime and reform child criminals. The orphanage 
movement, beginning in 1758, when the Orphan Working Home 
was established, has been continued to the present day on a vastly 
extended'scale. In 1772 a society for the discharge of persons 
imprisoned for small debts was established, and in 1773 Howard 
began his prison reforms. This raised the standard of work in 
institutional charities generally. After the civil wars the old 
hospital foundations of St Bartholomew and St Thomas, munici- 
palized by Edward VI., became endowed charities partly sup- 
ported by voluntary contributions. The same fate befell Christ's 
Hospital, in connexion with which the voting system, the admis- 
sion of candidates by the vote of the whole body of subscribers — 
that peculiarly English invention — first makes its appearance. 

A new interest in hospitals sprang up at the end of the 17th 
century. St Thomas's was rebuilt (1693) and St Bartholomew's 
(1739); Guy's was founded in 1724, and on the system of free 
" letters " obtainable in exchange for donations, voluntary 
hospitals and infirmaries were established in London (1733 and 
later) and in most of the large towns. Towards the end of 
the 18th century the dispensary movement was developed — a 
system of local dispensaries with fairly definite districts and home 
visiting, a substitute for attendance at a hospital, where " hos- 
pital fever " was dreaded, and an alternative to what was then 
a very ill-administered system of poor-law medical relief. After 
1840 the provident dispensary was introduced, in order that the 
patients by small contributions in the time of health might 
provide for illness without having to meet large doctors' bills, 
and the doctor might receive some sufficient remuneration for 
his attendance on poor patients. This movement was largely 
extended after i860. Three hospital funds for collecting con- 
tributions for hospitals and making them grants, a movement 
thai originated in Birmingham in 1859, were established in 
London in 1873 and 1897. 

Since 1868 the poor-law medical system of Great Britain has been 
immensely improved and extended, while at the same time the 
number of persons in receipt of free medical relief in most of the large 
towns has greatly increased. The following figures refer to London : 
at hospitals, 97 in number, in-patients (1904) during the year, 
118,536; out-patients and casualty cases, 1,858,800; patients at 
free, part-pay, or provident dispensaries, about 280,000; orders 
issued for attendance at poor-law dispensaries and at home, 114,158. 
The number of beds in poor-law infirmaries (1904) was 16,076. 
There are in London 12 general hospitals with, 18 without, medical 



schools, and 67 special hospitals. Thus the population in receipt 
of public and voluntary medical relief is very large, indeed altogether 
excessive. 

Each religious movement has brought with it its several 
charities. The Society of Friends, the Wesleyans, the Baptists 
have large charities. With the extension of the High Church 
movement there have been established many sisterhoods which 
support penitentiaries, convalescent homes and hospitals, schools, 
missions, &c. 

The magnitude of this accumulating provision of charitable relief 
is evident, though it cannot be summed up in any single total. 

At the beginning of the 19th century anti-mendicity societies 
were established; and later, about 1869, in England and Scotland 
a movement began for the organization of charitable relief, 
in connexion with which there are now societies and committees 
in most of the larger towns in Great Britain, in the colonies, and 
in the United States of America. More recently the movement 
for the establishment of settlements in poor districts, initiated 
by Canon Barnett at Toynbee Hall — " to educate citizens in the 
knowledge of one another, and to provide them with teaching and 
recreation "—has spread to many towns in England and America. 

These notes of charitable movements suggest an altogether 
new development of thought. On behalf of the charity school 
of Queen Anne's time were preached very formal iw—^g 
sermons, which showed but little sympathy with child of thought 
life. After the first half of the century a new humanism laisth 
with which we connect the name of Rousseau, slowly ff//lr 
superseded this formal beneficence. Rousseau made 
the world open its eyes and see nature in the child, 
the family and the community. He analysed social life, intent 
on explaining it and discovering on what its well-being 
depended; and he stimulated that desire to meet definite social 
needs which is apparent in the charities of the century. Little 
as it may appear to be so at first sight, it was a period of 
charitable reformation. Law revised the religious conception 
of charity, though he was himself so strangely devoid of social 
instinct that, like some of his successors, he linked the utmost 
earnestness in belief to that form of almsgiving which most 
effectually fosters beggardom. Howard introduced the era of 
inspection, the ardent apostle of a new social sagacity; and 
Bentham, no less sagacious, propounded opinions, plans and 
suggestions which, perhaps it may be said, in due course moulded 
the principles and methods of the poor-law of 1834. In the 
broader sense the turn of thought is religious, for while usually 
stress is laid on the religious scepticism of the century, the 
deeper, fervent, conscientious and evangelical charity in which 
Nonconformists, and especially " the Friends," took so large a 
part, is often forgotten. Sometimes, indeed, as often happens 
now, the feeling of charity passed into the merest sentimentality. 
This is evident, for instance, from so ill-considered a measure as 
Pitt's Bill for the relief of the poor. On the other hand, during 
the 1 8th century the poor-law was the object of constant criticism, 
though so long as the labour statutes and the old law of settle- 
ment were in force, and the relief of the labouring population 
as state " poor " prevailed, it was impossible to reform it. 
Indeed, the criticism itself was generally vitiated by a tacit 
acceptance of " the poor " as a class, a permanent and irrevocable 
charge on the funds of the community; and at the end of the 
1 8th century, when the labour statutes were abrogated, but 
the conditions under which poor relief was administered remained 
the same, serfdom in its later stage, the serfdom of the poor-law, 
asserted itself in its extremest form in times of dearth and 
difficulty during the Napoleonic War. In 1802-1803 it was 
calculated (Marshall's Digest) that 28% of the population were 
in receipt of permanent or occasional relief. Those in receipt 
of the former numbered 734,817, including children — so real 
had this serfdom of the poor become. 

In 1832 the expenditure on pauperism in England and Wales 
was £7,036,968. In the early years of the 19th century the 
mendicity societies, established in some of the larger towns, were 
a sign of the general discontent with existing methods of ad- 
ministration. The Society for Bettering the Condition of the 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



885 



Poor — representing a group of men such as Patrick Colquhoun, 
Sir I. Bernard, Dr Lettsom, Dr Haygarth, James Neald, Count 
Rumford and others — took a more positive line and issued 
many useful publications (1796). After 1833 the very atmosphere 
of thought seems changed. There was a general desire to be quit 
of the serfdom of pauperism. The Poor-law Amendment Act 
was passed in 1834, and since then male able-bodied pauperism 
has dwindled to a minimum. The bad years of 1860-1870 
revived the problem in England and Scotland, and the old spirit 
of reform for a time prevailed. Improved administration work- 
ing with economic progress effected still further reductions of 
pauperism, till on the 1st of January 1905 (exclusive of lunatics 
in .county asylums and casual paupers) the mean number of 
paupers stood at 764,589, or 22-6 per thousand of the population, 
instead of 41 -8 per thousand as in 1859 (see Poor-La w). 

Charity organization societies were formed after 1869, with 
the object of " improving the condition of the poor," or, in other 
words, to promote independence by an ordered and co-operative 
charity; and the Association for Befriending Young Servants, 
and workhouse aid committees, in order to prevent relapse into 
pauperism on the part of those who as children or young women 
received relief from the poor-law. The Local Government Board 
adopted a restricted out-door relief policy, and a new interest 
was felt in all the chief problems of local administration. The 
movement was general. The results of the Elberfeld system 
of municipal relief administered by unpaid almoners, each 
dealing with but one or two cases, influenced thought both in 
England and America. The experience gained by Mr Joseph 
Tuckerman of Boston of the utility of registering applications 
for relief, and the teaching of Miss Octavia Hill, led to the founda- 
tion of the system of friendly visiting and associated charity at 
Boston (1880) and elsewhere. Since that time the influence of 
Arnold Toynbee and the investigations of Charles Booth have led 
to a better appreciation of the conditions of labour; and to some 
extent, in London and elsewhere, the spirit of charity has assumed 
the form of a new devotion to the duties of citizenship. But 
perhaps, in regard to charity in Great Britain, the most important 
change has been the revival of the teaching of Dr Chalmers ( 1 780- 
1847), who (1819) introduced a system of parochial charity at 
St John's, Glasgow, on independent lines, consistent with the best 
traditions of the Scottish church. In the development of the 
theory of charitable relief on the economic side this has been a 
main factor. His view, which he tested by experience, may be 
summed up as follows: Society is a growing, self-supporting 
organism. It has within it, as between family and family, 
neighbour and neighbour, master and employee, endless links of 
sympathy and self-support. Poverty is not an absolute, but a 
relative term. Naturally the members of one class help one 
another; the poor help the poor. There is thus a large invisible 
fund available and constantly used by those who, by their 
proximity to one another, know best how to help. The philan- 
thropist is an alien to this life around him. Moved by a sense of 
contrast between his own lot, as he understands it, and the lot of 
those about him, whom he but little understands, he concludes 
that he should relieve them. But his gift, unless it be given in 
such a way as to promote this self-support, instead of weakening 
it, is really injurious. In the first place, by his interference he 
puts a check on the charitable resources of another class and 
lessens their social energy. What he gives they do not give, 
though they might do so. But next, he does more harm than this. 
He stimulates expectation, so that by a false arithmetic his gift of 
a few shillings seems to those who receive it and to those who 
hear of it a possible source of help in any difficulty. To them it 
represents a large command of means; and where one has 
received what, though it be little, is yet, relative to wage, a large 
sum to be acquired without labour, many will seek more, and 
with that object will waste their time and be put off their work, 
or even be tempted to lie and cheat. So social energy is diverted 
from its proper use. Alms thus given weakens social ties, 
diminishes the natural relief funds of mutual help, and beggars 
a neighbour instead of benefiting him. By this argument a 
clear and well-defined purpose is placed before charity. Charity 



becomes a science based on social principles and observation. 
Not to give alms, but to keep alive the saving health of the 
family, becomes its problem: relief becomes altogether sub- 
ordinate to this, and institutions or societies are serviceable or the 
reverse according as they serve or fail to serve this purpose. 
Not poverty, but distress is the plea for help; not almsgiving, 
but charity the means. To charity is given a definite social aim, 
and a desire to use consistently with this aim every method that 
increasing knowledge and trained ability can devise. 

Under such influences as these, joined with better economic 
conditions, a great reform has been made. The poor-law, how- 
ever, remains — the modern eleemosyna civica. It now, indeed, 
absorbs a proportionately lesser amount of the largely increased 
national income, but, excluding the maintenance of lunatics, it 
costs Great Britain more than twelve millions a year; and among 
the lower classes of the poor, directly or indirectly, it serves as a 
bounty on dependence and is a permanent obstacle to thrift and 
self-reliance. The number of those who are within the circle 
of its more immediate attraction is now perhaps, in different 
parts of the country or different districts in a town, not more 
than, say, 20% of the population. Upon that population the 
statistics of a day census would show a pauperism not of 2-63, the 
percentage of the mean day pauperism on the population in 1908, 
but of 13-15%; and the percentage would be much greater — 
twice as large, perhaps — if the total number of those who in some 
way received poor relief in the course of a year were taken into 
account. The English poor-law is thus among the lower classes,, 
those most tempted to dependence — say some six or seven millions 
of the people — a very potent influence definitely antagonistic 
to the good development of family life, unless it be limited to very 
narrow proportions; as, for instance, to restricted indoor or 
institutional relief for the sick, for the aged and infirm, who in 
extreme old age require special care and nursing, and for the 
afflicted, for whom no sufficient charitable provision is procurable. 
As ample experience shows, only on these conditions can poor- 
law relief be justified from the point of view of charity and the 
common good. In marked contrast to this opinion is the English 
movement for Old Age pensions, which came to its first fruition in 
1908 — a huge charity started on the credit of the state, the 
extension of which might ultimately involve a cost comparable 
with that of the army or the navy. Schemes of the kind have 
been adopted in the Australasian colonies with limitations and 
safeguards; and they seem likely to develop into a new type of 
poor-relief organization for the aged and infirm (Report: Royal 
Commission on Old Age Pensions, Commonwealth of Australia, 
1906). In England, partly to meet the demand for better state 
provision for the aged, the Local Government Board in 1900 urged 
the boards t>f guardians to give more adequate outdoor relief to 
aged deserving people, and laid no stress on the test of desti- 
tution, or, in other words, the limitation of relief to what was 
actually " necessary," the neglect of which has led to new diffi- 
culties. History has proved that demoralization results from the 
wholesale relief whether of the mass of the citizens, or of the 
able-bodied, or of the children, and the proposal to limit the 
endowment to the aged makes no substantial difference. The 
social results must be similar; but social forces work slowly, 
and usually only the unanswerable argument of financial bank- 
ruptcy suffices to convert a people habituated to dependence, 
though the inward decay of vitality and character may long 
before be manifest. Ultimately the distribution of pensions by 
way of out-door relief, corrupting a far more independent people, 
is calculated to work a far greater injury than the annona civica. 
Such an endowment of old age might indeed be justified as part of 
a system of regulated labour, which, as in earlier times, could not 
be enforced without some such extraneous help, but it could not 
be justified otherwise. It is naturally associated, therefore, with 
socialistic proposals for the regulation of wage. 

In the light of the principles of charity, which we have con- 
sidered historically, we have now to turn to two questions: 
charity and economics, and charity and socialism. 

The object of charity is to render to our neighbour the services 
and duties of goodwill, friendship and love. To prevent distress 



886 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



charity has for its further object to preserve and develop the 
manhood and womanhood of individuals and their self-main- 
tenance in and through the family; and any form of 
Thc m/cs state intervention is approved or disapproved by the 
o/cfauty? s* 11116 standard. By self-maintenance is meant self- 
support throughout life in its ordinary contingencies 
— sickness, widowhood, old age, &c. Political economy we 
would define as the science of exchange and exchange value. 
Here it has to be considered in relation to the purposes of charity. 
By way of illustration we take, accordingly, three points: 
distribution and use, supplementation of wage, and the standard 
of well-being or comfort in relation to wage. 

(i) Distribution and Use. — Economy in the Greek sense begins at 
this point — the administration and the use of means and resources. 
Political economy generally ignores this part of the problem. Yet 
from the point of view of charity it is cardinal to the whole issue. 
The distribution of wage may or may not be largely influenced by 
trades unions; but the variation of wage, as is generally the case, 
by the increase or decrease of a few pence is of less importance than 
its use. Comparing a careful and an unthrifty family, the difference 
in use may amount to as much as a third on the total wage. Mere 
abstention from alcohol may make, in a normal family, a difference 
of 6s. in a wage of 25s. On the other hand, membership of a friendly 
society is at a time of sickness equivalent to the command of a large 
sum of money, for the common stock of capital is by that means 
placed at the disposal of each individual who has a share in it. 
Further, even a small amount saved may place the holder in a 
position to get a better market for his labour; he can wait when 
another man cannot. Rent may be high, but by co-operation that 
too may be reduced. Other points are obvious and need not _ be 
mentioned. It is evident that while the amount of wage is im- 
portant, still more important is its use. In use it has a large 
expansive value. (2) Supplementation of Wage. — The exchange 
between skill and wage must be free if it is to be valid. The less the 
skill the greater is the temptation to philanthropists to supplement 
the lesser wage; and the more important is non-supplementation, 
for the skilled can usually look after their own interests in the 
market, while the less skilled, because their labour is less marketable, 
have to make the greater effort to avoid dependence. But the dole 
of endowed charities, outdoor relief, and any constant giving, tend 
to reduce wage, and thus to deprive the recipients of some part of the 
means of independence. The employer is pressed by competition 
himself, and in return he presses for profit through a reduced wage, 
if circumstances make it possible for the workman to take it. And 
thus a few individuals may lower the wages of a large class of poorly 
skilled or unskilled hands. In these conditions unionism, even if it 
were likely to be advantageous, is not feasible. Unionism can only 
create a coherent unit of workers where there is a limited market 
and a definite saleable skill. Except for the time, insufficient wage 
will not be remedied in the individual case by supplementation in 
any form — doles, clothes, or other kinds of relief ; and in that case, 
too, the relief will probably produce lessened energy after a short 
time, or in other words lessened ability to live. An insufficient wage 
may be prevented by increasing the skill of the worker, who will 
then have the advantage of a better series of economic exchanges, 
but hardly otherwise. If the supplementation be not immediate, 
but postponed, as in the case of old-age pensions, its etfect will be 
similar. To the extent of the prospective adventitious gain the 
attraction to the friendly society and to mutual help and saving will 
grow less. Necessity has been the inventor of these; and where 
wage is small, a little that would otherwise be saved is quickly spent 
if the necessity for saving it is removed. Only necessity schools 
most men, especially the weak, to whom it makes most difference 
ultimately, whether they are thrifty or whether or not they save for 
the future in any way. (3) The Standard of Well-being or Comfort 
in Relation to Wage. — With an increase of income there has to be 
an increase in the power to use income intelligently. Whatever is 
not so used reacts on the family to its undoing. Constantly when 
the wife can earn a few shillings a week, the husband will every week 
idle for two or three days; so also if the husband finds that in a few 
days he can earn enough to meet what he considers to be his require- 
ments for the week. In these circumstances the standard of well- 
being falls below the standard of wage ; the wage is in excess of the 
energy and intelligence necessary to its economic use, and in these 
cases ultimately pauperism often ensues. The family is demoralized. 
Thus, with a view to the prevention of distress in good times, when 
there is the less poverty there is the more need of charity, rightly 
understood; for charity would strive to promote the right use of 
wage, as the best means of preventing distress and preserving the 
economic well-being of the family. 

The theory of charity separates it entirely from socialism, 
as that word is commonly used. Strictly socialism means, in 
questions affecting the community, a dominant regard for the 
common or social good in so far as it is contrary to private or 
individual advantage. But even so the antithesis is misleading, 



for the two need not be inconsistent. On the contrary, the 
Common good is really and ultimately only individual good (not 
advantage) harmonized to a common end. The issue, 
indeed, is that of old Greek days, and the conditions C J^J ity 
of a settlement of it are not, substantially different, socialism. 
Using modern terms one may say that charity is 
" interventionist." It has sought to transform the world by the 
transformation of the will and the inward life in the individual 
and in society. It would intensify the spirit and feeling of 
membership in society and would aim at improving social con- 
ditions, as science makes clear what the lines of reform should 
be. So it has constantly intervened in all kinds of ways, and, 
in the 19th century for instance, it has initiated many move- 
ments afterwards taken up by public authorities— such as prison 
reform, industrial schools, child protection, housing, food 
reform, &c, and it has been a friendly ally in many reforms that 
affect industry very closely, as, for instance, in the introduction 
of the factory acts. But it has never aimed at recasting society 
itself on a new economic plan, as does socialism. Socialism 
indeed offers the people a new state of social security. It 
recognizes that the annona civica and the old poor-law may have 
been bad, but it would meet the objection made against them by 
insisting on the gradual creation of a new industrial society 
in which wage would be regulated and all would be supported, 
some by wage in adult life, some by allowance in old age, and 
others by maintenance in childhood. Accordingly for it all 
schemes for the state maintenance of school children, old age 
pensions, or state provision for the unemployed are, like municipal 
trading, steps towards a final stage, in which none shall want 
because all shall be supported by society or be dependent on it 
industrially. To charity this position seems to exclude the ethical 
element in life and to treat the people primarily or chiefly as 
human animals. It seems also to exclude the motives for energy 
and endeavour that come from self-maintenance. Against it, 
on the other hand, socialism would urge, that only by close 
regulation and penalty will the lowest classes be improved, and 
that only the society that maintains them can control them. 
Charity from its experience doubts the possibility of such control 
without a fatal loss of initiative on the part of those controlled, 
and it believes both that there is constant improvement on the 
present conditions of society and that there will be constantly 
more as science grows and its conclusions are put in force. 
Thus charity and socialism, in the usual meaning of the word, 
imply ultimately two quite different theories of social life. 
The one would re-found society industrially, the other would 
develop it and allow it to develop. 

The springs of charity lie in sympathy and religion, and, one 
would now add, in science. To organize it is to give to it the 
" ordered nature " of an organic whole, to give it a 
definite social purpose, and to associate the members i zg e tl „^"' 
of the community for the fulfilment of that purpose, charity. 
This in turn depends on the recognition of common 
principles, the adoption of a common method, self-discipline 
and training, and co-operation. In a mass of people there may 
be a large variation in motives coincident with much unity in 
action. Thus there may be acceptance of a common social 
purpose in charity, while in one the impulse is similar to that 
which moved St Francis or George Herbert, in another to that 
which moved Howard or Dr Chalmers, or a modern poor-law 
reformer like Sir G. Nicholls or E. Denison. Accepting, then, 
the principles of charity, we pass to the method in relation to 
assistance and relief. Details may vary, but on the following 
points there is general agreement among students and workers:— 
(1) The Committee or Conference. — There are usually two kinds 
of local relief: the public or poor-law relief, and relief connected 
with religious agencies. Besides, there is the relief of endowments, 
societies and charitable persons. Therefore, as a condition precedent 
to all organization, there must be some local centre of association 
for information and common help. A town should be divided for 
this purpose into manageable areas coincident with parishes or 
poor-law divisions, or other districts. Subject to an acceptance of 
general principles, those engaged in charity should be members of a 
local conference or committee, or allied to it. The committee would 
thus be the rallying-point of a large and somewhat loosely knit 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



887 



association of friends and workers. (2) Inquiry, A id and Registration. 
— The object of inquiry is to ascertain the actual causes of distress 
or dependence, and to carry on the work there must usually be a 
staff of several honorary and one or two paid workers. Two methods 
may be adopted : to inquire in regard to applications for help with 
a view to forming some plan of material help or friendly aid, or both, 
which will lead to the ultimate self-support of the family and its 
members, and, under certain conditions, in the case of the aged or 
sick, to their continuous or their sufficient help; or to ascertain 
the facts partly at once, partly by degrees, and then to form and 
carry out some plan of help, or continue to befriend the family in 
need of help, in the hope of bringing them to conditions of self- 
support, leaving the work of relief entirely to other agencies. The 
committee in neither case should be a relief committee — itself a 
direct source of relief. On the former method it has usually no relief 
fund, but it raises from relations, employers, charities and charit- 
able persons the relief required, according to the plan of help agreed 
upon, unless, indeed, it is better not to relieve the case, or to leave 
it to the poor-law. The committee thus makes itself responsible 
for endeavouring to the best of its ability to raise the necessary 
relief, and acts as trustee for those who co-operate without it, in 
such a way as to keep intact and to give play to all the natural 
obligations that lie within the inner circles of a self-supporting 
community. On the latter method the work of relief is left to general 
charity, or to private persons, or to the poor-law; and the effort is 
made to help the family to self-support by a friendly visitor. This 
procedure is that adopted by the associated charities in Boston, 
Mass., and other similar societies in America and elsewhere. It is 
akin also to that adopted in the municipal system of relief in Elber- 
feld — which has become with many variations in detail the standard 
method of poor relief in Germany. The method of associated help, 
combined with personal work, represents the usual practice of 
charity organization societies. Mutatis mutandis, the plan can be 
adopted on the simplest scale in parochial or other relief committees, 
subject to the safeguards of sufficient training and settled method. 
The inquiry should cover the following points: names and address, 
and ages of family, previous addresses, past employment and wages, 
present income, rent and liabilities, membership of friendly or other 
society, and savings, relations, relief (if any) from any source. 
These points should be verified, and reference should be made to the 
clergy, the poor-law authorities, and others, to ascertain if they 
know the applicant. The result should be to show how the applicant 
has been living, and what are the sources of possible help, and also 
what is his character. The problem, however, is not whether the 
person is " deserving " or " undeserving," but whether, granted the 
facts, the distress can be stayed and self-support attained. If the 
help can be given privately from within the circle of the family, so 
much the better. Often it may be best to advise, but not to inter- 
fere. In some cases but little help may be necessary; in others 
again the friendly relation between applicant and friend may last 
for months and even years. Usually in charitable work the question 
of the kind of relief available — money, tickets, clothes, &c. — governs 
the decision how the case should be assisted. But this is quite 
wrong : the opposite is the true rule. The wants of the case, rightly 
understood, should govern the decision as to what charity should 
do and what it should provide. Cases are overwhelming in number, 
as at the out-patient and casualty departments of a hospital, where 
the admissions are made without inquiry, and subject practically 
to no restrictions; but when there is inquiry, and each case is 
seriously considered and aided with a view to self-support, the 
numbers will seldom be overwhelming. On this plan appeal is made 
to the strength of the applicant, and requires an effort on his part. 
Indiscriminate relief, on the other hand, attracts the applicant by 
an appeal to his weakness, and it requires of him no effort. Hence, 
apart even from the differentiating effect of inquiry, one method 
makes applicants, the other limits their number, although on the 
latter plan much more strenuous endeavours be made to assist the 
lesser number of claimants. For the routine work of the office an 
extremely simple system of records with card index, &c, has been 
devised. In some cities, particularly in the United States of America, 
there is a central registration of cases, notified by individual charities, 
poor-relief authorities and private persons. The system of charity 
organization or associated charity, it will be seen, allows of the 
utmost variety of treatment, according to the difficulties in each 
instance and the remedies available, and the utmost scope for per- 
sonal work. (3) Training. — If charitable work is an art, those who 
undertake it must needs be trained both in practice and method 
and in judgment. It requires, too, that self-discipline which blends 
intelligence with emotion, and so endows emotion with strength 
and purpose. In times of distress a reserve of trained workers is 
of the utmost service. At all times they do more and produce, 
socially, better results; but when there is general distress of any 
kind they do not lose their heads like new recruits, but prevent 
at least some of the mischief that comes of the panic which often 
takes possession of a community, when distress is apprehended, 
and leads to the wildest distribution of relief. Also trained workers 
make the most useful poor-law guardians, trustees of charities, 
secretaries of charitable societies and district visitors. All clergy 
and ministers and all medical men who have to be engaged in the 
administration of medical relief should learn the art of charity. 



Poor-law guardians are usually elected on political or general grounds, 
and have no special knowledge of good methods of charity; and 
trustees are seldom appointed on the score of their qualifications 
on this head. To provide the necessary education in charity there 
should be competent helpers and teachers at charity organization 
committees and elsewhere, and an alliance for this purpose should 
be formed between them and professors and teachers of moral science 
and economics and the "settlements." Those who study social 
problems in connexion with what a doctor would call " cases " or 
" practice " see the limits and the falsity of schemes that on paper 
seem logical enough. This puts a check on the influence of scheme- 
building and that literary sensationalism which makes capital out 
of social conditions. (4) Co-operation. — Organization in charity 
depends on extensive co-operation, and ultimately on the acceptance 
'of common views. This comes but slowly. But with much tribula- 
tion the goal may be reached, if in case after case the effort is made 
to provide friendly help through charities and private persons, — 
unless, as may well be, it should seem best not to interfere, but to 
leave the applicant to apply to the administrators of public relief. 
Experience of what is right and wrong in charity is thus gained on 
both sides. Many sources may have to be utilized for aid of different 
kinds even in a single case, and for the prevention of distress co- 
operation with members cf friendly societies and with co-operative 
and thrift agencies is indispensable. 

Where there is accord between charity and the poor-law pauper- 
ism may be largely reduced. The poor-law in most countries has 
at its disposal certain institutional relief and out-door 
allowances, but it has no means of devising plans of law. 1 """^ 
help which may prevent application to the rates or 
" take " people " off the rates." Thus a widow in the first days 
of widowhood applies and receives an allowance according to 
the number of her children. Helped at the outset by charity on 
some definite plan, she may become self-supporting; and if her 
family be large one or two of her children may be placed in schools 
by the guardians, while she maintains the remaining children 
and herself. As far as possible there should be a division of 
labour between the poor-law and charity. Except where some 
plan such as that just mentioned is adopted, one or the other 
should take whole charge of the case relieved. There should be 
no supplementation of poor-law relief by charity. This will 
weaken the strength and dissipate the resources of charity with- 
out adding to the efficiency of the poor-law. Unless the guardians 
adopt a restrictive out-door relief policy, there is no scope for 
any useful division of labour between them and charity; for the 
many cases which, taken in time, charity might save from 
pauperism, they will draw into chronic dependence by their 
allowances a very much larger number. But if there is a 
restrictive out-door policy, so far as relief is necessary, charity 
may undertake to meet on its own lines distress which the poor- 
law would otherwise have met by allowances, and, subject to 
the assistance of urgent cases, poor-law relief may thus by 
degrees become institutional only. Then, in the main, natural 
social forces would come into play, and dependence on any form 
of annona civica would cease. 

Open-handed hospitality always creates mendicants. This is 
what the hospitals offer in the out-patient and casualty depart- 
ments, and they have created a class of hospital ff osoltals 
mendicants. The cases are quickly dealt with, without 
inquiry and without regard to home conditions. The medical 
man in the hospital does not co-operate with any fellow-workers 
outside the hospital. Where his physic or advice ceases to 
operate his usefulness ceases. He regards no conditions of 
morality. In a large number of cases drink or vice is the cause 
of application, and the cure of the patient is dependent on moral 
conditions; but he returns home, drinks and may beat his wife, 
and then on another visit to the hospital he will again be 
physicked and so on. The man is not even referred to the poor- 
law infirmary for relief. Nor are conditions of home sanitation 
regarded. One cause of constant sickness is thus entirely over- 
looked, while drugs, otherwise unnecessary, are constantly 
given at the hospital. The hospitals are thus large isolated 
relief stations which are creating a new kind of pauperism. 
So far as the patients can pay — and many can do so — the 
general practitioners, to whom they would otherwise go, are 
deprived of their gains. Still worse is it when the hospital itself 
charges a fee in its out-patient department. The relief is then 
claimed even more absolutely as a right, and the general 



888 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



practitioners are still further injured. The doctors, as a medical 
staff, are not only medical men, but whether they recognize the fact 
or not, they are also almsgivers or almoners; what they give is 
relief. Yet few or none of them have ever been trained for that 
work, and consequently they do not realize how very advantageous, 
even for the cure of their own patients, would be a thorough 
treatment of each case both at the hospital and outside it. Nor 
can they understand how their methods at present protract 
sickness and promote habitual dependence. Where this side of 
their work studied by them in any way they would be the first, 
probably, to press upon the governors of their hospitals the 
necessity for a change. Unfortunately, at present the governors 
are themselves untrained, and to finance the hospital and to 
make it a good institution is their sole object. Hospitals, how- 
ever, are, after all, only a part of the general administration of 
charity, though as they are now managed they have seldom any 
systematic connexion with that administration. Nor is there 
any co-ordination between the several hospitals and dispensaries. 
If one rightly refuses further treatment to certain applicants, 
they have only to wander to some other hospital, there to be 
admitted with little or no scrutiny. For usually outpatients 
and casualty patients are not even registered, nor can they be 
identified if they apply again. Practically they come and go at 
will. The definite limitation of cases, according to some standard 
of effectual work, association with general charity, trained 
almonership and inquiry, and a just regard for the interests of 
general practitioners, are stepping-stones to reform. In towns 
where medical charities are numerous a representative board 
would promote mutual help and organization. 

Like the poor-law, endowed charities may be permanent 
institutions established to meet what should be passing and 
decreasing needs (cf . the arguments in The State and 
charities. Charity, by T. Mackay) . Administered as they usually 
are in isolation — apart from the living voluntary 
charities of the generation, and consisting often of small trusts 
difficult to utilize satisfactorily, they tend to create a permanent 
demand which they meet by fixed quantities of relief. Also, as 
a rule, they make no systematic inquiries with a view to the 
verification of the statements of the applicants, for they have no 
staff for these purposes; nor have they the assistance of almoners 
or friendly visitors. Nor does the relief which they give form 
part of any plan of help in conjunction with other aid from with- 
out; nor is the administration subject to frequent inspection, 
as in the case of the poor-law. All these conditions have led to 
a want of progress in the actual administration of endowed 
charities, in regard to which it is often very difficult to prevent the 
exercise of an undue patronage. But there is no reason why 
these charities should not become a responsible part of the 
country's administration, aiding it to reduce outdoor pauperism. 
It was never intended that the poor-law should extinguish the 
endowed charities, still less, as statistics now prove, that where 
endowments abound the rate of pauperism should be considerably 
above the average of the rest of the country. This shows that 
these charities often foster pauperism instead of preventing it. 
As a step to reform, the publication of an annual register of 
endowed charities in England and Wales is greatly needed. The 
consolidating schemes of the charity commissioners have done 
much good; still more may be done in some counties by extending 
to the county the benefits of the charities of well-endowed towns, 
as has been accomplished by the extension of the eleemosynary 
endowments of the city of London to the metropolitan police 
area. Nor, again, until quite lately, and that as yet only in a few 
schemes, has the principle been adopted that pensions or other 
relief should be given only in supplementation of the relief of 
relations, former employers and friends, and not in substitution 
of it. This, coupled with good methods of inquiry and super- 
vision, has proved very beneficial. Hitherto, however, to a large 
extent, endowed charities, it must be admitted, have tended to 
weaken the family and to pauperize. 

In many places funds are raised for the relief of school children 
by the supply of meals during the winter and spring; and an act 
has now been passed in England (1906) enabling the cost to be 



put upon the rates. Usually a very large number of children 
are said to be underfed, but inquiry shows that such state- 
ments may be taken as altogether excessive. They 
are sometimes based on information drawn from the Heiietto 
children at school; or sometimes on general deduc- at school. 
tions; they are seldom founded on any systematic and 
competent inquiry at the homes. When this has been made, 
the numbers dwindle to very small proportions. Teachers of 
experience have noted the effect of the meals in weakening 
the independence of the family. While they are forthcoming 
women sometimes give up cooking meals at home, use their money 
for other things, and tell the child he can get his meal at school. 
Great temptations are put before a parent to neglect her family, 
and very much distress is due to this. The meals — just at a 
time when, owing to the age of her children, the mother's care 
is most needed, and just in those families where the temptation 
is greatest, and where the family instinct should be strengthened 
— stimulate this neglect. Considered from the point of view 
of meeting by eleemosynary provision a normal economic 
demand for food, intervention can only have one result. The 
demand must continue to outstrip the supply, so long as there are 
resources available on the one side, and until on the other side 
the desire of the social class that is chiefly exposed to the tempta- 
tions of dependence in relation to such relief has been satisfied. 
If the provision be made from the resources of local or general 
taxation the largeness of the fund available will allow practically 
of an unlimited expansion of the supply of food. If the provision 
be made from voluntary sources, in some measure limited there- 
fore and less certain, this very fact will tend to circumscribe 
demand and limit the offer of relief. It is indeed the problem 
of poor-law relief in 1832 over again. The relief provided by 
local taxation practically unlimited will create a mass of constant 
claimants, with a kind of assumed right to aid based on the 
payment of rates; while voluntary relief, whatever its short- 
comings, will be less injurious because it is less amply endowed. 
In Paris the municipal subvention for meals rose from 545,900 
francs in 1892 to 1,000,000 in 1904. Between 1894 and 1904 there 
was an increase of 9 % in the school population ; and an increase 
of 28% in the municipal grant. In that period the contribu- 
tions from the local school funds (caisses des ecoles) decreased 
36%; while the voluntary contributions otherwise received 
were insignificant ; and the payments for meals increased 2%. 

The subject has been lately considered from a somewhat 
different standpoint (cf. the reports of the Scottish Royal Com- 
mission on Physical Education, 1903; of the Inter-departmental 
committees on Physical Deterioration, 1905, and on Medical 
Inspection and the Feeding of School Children, 1905; also the 
report of the special committee of the Charity Organization 
Society on "the assistance of school children," 1893). After 
careful investigations medical officers especially have drawn 
attention to the low physical condition of children in schools 
in the poorer parts of large English towns, their low stature, 
their physical defects, the improper food supplied to them at 
home, their uncleanliness, and their want of decent bringing-up, 
and sometimes their want of food. Other inquiries have shown 
that, as women more usually become breadwinners their children 
receive less attention, and the home and its duties are neglected, 
while in the lowest sections of the poorer classes social irresponsi- 
bility reaches its maximum. Cheap but often quite improper 
food is provided, and infant mortality, which is largely prevent- • 
able, remains as high as ever, though adult fife is longer. This. 
with a marked decrease in the birth-rate in recent years, has, 
it may be said, opened out a new field for charitable effort and 
social work. Science is at each revision of the problem making 
its task more definite. Actually the mere demand for meals 
stands for less; the reform of home conditions for more. So it 
was hoped that instead of making school meals a charge on 
taxation, as parliament has done, it would be content to leave 
it a voluntary charge, while the medical inspection of elementary 
Schools will be made universal; representative relief committees 
formed for schools or groups of schools; the cases of want or 
distress among the school children dealt with individually in 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



889 



connexion with their families, and, where necessary, day schools 
established on the lines of day industrial schools. 

At a time of exceptional distress the following suggestions 
founded on much English experience may be of service (cf. 
Report of special committee of the Charity Organization 
f? cep ' Society on the best means of dealing with exceptional 
distress, distress, 1886). Usually at such a time proposals are 
1 made to establish special funds, and to provide employ- 
ment to men and women out of work. But it is best, if possible 
and as long as possible, to rely on existing agencies, and to 
strengthen them. Round them there are usually workers more 
or less trained. A new fund usually draws to it new people, many 
of whom may not have had any special experience at all. If a 
new fund is inevitable, it is best that it should make its grants 
to existing agencies after consultation with them. In any case, 
a clear policy should be adopted, and people should keep their 
heads. The exaggeration of feeling at a time of apprehended or 
actual distress is sometimes extraordinary, and the unwise action 
which it prompts is often a cause of continuing pauperism after- 
wards. Where there is public or poor-law relief the following 
plan may be adopted: — In any large town there are usually 
different recognized poor-law, charitable or other areas. The 
local people already at work in these areas should be formed 
into local committees. In each case a quick inquiry should be 
made, and the relieving officer communicated with, some central 
facts verified, and the home visited. Roughly, cases may be 
divided into three classes: the irresponsible casual labouring 
class, a middle class of men with decent homes, who have made 
no provision for the future, and are not members of either friendly 
society or trades union; and a third class, who have made some 
provision. These usually are affected last of all; at all hazards 
they should be kept from receiving public relief, and should be 
helped, as far as possible, privately and personally. If there 
are public works, the second class might be referred to them ; if 
there are not, probably some should be left to the poor-law, some 
assisted in the same way as members of class three. Much would 
turn upon the family and the home. The first class should be 
left to the poor-law. If there is no poor-law system at work they 
should be put on public works. Working men of independent 
position, not the creatures of any political club, but such as are 
respected members of a friendly society, or are otherwise well 
qualified for the task, should be called into consultation. The 
relief should be settled according to the requirements of each case, 
but if the pressure is great, at first at least it may be necessary 
to make grants according to some generally sufficient scale. There 
should be as constant a revision of cases as time permits. Great 
care should be taken to stop the relief as soon as possible, and to do 
nothing to make it the stepping-stone to permanent dependence. 
If employment be provided it should be work within the skill 
of all; it should be fairly remunerated, so that at least the 
scantiness of the pay may not be an excuse for neglect; and it 
should be paid for according to measured or piece work. The 
discipline should be strict, though due regard should be paid 
at first to those unaccustomed to digging or earthwork. In 
England and Wales the guardians have power to open labour 
yards. These, like charities which provide work, tend to attract 
and keep in employment a low class of labourer or workman, 
who finds it pays him to use the institution as a convenience. 
It is best, therefore, to avoid the opening of a labour yard 
if possible. If it is opened, the discipline should be very strict, 
and when there is laziness or insubordination, relief in the work- 
house should at once be offered. The relief furnished to men 
employed in a labour yard, of which in England at least half has 
to be given in kind, should, it has been said, be dealt out from 
day to day. This leads to the men giving up the work sooner 
than they otherwise would. They have less to spend. 

In Great Britain a great change has taken place in regard 
to the provision of employment in connexion with the state. 
Vaem- Since about 1890 there has been a feeling that men in 
pioymeat. distress from want of employment should not be dealt 
with by the poor-law. A circular letter issued by the 
Local Government Board in 1886, and subsequently in 1895, 



coincided with this feeling. It was addressed to town councils 
and other local authorities, asking them to provide work (1) 
which will not involve the stigma of pauperism, (2) which all 
can perform whatever may have been their previous avocations, 
and (3) which does not compete with that of other labourers 
at present in employment. This circular led to the vestries and 
subsequently the borough councils in many districts becoming 
partially recognized relief authorities for the unemployed, 
concurrently with the poor-law. Much confusion resulted. 
The local authorities had seldom any suitable organization for 
the investigation of applications. It was difficult to supply 
work on the terms required; and the work was often ill-done 
and costly. Also it was found that the same set of people would 
apply year after year, unskilled labourers usually out of work 
part of the winter, or men habitually " unemployed." As on 
other occasions when public work was provided, very few of the 
applicants were found to be artisans, or members of trades 
unions or of friendly societies. In 1904 Mr Long, then president 
of the Local Government Board, proposed that local voluntary 
distress committees should be established in London consisting 
of poor-law guardians and town councillors and others, more or 
less supervised by a central committee and ultimately by the 
Local Government Board. This organization was set on foot 
and large sums were subscribed for its work. The report on 
the results of the movement was somewhat doubtful (Report, 
London Unemployed Fund, 1904-1905, p. 101, &c), but in 1905 
the Unemployed Workmen's Act was passed, and in London 
and elsewhere distress committees like the voluntary committees 
of the previous year were established by statute. It was enacted 
that for establishment expenses, emigration and removal, labour 
exchanges, and the acquisition of land a halfpenny rate might 
be levied, but that the rate would not be available for the re- 
muneration of men employed. For this purpose (1905-1906) 
a large charitable fund was raised. A training farm at Hollesley 
Bay was acquired, and it was hoped to train Londoners there 
to become fit for agricultural work. It is impossible to judge this 
experiment properly, on the evidence available up to 1908. 
But one or two points are important: (1) something very like 
the "right to labour" has been granted by the legislature; 
(2) this has been done apart from the conditions required by the 
poor-laws and orders of the Local Government Board on poor 
relief and without imposing disfranchisement on the men 
employed; (3) a labour rate has not been levied, but a rate has 
been levied in aid of the provision of employment; (4) if the line 
of development that the act suggests were to be followed (as the 
renewed Labour agitation in 1908- 1909 made probable) it must 
tend to create a class of " unemployed," unskilled labourers 
of varying grades of industry who may become the dependent 
and state-supported proletariat of modern urban life. Thus, 
unless the administration be extremely rigorous, once more 
will a kind of serfdom be established, to be, as some would say, 
taken over hereafter by the socialist state. 

In some of the English colonies Homeric hospitality still 
prevails, but by degrees the station-house or some refuge is 
established in the towns as they grow more populous. Va 
Finally, some system of labour in exchange for relief agrancy - 
is evolved. At first this is voluntary, afterwards it is officially 
recognized, and finally it may become part of the system of 
public relief. As bad years come, these changes are made step 
by step. In England thfi vagrant or wayfarer is tolerated and 
discouraged, but not kept employed. He should be under greater 
pressure to maintain himself, it is thought. The provision made 
for him in different parts of the country is far from uniform, and 
now, usually, at least in the larger towns, after he has had a bath 
and food, he is admitted to a separate room or cell in a casual 
ward. Before he leaves he has to do a task of work, and, subject 
to the discretion of the master, he is detained two nights. This 
plan has reduced vagrancy, and if it were universally adopted 
clean accommodation would everywhere be provided for the 
vagrant without the attractions of a common or " associated " 
ward; and probably vagrancy would diminish still further. It 
seems almost needless to say that, in these circumstances at any 



8 9 o 



CHARITY AND CHARITIES 



rate, casual alms should not be given to vagrants. They know 
much better how to provide for themselves than the almsgiver 
imagines, for vagrancy is in the main a mode of life not the result 
of any casual difficulty. Vagrancy and criminality are also nearly 
allied. The magistrate, therefore, rather than the almsgiver, 
should usually interfere; and, as a rule, where the magistrates 
are strict, vagrancy in a county diminishes. An inter-depart- 
mental committee ( 1906) taking generally this line, reported 
in favour of vagrants being placed entirely under police control, 
and it recommended a system of wayfarers' tickets for men on 
the roads who are not habitual vagrants, and the committal 
of men likely to become habitual vagrants to Certified labour 
colonies for not less than six months. Still undoubtedly vagrancy 
has its economic side. In a bad year the number of tramps is 
increased by the addition of unskilled and irresponsible labourers, 
who are soonest discharged when work is slack. As a part- 
voluntary system under official recognition the German Arbeiter- 
colonien are of interest. This in a measure has led to the introduc- 
tion of labour homes in England, the justification of which should 
be that they recruit the energy of the men who find their way to 
them, and enable them to earn a living which they could not do 
otherwise. In a small percentage of cases their result may be 
achieved. Charitable refuges or philanthropic common Jodging- 
houses, usually established in districts where this class already 
congregate, only aggravate the difficulty. They give additional 
attractions to a vagrant and casual life, and make it more 
endurable. They also make a comfortable avoidance of the 
responsibilities of family life comparatively easy, and in so far 
as they do this they are clearly injurious to the community. 

The English colonists of the New England states and Pennsyl- 
vania introduced the disciplinary religious and relief system of 
American Protestantism and the Elizabethan poor-law. To 
conditions the former reference has already been made. With an 
and . . appreciation of the fact that the cause of distress is 
not usually poverty, but weakness of character and 
want of judgment, and that relief is in itself no remedy, those 
who have inherited the old Puritan traditions have, in the light 
of toleration and a larger social experience, organized the 
method of friendly visiting, the object of which is illustrated by 
the motto, " Not alms, but a friend." To the friendship of 
charity is thus given a disciplinary force, capable of immense 
expansion and usefulness, if the friendship on the side of those 
who would help is sincere and guided by practical knowledge 
and sagacity, and if on the side of those in distress there is 
awakened a reciprocal regard and a willingness to change their 
way of life by degrees. Visiting by " districts " is set aside, for 
" friendliness " is not a quality easily diffused over a wide area. 
To be real it must be limited as time and ability allow. Conse- 
quently, a friendly visitor usually befriends but one or two, 
or in any case only a few, families. The friendly visitor is the 
outcome of the movement for " associated charities," but in 
America charity organization societies have also adopted the 
term, and to a certain extent the method. Between the two 
movements there is the closest affinity. The registration of 
applicants for relief is much more complete in American cities 
than in England, where the plan meets with comparatively little 
support. At the office of the associated charities in Boston there 
is a central and practically a complete register of all the applica- 
tions made to the public authority for poor relief, to the associated 
charities, and to many other voluntary bodies. 

The Elizabethan poor-law system, with the machinery of 
overseers, poor-houses and out-door relief, is still maintained 
in New England, New York state and Pennsylvania, but with 
many modifications, especially in New York." A chief factor in 
these changes has been immigration. While the County or town 
remained the administrative area for local poor relief, the large 
number of immigrant and " unsettled " poor, and the business 
connected with their removal from the state, entailed the estab- 
lishment of a secondary or state system of administration and 
aid, with special classes of institutions to which the counties 
or towns could send their poor, as, for instance,, state reform 
schools, farms, almshouses, &c. For the oversight of these 



institutions, and often of prisons also and lunatic asylums, in 
many states there have been established state boards of " charity 
or corrections and charity." The members of these boards are 
selected by the state for a term of years, and give their services 
honorarily. There are state boards in Massachusetts, New York, 
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, 
Iowa, Colorado, North Carolina and elsewhere. There is also a 
district board of charities in the district of Columbia. These 
boards publish most useful and detailed reports. Besides the state 
board there is sometimes also, as in New York, a State Charities 
Aid Association, whose members, in the counties in which they 
reside, have a legal right of entry to visit and inspect any public 
or charitable institution owned by the state, and any county and 
other poor-house. A large association of visitors accustomed 
to inspect and report on institutions has thus been created. 
Further, the counties and towns in New York state, for instance, 
and Massachusetts, and the almshouse districts in Pennsylvania, 
are under boards of supervision. Usually the overseers give out- 
door relief, and the pauperism of some areas is as high as that 
in some English unions, 3, 4 and 5%. On the whole population 
of the United States, however, and of individual states, consisting 
to a great extent of comparatively young and energetic immi- 
grants, the pauperism is insignificant. In Massachusetts " it 
has been the general policy of the state to order the removal 
to the state almshouse of unsettled residents of the several cities 
and towns in need of temporary aid, thus avoiding some of the 
abuses incident to out-door relief." In New York state, in the 
city of New York, including Brooklyn, the distribution of out- 
door relief by the department of charities is forbidden, except 
for purposes of transportation and for the adult blind. Most 
counties in the state have an almshouse, and the county super- 
intendents and overseers of the poor " furnish necessary relief to 
such of the county poor as may require only temporary assistance, 
or are so disabled that they cannot be safely removed to the 
almshouse." Public attention is in many cases being drawn 
to the inutility and injury of out-door relief. 

In some states and cities the system of subsidizing voluntary 
institutions is in full force, and it is in force also in many English 
colonies. At first sight it has the advantage of providing relief 
for public purposes without the creation of a new staff or estab- 
lishment. There is thus an apparent economy. But the evils 
are many. Political partisanship and favour may influence the 
amount and disposition of the grants. The grants act as a 
bounty on the establishment and continuance of charitable 
institutions, homes for children, hospitals, &c, but not on the 
expansion of the voluntary charitable funds and efforts that 
should maintain them; and thus charitable homes exist in which 
charity in its truer sense may have little part, but in which the 
chief motive of the administration may be to support sectarian 
interests by public subsidies. Claimants for relief have little 
scruple in turning such institutions to their own account; and 
the institutions, being financially irresponsible, are not in these 
circumstances scrupulous on their side to prevent a misdirection 
of their bounties. " Parents unload their children upon the 
community more recklessly when they know that such children 
will be provided for in private orphan asylums and protectories, 
where the religious training that the parents prefer will be given 
them " (Amos G. Warner, in International Congress: Charities 
and Correction, 1893). Past history in New York city illustrates 
the same evil. The admission was entirely in the hands of the 
managers. They admitted; the city paid. In New York city 
the population between 1870 and 1890 increased about 80%; 
the subsidies for prisoners and public paupers increased by 43 %, 
but those for paupers in private institutions increased frcm 
$334,828 to $1,845,872, or about 461 %. The total was at that 
time $3,794,972; in 1898 it was rather less, $3,132,786. The 
alternative to this system is either the establishment of state or 
municipal institutions, and possibly in special cases payments 
to voluntary homes for the maintenance of inmates admitted at 
the request of a state authority, as at certified and other homes in 
England, with grants made conditional on the work being con- 
ducted on specified lines, and subject to a certain increasing 



CHARIVARI— CHARLEMAGNE 



891 



amount of voluntary financial support; or a close general and 
financial inspection o'f charitable institutions — the method of 
reform adopted in New York; or payment for only those inmates 
who are sent by public authorities and admitted on their request. 
The enormous extent to which children's aid societies have 
been increased in the United States, sometimes with the help of 
considerable public grants, suggests the greatest need for caution 
from the point of the preservation of the family as the central 
element of social strength in the community. The problem of 
charity in relation to medical relief in the large towns of the 
United States is similar to that of England; its difficulties are 
alike. 

Literature. — As good translations of the classics become ac- 
cessible it is easy for the general reader or student to combine a 
study of the principles of charity in relation to the community with 
a study of history. Thus, and in connexion with special investi- 
gations and the conditions of practical charity, social economics 
may best be studied. In N. Masterman, Chalmers on Charity (1900) ; 
T. Mackay, Methods of Social Reform (1896); B. Bosanquet and 
others, Some Aspects of the Social Problem (1894) ; and C. S. Loch, 
Methods of Social Advance (1904), this point of view is generally 
assumed. Special investigations of importance may be found in the 
reports of medical officers of health. See Report of Committee on 
Physical Deterioration referred to above, and", for instance, Dr News- 
holme's Vital Statistics and Charles Booth's Labour and Life in 
London. For the history of charity there is no good single work. 
On details there are many good articles in Daremberg's Dictionary 
of Classical Antiquities, and similar works. Modern Methods of 
Charity, by C. H. Henderson and others (1904), supplies much 
general information in regard to poor relief and charity in different 
countries. Apart from books and official documents mentioned 
in the text as' indicating the present state of charitable and public 
relief, or as aids to practical work, the following may be of service. 
England : — A nnual Charities' Register and Digest, with Introduction 
on "How to help Cases of Distress"; the Charity Organization 
Review; Occasional Papers (3 vols.), published by the London 
Charity Organization Society (1896-1906); Reports of Proceedings 
of Conferences of Poor-Law Guardians; The Strength of the People, 
by Helen Bosanquet; Homes of the London Poor and Our Common 
Land, by Miss Octavia Hill ; The Queen's Poor, by M. Loane. United 
States of America : — The Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Charities and Correction (1894), and the proceedings of the annual 
conferences; Friendly Visiting among the Poor, by Mary E. Rich- 
mond (1899); American Charities, by Amos G. Warner (1908); 
The Practice of Charity, by E. T. Devine; Handworterbuch der 
Staatswissenschaften, by Dr J. Conrad, &c, vol. ii. ; Das Armenwesen 
in den Vereinigten Staaten von America, by Dr Francis G. Peabody 
(1897) ; the Charities Review, published monthly by the New York 
Charity Organization Society ; the Papers and Reports of the Boston 
and Baltimore societies. France : — La Bibliographic charitable, by 
Camille Granier (1891); La Charite avant et depuis iy8g, by P. 
Hubert Valleroux; Fascicules of the Conseil supSrieur de V assistance 
publique, Revue d 'assistance, published by the SociStS internationale 
pour l' etude des questions d' assistance. Germany : — Reports and Pro- 
ceedings of the Deutsche Vereine fur Armenpflege und Wohltatigkeit; 
Die Armenpflege, a practical handbook.by Dr E.Miinsterberg (1897). 
Austria: — Osterreichs Wohlfahrtseinrichtungen, 1848-1898, by Dr 
Ernest Mischler (1899). (C. S. L.) 

CHARIVARI, a French term of uncertain origin, but probably 
onomatopoeic, for a mock serenade " rough music," made by 
beating on kettles, fire-irons, tea-trays or what not. The 
charivari was anciently in France a regular wedding custom, all 
bridal couples being thus serenaded. Later it was reserved for 
ill-assorted and unpopular marriages, for widows or widowers 
who remarried too soon, and generally as a mockery for all who 
were unpopular. At the beginning of the 17th century, wedding 
charivaris were forbidden by the Council of Tours under pain of 
excommunication, but the custom still lingers in rural districts. 
The French of Louisiana and Canada introduced the charivari 
into America, where it became known under the corrupted name 
of " shivaree." 

CHARKHARI, a native state in the Bundelkhand agency of 
Central India. Area, 745 sq. m.; pop. (1901) 123,594; estimated 
revenue £33,000. It is surrounded on all sides by other states of 
Central India, except near Charkhari town, where it meets the 
United Provinces. It was founded by Bijai Bahadur (vikrama- 
ditya), a sanad being granted him in 1804 and another in 181 1. 
The chief, whose title is maharaja, is a Rajput of the Bundela 
clan, descended from Chhatar Sal, the champion of the inde- 
pendence of Bundelkhand in the 18th century. In 1857 Raja 



Ratan Singh received a hereditary salute of 11 guns, a khilal and 
a perpetual jagir of £1300 a year in recognition of his services 
during the Mutiny. The town of Charkhari (locally Maharaj- 
nagar) is 40 m. W. of Banda; pop. (1901) 11,718. 

CHARLATAN (Ital. ciarlatano, from ciarlare, to chatter), 
originally one who " patters " to a crowd to sell his wares, like a 
" cheap-jack " or " quack " doctor — " quack " being similarly 
derived from the noise made by a duck; so an impostor who 
pretends to have some special skill or knowledge. 

CHARLEMAGNE [Charles the Great] (c. 742-814), Roman 
emperor, and king of the Franks, was the elder son of Pippin the 
Short, king of the Franks, and Bertha, or Bertrada, daughter of 
Charibert, count of Laon. The place of his birth is unknown and 
its date uncertain, although some authorities give it as the 2nd of 
April 742 ; doubts have been cast upon his legitimacy, and it is 
just possible that the marriage of Pippin and Bertha took place 
subsequent to the birth of their elder son. When Pippin was 
crowned king of the Franks at St Denis on the 28th of July 754 
by Pope Stephen II., Charles, and his brother Carloman were 
anointed by the- pope as a sign of their kingly rank. The rough 
surroundings of the Frankish court were unfavourable to the 
acquisition of learning, and Charles grew up almost ignorant of 
letters, but hardy in body and skilled in the use of weapons. 

In 76r he accompanied his father on a campaign in Aquitaine, 
and in 763 undertook the government of several counties. In 
768 Pippin divided his dominions between his two sons, and on his 
death soon afterwards Charles became the ruler of the northern 
portion of the Frankish kingdom, and was crowned at Noyon on 
the 9th of October 768. Bad feeling had existed for some time 
between Charles and Carloman, and when Charles early in 769 
was called upon to suppress a rising in Aquitaine, his brother 
refused to afford him any assistance. This rebellion, however, 
was easily crushed, its leader, the Aquitainian duke Hunold, was 
made prisoner, and his territory more closely attached to the 
Frankish kingdom. About this time Bertha, having effected a 
temporary reconciliation between her sons, overcame the re- 
pugnance with which Pope Stephen III. regarded an alliance 
between Frank and Lombard, and brought about a marriage 
between Charles and a daughter of Desiderius, king of the 
Lombards. Charles had previously contracted a union , probably 
of an irregular nature, with a Frankish lady named Himiltrude, 
who had borne him a son Pippin, the " Hunchback." The peace 
with the Lombards, in which the Bavarians as allies of Desiderius 
joined, was, however, soon broken. Charles thereupon repudi- 
ated his Lombard wife (Bertha or Desiderata) and married in 
771 a princess of the Alamanni named Hildegarde. Carloman 
died in December 77r, and Charles was at once recognized at 
Corbeny as sole king of the Franks. Carloman's widow Gerberga 
had fled to the protection of the Lombard king, who espoused her 
cause and requested the new pope, Adrian I., to recognize her two 
sons as the lawful Frankish kings. Adrian, between whom and 
the Lombards other causes of quarrel existed, refused to assent 
to this demand, and when Desiderius invaded the papal terri- 
tories he appealed to the Frankish king for help. Charles, who 
was at the moment engaged in his first Saxon campaign, ex- 
postulated with Desiderius; but when such mild measures 
proved useless he led his forces across the Alps in 773. Gerberga 
and her children were delivered up and disappear from history; 
the siege of Pavia was undertaken; and at Easter 774 the king 
left the seat of war and visited Rome, where he was received with 
great respect. 

During his stay in the city Charles renewed the donation which 
his father Pippin had made to the papacy in 754 or 756. This 
transaction has given rise to much discussion as to its trust- 
worthiness and the extent of its operation. Our only authority, 
a passage in the Liber Pontificalis, describes the gift as including 
the whole of Italy and Corsica, except the lands north of the Po, 
Calabria and the city of Naples. The vast extent of this donation, 
which, - moreover, included territories not owning Charles's 
authority, and the fact that the king did not execute, or 
apparently attempt to execute, its provisions, has caused many 
scholars to look upon the passape as a forgery; but the better 



8g2 



CHARLEMAGNE 



opinion would appear to be that it is genuine, or at least has a 
genuine basis. Various explanations have been suggested. The 
area of the grant may have been enlarged by later interpola- 
tions; or it may have dealt with property rather than with 
sovereignty, and have only referred to estates claimed by the 
pope in the territories named ; or it is possible that Charles may 
have actually intended to establish an extensive papal kingdom 
in Italy, but was released from his promise by Adrian when the 
pope saw no chance of its fulfilment. Another supposition is that 
the author of the Liber Pontificalis gives the papal interpretation 
of a grant that had been expressed by Pippin in ambiguous 
terms; and this view is supported by the history of the subse- 
quent controversy between king and pope. 

Returning to the scene of hostilities, Charles witnessed the 
capitulation of Pavia in June 774, and the capture of Desiderius, 
who was sent into a monastery. He now took the title " king of 
the Lombards," to which he added the dignity of " Patrician of 
the Romans," which had been granted to his father. Adalgis, 
the son of Desiderius, who was residing at Constantinople, hoped 
the emperor Leo IV. would assist him in recovering his father's 
kingdom; but a coalition formed for this purpose was ineffectual, 
and a rising led by his ally Rothgaud, duke of Friuli, was easily 
crushed by Charles in 776. In 777 the king was visited at Pader- 
born by three Saracen chiefs who implored his aid against Abd- 
ar-Rahman, the caliph of Cordova, and promised some Spanish 
cities in return for help. Seizing this opportunity to extend his 
influence Charles marched into Spain in 778 and took Pampeluna, 
but meeting with some checks decided to return. As the Frankish 
forces were defiling through the passes of the Pyrenees they were 
attacked by the Wascones (probably Basques), and the rear- 
guard of the army was almost annihilated. It was useless to 
attempt to avenge this disaster, which occurred on the 15th of 
August 778, for the enemy disappeared as quickly as he came; 
the incident has passed from the domain of history into that of 
legend and romance, being associated by tradition with the pass 
of Roncesvalles. Among the slain wasone Hruodland, or Roland, 
margrave of the Breton march, whose death gave rise to the 
Chanson de Roland (see Roland, Legend of). 

Charles now sought to increase his authority in Italy, where 
Frankish counts were set over various districts, and where 
Hildebrand, duke of Spoleto, appears to have recognized his 
overlordship. In 780 he was again in the peninsula, and at 
Mantua issued an important capitulary which increased the 
authority of the Lombard bishops', relieved freemen who under 
stress of famine had sold themselves into servitude, and con- 
demned abuses of the system of vassalage. At the same time 
commerce was encouraged by the abolition of unauthorized 
tolls and by an improvement of the coinage; while the sale of 
arms to hostile peoples, and the trade in Christian slaves were 
forbidden. Proceeding to Rome, the king appears to have 
come to some arrangement with Adrian about the donation of 
774. At Easter 781, Carloman, his second son by Hildegarde, 
was renamed Pippin and crowned king of Italy by Pope Adrian, 
and his youngest son Louis was crowned king of Aquitaine; 
but no mention was made at the time of his eldest son. Charles, 
who was doubtless intended to be king of the Franks. In 783 
the king, having lost his wife Hildegarde, married Fastrada, 
the daughter of a Frankish count named Radolf; and in the 
same year his mother Bertha died . The emperor Constantine VI . 
was at this time exhibiting some interest in Italian affairs, and 
Adalgis the Lombard was still residing at his court; so Charles 
sought to avert danger from this quarter by consenting in 781 to 
a marriage between Constantine and his own daughter Rothrude. 
In 786 the entreaties of the pope and the hostile attitude of 
Arichis II., duke of Benevento, a son-in-law of Desiderius, called 
the king again into Italy. Arichis submitted without a struggle, 
though the basis of Frankish authority in his duchy was far from 
secure; but in conjunction with. Adalgis he sought aid from 
Constantinople. His plans were ended by his death in 787, and 
although the empress Irene, the real ruler of the eastern empire, 
broke off the projected marriage between her son and Rothrude, 
she appears to have given very little assistance to Adalgis, 



whose attack on Italy was easily repulsed. During this visit 
Charles had presented certain towns to Adrian, but an estrange- 
ment soon arose between king and pope over the claim of Charles 
to confirm the election to the archbishopric of Ravenna, and it 
was accentuated by Adrian's objection to the establishment by 
Charles of Grimoald III. as duke of Benevento, in succession to 
his father Arichis. 

These journeys and campaigns, however, were but interludes 
in the long and stubborn struggle between Charles and the Saxons, 
which began in 772 and ended in 804 with the incorporation of 
Saxony in the Carolingian empire (see Saxony). This contest, 
in which the king himself took a very active part, brought the 
Franks into collision with the Wiltzi, a tribe dwelling east of the 
Elbe, who in 789 was reduced to dependence. A similar sequence 
of events took place in southern Germany. Tassilo III., duke of 
the Bavarians, who had on several occasions adopted a line of 
conduct inconsistent with his allegiance to Charles, was deposed 
in 788 and his duchy placed under the rule of Ceroid, a brother- 
in-law of Charles, to be governed on the Frankish system (see 
Bavaria). Having thus taken upon himself the control of 
Bavaria, Charles felt himself responsible for protecting its 
eastern frontier, which had long been menaced by the Avars, 
a people inhabiting the region now known as Hungary. He 
accordingly ravaged their country in 791 at the head of an army 
containing Saxon, Frisian, Bavarian and Alamannian warriors, 
which penetrated as far as the Raab ; and he spent the following 
year in Bavaria preparing for a second campaign against them, 
the conduct of which, however, he was compelled by further 
trouble in Saxony to entrust to his son king Pippin, and to Eric, 
margrave of Friuli. These deputies succeeded in 795 and 796 
in taking possession of the vast treasures of the Avars, which 
were distributed by the king with lavish generosity to churches, 
courtiers and friends. A conspiracy against Charles, which his 
friend and biographer Einhard alleges was provoked by the 
cruelties of Queen Fastrada, was suppressed without difficulty 
in 792, and its leader, the king's illegitimate son Pippin, was 
confined in a monastery till his death in 811. Fastrada died in 
August 794, when Charles took for his fourth wife an Alamannian 
lady named Liutgarde. 

The continuous interest taken by the king in ecclesiastical 
affairs was shown at the synod of Frankfort, over which he 
presided in 794. It was on his initiative that this synod con- 
demned the heresy of adoptianism and the worship of images, 
which had been restored in 787 by the second council of Nicaea; 
and at the same time that council was declared to have been 
superfluous. This policy caused a further breach with Pope 
Adrian; but when Adrian died in December 795, his successor, 
Leo III., in notifying his elevation to the king, sent him the keys 
of St Peter's grave and the banner of the city, and asked Charles 
to send an envoy to receive his oath of fidelity. There is no 
doubt that Leo recognized Charles as sovereign of Rome. He 
was the first pope to date his acts according to the years of the 
Frankish monarchy, and a mosaic of the time in the Lateran 
palace represents St Peter bestowing the banners upon Charles 
as a token of temporal supremacy, while the coinage issued by 
the pope bears witness to the same idea. Leo soon had occasion 
to invoke the aid of his protector. In 799, after he had been 
attacked and maltreated in the streets of Rome during a proces- 
sion, he escaped to the king at Paderborn, and Charles sent him 
back to Italy escorted by some of his most trusted servants. 
Taking the same journey himself shortly afterwards, the king 
reached Rome in 800 for the purpose (as he declared) of restoring 
discipline in the church. His authority was undisputed; and 
after Leo had cleared himself by an oath of certain charges made 
against him, Charles restored the pope and banished his leading 
opponents. 

The great event of this visit took place on the succeeding 
Christmas Day, when Charles on rising from prayer in St Peter's 
was crowned by Leo and proclaimed emperor and augustus 
amid the acclamations of the crowd. This act can hardly have 
been unpremeditated, and some doubt has been cast upon the 
statement which Einhard attributes to Charles, that he would not 



CHARLEMAGNE 



893 



have entered the building had he known of the intention of Leo. 
He accepted the dignity at any rate without demur, and there 
seems little doubt that the question of assuming, or obtaining, 
this title had previously been discussed. His policy had been 
steadily leading up to this position, which was rather the 
emblem of the power he already held than an extension of the 
area of his authority. It is probable therefore that Charles 
either considered the coronation premature, as he was hoping 
to obtain the assent of the eastern empire to this step, or that, 
from fear of evils which he foresaw from the claim of the pope 
to crown the emperor, he wished to crown himself. All the 
evidence tends to show that it was the time or manner of the 
act rather than the act itself which aroused his temporary 
displeasure. Contemporary accounts lay stress upon the fact 
that as there was then no emperor, Constantinople being under 
the rule of Irene, it seemed good to Leo and his counsellors and 
the " rest of the Christian people " to choose Charles, already 
ruler of Rome, to fill the vacant office. However doubtful such 
conjectures concerning his intentions may be, it is certain that 
immediately after his coronation Charles sought to establish 
friendly relations with Constantinople, and even suggested a 
marriage between himself and Irene, as he had again become a 
widower in 800. The deposition and death of the empress foiled 
this plan; and after a desultory warfare in Italy between the 
two empires, negotiations were recommenced which in 810 led 
to an arrangement between Charles and the eastern emperor, 
Nicephorus I. The death of Nicephorus and the accession of 
Michael I. did not interfere with the relations, and in 812 an 
embassy from Constantinople arrived at Aix-la-Chapelle, when 
Charles was acknowledged as emperor, and in return agreed to 
cede Venice and Dalmatia to Michael. 

Increasing years and accumulating responsibilities now caused 
the emperor to alter somewhat his manner of life. No longer 
leading his armies in person he entrusted the direction of 
campaigns in various parts of his empire to his sons and other 
lieutenants, and from his favourite residence at Aix watched their 
progress with a keen and sustained interest. In 802 he ordered 
that a new oath of fidelity to him as emperor should be taken by 
all his subjects over twelve years of age. In 804 he was visited 
by Pope Leo, who returned to Rome laden with gifts. Before 
his coronation as emperor, Charles had entered into communica- 
tions with the caliph of Bagdad, Harun-al-Rashid, probably in 
order to protect the eastern Christians, and in 801 he had received 
an embassy and presents from Harun. In the same year the 
patriarch of Jerusalem sent him the keys of the Holy Sepulchre; 
and in 807 Harun not only sent further gifts, but appears to 
have confirmed the emperor's rights in Jerusalem, which, how- 
ever, probably amounted to no more than an undefined protector- 
ate over the Christians in that part of the world. While thus 
extending his influence even into Asia, there was scarcely any 
part of Europe where the power of Charles did not make itself 
felt. He had not visited Spain since the disaster of Roncesvalles, 
but he continued to take a lively interest in the affairs of that 
country. In 798 he had concluded an alliance with Alphonso II., 
king of the Asturias, and a series of campaigns mainly under the 
leadership of King Louis resulted in the establishment of the 
" Spanish march," a district between the Pyrenees and the Ebro 
stretching from Pampeluna to Barcelona, as a defence against 
the Saracens. In 799 the Balearic Islands had been handed over 
to Charles, and a long warfare was carried on both by sea and 
land between Frank and Saracen until 810, when peace was made 
between the emperor and El-Hakem, the emir of Cordova. Italy 
was equally the scene of continuous fighting. Grimoald of Bene- 
vento rebelled against his overlord; the possession of Venice 
and Dalmatia was disputed by the two empires; and Istria 
was brought into subjection. 

With England the emperor had already entered into relations, 
and at one time a marriage was proposed between his son Charles 
and a daughter of Offa, king of the Mercians. English exiles 
were welcomed at his court; he was mainly instrumental in 
restoring Eardwulf to the throne of Northumbria in 809; and 
Einhard includes the Scots within the sphere of his influence. 



In eastern Europe the Avars had owned themselves completely 
under his power in 805; campaigns against the Czechs in 805 
and 806 had met with some success, and about the same time 
the land of the Sorbs was ravaged; while at the western ex- 
tremity of the continent the Breton nobles had done homage 
to Charles at Tours in 800. Thus the emperor's dominions now 
stretched from the Eider to the Ebro, and from the Atlantic to 
the Elbe, the Saale and the Raab, and they also included the 
greater part of Italy; while even beyond these bounds he exer- 
cised an acknowledged but shadowy authority. In 806 Charles 
arranged a division of 'his territories among his three legitimate 
sons, but this arrangement came to nothing owing to the death 
of Pippin in 810, and of the younger Charles in the following 
year. Charles then named his remaining son Louis as his suc- 
cessor; and at his father's command Louis took the crown from 
the altar and placed it upon his own head. This ceremony took 
place at Aix on the nth of September 813. In 808 the Frankish 
authority over the Obotrites was interfered with by Gudrod 
(Godfrey), king of the Danes, who ravaged the Frisian coasts 
and spoke boastfully of leading his troops to Aix. To ward off 
these attacks Charles took a warm interest in the building of a 
fleet, which he reviewed in 811; but by this time Gudrod had 
been killed, and his successor Hemming made peace with the 
emperor. 

In 81 1 Charles made his will, which shows that he contemplated 
the possibility of abdication. The bulk of his possessions were 
left to the twenty-one metropolitan churches of his dominions, 
and the remainder to his children, his servants and the poor. 
In his last years he passed most of his days at Aix, though 
he had sufficient energy to take the field for a short time during 
the Danish War. Early in 814 he was attacked by a fever which 
he sought to subdue by fasting; but pleurisy supervened, and 
after partaking of the communion, he died on the 28th of January 
814, and on the same day his body was buried in the church of 
St Mary at Aix. In the year 1000 his tomb was opened by the 
emperor Otto III., but the account that Otto found the body 
upright upon a throne with a golden crown on the head and hold- 
ing a golden sceptre in the hands, is generally regarded as legend- 
ary. The tomb was again opened by the emperor Frederick I. 
in 1 165, when the remains were removed from a marble sarco- 
phagus and placed in a wooden coffin. Fifty years later they were 
transferred by order of the emperor Frederick II. to a splendid 
shrine, in which the relics are still exhibited once in every six 
years. The sarcophagus in which the body originally lay may 
still be seen at Aix, and other relics of the great emperor are in 
the imperial treasury at Vienna. In 1 165 Charles was canonized 
by the antipope Paschal III. at the instance of the emperor 
Frederick I., and Louis XL of France gave strict orders that the 
feast of the saint should be observed. 

The personal appearance of Charles is thus described by 
Einhard:-—" Big and robust in frame, he was tall, but not 
excessively so, measuring about seven of his own feet in height. 
His eyes were large and lustrous, his nose rather long and 
his countenance bright and cheerful." He had a commanding 
presence, a clear but somewhat feeble voice, and in later life 
became rather corpulent. His health was uniformly good, owing 
perhaps to his moderation in eating and drinking, and to 
his love for hunting and swimming. He was an affectionate 
father, and loved to pass his time in the company of his children, 
to whose education he paid the closest attention. His sons were 
trained for war and the chase, and his daughters instructed in the 
spinning of wool and other feminine arts. His ideas of sexual 
morality were primitive. Many concubines are spoken of, he 
had several illegitimate children, and the morals of his daughters 
were very loose. He was a regular observer of religious rites, 
took great pains to secure decorum in the services of the church, 
and was generous in almsgiving both within his empire and 
without. He reformed the Frankish liturgy, and brought singers 
from Rome to improve the services of the church. He had 
considerable knowledge of theology, took a prominent part in the 
theological controversies of the time, and was responsible for the 
addition of the clause filioqtie to the Nicene Creed. The most 



8 94 



CHARLEMAGNE 



attractive feature of his character, however, was his love of 
learning. In addition to his native tongue he could readLatin and 
understood Greek, but he was unable to write, and Einhard 
gives an account of his futile efforts to learn this art in later life. 
He loved the reading of histories and astronomy, and by ques- 
tioning travellers gained some knowledge of distant parts of the 
earth. He attended lectures on grammar, and his favourite 
work was St Augustine's De civitate Dei. He caused Frankish 
sagas to be collected, began a grammar of his native tongue, and 
spent some of his last hours in correcting a text of the Vulgate. 
He delighted in the society of scholars — Alcuin, Angilbert, Paul 
the Lombard, Peter of Pisa and others, and in this company the 
trappings of rank were laid aside and the emperor was known 
simply as David. Under his patronage Alcuin organized the 
school of the palace, where the royal children were taught in the 
company of others, and founded a school at Tours which became 
the model for many other establishments. Charles was un- 
wearying in his efforts to improve the education of clergy and 
laity, and in 789 ordered that schools should be established in 
every diocese. The atmosphere of these schools was strictly 
ecclesiastical and the questions discussed by the scholars were 
often puerile, but the greatness of the educational work of 
Charles will not be doubted when one considers the rude condition 
of Frankish society half a century before. The main work 
of the Carolingian renaissance was to restore Latin to its 
position as a literary language, and to reintroduce a correct 
system of spelling and an improved handwriting. The 
manuscripts of the time are accurate and artistic, copies of 
valuable books were made and by careful collation the texts 
were purified. 

Charles was not a great warrior. His victories were won rather 
by the power of organization, which he possessed in a marked 
degree, and he was eager to seize ideas and prompt in their 
execution. He erected a stone bridge with wooden piers across 
the Rhine at Mainz, and began a canal between the Altmuhl and 
the Rednitz to connect the Rhine and the Danube, but this work 
was not finished. He built palaces at Aix (his favourite residence) , 
Nijmwegen and Ingelheim, and erected the church of St Mary 
at Aix, modelled on that of St Vitalis at Ravenna and adorned 
with columns and mosaics brought from the same city. He 
loved the simple dress and manners of the Franks, and on two 
occasions only did he assume the more stately attire of a Roman 
noble. The administrative system of Charles in church and 
state was largely personal, and he brought to the work an untir- 
ing industry, and a marvellous grasp of detail. He admonished 
the pope, appointed the bishops, watched over the morals and 
work of the clergy, and took an active part in the deliberations 
of church synods; he founded bishoprics and monasteries, 
was lavish in his gifts to ecclesiastical foundations, and chose 
bishops and abbots for administrative work. As the real 
founder of the ecclesiastical state, he must be held mainly 
responsible for the evils which resulted from the policy of 
the church in exalting the ecclesiastical over the secular 
authority. 

In secular affairs Charles abolished the office of duke, placed 
counts over districts smaller than the former duchies, and 
supervised their government by means of missi dominici, officials 
responsible to himself alone. Marches were formed on all the 
borders of the empire, and the exigencies of military service 
led to the growth of a system of land-tenure which contained 
the germ of feudalism. The assemblies of the people gradually 
changed their character under his rule. No longer did the nation 
come together to direct and govern, but the emperor summoned 
his people to assent to his acts. Taking a lively interest in 
commerce and agriculture, Charles issued various regulations 
for the organization of the one and the improvement of the other. 
He introduced a new system of weights and measures, which he 
ordered should be used throughout his kingdom, and took steps 
to reform the coinage. He was a voluminous lawgiver. Without 
abolishing the customary law of the German tribes, which is 
said to have been committed to writing by his orders, he 
added "to it by means of capitularies, and thus introduced 



certain Christian principles and customs, and some degree of 
uniformity. 

The extent and glamour of his empire exercised a potent spell 
on western Europe. The aim of the greatest of his successors 
was to restore it to its pristine position and influence, while 
many of the French rulers made its re-establishment the goal of 
their policy. Otto the Great to a considerable extent succeeded; 
Louis XIV. referred frequently to the empire of Charlemagne; 
and Napoleon regarded him as his prototype and predecessor. 
The empire of Charles, however, was not lasting. In spite of his 
own wonderful genius the seeds of weakness were sown in his 
lifetime. The church was too powerful, an incipient feudalism 
was present, and there was no real bond of union between the 
different races that acknowledged his authority. All the vigi- 
lance of the emperor could not restrain the dishonesty and the 
cupidity of his servants, and no sooner was the strong hand of 
their ruler removed than they began to acquire territorial power 
for themselves. 

• Authorities. — The chief authorities for the life and times of 
Charlemagne are Einhard's Vita Karoli Magni, the Annates Lauris- 
senses majores, the Annates Fuldenses, and other annals, which are 
published in the Monumenta Germaniae historica. Scriptores, Band 
1. and ii., edited by G. H. Pertz (Hanover and Berlin, 1826-1892). 
For the capitularies see Capitularia regum Francorum, edited by 
A. Boretius in the Monumenta. Leges. Many of the songs of the 
period appear in the Poetae Latini aevi Carolini, edited by E. 
Diimmler (Berlin, 1 881-1884). The Bibliotheca rerum Germani- 
carum, tome iv., edited by Ph. Jaffe ^Berlin, 1864-1873), contains 
some of the emperor's correspondence, and Hincmar's De ordine 
palatii, edited by M. Prou (Paris, 1884), is also valuable. 

The best modern authorities are S. Abel and B. Simson, Jahr- 
biicher des frdnkischen Reiches unter Karl dem Grossen (Leipzig, 
1883-1888); G. Richter and H. Kohl, Annalen des frdnkischen 
Reichs im Zeitalter der Karolinger (Halle, 1885-1887) ; E. Miihlbacher, 
Deutsche Geschichte unter den Karolingern (Stuttgart, 1886); H. 
Brosien, Karl der Grosse (Leipzig and Prague, 1885) ; J. I. Mombert, 
History of Charles the Great (London, 1888) ; M. Lipp, Dasfrankische 
Grenzsystem unter Karl dem Grossen (Breslau, 1892) ; J. von Doll- 
inger, Das Kaiserthum Karls des Grossen und seiner Nachfolger 
(Munich, 1864) ; F. von Wyss, Karl der Grosse als Gesetzgeber (Zurich, 
1869); Th. Sickel, Lehre von den Vrkunden der ersten Karolinger 
(Vienna, 1867); E. Diimmler in the Allgemeine deutsche Biographie, 
Band xv. ; Th. Lindner, Die Fabel von der Bestattung Karls des 
Grossen (Aix-la-Chapelle, 1893); J. A. Ketterer, Karl der Grosse 
und die Kirche (Munich and Leipzig, 1898) ; and J. B. Mullinger, 
The Schools of Charles the Great and the Restoration of Education 
in the gth century (London, 1877). 

The work of the monk of St Gall is found in the Monumenta, 
Band ii. ; an edition of the Historia de vita Caroli Magni et Rolandi, 
edited by F. Castets, has been published (Paris, 1880), and an edition 
of the Kaiserchronik, edited by E. Schroder (Hanover, 1892). See 
also P. Clemen, Die Portratdarstellung Karls des Grossen (Aix-la- 
Chapelle, 1896). (A. W. H.*) 

The Charlemagne Legends 

Innumerable legends soon gathered round the memory of the 
great emperor. He was represented as- a warrior performing 
superhuman feats, as a ruler dispensing perfect justice, and even 
as a martyr suffering for the faith. It was confidently believed 
towards the close of the 10th century that he had made a pil- 
grimage to Jerusalem; and, like many other great rulers, it 
was reported that he was only sleeping to awake in the hour of 
his country's need. We know from Einhard (Vita Karoli, cap. 
xxix.) that the Frankish heroic ballads were drawn up in writing 
by Charlemagne's order, and it may be accepted as certain 
that he was himself the subject of many such during his lifetime. 
The legendary element crept even into the Latin panegyrics 
produced by the court poets. Before the end of the 9th century 
a monk of St Gall drew up a chronicle De gestis Karoli Magni, 
which was based partly on oral tradition, received from an old 
soldier named Adalbert, who had' served in Charlemagne's 
army. This recital contains various fabulous incidents. The 
author relates a conversation between Otkar the Frank (Ogier 
the Dane) and the Lombard king Desiderius (Didier) on the walls 
of Pavia in view of Charlemagne's advancing army. To Didier's 
repeated question "Is this the emperor?" Otkar continues 
to answer " Not yet," adding at last " When thou shalt see 
the fields bristling with an iron harvest, and the Po and the 
Ticino swollen with sea-floods, inundating the walls of the city 



CHARLEMAGNE 



895 



with iron billows, then shall Karl be nigh at hand." This episode, 
which bears the marks of popular heroic poetry, may well be the 
substance of a lost Carolingian cantilena. 1 

The legendary Charlemagne and his warriors were endowed 
with the great deeds of earlier kings and heroes of the Frankish 
kingdom, for the romancers were not troubled by considerations 
of chronology. National traditions extending over centuries were 
grouped round Charlemagne, his father Pippin, and his son Louis. 
The history of Charles Martel especially was absorbed in the 
Charlemagne legend. But if Charles's name was associated 
with the heroism of hjs predecessors he was credited with equal 
readiness with the weaknesses of his successors. In the earlier 
chansons de geste he is invariably a majestic figure and represents 
within limitations the grandeur of the historic Charles. But in 
the histories of the wars with his vassals he is often little more 
than a tyrannical dotard, who is made to submit to gross insult. 
This picture of affairs is drawn from later times, and the sym- 
pathies of the poet are generally with the rebels against the 
monarchy. Historical tradition was already dim when the 
hypothetical and much discussed cantilenae, which may be taken 
to have formed the repository of the national legends from the 
8th to the 10th century, were succeeded in the nth and the 
early 12th centuries by the chansons de geste. The early poems 
of the cycle sometimes contain curious information on the 
Frankish methods in war, in council and in judicial procedure, 
which had no parallels in contemporary institutions. The account 
in the Chanson de Roland of the trial of Ganelon after the battle 
of Roncesvalles must have been adopted almost intact from 
earlier poets, and provides a striking example of the value of the 
chansons de geste to the historian of manners and customs. 
In general, however, the trouvere depicted the feeling and 
manners of his own time. 

Charlemagne's wars in Italy, Spain and Saxony formed part 
of the common epic material, and there are references to his 
wars against the Slavs; but especially he remained in the popular 
mind as the great champion of Christianity against the creed 
of Mahomet, and even his Norman and Saxon enemies became 
Saracens in current legend. He is the Christian emperor directly 
inspired by angels; his sword Joyeuse contained the point 
of the lance used in the Passion; his standard was Romaine, the 
banner of St Peter, which, as the orifiamme of Saint Denis, was 
later to be borne in battle before the kings of France; and in 
1 1 64 Charles was canonized at the desire of the emperor Frederick 
I. Barbarossa by the anti-pope Pascal III. This gave him no 
real claim to saintship, but his festival was observed in some 
places until comparatively recent times. Charlemagne was 
endowed with the good and bad qualities of the epic king, and 
as in the case of Agamemnon and Arthur, his exploits paled 
beside those of his chief warriors. These were not originally 
known as the twelve peers 2 famous in later Carolingian romance. 
The twelve peers were in the first instance the companions in 
arms of Roland in the Teutonic sense. 3 The idea of the paladins 
forming an association corresponding to the Arthurian Round 
Table first appears in the romance of Fierabras. The lists of 
them are very various, but all include the names of Roland and 

1 A remnant of the popular poetry contemporary with Charle- 
magne and written in the vernacular has been thought to be dis- 
cernible under its Latin translation in the description of a siege 
during Charlemagne's war against the Saracens, known as the 
" Fragment from the Hague " (Pertz, Script, iii. pp. 708-710). 

2 The words douze pairs were anglicized in a variety of forms 
ranging from douzepers to dosepers. The word even occurred as a 
singular in the metrical romance of Octavian: — " Ferst they sent 
out a doseper." At the beginning of the 13th century there existed 
a cour des pairs which exercised judicial functions and dated possibly 
from the nth century, but their prerogatives at the beginning of the 
14th century appear to have been mainly ceremonial and decorative. 
In 1257 the twelve peers were the chiefs of the great feudal provinces, 
the dukes of Normandy, Burgundy and Aquitaine, the counts of 
Toulouse, Champagne and Flanders, and six spiritual peers, the 
archbishop of Reims, the bishops of Laon, Ch&lons-sur-Marne, 
Beauvais, Langres and Noyon. (See Du Cange, Clossarium, s.v. 
".Par."). 

3 See J. Flach, Le Compagnonnage dans les chansons de geste (Paris, 
1891). 



Oliver. The chief heroes who fought Charlemagne's battles 
were Roland; Ganelon, afterwards the traitor; Turpin, the 
fighting archbishop of Reims; Duke Naimes of Bavaria, the 
wise counsellor who is always on the side of justice; Ogier 
the Dane, the hero of a whole series of romances; and Guillaume 
of Toulouse, the defender of Narbonne. Gradually most of the 
chansons de geste were attached to the name of Charlemagne, 
whose poetical history falls into three cycles: — the geste du roi, 
relating his wars and the personal history of himself and his 
family; the" southern cycle, of which Guillaume de Toulouse is 
the central figure; and the feudal epic, dealing with the revolts 
of the barons against the emperor, the rebels being invariably 
connected by the trouveres with the family of Doon de Mayence 

(?■»■)■ 

The earliest poems of the cycle are naturally the closest to 
historical truth. The central point of the geste du roi is the 1 ith- 
century Chanson de Roland (see Roland, Legend of), one of 
the greatest of medieval poems. Strangely enough the defeat 
of Roncesvalles, which so deeply impressed the popular mind, 
has not a corresponding importance in real history. But it 
chanced to find as its exponent a poet whose genius established 
a model for his successors, and definitely fixed the type of later 
heroic poems. The other early chansons to which reference is 
made in Roland — Aspremont, Enfances Ogier, Guiteclin, Balan, 
relating to Charlemagne's wars in Italy and Saxony — are not 
preserved in their original form, and only the first in an early 
recension. Basin or Carl el Elegast (preserved' in Dutch and 
Icelandic), the Voyage de Charlemagne & Jerusalem and Le 
Couronnement Looys also belong to the heroic period. The purely 
fictitious and romantic tales added to the personal history of 
Charlemagne and his warriors in the 13th century are inferior 
in manner, and belong to the decadence of romance. The old 
tales, very much distorted in the 15th-century prose versions, 
were to undergo still further degradation in 18th-century 
compilations. 

According to Berte aus grans pie's, in the 13th-century remanie- 
menl of the Brabantine trouvere Adenes li Rois, Charlemagne 
was the son of Pippin and of Berte, the daughter of Flore and 
Blanchefleur, king and queen of Hungary. The tale bears marks 
of high antiquity, and presents one of the few incidents in the 
French cycle which may be referred to a mythic origin. On the 
night of Berte's marriage a slave, Margiste, is substituted for 
her, and reigns in her place for nine years, at the expiration of 
which Blanchefleur exposes the deception; whereupon Berte is 
restored from her refuge in the forest to her rightful place as 
queen. Mainet (12th century) and the kindred poems in German 
and Italian are perhaps based on the adventures of Charles 
Martel, who after his father's death had to flee to the Ardennes. 
They relate that, after the death of his parents, Charles was 
driven by the machinations of the two sons of Margiste to take 
refuge in Spain, where he accomplished his enfances (youthful 
exploits) with the Mussulman king Galafre under the feigned 
name of Mainet. He delivered Rome from the besieging Sara- 
cens, and returned to France in triumph. But his wife Galienne, 
daughter of Galafre, whom he had converted to the Christian 
faith, died on her way to rejoin him. Charlemagne then made 
an expedition to Italy {Enfances Ogier in the Venetian Charle- 
magne, and the first part of the Chevalerie Ogier de Dannemarche 
by Raimbert of Paris, 12th century) to raise the siege of Rome, 
which was besieged by the Saracen emir Corsuble. He crossed 
the Alps under the guidance of a white hart, miraculously sent 
to assist the passage of the army. Aspremont (12th century) 
describes a fictitious campaign against the Saracen King Agolant 
in Calabria, and is chiefly devoted to the enfances of Roland. 
The wars of Charlemagne with his vassals are described in 
Girart de Roussillon, Renaus de Montauban, recounting, the deeds 
of the four sons of Aymon, Huon de Bordeaux, and in the latter 
part of the Chevalerie Ogier, which belong properly to the cycle 
connected with Doon of Mayence. 

The account of the pilgrimage of Charlemagne and his twelve 
paladins to the Holy Sepulchre must in its first form have been 
earlier than the Crusades, as the patriarch asks the emperor to 



896 



CHARLEMAGNE 



free Spain, not the Holy Land, from the Saracens. The legend 
probably originated in a desire to authenticate the relics in the 
abbey of Saint Denis, supposed to have been brought to Aix by 
Charlemagne, and is preserved in a 12th-century romance, Le 
Voyage de Charlemagne a Jerusalem et a Constantinople. 1 This 
journey forms the subject of a window in the cathedral of 
Chartres, and there was originally a similar one at Saint-Denis. 
On the way home Charles and his paladins visited the emperor 
Hugon at Constantinople, where they indulged in a series of 
gabs which they were made to carry out. Galien, a favourite 
15th-century romance, was attached to this episode, for Galien 
was the son of the amours of Oliver with Jacqueline, Hugon's 
daughter. The traditions of Charlemagne's fights with the 
Norsemen (Norois, Noreins) are preserved in Aiquin (12th 
century), which describes the emperor's reconquest of Armorica 
from the " Saracen " king Aiquin, and a disaster at Cezembre 
as terrible in its way as those of Roncesvalles and Aliscans. La 
destruction de Rome is a 13th-century version of the older chanson 
of the emir Balan, who collected an army in Spain and sailed to 
Rome. The defenders were overpowered and the city destroyed 
before the advent of Charlemagne, who, however, avenged the 
disaster by a great battle in Spain. The romance of Fierabras 
(13th century) was one of the most popular in the 15th century, 
and by later additions came to have pretensions to be a complete 
history of Charlemagne. The first part represents an episode 
in Spain three years before Roncesvalles, in which Oliver defeats 
the Saracen giant Fierabras in single combat, and converts him. 
The hero of the second part is Gui de Bourgogne, who recovers 
the relics of the Passion, lost in the siege of Rome. Otinel (13 th 
century) is also pure fiction. L' Entree en Espagne, preserved in 
a 14th-century Italian compilation, relates the beginning of the 
Spanish War, the siege of Pampeluna, and the legendary combat 
of Roland with Ferragus. Charlemagne's march on Saragossa, 
and the capture of Huesca, Barcelona and Girone, gave rise to 
La Prise de Pampelune (14th century, based on a lost chanson); 
and Gui de Bourgogne (12th century) tells how the children of the 
barons, after appointing Guy as king of France, set out to find 
and rescue their fathers, who are represented as having been 
fighting in Spain for twenty-seven years. The Chanson de Roland 
relates the historic defeat of Roncesvalles on the 15th of August 
778, and forms the very crown of the whole Carolingian legend. 
The two 13th-century romances, Gaidon, by Herbert Leduc 
de Dammartin, and Anstis de Carthage, contain a purely fictitious 
account of the end of the war in Spain, and of the establishment 
of a Frankish kingdom under the rule of Anseis. Charlemagne 
was recalled from Spain by the news of the outbreak of the 
Saxons. The contest between Charlemagne and Widukind 
(Guiteclin) offered abundant epic material. Unfortunately the 
original Guiteclin is lost, but the legend is preserved in Les 
Saisnes (c. 1300) of Jehan Bodel, which is largely occupied by 
the loves of Baudouin and Sibille, the wife of Guiteclin. The 
adventures of Blanchefleur, wife of Charlemagne, form a variation 
of the common tale of the innocent wife falsely accused, and are 
told in Macaire and in the extant fragments of La Reine Sibille 
(14th century). After the conquest of the Saracens and the 
Saxons, the defeat of the Northmen, and the suppression of the 
feudal revolts, the emperor abdicated in favour of his son Louis 
{Le Couronnement Looys, 1 2 th century) . Charles's harangue to his 
son is in the best tradition of epic romance. The memory of 
Roncesvalles haunts him on his death-bed, and at the moment 
of death he has a vision of Roland. 

The mythic element is practically lacking in the French 
legends, but in Germany some part of the Odin myth was 
associated with Charles's name. The constellation of the Great 
Bear, generally associated with Odin, is Karlswagen in German, 
and Charles's Wain in English. According to tradition in Hesse, 
he awaits resurrection, probably symbolic of the triumph of the 
sun over winter, within the Gudensberg (Hill of Odin) . Bavarian 

1 For clerical accounts of Charles's voyage to the Holy Land see 
the Chronicon (c. 968) of Benedict, a monk of St Andre, and De- 
scriptio qualiter Karolus Magnus clavum et coronam Domini . . . 
demerit, by an 11th-century writer. 



tradition asserts that he is seated in the Untersberg in a chair, 
as in his tomb at Aix-la-Chapelle. His white beard goes on grow- 
ing, and when it has thrice encircled the stone table before him 
the end of the world will come; or, according to another version. 
Charles will arise and after fighting a great battle on the plain 
of Wals will reign over a new Germany. There were medieval 
chroniclers who did not fear to assert that Charles rose from 
the dead to take part in the Crusades.' In the MS. Annates S. 
Stephani Frisingenses (15th century), which formerly belonged 
to the abbey of Weihenstephan, and is now at Munich, the 
childhood of Charlemagne is practically the same as that of many 
mythic heroes. This work, generally known as the chronicle 
of Weihenstephan, gives among other legends a curious history 
of the emperor's passion for a dead woman, caused by a charm 
given to Charles by a serpent to whom he had rendered justice. 
The charm was finally dtopped into a well at Aix, which thence- 
forward became Charles's favourite residence. The story of 
Roland's birth from the union of Charles with his sister Gilles, 
also found in German and Scandinavian versions, has abundant 
parallels in mythology, and was probably transferred from 
mythology to Charlemagne. 

The Latin chronicle, wrongly ascribed to Turpin (Tilpinus), 
bishop of Reims from 753 to 800, was. in reality later than 
the earlier poems of the French cycle, and the first properly 
authenticated mention of it is in 1165. Its primary object 
was to authenticate the relics of St James at Compostella. 
Alberic Trium Fontium, a monk of the Cistercian monastery of 
Trois Fontanes in the diocese of Chalons, embodied much 
poetical fiction in his chronicle (c. 1249). A large section of the 
Chronique rimee (c. 1243) of Philippe Mousket is devoted to 
Charlemagne's exploits. At the beginning of the 14th century 
Girard of Amiens made a dull compilation known as Charlemagne 
from the chansons de gests, authentic history and the pseudo- 
Turpin. La Conqueste que fit le grand roi Charlemaigne es 
Espaignes (pr. i486) is the same work as the prose compilation 
of Fierabras (pr. 1478), and Caxton's Lyf of Charles the Crete 
(148S). 

The Charlemagne legend was fully developed in Italy, where ii. 
was to have later a great poetic development at the hands of 
Boiardo, Ariosto and Tasso. There are two important Italian 
compilations, MS. XIII. of the library of St Mark, Venice 
(c. 1200), a.nd the Reali di Francia (c. 1400) of a Florentine 
writer, Andrea da Barberino (b. 1370), edited by G. Vandelli 
(Bologna, 1892). The six books of this work are rivalled in 
importance by the ten branches of the Norse Karlamagnus saga, 
written under the reign of Haakon V. This forms a consecutive 
legendary history of Charles, and is apparently based on earlier 
versions of the French Charlemagne poems than those which 
we possess. It thus furnishes a guide to the older forms of 
stories, and moreover preserves the substance of others which 
have not survived in their French form. A popular abridgment, 
the Keiser Karl Magnus Kronike (pr. Malmo, 1534), drawn up 
in Danish, serves in some cases to complete the earlier work. 
The 2000 lines of the German Kaiserchronik on the history of 
Charlemagne belong to the first half of the 12th century, and 
were perhaps the work of Conrad, the poet of the Ruolantes 
Liet. The German poet known as the Strieker used the 
same sources as the author of the chronicle of Weihen- 
stephan for his Karl (c. 1230). The earliest important Spanish 
version was the Chronica Hispaniae (c. 1284) of Rodrigo de 
Toledo. 

The French and Norman- French chansons circulated as freely 
in England as in France, and it was therefore not until the period 
of decadence that English versions were made. The English 
metrical romances of Charlemagne are: — Rowlandes Song (15th 
century); The Taill of Rauf Coilyear (c. 1475, pr. by R. Lek- 
preuik, St Andrews, 1472), apparently original; Sir Ferumbras 
(c. 1380) and the Sowdone of Babylone (c. 1400) from an early 
version of Fierabras; a fragmentary Roland and Vernagu 
(Ferragus); two versions of Otuel (Otinel); and a Sege of 
Meldyne (c. 1390), forming a prologue to Otinel unknown in 
French. 



CHARLEMAGNE, J. A.— CHARLES II. 



»97 



Bibliography. — The most important works on the Charlemagne 
cycle of romance are : — G. Paris, Hist, poetique de Charlemagne 
(Paris, 1865; reprint, with additional notes by Paris and P. Meyer, 
1905); L. Gautier, Les Epopees franqaises (Paris, 4 vols, new ed., 
1878, 1892, 1880, 1882) and the supplementary Bibliographie des 
chansons de geste (1897). The third volume of the Mpopees francaises 
contains an analysis and full particulars of the chansons de geste 
immediately connected with the history of Charlemagne. See also 
G. Rauschen, Die Legende Karls des Grossen im llten und I2ten 
Jahrhundert (Leipzig, 1890); Kristoffer Nyrop, Den oldfranske 
Heldedigtning (Copenhagen, 1883; Ital. trans. Turin, 1886); Pio 
Rajna, Le Origini dell' epopea francese (Florence, 1884); G. T. 
Graesse, " Die grossen Sagenkreise des Mittelalters," in his Litterar- 
geschichte (Dresden, 1842) ; Histoire litteraire de la France (vol. xxii., 
1-852); H. L. Ward, Catalogue of Romances in the Dept. of MSS. in 
the British Museum (1883), vol. i. pp. 546-689; E. Muntz, La L&gende 
de Charlemagne dans Vart du moyen age (Paris, 1885); and for 
the German legend, vol. iii. of H. F. Massmann's edition of the 
Kaiserchronik (Quedlinburg, 1 849-1 854). The English Charlemagne 
Romances were edited (extra series) for the Early Eng. Text Soc. 
by Sidney J. Herrtage, Emil Hausknecht, Octavia Richardson 
and Sidney Lee (1879-1881), the romance of Duke Huon of Bordeaux 
containing a general account of the cycle by Sidney Lee; the 
Karlamagnussaga, by C. R. Unger (Christiania, i860), see also 
G. Paris in Bibl. de I'Ecole des Charles (1864-1865). For individual 
chansons see Anseis de Carthage, ed. J. Alton (Tubingen, 1892); 
Aiquin, ed. F. Jouon des Longrais (Nantes, 1880) ; Aspremont, ed. 
F. Guessard and L. Gautier (Paris, 1885); Basin, or Charles et 
Elegast or Le Couronnement de Charles, preserved only in foreign 
versions (see Paris, Hist. Poet. pp. 315, seq.) ; Berta de li gran pie, 
ed. A. Mussafia, in Romania (vols. iii. and iv., 1874-1875); Berte 
aus grans pies, ed. A. Scheler (Brussels, 1874) ; Charlemagne, by 
Girard d'Amiens, detailed analysis in Paris, Hist. Poet. (Appendix 
iv.) ; Couronnement Looys, ed. E. Langlois (Le Puy, 1888) ; Desier 
(Desiderius or Didier), lost songs of the wars of Lombardy, some 
fragments of which are preserved in Ogier le Danois ; Destruction de 
Rome, ed. G. Grober in Romania (1873) ; A. Thomas, Nouvelles 
recherches sur " I'entree de Spagne," in Bibl. des ecoles francaises de 
Rome (Paris, 1882); Fierabras, ed. A. Krober and G. Servois (Paris, 
i860) in Anciens poetes de la France, and Provencal text, ed. I. Bekker 
(Berlin, 1829) ; Galien, ed. E. Stengel and K. Pfeil (Marburg, 1890) ; 
Gaydon, ed. F. Guessard and S. Luce (Anciens poetes .... 1862); 
Gui de Bourgogne, ed. F. Guessard and H. Michelant (same series, 
1859); Mainet (fragments only extant), ed. G. Paris, in Romania 
(t875); Otinel, ed .Guessard and Michelant (Anciens poetes, 1859), 
and Sir Otuel, ed. S. J. Herrtage (E.E.T.S., 1880); Prise de Pam- 
pelune (ed. A. Mussafia, Vienna, 1864) ; for the Carolingian romances 
relating to Roland, see Roland; Les Saisnes, ed. F. Michel (1839); 
The Sege of Melaine, introductory to Otinel, preserved in English 
only (ed. E.E.T.S., 1880); Simon de Pouille, analysis in lipop. fr. 
(iii. pp. 346 sq.) ; Voyage de C. d, Jerusalem, ed. E. Koschwitz 
(Heilbronn, 1879). For the chronicle of the Pseudo-Turpin, see an 
edition by Castets (Paris, 1881) for the " Societe des langues 
romanes," and the dissertation by G. Paris, De Pseudo-Turpino 
(Paris, 1865). The Spanish versions of Carolingian legends are 
studied by Mila y Fontanals in Dela poesia heroico-popular castellana 
(Barcelona, 1874). (M. Br.) 

CHARLEMAGNE, JEAN ARMAND (1753-1838), French 
dramatic author, was born at Bourget (Seine) on the 30th of 
November 1753. Originally intended for the church, he turned 
first to being a lawyer's clerk and then a soldier. He served in 
the American War of Independence, and on returning to France 
(1783) began to employ his pen on economic subjects, and later 
in writing for the stage. He became the author of a large number 
of plays, poems and romances, among which may be mentioned 
the comedies M. de Crac a Paris (1793), Le Souper des Jacobins 
(i795)and L'Agioteur(i 796) , and Observations de quelques patriotes 
sur la necessite de conserver les monuments de la littSrature et des 
arts (1794), an essay written in collaboration with M.M. Chardin 
and Renouard, which induced the Convention to protect books 
adorned with the coats of arms of their former owners and other 
treasures from destruction at the hands of the revolutionists. 
He died in Paris on the 6th of March 1838. 

CHARLEMONT, JAMES CAULFEILD, ist Earl of (1728- 
1799), Irish statesman, son of the 3rd viscount Charlemont, was 
born in Dublin on the 18th of August 1728, and succeeded his 
father as 4th viscount in 1 734. The title of Charlemont descended 
from Sir Toby Caulfeild (1565-1627) of Oxfordshire, England, 
who was given lands in Ireland, and created Baron Charlemont 
(the name of a fort on the Blackwater), for his services to King 
James I. in 1620, and the ist viscount was the'sth baron (d. 1671), 
who was advanced by Charles II. Lord Charlemont is historically 
interesting for his political connexion with P'lood and Grattan; 
V29— 1 



he was a cultivated man with literary and artistic tastes, and both 
in Dublin and in London his amiable character gave him con- 
siderable social influence. For various early services in Ireland 
he was made an earl in 1 763, but he disregarded court favours and 
cordially joined Grattan in 1780 in the assertion of Irish inde- 
pendence. He was president of the volunteer convention in 
Dublin in November 1783, having taken from the first a leading 
part in the embodiment of the volunteers; and he was a strong 
opponent of the proposals for the Union.. He died on the 4th of 
August 1799; his eldest son, who succeeded him, being subse- 
quently (1837) created an English baron. 
His Life, by F. Hardy, appeared in 1810. 

CHARLEROI (Carolus Rex), a town in the province of Hainaut, 
Belgium. Pop. (1904) 26,528. It was founded in 1666 on the 
site of a village called Charnoy by the Spanish governor Roderigo 
and named after his sovereign Charles II. of Spain. Charleroi 
is the centre of the iron industry of Belgium. It is connected by 
a canal with Brussels, and from its position on the Sambre enjoys 
facilities of communication by water with France as well as 
Belgium. It was ceded soon after its foundation to France by 
the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, and Vauban fortified it. During 
the French occupation the town was considerably extended, and 
the fortifications were made so strong that Charleroi twice 
successfully resisted the strenuous attacks of William of Orange. 
In 1794 Charleroi again fell into the hand's of the French, and on 
this occasion instead of fortifying they dismantled it. In 1816 
Charleroi was refortified under Wellington's direction, and it was 
finally dismantled in 1859. Some portions of the old ramparts 
are left near the railway station. There is an archaeological 
museum with a miscellaneous collection of Roman and Frank 
antiquities. 

CHARLEROI, a borough of Washington county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., on the Monongahela river, near the S.W. corner of the 
state, about 20 m. S. of Pittsburgh. Pop. (1900) 5930, (1749 
foreign-born); (1910) 9615 It is served by the Pennsylvania 
railway. The surrounding country has good farming land and 
large coal mines. In 1905 the borough ranked fifth among the 
cities of the United States in the manufacture of glass (plate- 
glass, lamp chimneys and bottles), its product (valued at 
$1,841,308) being 2-3 % of that of the whole country. Charleroi 
was settled in 1890 and was incorporated in 1891. 

CHARLES (Fr. Charles; Span. Carlos; Ital. Carlo; Ger. 
Karl; derived from O.H.G. CAara/,latinized as Carolus, meaning 
originally " man ": cf. Mod. Ger., Kerl," fellow," A.S. ceorl, Mod. 
Eng. " churl "), a masculine proper name. It has been borne by 
many European princes, notices of the more important of whom 
are given below in the following order: (1) Roman emperors, (2) 
kings of England, (3) other kings in the alphabetical order of their 
states, (4) other reigning princes in the same order, (5) non- 
reigning princes. Those princes who are known by a name in 
addition to Charles (Charles Albert, &c.) will be found after the 
private individuals bearing Charles as a surname. 

CHARLES II. 1 called The Bald (823-877), Roman emperor 
and king of the West Franks, was the son of the emperor Louis 
the Pious and of his second wife Judith and was born in 823. 
The attempts made by his father to assign him a kingdom, first 
Alamannia (829), then the country between the Meuse and the 
Pyrenees(839),a1,theexpenseofhishalf-brothersLothairandLouis 
led to a rising on the part of these two (see Louis I., the Pious). 
The death of the emperor in 840 was the signal for the outbreak 
of war between his sons. Charles allied himself with his brother 
Louis the German to resist the pretensions of the emperorLothair, 
and the two allies conqueredhim in thebloody victoryofFontenoy- 
en-Puisaye (25 June 841). In the following year, the two brothers 
confirmed their alliance by the celebrated oaths of Strassburg, 
made by Charles in the Teutonic language spoken by the subjects 
of Louis, and by Louis in the Romance tongue of Charles's 
subjects. The war was brought to an end by the treaty of 
Verdun (August 843), which gave to'Charles the Bald the kingdom 
of the western Franks, Which practically corresponded with what 

1 For Charles I., Roman emperor, see Charlemagne ; cf. under 
Charles I. of France below. 

IX 



898 



CHARLES III.— CHARLES IV. 



[ROMAN EMPERORS 



is now France, as far as the Meuse, the Saone and the Rhone, 
with the addition of the Spanish March as far as the Ebro. The 
first years of his reign up to the death of Lothair I. (855) were 
comparatively peaceful, and during them was continued the 
system of " confraternal government " of the sons of Louis the 
Pious, who had various meetings with one another, at Coblenz 
(848) , at Meersen (851), and at Attigny (854). In 8 58 Louis the 
German, summoned by the disaffected nobles, invaded the king- 
dom of Charles, who fled to Burgundy, and was only saved by 
the help of the bishops, and by the fidelity of the family of the 
Welfs, who were related to Judith. In 860 he in his turn tried to 
seize the kingdom of his nephew, Charles of Provence, but met 
with a repulse. On the death of Lothair II. in 869 he tried to 
seize his dominions, but by the treaty of Mersen (870) was com- 
pelled to share them with Louis the German. Besides this, 
Charles had to struggle against the incessant rebellions in Aqui- 
taine, against the Bretons, whose revolt was led by their chief 
Nomenoe and Erispoe, and who inflicted on the king the defeats 
of Ballon (845) and Juvardeil (851), and especially against the 
Normans, who devastated the country in the north of Gaul, the 
va'-'.eys of the Seine and Loire, and even up to the borders of 
A^uitaine. Charles was several times compelled to purchase 
tHeir retreat at a heavy price. He has been accused of being 
incapable of resisting them, but we must take into account the 
unwillingness of the nobles, who continually refused to join the 
royal army; moreover, the Frankish army does not seem to have 
been sufficiently accustomed to war to make any headway'against 
the pirates. At any rate, Charles led various expeditions against 
the invaders, and tried to put a barrier in their way by having 
fortified bridges built over all the rivers. In 875, after the death 
of the emperor Louis II., Charles the Bald, supported by Pope 
John VIII., descended into Italy, receiving the royal crown at 
Pavia and the imperial crown at Rome (29th December). But 
Louis the German, who was also a candidate for the succession of 
Louis II., revenged himself for Charles's success by invading and 
devastating his dominions. Charles was recalled to Gaul, and 
after the death of Louis the German (28th August 876), in his 
turn made an attempt to seize his kingdom, but at Andernach 
met with a shameful defeat (8th October 876). In the meantime, 
John VIII., who was menaced by the Saracens, was continually 
urging him to come to Italy, and Charles, after having taken at 
Quierzy the necessary measures for safeguarding the government 
of his dominions in his absence, again crossed the Alps, but 
this expedition had been received w,ith small enthusiasm by the 
nobles, and even by Boso, Charles's brother-in-law, who had been 
entrusted by him with the government of Lombardy, and they 
refused to come with their men to join the imperial army. At 
the same time Carlo man, son of Louis the German, entered 
northern Italy. Charles, ill and in great distress, started on his 
way back to Gaul, and died while crossing the pass of the Mont 
Cenis on the 5th or 6th of October 877. He was succeeded by his 
son Louis the Stammerer, the child of Ermentrude, daughter of a 
count of Orleans, whom he had married in 842, and who had died in 
86q. In 870 he had married Richilde, who was descended from a 
noble family of Lorraine, but none of the children whom he had by 
her played a part of any importance. Charles seems to have been 
a prince of education and letters, a friend of the church, and 
conscious of the support he could find in the episcopate against 
his unruly nobles, for he chose his councillors for preference 
from among the higher clergy, as in the case of Guenelon of Sens, 
who betrayed him, or of Hincmar of Reims. But his character 
and his reign have been judged very variously. The general 
tendency seems to have been to accept too easily the accounts 
of the chroniclers of the east Frankish kingdom, which are 
favourable to Louis the German, and to accuse Charles of 
cowardice and bad faith. He seems on the contrary not to have 
lacked activity or decision. 

Authorities. — The most important authority for the history 
of Charles's reign is represented by the Annates Bertiniani, which 
were the work of Prudentius, bishop of Troyes, up to 861, then up 
to 882 of the celebrated Hincmar, archbishop of Reims. This 
prince's charters are to be found published in the collections of the 
Academic des Inscriptions, by M. M. Prou. The most complete 



history of the reign is found in E. Dummler, Geschichte des ost- 
frdnkiscken Reiches (3 vols., Leipzig, 1 887-1 888). See also J. Cal- 
mette, La Diplomatic carolingienne du traitS de Verdun ti la mort de 
Charles le Chauve (Paris, 1901), and^F. Lot, " Une Annee du regne de 
Charles le Chauve," in Le Moyen-Age, (1902) pp. 393-438. 

CHARLES III., the Fat ! (832-888), Roman emperor and king 
of the West Franks, was the youngest of the three sons of Louis 
the German, and received from his father the kingdom of Swabia 
(Alamannia). After the death of his two brothers in succession, 
Carloman (881) and Louis the Young (882) , he inherited the whole 
of his father's dominions. In 880 he had helped his two cousins 
in the west Frankish realm, Louis III. and Carloman, in their 
struggle with the usurper Boso of Provence, but abandoned 
them during the campaign in order to be crowned emperor at 
Rome by Pope John VIII. (February 881). On his return he led 
an expedition against the Norsemen of Friesland, who were 
entrenched in their camp at Elsloo, but instead of engaging with 
them he preferred to make terms and paid them tribute. In 884 the 
death of Carloman brought into his possession the west Frankish 
realm, and in 885 he got rid of his rival Hugh of Alsace, an 
illegitimate son of Lothair II., taking him prisoner by treachery 
and putting out his eyes. However, in spite of his six expeditions 
into Italy, he did not succeed in pacifying the country, nor in 
delivering it from the Saracens. He was equally unfortunate in 
Gaul and in Germany against the Norsemen, who in 886-887 
besieged Paris. The emperor appeared before the city with a 
large army (October 886), but contented himself by treating with 
them, buying the retreat of the invaders at the price of a heavy 
ransom, and his permission for them to ravage Burgundy without 
his interfering. On his return to Alamannia, however, the general 
discontent showed itself openly and a conspiracy was formed 
against him. He was first forced to dismiss his favourite, the 
chancellor Liutward, bishop of Vercelli. The dissolution of his 
marriage with the pious empress Richarde, in spite of her inno- 
cence as proved by the judicial examination, alienated his nobles 
still more from him. He was deposed by an assembly which met 
at Frankfort or at.Tribur (November 887), and died in poverty 
at Neidingen on the Danube (iSth January 888). 

See E. Dummler, Geschichte des ostfrdnkischen Reiches vol. iii. 
(Leipzig 1888). 

CHARLES IV. (1316-1378), Roman emperor and king of 
Bohemia, was the eldest son of John of Luxemburg, king of 
Bohemia, and Elizabeth, sister of Wenceslas III., the last 
Bohemian king of the Premyslides dynasty. He was born at 
Prague on the 14th of May 1316, and in 1323 went to the court 
of his uncle, Charles IV., king of France, and exchanged his 
baptismal name of Wenceslas for that of Charles. He remained 
for seven years in France, where he was well educated and learnt 
five languages; and there he married Blanche, sister of King 
Philip VI., the successor of Charles IV. In 1331 he gained some 
experience of warfare in Italy with his father; and on his return 
to Bohemia in 1333 he was made margrave of Moravia. Three 
years later he undertook the government of Tirol on behalf of his 
brother John Henry, and was soon actively concerned in a 
struggle for the possession of this county. In consequence of an 
alliance between his father and Pope Clement VI., the relentless 
enemy of the emperor Louis IV., Charles was chosen German king 
in opposition to Louis by some of the princes at Rense on the 
nth of July 1346. As he had previously promised to be sub- 
servient to Clement he made extensive concessions to the pope 
in 1347. Confirming the papacy in the- possession of wide 
territories, he promised to annul the acts of Louis against 
Clement, to take no part in Italian affairs, and to defend and 
protect the church. Meanwhile he had accompanied his father 
into France and had taken part in the battle of Crecy in August 
1346, when John was killed and Charles escaped wounded from 
the field. As king of Bohemia he returned to Germany, and 
after being crowned German king at Bonn on the 26th of 
November 1346, prepared to attack Louis. Hostilities were 
interrupted by the death of the emperor in October 1347, and 
Gunther, count of Schwarzburg, who was chosen king by the 

' This surname has only been applied to Charles since the 13th 
century. 



ROMAN EMPEROR] 



CHARLES V. 



899 



partisans of Louis, soon abandoned the struggle. Charles, 
having made good use of the difficulties of his opponents, was 
recrowned at Aix-la-Chapelle on the 25th of July 1549, and was 
soon the undisputed ruler of Germany. Gifts or promises had 
won the support of the Rhenish and Swabian towns; a marriage 
alliance secured the friendship of the Habsburgs; and that of 
Rudolph II., count palatine of the Rhine, was obtained when 
Charles, who had become a widower in 1348, married his daughter 
Anna. 

In 1350 the king was visited at Prague by Cola di Rienzi, who 
urged him to go to Italy, where the poet Petrarch and the 
citizens of Florence also implored his presence. Turning a deaf 
ear to these entreaties, Charles kept Rienzi in prison for a year, 
and then handed him as a prisoner to Clement at Avignon. 
Four years later, however, he crossed the Alps without an army, 
received the Lombard crown at Milan on the 6th of January 
1355, and was crowned emperor at Rome by a cardinal on the 
5th of April in the same year. His sole object appears to have 
been to obtain the imperial crown in peace, and in accordance 
with a promise previously made to Pope Clementheonly remained 
in the city for a few hours, in spite of the expressed wishes of the 
Romans. Having virtually abandoned all the imperial rights 
in Italy, the emperor recrossed the Alps, pursued by the scornful 
words of Petrarch but laden with considerable wealth. On his 
return Charles was occupied with the administration of Germany, 
then just recovering from the Black Death, and in 1356 he 
promulgated the Golden Bull (q.v.) to regulate the election of 
the king. Having given Moravia to one brother, John Henry, 
and erected the county of Luxemburg into a duchy for another, 
Wenceslas, he was unremitting in his efforts to secure other 
territories as compensation and to strengthen the Bohemian 
monarchy. To this end he purchased part of the upper Palatinate 
of the Rhine in 1353, and in 1367 annexed Lower Lusatia to 
Bohemia and bought numerous estates in various parts of 
Germany. On the death in 1363 of Meinhard, duke of Upper 
Bavaria and count of Tirol, Upper Bavaria was claimed by the 
sons of the emperor Louis IV., and Tirol by Rudolph IV., duke 
of Austria. Both claims were admitted by Charles on the 
understanding that if these families died out both territories 
should pass to the house of Luxemburg. About the same time 
he was promised the succession to the margraviate of Branden- 
burg, whichghe actually obtained for his son Wenceslas in 1373. 
He also gawked a considerable portion of Silesian territory, 
partly by inheritance through his third wife, Anna, daughter of 
Henry II., duke of Schweidnitz. In 1365 Charles visited Pope 
Urban V. at Avignon and undertook to escort hkn to Rome; 
and on the same occasion was crowned king of Burgundy, or 
Aries, at Aries on the 4th of June 1365. 

His second journey to Italy took place in 1368, when he had 
a meeting with Urban at Viterbo, was besieged in his palace at 
Siena, and left the country before the end of the year 1369. 
During his later years the emperor took little part in German 
affairs beyond securing the election of his son Wenceslas as king 
of the Romans in 1376, and negotiating a peace between the 
Swabian league and some nobles in 1378. After dividing his 
lands between his three sons, he died on the 29th of November 
1378 at Prague, where he was buried, and where a statue was 
erected to his memory in 1848. 

Charles, who according to the emperor Maximilian I. was 
the step-father of the Empire, but the father of Bohemia, brought 
the latter country to a high state of prosperity. He reformed 
the finances, caused roads to be made, provided for greater 
security to life and property, and introduced or encouraged 
various forms of industry. In 1348 he founded the university 
of Prague, and afterwards made this city the seat of an arch- 
bishop, and beautified it by the erection of several fine buildings. 
He was an accomplished diplomatist, possessed a penetrating 
intellect, and was capable of much trickery in order to gain his 
ends. By refusing to become entangled in Italian troubles and 
confining himself to Bohemia, he proved that he preferred the 
substance of power to its shadow. Apparently the most pliant 
of men, he had in reality great persistence of character, and if 



foiled in one set of plans readily turned round and reached his 
goal by a totally different path. He was superstitious and peace- 
loving, had few personal wants, and is described as a round- 
shouldered man of medium height, with black hair and beard, 
and sallow cheeks. 

His autobiography the " Vita Caroli IV.," which deals with events 
down to the year 1346, and various other documents relating to hit 
life and times, are published in the Fontes rerum Germanicarum, 
Band I., edited by J. F. Bohmer (Leipzig, 1885). For other docu- 
ments relating to the time see Die Regesten des Kaiserreichs unter 
Kaiser Karl IV., edited by J. F. Bohmer and A. Huber (Innsbruck, 
1889); Acta Karoli IV. imperatoris inedita (Innsbruck, 1891); 
E. Werunsky, Excerpta ex registris Clementis VI. et Innocentii VI. 
(Innsbruck, 1885). See also E. Werunsky, Geschichte Kaiser Karls 
IV. und seiner Zeit (Innsbruck, 1880-1892); H. Friedjung, 
Kaiser Karl IV. und sein Antheil am geistigen Leben seiner Zeit 
(Vienna, 1876) ; A. Gottlob, Karls IV. private und politische Bezie- 
hungen zu Frankreich (Innsbruck, 1883) ; O. Winckelmann, Die 
Beziehungen Kaiser Karls IV. zum Kdnigreich Arelat (Strassburg, 
1882); K. Palm, " Zu Karls IV. Politik gegen Baiern," in the 
Forschungen zur deutschen Geschichte, Band xv. (Gottingen, 1862- 
1866); Th. Lindner, "Karl IV. und die Wittelsbacher," and S. 
Stienherz, " Die Beziehungen Ludwigs I. von Ungarn zu Karl IV.," 
and " Karl IV. und die osterreichischen Freiheitsbriefa," in the 
Mittheilungen des Instituts fiir osterreichische Geschichtsforschung 
(Innsbruck, 1880). 

CHARLES V. (1500-1358), Roman emperor and (as Charles I.) 
king of Spain, was born at Ghent on the 24th of February 1500. 
His parents were Philip of Burgundy and Joanna, third child 
of Ferdinand and Isabella. Philip died in 1506, and Charles 
succeeded to his Nethcrland possessions and the county of 
Burgundy (Franche Comte). His grandfather, the emperor 
Maximilian, as regent, appointed his daughter Margaret vice- 
regent, and under her strenuous guardianship Charles lived in 
the Netherlands until the estates declared him of age in 151 5. 
In Castile, Ferdinand, king of Aragon, acted as regent for his 
daughter Joanna, whose intellect was already clouded. On the 
23rd of January 1516 Ferdinand died. Charles's visit to Spain 
was delayed until the autumn of 151 7, and only in 1518 was he 
formally recognized as king conjointly with his mother, firstly 
by the cortes of Castile, and then by those of Aragon. Joanna 
lived to the very eve of her son's abdication, so that he was only 
for some months technically sole king of Spain. During this 
Spanish visit Maximilian died, and Charles succeeded to the 
inheritance of the Habsburgs, to which was shortly added the 
duchy of Wurttemberg. Maximilian had also intended that he 
should succeed as emperor. In spite of the formidable rivalry of 
Francis I. and the opposition of Pope Leo X., pecuniary corrup- 
tion and national feeling combined to secure his election in 15 19. 
Charles hurriedly left Spain, and after a visit to Henry VIII. 
and his aunt Catherine, was crowned at Aix on the 23rd of 
October 1520. 

The difficulty of Charles's reign consists in the complexity of 
interests caused by the unnatural aggregate of distinct territories 
and races. The crown of Castile brought with it the two recently 
conquered kingdoms of Navarre and Granada, together with 
the new colonies in America and scattered possessions in northern 
Africa. That of Aragon comprised the three distinct states of 
Aragon, Valencia and Catalonia, and in addition the kingdoms 
of Naples, Sicily and Sardinia, each with a separate character 
and constitution of its own. No less than eight independent 
cortes or parliaments existed in this Spanish-Italian group, 
adding greatly to the intricacy of government. In the Nether- 
land provinces again the tie was almost purely personal; there 
existed only the rudiments of a central administration and a 
common representative system, while the county of Burgundy 
had a history apart. Much the same was true of the Habsburg 
group of states, but Charles soon freed himself from direct 
responsibility for their government by making them over, 
together with Wurttemberg, to his brother Ferdinand. The 
Empire entailed serious liabilities on its ruler without furnishing 
any reliable assets: only through the cumbrous machinery of 
the diet could Charles tap the military and financial resources of 
Germany. His problem here was complicated by the growth of 
Lutheranism, which he had to face at his very first diet in 15 21. 
In addition to such administrative difficulties Charles had 



900 



CHARLES V. 



[ROMAN EMPEROR 



inherited a quarrel with France, to which the rivalry of Francis I. 
for the Empire gave a personal character. Almost equally 
formidable was the advance of Sultan Suliman up the Danube, 
and the union of the Turkish naval power with that of the 
Barbary States of northern Africa. Against Lutheran Germany 
the Catholic emperor might hope to rely upon the pope, and 
against France on England. But the attitude of the popes was 
almost uniformly disagreeable, while from Henry VIII. and 
Edward VI. Charles met with more unpleasantness than favour. 

The difficulty of Charles himself is also that of the historian 
and reader of his reign. It is probably more instructive to treat 
it according to the emperor's several problems than in strict 
chronological order. Yet an attempt to distinguish the several 
periods of his career may serve as a useful introduction. The two 
best dividing lines are, perhaps, the coronation as emperor at 
Bologna in 1530, and the peace of Crepy in 1544. Until his visit 
to Italy (1529) Charles remained in the background of the 
European stage, except for his momentous meeting with Luther 
at the diet of Worms (1521). This meeting in itself forms a 
subdivision. Previously to this, during his nominal rule in the 
Netherlands, his visit to Spain, and his candidature for the 
Empire, he seemed, as it was said, spell-bound under the ferule 
of his minister Chievres. Almost every report represented him 
as colourless, reserved and weak. His dependence on his Flemish 
counsellors provoked the rising in Castile, the feebleness of his 
government the social war in Aragon. The religious question 
first gave him a living interest, and at this, moment Chievres died. 
Aleander, the papal nuncio at Worms, now recognized that public 
opinion had been wrong in its estimate of Charles. Never again 
was he under tutelage. The necessity, however, of residence in 
Spain prevented his taking a personal part in the great fight with 
Francis I. for Italy. , He could claim no credit for the capture of 
his rival at Pavia. When his army sacked Rome and held Pope 
Clement VII. prisoner, he could not have known where this 
army was. And when later the French overran Naples, and 
all but deprived him of his hold on Italy, he had to instruct his 
generals that they must shift for themselves. The world had 
become afraid of him, but knew little of his character. In the 
second main division of his career Charles changed all this, 
No monarch until Napoleon was so widely seen in Europe and in 
Africa. Complexity of prbblems is: the characteristic of. this 
period. At the head of his arrny Charles forced the Turks back- 
wards down the Danube (153?^. He personally conquered.Tunis 
(1535), and was only prevented by " act of God" from winning 
Algiers (1541). The invasion of Provence in 1536 was headed by 
the emperor. In person he crushed the rebellion of Ghent (1540). 
In his last war with Francis (1 542-44) he journeyed from Spain to 
the Netherlands, brought the rebellious duke of Cleves to his 
knees, and was within easy reach of Paris when he made the peace 
of Crepy ( 1 544) . In Germany, meanwhile, from the diet of Augs- 
burg (1530) onwards, he had presided at the diets or conferences, 
which, as he hoped, would effect the reunion of the church. 

Peace with France and the Turk and a short spell of friendliness 
with Pope Paul III. enabled Charles at last to devote his whole 
energies to the healing of religious schism. Conciliation proving 
impossible, he led the army which received the submission of the 
Lutheran states, and then captured the elector of Saxony at 
Mtihlberg, after which the other leader, Philip of Hesse, capitu- 
lated. The Armed Diet of 1548 was the high-water mark of 
Charles's power. Here, in defiance of the pope, he published the 
Interim which was meant to reconcile the Lutherans with the 
church, and the so-called Reform which was to amend its abuses. 
During the next four years, owing to ill-health and loss of insight, 
his power was ebbing. In 1552 he was flying over the Brenner 
from Maurice of Saxony, a princeling whose fortunes he had 
made. Once again the old complications had arisen^ His old 
enemy's son, Henry II., had attacked him indirectly in Piedmont 
and Parma, and then directly in Germany in alliance with 
Maurice. Once more the Turk was moving in the Danube and 
in the western Mediterranean. The humiliation of his flight 
gave Charles new spirit, and he once more led an army through 
Germany against the French, only to be checked by the duke of 



Guise's defence of Metz. Henceforth the waves of his fortune 
plashed to and fro until his abdication without much ostensible 
loss or gain. 

Charles had abundance of good sense, but little creative genius, 
and he was by nature conservative. Consequently he never 
sought to impose any new or common principles of administra- 
tion on his several states. He took them as he found them, arid 
at most, as in the Netherlands, improved upon what he found. 
So also in dealing with rival powers his policy may be called 
opportunist. He was indeed accused by his enemies of emulating 
Charlemagne, of aiming at universal empire. Historians have 
frequently repeated this charge. Charles himself in later life 
laughingly denied the imputation, and facts are in favour of his 
denial. When Francis I. was in his power he made no attempt to 
dismember France, in spite of his pledges to his allies Henry VIII. 
and the duke of Bourbon. He did, indeed, demand the duchy 
of Burgundy, because he believed this to have been unrighteously 
stolen by Louis XI. from his grandmother when a helpless girl. 
The claim was not pressed, and at the height of his fortunes in 
1548 he advised his son never to surrender it, but also never to 
make it a cause of war. When Clement VII. was his prisoner, he 
was vehemently urged to overthrow the temporal power, to 
restore imperial dominion in Italy, at least to make the papacy 
harmless for the future. In reply he restored his enemy to the 
whole of his dominions, even reimposing him by force on the 
Florentine republic. To the end of his life his conscience was 
sensitive as to Ferdinand's expulsion of the house of Albret from 
Spanish Navarre, though this was essential to the safety of Spain. 
Though always at war he was essentially a lover of peace, and all 
his wars were virtually defensive. " Not greedy of territory," 
wrote Marcantonio Contarini in 1536, " but most greedy of peace 
and quiet;" For peace he made sacrifices which angered his hot- 
headed brother Ferdinand. He would not aid in expelling the 
sultan's puppet Zapolya from Ferdinand's kingdom of Hungary, 
and he suffered the restoration of the ruffianly duke of Wurttem- 
berg, to the grave prejudice of German Catholicism. In spite of 
his protests, Henry VIII. with impunity ill-treated his aunt 
Catherine, and the feeble government of Edward VI. bullied his 
cousin Mary, who had been his fiancee. No serious efforts were 
made to restore his brother-in-law, Christian II., to the throne of 
Denmark, and he advised his son Philip to make friends with the 
usurper. After the defeat of the Lutheran powers in 1 547 he did 
not gain a palm's breadth of territory for himself. . He resisted 
Ferdinand's claim for Wurttemberg, which the duke had deserved 
to forfeit; he disliked his acceptance of the voluntary surrender 
of the city of Constance; he would not have it said that he had 
gone to war for the benefit of the house of Habsburg. 

On the other hand, Charles V.'s policy was not merely negative. 
He enlarged upon the old Habsburg practice of marriage as a 
means of alliance of influence. Previously to his election as 
emperor, his sister Isabella was married to Christian II. of 
Denmark, and the marriages of Mary and Ferdinand with the 
king of Hungary and his sister had been arranged. Before he was 
twenty Charles himself had been engaged some ten times with a 
view to political combinations. Naturally, therefore, he regarded 
his near relations as diplomatic assets. The federative system 
Was equally familiar; Germany, the Netherlands, and even Spain, 
were in a measure federations. Combining these two principles, he 
would within his more immediate spheres of influence strengthen 
existing federations by intermarriage, while he hoped that the 
same means would convert the jarring powers of Europe into a 
happy family. He made it a condition of the treaty of Madrid 
(1526) that Francis I. should marry his sister Eleanor, Manuel of 
Portugal's widow, in the hope, not that she would be an ally or a 
spy within the enemy's camp, but an instrument of peace. His 
son's marriage with Mary Tudor would not only salve the rubs 
with England, but give such absolute security to the Netherlands 
that France would shrink from war. The personal union of all 
the Iberian kingdoms under a single ruler had long been an aim of 
Spanish statecraft. So Charles had married his sister Eleanor, 
much against her will, to the old king Manuel, and then his sister 
Catherine to his successor. The empress was a Portuguese 



ROMAN EMPEROR] 



CHARLES V, 



901 



infanta, and Philip's first wife wa9 another. It is thus small 
wonder that, within a quarter of a century of Charles's death, 
Philip became king of Portugal. 

In the wars with Francis I. Italy was the stake. In spite of his 
success Charles for long made no direct conquests. He would 
convert the peninsula into a federation mainly matrimonial. 
Savoy, the important buffer state, was detached from France by 
the marriage of the somewhat feeble duke to Charles's capable 
and devoted sister-in-law, Beatrice of Portugal. Milan, con- 
quered from France, was granted to Francesco Sforza, heir 
of the old dynasty, and even after his treason was restored to 
him. In the vain hope of offspring Charles sacrificed his niece, 
Christina of Denmark, to the valetudinarian duke. In the long 
negotiations for a Habsburg-Valois dynasty which followed 
Francesco's death, Charles was probably sincere. He insisted 
that his daughter or niece should marry the third rather than the 
second son of Francis I., in order, apart from other reasons, to 
run less risk of the duchy falling under French dominion. The 
final investiture of Philip was forced upon him, and does not 
represent his saner policy. The Medici of Florence, the Gonzaga 
of Mantua, the papal house of Farnese, were all attached by 
Habsburg marriages. The republics of Genoa and Siena were 
drawn into the circle through the agency of their chief noble 
families, the Doria and Piccolomini; while Charles behaved 
with scrupulous moderation towards Venice in spite of her active 
hostility before and after the League of Cognac. Occasional 
acts of violence there were, such as the participation in the 
murder of Pierluigi Farnese, and the measures which provoked 
the rebellion of Siena. These were due to the difficulty of 
controlling the imperial agents from a distance, and in part to 
the faults of the victim prince and republic. On the whole, the 
loose federation of viceroyalties and principalities harmonized 
with Italian interests and traditions. The alternative was not 
Italian independence, but French domination. At any rate, 
Charles's structure was so durable that the French met with no 
real success in Italy until the 18th century. 
• Germany offered a fine field for a creative intellect, since the 
evils of her disintegration stood confessed. On the other hand, 
princes and towns were so jealous of an increase of central 
authority that Charles, at least until his victory over the League 
of Schmalkalden, had little effective power. Owing to his wars 
with French and Turks he was rarely in Germany, and his visits 
were very short. His problem was infinitely complicated by the 
union of Lutheranism and princely independence. He fell back 
on the old policy of Maximilian, and strove to create a party by 
personal alliances and intermarriage. In this he met with some 
success. The friendship of the electors of Brandenburg, whether 
Catholic or Protestant, was unbroken. In the war of Schmal- 
kalden half the Protestant princes were on Charles's side or 
friendly neutrals. At the critical moment which preceded this, 
the lately rebellious duke of Cleves and the heir of Bavaria 
were secured through the agency of two of Ferdinand's invaluable 
daughters. The relations, indeed, between the two old enemies, 
Austria and Bavaria, were permanently improved. The elector 
palatine, whose love affairs with his sister Eleanor Charles as a 
boy had roughly broken, received in compensation a Danish 
niece. Her sister, widow of Francesco Sforza, was utilized to 
gain a hold upon the French dynasty which ruled Lorraine. 
More than once there were proposals for winning the hostile 
house of Saxony by matrimonial means. After his victory over 
the League of Schmalkalden, Charles perhaps had really a chance 
of making the imperial power a reality. But he lacked either 
courage or imagination, contenting himself with proposals for 
voluntary association on the lines of the defunct Swabian 
League, and dropping even these when public opinion was against 
them. Now, too, he made his great mistake in attempting to 
foist Philip upon the Empire as Ferdinand's successor. Gossip 
reported that Ferdinand himself was to be set aside, and careless 
historians have given currency to this. Such an idea was im- 
possible. Charles wished Philip to succeed Ferdinand, while he 
ultimately conceded that Ferdinand's son Maximilian should 
follow Philip, and even in his lifetime exercise the practical 



power in Germany. This scheme irritated Ferdinand and his 
popular and ambitious son at the critical moment when it was 
essential that the Habsburgs should hold together against 
princely malcontents. Philip was imprudently introduced to 
Germany, which had also just received a foretaste of the un- 
pleasant characteristics of Spanish troops. Yet the person rather 
than the policy was, perhaps, at fault. It was natural that the 
quasi-hereditary succession should revert to the elder line. 
France proved her recuperative power by the occupation of 
Savoy and of Metz, Toul and Verdun, the military keys of 
Lorraine. The separation of the Empire and Spain left two 
weakened powers not always at accord, and neither of them 
permanently able to cope on equal terms with France. Never- 
theless, this scheme did contribute in no small measure to the 
failure of Charles in Germany. The main cause was, of course, 
the religious schism, but his treatment of this requires separate 
consideration. 

The characteristics of Charles's government, its mingled 
conservatism and adaptability, are best seen in Spain and the 
Netherlands, with which he was in closer personal contact than 
with Italy and Germany. In Spain, when once he knew the 
country, he never repeated the mistakes which on his first visit 
caused the rising of the communes. The cortes of Castile were 
regularly summoned, and though he would allow no encroach- 
ment on the crown's prerogatives, he was equally scrupulous 
in respecting their constitutional rights. They became, perhaps, 
during the reign slightly more dependent on the crown. This 
has been ascribed to the system of gratuities which in later reigns 
became a scandal, but was not introduced by Charles, and as 
yet amounted ;to little more than the payment of members' 
expenses. Indirectly, crown influence increased owing to the 
greater control which had gradually been exercised over the 
composition of the municipal councils, which often returned the 
deputies for the cortes. Charles was throughout nervous as to 
the power and wealth of the greater nobles. They rather than 
the crown had conquered the communes, and in the past they 
rather than the towns had been the enemies of monarchy. He 
earnestly warned his son against giving them administrative 
power, especially the duke of Alva, who in spite of his sancti- 
monious and humble bearing cherished the highest ambitions: 
in foreign affairs and war he might be freely used, for he was 
Spain's best soldier. In the cortes of 1538 Charles came into 
collision with the nobles as a class. They usually attended only 
on ceremonial occasions, since they were exempted from direct 
taxation, which was the main function of the cortes. Now, 
however, they were summoned, because Charles was bent upon 
a scheme of indirect taxation which would have affected all 
classes. They offered an uncompromising opposition, and Charles 
somewhat angrily dismissed them, nor did he ever summon 
them again. The peculiar Spanish system of departmental 
councils was further developed, so that it may be said that the 
bureaucratic element was slightly increasing just as the parlia- 
mentary element was on the wane. The evils of this tendency 
were as yet scarcely apparent owing to Charles's personal inter- 
vention in all departments. The councils presented their reports 
through the minister chiefly concerned; Charles heard their 
advice, and formed his own conclusions. He impressed upon 
Philip that he should never become the servant of his ministers : 
let him hear them all but decide himself. Naturally enough, he 
was well served by his ministers, whom he very rarely changed. 
After the death of the Piedmontese Gattinara he relied mainly on 
Nicolas Perrenot de Granvella for Netherland and German 
affairs, and on Francisco de los Cobos for Spanish, while the 
younger Granvella was being trained. From 1520 to 1555 these 
were the only ministers of high importance. Above all, Charles 
never had a court favourite, and the only women who exercised 
any influence were his natural advisers, his wife, his aunt Margaret 
and his sister Mary. In all these ladies he was peculiarly fortu- 
nate. Charles was never quite popular in Spain, but the empress 
whom he married at his people's request was much beloved. 
Complaints were made of his absenteeism, but until rs43 he 
spent the greater portion of his reign in Spain, or on expeditions 



902 



CHARLES V. 



[ROMAN EMPEROR 



such as those against Tunis and Algiers which were distinctively 
in Spanish interests. Spaniards disliked his Netherland and 
German connexions, but without the vigorous blows which these 
enabled him to strike at France, it is improbable that Spain 
could have retained her hold on -Italy, or her monopoly of 
commerce with the Indies. The wars with Francis I. were, in 
spite of the rival candidature for the Empire, Spanish wars 
entailed by Ferdinand's retention of Roussillon, his annexation 
of Navarre, his summary eviction of the French from Naples. 
The Netherlands had become convinced on commercial grounds 
of the wisdom of peace with France, and the German interest in 
Milan was not sufficiently active to be a standing cause of war. 
Charles and Francis had inherited the hostility of Ferdinand and 
Louis XII. 

The reign of Charles was in America the age of conquest and 
organization. Upon his accession the settlements upon the 
mainland were insignificant; by 1556 conquest was practically 
complete, and civil and ecclesiastical government firmly estab- 
lished. Actual expansion was the work of great adventurers 
starting on their own impulse from the older colonies. To 
Charles fell the task of encouraging such ventures, of controlling 
the conquerors, of settling the relations between colonists and 
natives, which involved those between the colonists and the 
missionary colonial church. He must arrest depopulation, 
provide for the labour market, regulate oceanic trade, and check 
military preponderance by civil and ecclesiastical organization. 
In America Charles took an unceasing interest; he had a bound- 
less belief in its possibilities, and a determination to safeguard 
the interests of the crown. Cortes, Alvarado and the brothers 
Pizarro were brought into close personal communication with 
the emperor. If he bestowed on Cortes the confidence which the 
loyal conqueror deserved, he showed the sternest determination 
in crushing the rebellious and autonomous instincts of Almagro 
and the Pizarros. But for this, Peru and Chile must have become 
independent almost as soon as they were conquered. Throughout 
he strove to protect the natives, to prevent actual slavery, and 
the consequent raids upon the natives. Legislation was not, 
indeed, always consistent, because the claims of the colonists 
could not always be resisted, but on the whole he gave earnest 
support to the missionaries, who upheld the cause of the natives 
against the military, and sometimes the civil and ecclesiastical 
elements. His humane care for his native subjects may well be 
studied in the instructions sent to Philip from Germany in 1548, 
when Charles was at the summit of his power. If Charles had 
had his will, he would have opened the colonial trade to the whole 
of his wide possessions. The Castilians, however, jealously con- 
fined it to the city of Seville, artificially fostering the indolence 
of the colonists to maintain the agricultural and manufacturing 
monopoly of Castile, and by extreme protective measures 
forcing them to live on smuggled goods from other countries. 
Charles did actually attempt to cure the exclusive interest of 
the colonists in mineral wealth by the establishment of peasant 
and artisan colonies. If in many respects he failed, yet the 
organization of Spanish America and the survival of the native 
races were perhaps the most permanent results of his reign. It 
is a proof of the complexity of his interests that the march of the 
Turk upon Vienna and of the French on Naples delayed until 
the following reign the foundation of Spain's eastern empire. 
Charles carefully organized the expedition of Magellan, which 
sailed for the Moluccas and discovered the Philippines. Un- 
fortunately, his straits for money in 1529 compelled him to 
mortgage to Portugal his disputed claim to the Moluccas, and the 
Philippines consequently dropped out of sight. 

If in the administration of Spain Charles did little more than 
mark time, in the Netherlands advance was rapid. Of the seven 
northern provinces he added five, containing more than half the 
area of the later United Provinces. In the south he freed 
Flanders and Artois from French suzerainty, annexed Tournai 
and Cambrai, and closed the natural line of French advance 
through the great bishopric of Liege by a line of fortresses across 
its western frontier. Much was done to convert the aggregate 
of jarring provinces into a harmonious unity by means of common 



principles of law and finance, and by the creation of a national 
army. While every province had its own assembly, there were 
at Charles's accession only the rudiments of estates general 
for the Netherlands at large. At the close of the reign the 
common parliamentary system was in full swing, and was fast 
converting the loosely knit provinces into a state. By these 
means the ruler had wished to facilitate the process of supply, 
but supply soon entailed redress, and the provinces could 
recognize their common interests and grievances. Under Philip 
II. all patriotic spirits passionately turned to this creation of 
his father as the palladium of Netherland liberty. This process 
of consolidation was infinitely difficult, and conflicts between 
local and central authorities were frequent. That they were 
safely tided over was due to Charles's moderation and his legal 
mind, which prompted him to draw back when his case was bad. 
The harshest act of his life was the punishment of the rebellion 
of Ghent. Yet the city met with little or no sympathy in other 
quarters, because she had refused to act in concert with the other 
members of Flanders and the other provinces. It was no mere 
local quarrel, but a breach of the growing national unity. 

In the Netherlands Charles showed none of the jealousy with 
which he regarded the Spanish nobles. He encouraged the 
growth of large estates through primogeniture; he gave the 
nobles the provincial governorships, the great court offices, the 
command of the professional cavalry. In the Order of the Golden 
Fleece and the long established presence of the court at Brussels, 
he possessed advantages which he lacked in Spain. The nobility 
were utilized as a link between the court and the provinces. 
Very different was it with the church. By far the greater part 
of the Netherlands fell under foreign sees, which were peculiarly 
liable to papal exactions and to the intrigues of rival powers. 
Thus the usual conflict between civil and ecclesiastical juris- 
diction was peculiarly acute. To remedy this dualism of 
authority and the consequent moral and religious abuses, 
Charles early designed the creation of a national diocesan 
system, and this was a darling project throughout his life. 
He was doing what every German territorial prince, Catholic or- 
Lutheran, attempted, making bishoprics and abbeys dependent 
on the crown, with nomination and institution in his hands, 
and with reasonable control over taxation and jurisdiction. 
The papacy unfortunately thwarted him, and the scheme, 
which under Charles would have been carried with national 
assent, and created a national church, took the appearance under 
Philip of alien domination. 

If in Germany Charles was emperor, he was in the Netherlands 
territorial prince, and thus his interests might easily be at 
disaccord with those of the Empire. Consequently, just as he had 
shaken off French suzerainty from Flanders and Artois, so he 
loosened the tie of the other provinces to Germany.' In 1548 
they were declared free and sovereign principalities not subject 
to imperial laws, and all the territories were incorporated in the 
Burgundian circle. It was, indeed, agreed that they should 
contribute to imperial taxation, and in return receive imperial 
protection. But this soon became a dead letter, and the Nether- 
lands were really severed from the Empire, save for the nominal 
feudal tie in the case of some provinces. Thus some writers have 
dated their independence from Charles's convention of 1548 
rather than from the peace of 'Westphalia, a century later. 
Having converted his heterogeneous territories into a self- 
sufficient state, Charles often contemplated the formation of a 
middle kingdom between France and Germany. At the last 
moment he spoiled his own work by granting the Netherlands to 
Philip. It was indeed hard to set aside the order of inheritance, 
and the commercial interests of the provinces were closely bound 
with Spain, and with England, whose queen Philip had married. 
Under any other ruler than Philip the breach might not have 
come so early. Yet it must be regretted that Charles had not 
the courage of his convictions, and that he lost the opportunity 
of completing the new nation which he had faithfully laboured to 
create. 

Charles V. is in the eyes of many the very picture of a Catholic 
zealot. Popular opinion is probably mainly based upon the 



ROMAN EMPEROR] 



CHARLES V. 



903' 



letters written from Yuste in 1558, when two hot-beds of heresy 
had been discovered in Spain herself, and on the contemporary- 
codicil to his will. These were, perhaps, really in part responsible 
for the later persecution. Yet the circumstances were far from 
being typical of the emperor's career. Death was very near 
him; devotional exercises were his main occupation. The 
letters, moreover, were cries of warning, and not edicts. Charles 
was not then the responsible authority. There is a long step 
between a violent letter and a violent act. Few men would 
care to have their lives judged by letters written in the last 
extremities of gout. Less pardonable was the earlier persecution 
of the Valencian Moriscoes in 1525-1526. They had fought for 
their landlords in the cause of order, had been forcibly converted 
by the revolutionaries, and on the suppression of revolution had 
naturally relapsed. But for this momentary conversion the 
Inquisition would have had no hold upon them. The edict of 
persecution was cruel and unnecessary, and all expert opinion in 
Valencia was against it. It was not, however, actually enforced 
until after the victory of Pavia. It seems likely that Charles 
in a fit of religious exaltation regarded the persecution as a 
sacrificial thank-offering for his miraculous preservation. It is 
characteristic that, when in the following year he was brought 
into personal contact with the Moors of Granada, he allowed 
them to buy themselves off from the more obnoxious measures 
of the Inquisition. Henceforth the reign was marked by extreme 
leniency. Spain enjoyed a long lull in the activity of her In- 
quisition. At Naples in 1547 a rumour that the Spanish 
Inquisition was to be introduced to check the growth of heresy 
in influential quarters produced a dangerous revolt. The 
briefs were, however, issued by Paul III., no friend of Charles, 
and when a Neapolitan deputation visited the emperor he dis- 
claimed any intention of making innovations. Of a different 
type to all the above was the persecution in the Netherlands. 
Here it was deliberate, chronic, and on an ascending scale. 
It is not a sufficient explanation that heresy also was persistent, 
ubiquitous and increasing, for this was also the case in Germany 
where Charles's methods were neither uniform nor drastic. But 
in the Netherlands the heretics were his immediate subjects, 
and as in every other state, Catholic or Lutheran, they must 
conform to their prince's religion. But there was more than this. 
After the suppression of the German peasant revolt in 1525 
many of the refugees found shelter in the teeming Netherland 
cities, and heresy took the form, not of Lutheranism, but of 
Anabaptism, which was believed to be perilous to society and 
the state. The government put down Anabaptism, as a modern 
government might stamp out Anarchism. The edicts were, 
indeed, directed against heresy in general, and were as harsh 
as they could be — at least on paper. Yet when Charles was 
assured that they were embarrassing foreign trade he let it be 
understood that they should not affect the foreign mercantile 
communities. Prudential considerations proved frequently a 
drag upon religious zeal.' 

The relations of Charles to heresy must be judged in the main 
by his treatment of German Lutheranism. Here he had to deal, 
not with drawing-room imprudences nor hole-and-corner con- 
venticles, not with oriental survivals nor millenary aspirations, 
but with organized churches protected by their princes, supported 
by revenues filched from his own church and stiffened by formulae 
as rigid as those of Catholicism. The length and stubbornness of 
the conflict will serve to show that Charles's religious conserva- 
tism had a measure of elasticity, that he was not a bigot and 
nothing more. It should be remembered that all his principal 
ministers were inclined to be Erasmian or indifferent, that one of 
his favourite confessors, Loaysa, advised compromise, and that 
several intimate members of his court and chapel were, after his 
death, victims of the Inquisition. The two more obvious courses 
towards the restoration of Catholic unity were force and re- 
conciliation, in other words, a religious war or a general council. 
Neither of these was a simple remedy. The latter was impossible 
without papal concurrence, inoperative without the assistance of 
the European powers, and merely irritant without the adhesion 
of the Lutherans. It was most improbable that the papacy, the 



powers and the Lutherans would combine in a measure so 
palpably advantageous to the emperor. Force was hopeless 
save in the absence of war with France and the Turk, and of 
papal hostility in Italian territorial politics. Charles must obtain 
subsidies from ecclesiastical sources, and the support of all German 
Catholics, especially of the traditional rival, Bavaria. Even so 
the Protestants would probably be the stronger, and therefore 
they must be divided by utilizing any religious split, any class 
distinction, any personal or traditional dislikes, or else by bribery. 
Force and reconciliation seeming equally difficult, could an 
alternative be found in toleration? The experiment might take 
the form either of individual toleration, or of toleration for the 
Lutheran states. The former would be equally objectionable 
to Lutheran and Catholic princes as loosening their grip upon 
their subjects. Territorial toleration might seem equally 
obnoxious to the emperor, for its recognition would strengthen 
the anti-imperial particularism so closely associated with 
Lutheranism. If Charles could find no permanent specific, he 
must apply a provisional palliative. It was absolutely necessary 
to patch, if not to cure, because Germany must be pulled together 
to resist French and Turks. Such palliatives were two — suspen- 
sion and comprehension. Suspension deferred the execution of 
penalties incurred by heresy, either for a term of years, or until 
a council should decide. Thus it recognized the divorce of the 
two religions, but limited it by time. Comprehension instead of 
recognizing the divorce would strive to conceal the breach. It 
was a domestic remedy, German and national, not European and 
papal. To become permanent it must receive the sanction of 
pope and council, for the Roman emperor could not set up a 
church of Germany. Yet the formula adopted might conceivably 
be found to fall within the four corners of the faith, and so 
obviate the necessity alike of force or council. Such were the 
conditions of the emperor's task, and such the methods which he 
actually pursued. He would advance now on one line, now on 
another, now on two or three concurrently, but he never de- 
finitely abandoned any. This fusion of obstinacy and versatility 
was a marked feature of his character. 

Suspension was of course often accidental and involuntary. 
The two chief stages of Lutheran growth naturally corresponded 
with the periods, each of nine years, when Charles was absent. 
Deliberate suspension was usually a consequence of the failure 
of comprehension. Thus at Augsburg in 1530 the wide gulf 
between the Lutheran confession and the Catholic confutation 
led to the definite suspensive treaty granted to the Lutherans at 
Nuremberg (1532). Charles dared not employ the alternative 
of force, because he needed their aid for the Turkish war. In 
1 541 , after a series of religious conferences,he personally presented 
a compromise in the so-called Book of Regensburg, which .was 
rejected by both parties. He then proposed that the articles 
agreed upon should be compulsory, while on others toleration 
should be exercised until a national council should decide. Never 
before nor after did he go so far upon the path of toleration, or so 
nearly accept a national settlement. He was then burning to set 
sail for Algiers. His last formal suspensive measure was that of 
Spires (Speyer) in 1544, when he was marching against Francis. 
He promised a free and general council to be held in Germany, 
and, as a preparation, a national religious congress. The 
Lutherans were privately assured that a measure of compre- 
hension should be concluded with or without papal approval. 
Meanwhile all edicts against heresy were suspended. No wonder 
that Charles afterwards confessed that he could scarcely reconcile 
these concessions with his conscience, but he won Lutheran aid 
for his campaign. The peace of Crepy gave all the conditions 
required for the employment of force. He had peace with French 
and Turk, he won the active support of the pope, he had deeply 
divided the Lutherans and reconciled Bavaria. Finding that the 
Lutherans would not accept the council summoned by the pope to 
Trent, he resorted to force, and force succeeded. At the Armed 
Diet of 1 548 reunion seemed within reach. But Paul III. in direct 
opposition to Charles's wish had withdrawn the council from 
Trent to Bologna. Charles could not force Lutherans to submit 
to a council which he did not himself recognize, and he could not 



9°4 



CHARLES V. 



[ROMAN EMPEROR 



bring himself to national schism. Thus, falling back upon his old 
palliatives, he issued the Interim and the accompanying Reform 
of the Clergy, pending a final settlement by a satisfactory general 
council. These measures pleased neither party, and Charles at 
the very height of his power had failed. He was conscious of 
failure, and made few attempts even to enforce the Interim. 
Henceforward political complications gathered round him anew. 
The only remedy was toleration in some form, independent of 
the papacy and limitless in time. To this Charles could never 
assent. His ideal was shattered, but it was a great ideal, 
and the patience, the moderation, even at times the adroit-' 
ness with which he had striven towards it, proved him to be no 
bigot. 

The idea of abdication had long been present with Charles. 
After his failure to eject the French from Metz he had not shrunk 
from a wearisome campaign against Henry II., and he was now 
tired out. His mother's death removed an obstacle, for there 
could now be no question as to his son's succession to the Spanish 
kingdoms. Religious settlement in Germany could no longer be 
postponed, and he shrank from the responsibility; the hand that 
should rend the seamless raiment of God's church must not be 
his. To Ferdinand he gave his full authority as emperor, although 
at his brother's earnest request formal abdication was delayed 
until 1558. In the Hall of the Golden Fleece at Brussels on 
the 25th of October 1555 he formally resigned to Philip the 
sovereignty of his beloved Netherlands. Turning from his son to 
the representatives of the estates he said, " Gentlemen, you must 
not be astonished if, old and feeble as I am in all my members^ 
and also from the love I bear you, I shed some tears." In the 
Netherlands at least the love was reciprocal, and tears were 
infectious among the thousand deputies who listened to their 
sovereign's last speech. On the 1 6th of January 1556, Charles 
resigned his Spanish kingdoms and that of Sicily, and shortly 
afterwards his county of Burgundy. On the 17th of September 
he sailed from Flushing on the last of his many voyages, an 
English fleet from Portland bearing him company down the 
Channel. In February 1 5 5 7 he was installed in the home which he 
had chosen at Yuste in Estremadura. 

The excellent books which have been written upon the 
emperor's retirement have inspired an interest out of all pro- 
portion to its real significance. His little house was attached to 
the monastery, but was not within it. He was neither an ascetic 
nor a recluse. Gastronomic indiscretions still entailed their 
inevitable penalties. Society was not confined to interchange of 
civilities with the brethren. His relations, his chief friends, his 
official historians, all found their way to Yus,te. Couriers brought 
news of Philip's war and peace with Pope Paul IV., of the victories 
of Saint Quentin and Gravelines, of the French capture of Calais, 
of the danger of Oran. As head of the family he intervened in the 
delicate relations with the closely allied house of Portugal: he 
even negotiated with the house of Navarre for reparation forthe 
wrong done by his grandfather Ferdinand, which appeared to 
weigh upon his conscience. Above all he was shocked by the 
discovery that Spain, his own court, and his very chapel were 
infected with heresy. His violent letters to his son and daughter 
recommending immediate persecution, his profession of regret at 
having kept his word when Luther was in his power, have weighed 
too heavily on his reputation. The feverish phrases of religious 
exaltation due to broken health and unnatural retirement cannot 
balance the deliberate humanity and honour of wholesome 
manhood. Apart from such occasional moments of excitement, 
the emperor's last years passed tranquilly enough. At first he 
would shoot pigeons in the monastery woods, and till his last 
illness tended his garden and his animal pets, or watched the 
operations of Torriani, maker of clocks and mechanical toys. 
After an illness of three weeks the call came in the early hours of 
the feast of St Matthew, who, as his chaplain said, had for Christ's 
sake forsaken wealth even as Charles had forsaken empire. The 
dying man clasped his wife's crucifix to his breast till his fingers 
lost their hold. The archbishop held it before his eyes, and with 
the cry of "Ay Jesus!" died, in the words of his faithful squire 
D, Luis de Quijada, " the chief of men that had ever been or 



would ever be." Posterity need not agree, but no great man can 
boast a more honest panegyric. 

In character Charles stands high among contemporary princes. 
It consists of pairs of contrasts, but the better side is usually 
stronger than the worse. Steadfast honesty of purpose was 
occasionally warped by self-interest, or rather he was apt to 
think that his own course must needs he that of righteousness. 
Self-control would give way, but very rarely, to squalls of passion. 
Obstinacy and irresolution were fairly balanced, the former 
generally bearing upon ends, the latter upon means. His own 
ideals were constant, but he could gradually assimilate the views 
of others, and could bend to argument and circumstance; yet 
even here he had a habit of harking back to earlier schemes 
which he had seemed to have definitely abandoned. Intercourse 
with different nationalities taught him a certain versa tility; he 
was dignified with Spaniards, familiar with Flemings, while the 
material Italians were pleased with his good sense. His sym- 
pathies were neither wide nor quick, but he was a most faithful 
friend, and the most considerate of masters. For all who sought 
him his courtesy and patience were unfailing. At his abdication 
he dwelt with reasonable pride upon his labours and his journey- 
ings. Few monarchs have lived a more strenuous life. Yet his 
industry was broken by fits of indolence, which were probably due 
to health. In his prime his confessor warned him against this 
defect, and it caused, indeed, the last great disaster of his life. 
Fortunately he was conscious of his obstinacy, his irresolution 
and his indolence. He would accept admonition from the chapter 
of the Golden Fleece, would comment on his failings as a warning 
to his son. When Cardinal Contarini politely assured him that 
to hold fast to good opinions is not obstinacy but firmness, 
the emperor replied, " Ah! but I sometimes stick to bad ones." 
Charles was not cruel, indeed the character of his reign was 
peculiarly merciful. But he was somewhat unforgiving. He 
especially resented any slight upon his honour, and his unwise 
severity to Philip of Hesse was probably due to the unfounded 
accusation that he had imprisoned him in violation of his pledge. 
The excesses of his troops in Italy, in Guelders and on the 
Austrian frontiers caused him acute pain, although he called him- 
self " hard to weep." No great nobleman, statesman or financier 
was executed at Charles's order. He was proud of his generalship, 
classing himself with Alva and Montmorenci as the best of his 
day. Yet his failures nearly balanced his successes. It is true 
that in his most important campaign, that against the League 
of Schmalkalden, the main credit must be ascribed to his well- 
judged audacity at the opening, and his dogged persistency at 
the close. As a soldier he must rank very high. It was said 
that his being emperor lost to Spain the best light horseman of 
her army. At every crisis he was admirably cool, setting a truly 
royal example to his men. His mettle was displayed when he 
was attacked on the burning sands of Tunis, when his troops 
were driven in panic from Algiers, when in spite of physical 
suffering he forded the Elbe at Muhlberg, and when he was 
bombarded by the vastly superior Lutheran artillery under the 
walls of Ingolstadt. When blamed for exposing himself on this 
last occasion, " I could not help it," he apologized; "we were 
short of hands, I could not set a bad example." Nevertheless 
he was by nature timid. Just before this very action he had a 
fit of trembling, and he was afraid of mice and spiders. The 
force of his example was not confined to the field. Melanchthon 
wrote from Augsburg in 1530 that he was a model of continence, 
temperance and moderation, that the old domestic discipline 
was now only preserved in the imperial household. He tenderly 
loved his wife, whom he had married for pecuniary and diplomatic 
reasons. Of his two well-known illegitimate children, Margaret 
was born before he married, and Don John long after his wife's 
death, but he felt this latter to be a child of shame. His sobriety 
was frequently contrasted with the universal drunkenness of the 
German and Flemish nobles, which he earnestly condemned; 
But on his appetite he could place no control, in spite of the 
ruinous effects of his gluttony upon his health. In dress, in his 
household, and in his stable he was simple and economical. 
He loved children, flowers, animals and birds. Professional 



ROMAN EMPERORS] 



CHARLES VI.— CHARLES VII. 



9° 5 



jesters amused him, and hs was not above a joke himself. Maps 
and mechanical inventions greatly interested him, and in later 
life he became fond of reading. He takes his place indeed among 
authors, for he dictated the commentaries on his own career. 
Of music he possessed a really fine knowledge, and his high 
appreciation of Titian proves the purity of his feeling for art. 
The little collection of books and pictures which he carried to 
Yuste is an index of his tastes. ■ Charles was undeniably plain. 
He confessed that he was by nature ugly, but that as artists 
usually painted him uglier than he was, strangers on seeing him 
were agreeably disappointed. The protruding lower jaw and 
the thin pale face were redeemed by the fine open brow and 
the bright speaking eyes. He was, moreover, well made, and 
in youth had an incomparable leg. Above all no man could 
doubt his dignity; Charles was every inch an emperor. 

Bibliography. — Commentaries de Charles-quint, ed. by Baron 
Kervyn de Lettenhove (Brussels, 1862) ; Memoirs written by Charles 
in 1550, and treating somewhat fully of the years 1543-1548; W. 
Robertson, History of the Emperor Charles V. (latest ed., London, 
1887), an English classic, which needs supplementing by later 
authorities; F. A. Mignet, Rivalite de Francois I et de Charles-quint 
(2 vols., Paris, 1875) ; E. Armstrong, The Emperor Charles V. (2 vols., 
London, 1902), to which reference may be made for monographs 
and collections of documents bearing on the reign; H. Baumgarten, 
Ceschichte Karls V. (3 vols., Stuttgart, 1885-1893), very full but 
extending only to 1539; G. de Leva, Storia documentata di Carlo V. 
in forreldzione all' Italia (5 vols., Venice, 1 862-1 894), a general history 
•of the reign, though with special reference to its Italian aspects, 
and extending to 1552 ; article by L. P. Gachard in Biographie 
nationale, vol. iii., 1872, an excellent compressed account. The 
life of Charles V. at Yuste may be studied in L. P. Gachard's Retraite 
et mort de Charles-quint au monastire de Yuste (Brussels, 1 854-1 855), 
and in Sir W. Stirling-Maxwell's The Cloister Life of the Emperor 
Charles V. (London, 4 editions from 1852) ; also in W. H. Prescott's 
edition of Robertson's History (1857). (E. Ar.) 

CHARLES VI. (1685-1740), Roman emperor, was born on the 
1st of October 1685 at Vienna. He was the second son of the 
emperor Leopold I. by his third marriage with Eleanore, daughter 
of Philip William of Neuburg, elector palatine of the Rhine. 
When the Spanish branch of the house of Habsburg became 
extinct in 1 700^ he was put forward as the lawful heir in opposi- 
tion to Philip V., the Bourbon to whom the Spanish dominions 
had been left by the will of Charles II. of Spain. He was pro- 
claimed at Vienna on the 19th of September 1703, and made 
his way to Spain by the Low Countries, England and Lisbon, 
remaining in Spain till 1 7 1 1 , mostly in Catalonia, where the Habs- 
burg party was strong. Although he had a certain tenacity of 
purpose, which he showed in later life, he displayed none of the 
qualities required in a prince who had to gain his throne by the 
sword (see Spanish Succession, War of). He was so afraid of 
appearing to be ruled by a favourite that he would not take 
good advice, but was easily earwigged by flatterers who played 
on his weakness for appearing independent. In 1708 he was 
married at Barcelona to Elizabeth Christina of Brunswick- 
Wolfenbiittel (1691-1750), a Lutheran princess who was per- 
suaded to accept Roman Catholicism by the assurances of 
Protestant divines and of the philosopher Leibnitz, that she 
could always give an Evangelical meaning to Catholic ceremonies. 
On the death of his elder brother Joseph I. on the 1 7th of April 
171 1, Charles inherited the hereditary possessions of the house 
of Habsburg, and their claims on the Empire. The death of 
Joseph without male issue had been foreseen, and Charles had 
at one time been prepared to give up Spain and the Indies on 
condition that he was allowed to retain Naples, Sicily and the 
Milanese. But when the case arose, his natural obstinacy led 
him to declare that he would not think of surrendering any of 
the rights of his family. It was with great difficulty that he 
was persuaded to leave Spain, months after the death of his 
brother (on the 27th of September 1711). Only the emphatic 
refusal of the European powers to tolerate the reconstruction 
of the empire of Charles V. forced him to give a sullen submission 
to necessity. He abandoned Spain and was crowned emperor 
in December 171 1, but for a long time he would not recognize 
Philip V. It is to his honour that he was very reluctant to 
desert the Catalans who had fought for his cause. Some of their 



chiefs followed him to Vienna, and their advice had an un- 
fortunate influence on his mind. They almost succeeded in 
arousing his suspicions of the loyalty of Prince Eugene at the 
very moment when the prince's splendid victories over the Turks 
had led to the peace of Passarowitz on the 28th of July 17 18, and 
a great extension of the Austrian dominions eastward. Charles 
showed an enlightened, though not always successful, interest 
in the commercial prosperity of his subjects, but from the date 
of his return to Germany till his death his ruling passion was to 
secure his inheritance against dismemberment. As early as 
1 7 13 he had begun to prepare the " Pragmatic Sanction " 
which was to regulate the succession. An only son, born on the 
13th of April 1716, died in infancy, and it became the object of 
his policy to obtain the recognition of his daughter Maria Theresa 
as his heiress. He made great concessions to obtain his aim, 
and embarked on complicated diplomatic negotiations. His 
last days were embittered by a disastrous war with Turkey, in 
which he lost almost all he had gained by the peace of Passaro- 
witz. He died at Vienna on the 20th of October 1740, and 
with him expired the male line of his house. Charles VI. was 
an admirable representative of the tenacious ambition of the 
Habsburgs, and of their belief in their own " august greatness " 
and boundless rights. 

For the personal character of Charles VI. see A. von Arneth, 
Ceschichte Maria Theresias (Vienna, 1863-1879). Dr Franz Krones, 
R. v. Marchland, Grundriss der osterreichischen Ceschichte (Vienna, 
1882), gives a very copious bibliography. 

CHARLES VII. (1697-1745), Roman emperor, known also as 
Charles Albert, elector of Bavaria, was the son of the elector 
Maximilian Emanuel and his second wife, Theresa Cunigunda, 
daughter of John Sobieski, king of Poland. He was born on the 
6th of August 1697. His father having taken the side of Louis 
XIV. of France in the War of the Spanish Succession (q.v), 
Bavaria was occupied by the allies. Charles and his brother 
Clement, afterwards archbishop of Cologne, were carried prisoners 
to Vienna, and were educated by the Jesuits under the name of 
the counts of Wittelsbach. When his father was restored to his 
electorate, Charles was released, and rn 17 17 he led the Bavarian 
contingent of the imperial army which served under Prince 
Eugene against the Turks, and is said to have distinguished 
himself at Belgrade. On the 25th of September 1722 he was 
betrothed to Maria Amelia, the younger of the two orphan 
daughters of the emperor Joseph I. Her uncle Charles VI. 
insisted that the Bavarian house should recognize the Pragmatic 
Sanction which established his daughter Maria Theresa as heiress 
of the Habsburg dominions. They did so, but with secret protests 
and mental reservations of their rights, which were designed to 
render the recognition valueless. The electors of Bavaria had 
claims on the possessions of the Habsburgs under the will of 
the emperor Ferdinand I., who died in 1564. 

Charles succeeded his father on the 26th of February 1726. 
As a ruler of Bavaria, he showed a vague disposition to improve 
the condition of his subjects, but his profuse habits and his efforts 
to rival the splendour of the French court crippled his finances. 
His policy was one of much duplicity, for he was constantly 
endeavouring to keep on good terms with the emperor while 
slipping out of his obligation to accept the Pragmatic Sanction 
and intriguing to secure French support for his claims whenever 
Charles VI. should die. On hearing of the emperor's last illness, 
he ordered his agent at Vienna to renew his claim to the Austrian 
inheritance. The claim was advanced immediately after the 
death of Charles VI. on the 20th of October 1 740. Charles Albert 
now entered into the league against Maria Theresa, to the great 
misfortune of himself and his subjects. By the help of her enemies 
he was elected emperor in opposition to her husband Francis, 
grand duke of Tuscany, on the 24th of January 1742, under the 
title of Charles VII., and was crowned at Frankfort-on-Main 
on the 12th of February. But as his army had been neglected, 
he was utterly unable to resist the Austrian troops. While he was 
being crowned his hereditary dominions in Bavaria were being 
overrun. He described himself as attacked by stone and gout, 
ill, without money or land, and in distress comparable to the 



go6 



CHARLES I. 



[ENGLAND 



sorrows of Job. During the War of the Austrian Succession 
(q.v.) he was a mere puppet in the hands of the anti-Austrian 
coalition, and was often in want of mere necessaries. In the 
changes of the war he was able to re-enter his capital, Munich, 
in 1743, but had immediately afterwards to take flight again. 
He was restored by Frederick the Great in October 1744, but died 
worn out at Munich on the 20th of January 1745. 

See A. von Arneth, Geschichte Maria Theresias (Vienna, 1863- 
1879) ; and P. T. Heigel, Der osterreichische Erbfolgestreit und die 
Kaiserwahl Karls VII. (Munich, 1877). 

CHARLES I. (1600-1649), king of Great Britain and Ireland, 
second son of James I. and Anne of Denmark, was born at 
Dunfermline on the 19th of November 1600. At his baptism he 
was created duke of Albany, and on the 16th of January 1605 
duke of York. In 161 2, by the death of his elder brother Henry, 
he became heir-apparent, and was created prince of Wales on the 
3rd of November 1616. In 1620 he took up warmly the cause 
of his sister the queen of Bohemia, and in 162 1 he defended Bacon, 
using his influence to prevent the chancellor's degradation from 
the peerage. The prince's marriage with the infanta Maria, 
daughter of Philip III. of Spain, had been for some time the 
subject of negotiation, James desiring to obtain through Spanish 
support the restitution of his son-in-law, Frederick, to the 
Palatinate; and in 1623 Charles was persuaded by Buckingham, 
who now obtained a complete ascendancy over him in opposition 
to wiser advisers and the king's own wishes, to make a secret 
expedition himself to Spain, put an end to all formalities, and 
bring home his mistress himself: " a gallant and brave thing 
for his Highness." " Steenie " and " Baby Charles," as James 
called them, started on the 17th of February, arriving at Paris 
on the 21st and at Madrid on the 7th of March, where they 
assumed the unromantic names of Mr Smith, and Mr Brown. 
They found the Spanish court by no means enthusiastic for the 
marriage 1 and the princess herself averse. The prince's im- 
mediate conversion was expected, and a complete religious 
tolerance for the Roman Catholics in England demanded. James 
engaged to allow the infanta the right of public worship and to 
use his influence to modify the law, but Charles himself went 
much further. He promised the alteration of the penal laws 
within three years, conceded the education of the children to 
the mother till the age of twelve, and undertook to listen to the 
infanta's priests in matters of religion, signing the marriage 
contract on the 25th of July 1623. The Spanish, however, did 
not trust to words, and Charles was informed that his wife could 
only follow him to England when these promises were executed. 
Moreover, they had no intention whatever of aiding the Protestant 
Frederick. Meanwhile Buckingham, incensed at the failure of 
the expedition, had quarrelled with the grandees, and Charles 
left Madrid, landing at Portsmouth on the 5th of October, to the 
joy of the people, to whom the proposed alliance was odious. 
He now with Buckingham urged James to make war on Spain, 
and in December 1624 signed a marriage treaty with Henrietta 
Maria, daughter of Henry IV. of France. In April Charles had 
declared solemnly to the parliament that in case of his marriage 
to a Roman Catholic princess no concessions should be granted to 
recusants, but these were in September 1624 deliberately promised 
by James and Charles in a secret article, the first instance of the 
duplicity and deception practised by Charles in dealing with the 
parliament and the nation. The French on their side promised 
to assist in Mansfeld's expedition for the recovery of the 
Palatinate, but Louis in October refused to allow the men to pass 
through France; and the army, without pay or provisions, 
dwindled away in Holland to nothing. 

On the 27th of March 1625 Charles I. succeeded to the throne 
by the death of his father, and on the 1st of May he was married 
by proxy to Henrietta Maria. He received her at Canterbury 
on the 13th of June, and on the 18th his first parliament 
assembled. On the day of his marriage Charles had given direc- 
tions that the prosecutions of the Roman Catholics should cease, 
but he now declared his intention of enforcing the laws against 
them, and demanded subsidies for carrying on the war against 
1 Hist. MSS. Comm. n Rep. app. Pt. iv. 21. 



Spain. The Commons, however, responded coldly. Charles had 
lent ships to Louis XIII. to be used against the Protestants at 
LaRochelle, and the Commons were not aware of the subterfuges 
and fictitious delays intended to prevent their employment. 
The Protestant feelings of the Commons were also aroused by the 
king's support of the royal chaplain, Richard Montagu, who had 
repudiated Calvinistic doctrine. They only voted small sums, 
and sent up a petition on the state of religion and reflecting upon 
Buckingham, whom they deemed responsible for the failure of 
Mansfeld's expedition, at the same time demanding counsellors in 
whom they could trust. Parliament was accordingly dissolved 
by Charles on the 1 2th of August. He hoped that greater success 
abroad would persuade the Commons to be more generous. 
On the 8th of September 1625 he made the treaty of Southampton 
with the Dutch against Spain, and sent an expedition to Cadiz 
under Sir Edward Cecil, which, however, was a failure. In order to 
make himself independent of parliament he attempted to raise 
money on the crown jewels in Holland, and to diminish the 
opposition in the Commons he excluded the chief leaders by 
appointing them sheriffs. When the second parliament met, 
however, on the 6th of February 1626, the opposition, led by Sir 
John Eliot, was more determined than before, and their attack 
was concentrated upon Buckingham. On the 29th of March, 
Charles, calling the Commons into his presence, accused them of 
leading him into the war and of taking advantage of his difficulties 
to "make their own game." "I pray you not to be deceived,"' 
he said, " it is not a parliamentary way, nor 'tis not a way to deal 
with a king. Remember that parliaments are altogether in my 
power for their calling, sitting, and dissolution; therefore as I 
find the fruits of them good or evil, they are to continue or not to 
be." Charles, however, was worsted in several collisions with the 
two houses, with a consequent loss of influence. He was obliged 
by the peers to set at liberty Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, 
whom he had put into the Tower, and to send a summons to the 
earl of Bristol, whom he had attempted to exclude from parlia- 
ment, while the Commons compelled him, with a threat of doing 
nobusiness, to liberate Eliot and Digges, the managersof Bucking- 
ham's impeachment, whom he had imprisoned. ^Finally in June 
the Commons answered Charles's demand for money by a re- 
monstrance asking for Buckingham's dismissal, which they 
decided must precede the grant of supply. They claimed respon- 
sible ministers, while Charles considered himself the executive 
and the sole and unfettered judge of the necessities of the state. 
Accordingly on the 1 5th Charles dissolved the parliament. 

The king was now in great need of money. He was at war 
with Spain and had promised to pay £30,000 a month to Christian 
IV. of Denmark in support of the Protestant campaign in 
Germany. To these necessities was now added a war with 
France. Charles had never kept his promise concerning the 
recusants; disputes arose in consequence with his wife, and on 
the 31st of July 1626 he ordered all her French attendants to be 
expelled from Whitehall and sent back to France. At the same 
time several French ships carrying contraband goods to the 
Spanish Netherlands were seized by English warships. On the 
27th of June 1627 Buckingham with a large expedition sailed to 
the Isle of Re to relieve La Rochelle, then besieged by the forces 
of Louis XIII. Though the success of the French Protestants was 
an object much desired in England, Buckingham's unpopularity 
prevented support being given to the expedition, and the duke 
returned to Plymouth on the nth of November completely 
defeated. Meanwhile Charles had endeavoured to get the money 
refused to him by parliament by means of a forced loan, dis- 
missing Chief Justice Crewe for declining to support its legality, 
and imprisoning several of the leaders of the opposition for re- 
fusing to subscribe to it. These summary measures, however, 
only brought a small sum into the treasury. On the 2nd of 
January 1628 Charles ordered the release of all the persons 
imprisoned, and on the 17th of March summoned his third 
parliament. 

Instead of relieving the king's necessities the Commons im- 
mediately proceeded to discuss the constitutional position and 
to formulate the Petition of Right, forbidding taxation without 



ENGLAND] 



CHARLES I. 



907 



consent of parliament, arbitrary and illegal imprisonment, 
compulsory billeting in private houses, and martial law. Charles, 
on the 1st of May, first demanded that they should " rest on his 
royal word and promise." He obtained an opinion from the 
judges that the acceptance of the petition would not absolutely 
preclude in certain cases imprisonments without showing cause, 
and after a futile endeavour to avoid an acceptance by returning 
an ambiguous answer which only exasperated the Commons, he 
gave his consent on the 7 th of June in the full and usual form. 
Charles now obtained his subsidies, but no real settlement was 
reached, and his relations with the parliament remained as 
unfriendly as before. They proceeded to remonstrate against his 
government and against his support of Buckingham, and denied 
his right to tonnage and poundage. Accordingly, on the 26th of 
June they were prorogued. New disasters befell Charles, in the 
assassination of Buckingham and in the failure of the fresh 
expedition sent to Re. In January 1629 the parliament re- 
assembled, irritated by the exaction of the duties and seizure of 
goods during the interval, and suspicious of " innovations in 
religion," the king having forbidden the clergy to continue 
the controversy concerning Calvinistic and Arminian doctrines, 
the latter of which the parliament desired to suppress. While 
they were discussing these matters, on the 2nd of March 1629, 
the king ordered them to adjourn, but amidst a scene of great 
excitement the speaker, Sir John Finch, was held down in his 
chair and the doors were locked, whilst resolutions against innova- 
tions in religion and declaring those who levied or paid tonnage and 
poundage enemies to their country were passed. Parliament was 
immediately dissolved, and Charles imprisoned nine members, 
leaders of the opposition, Eliot, Holies, Strode, Selden, Valentine, 
Coryton, Heyman, Hobart and Long, his vengeance being especi- 
ally shown in the case of Eliot, the most formidable of his 
opponents, who died in the Tower of consumption after long 
years of close and unhealthy confinement, and whose corpse even 
Charles refused to give up to his family. 

For eleven years Charles ruled without parliaments and with 
some success. There seemed no reason to think that "that 
noise," to use Laud's expression concerning parliaments, would 
ever be heard again by those then living. A revenue of about 
£618,000 was obtained by enforcing the payment of tonnage and 
poundage, and while avoiding the taxes, loans, and benevolences 
forbidden by the petition of right, by monopolies, fines for 
knighthood, and for pretended encroachments on the royal 
domains and forests, which enabled the king to meet expenditure 
at home. In Ireland, Charles, in order to get money, had granted 
the Graces in 1628, conceding security of titles of more than 
sixty years' standing, and a more moderate oath of allegiance for 
the Roman Catholics, together with the renunciation of the shilling 
fine for non-attendance at church. He continued, however, to 
make various attempts to get estates into his possession on the 
pretext of invalid title, and on the 12th of May 1635 the city of 
London estates were sequestered. Charles here destroyed one of 
the most valuable settlements in Ireland founded by James I. 
in the interests of national defence, and at the same time ex- 
tinguished the historic loyalty of the city of London, which 
henceforth steadily favoured the parliamentary cause. In 1633 
Wentworth had been sent to Ireland to establish a medieval 
monarchy and get money, and his success in organization seemed 
great enough to justify the attempt to extend the system to 
England. Charles at the same time restricted his foreign policy 
to scarcely more than a wish for the recovery of the Palatinate, to 
further which he engaged in a series of numerous and mutually 
destructive negotiations with Gustavus Adolphus and with 
Spain, finally making peace with Spain on the 5th of November 
1630, an agreement which was' followed on the 2nd of January 
1631 by a further secret treaty, the two kings binding themselves 
to make war on the Dutch and partition their territories. A 
notable feature of this agreement was that while in Charles's 
portion Roman Catholicism was to be tolerated, there was no 
guarantee for the security of Protestantism in the territory to be 
ceded to Spain. 

In 1634 Charles levied ship-money from the seaport towns for 



the increase of the navy, and in 1635 the tax was extended to 
the inland counties, which aroused considerable opposition. In 
February 1637 Charles obtained an opinion in favour of his claims 
from the judges, and in 1638 the great Hampden case was decided 
in his favour. The apparent success, however, of Charles was 
imperilled by the general and growing resentment aroused by his 
exactions and whole policy, and this again was small compared 
with the fears excited by the king's attitude towards religion and 
Protestantism. He supported zealously Laud's rigid Anglican 
orthodoxy, his compulsory introduction of unwelcome ritual, and 
his narrow, intolerant and despotic policy, which was marked by 
several savage prosecutions and sentences in the Star Chamber, 
drove numbers of moderate Protestants out of the Church into 
Presbyterianism, and created an intense feeling of hostility to the 
government throughout the country. Charles further increased 
the popular fears on the subject of religion by his welcome given to 
Panzani, the pope's agent, in 1634, who endeavoured unsuccess- 
fully to reconcile the two churches, and afterwards to George 
Conn, papal agent at the court of Henrietta Maria, while the 
favour shown by the king to these was contrasted with the severe 
sentences passed upon the Puritans. 

The same imprudent neglect of the national sentiment was 
pursued in Scotland. Charles had already made powerful 
enemies there by a declaration announcing the arbitrary revoca- 
tion of former church estates to the crown. On the 18th of June 
1633 he was crowned at Edinburgh with full Anglican ceremonial, 
which lost him the hearts of numbers of his Scottish subjects and 
aroused hostility to his government in parliament. After his 
return to England he gave further offence by ordering the use 
of the surplice, by his appointment of Archbishop Spotiswood 
as chancellor of Scotland, and by introducing other bishops into 
the privy council. In 1636 the new Book of Canons was issued 
by the king's authority, ordering the communion table to be 
placed at the east end, enjoining confession, and declaring 
excommunicate any who should presume to attack the new 
prayer-book. The latter was orderedto be used on the 18th of 
October 1636, but it did not arrive in Scotland till May 1637. 
It was intensely disliked both as. "popish" and as English. 
A riot followed its first use in St Giles' cathedral on the 23rd of 
July, and Charles's order to enforce it on the 10th of September 
was met by fresh disturbances and by the establishment of ' 
the " Tables," national committees which now became the real 
though informal government of Scotland. In 1638 the national 
covenant was drawn up, binding those that signed it to defend 
their religion to the death, and was taken by large numbers 
with enthusiasm all over the country. Charles now drew back, 
promised to enforce the canons and prayer-book only in a " fair 
and legal way," and sent the marquis of Hamilton as a mediator. 
The latter, however, a weak and incapable man, desirous of 
popularity with all parties, and unfaithful to the king's interests, 
yielded everything, without obtaining the return of Charles's 
subjects to their allegiance. The assembly met at Glasgow on 
the 2 1 st of November, and in spite of Hamilton's opposition 
immediately proceeded to judge the bishops. On the 28th 
Hamilton dissolved it, but it continued to sit, deposed the bishops 
and re-established Presbyterianism. The rebellion had now 
begun, and an appeal to arms alone could decide the quarrel 
between Charles and his subjects. On the 28th of May 1639 
he arrived at Berwick with a small and ill-trained force, thus 
beginning what is known as the first Bishops' War; but being 
confronted by the Scottish army at Duns Law, he was compelled 
to sign the treaty of Berwick on the 18th of June, which provided 
for the disbandment of both armies and the restitution to the 
king of the royal castles, referring all questions to a general 
assembly and a parliament. When the assembly met it abolished 
episcopacy, but Charles, who on the 3rd of August had returned 
to Whitehall, refused his consent to this and to other measures 
proposed by the Scottish parliament. His extreme financial 
necessities, and the prospect of renewed hostilities with the Scots, 
now moved Charles, at the instigation of Strafford, who in 
September had left Ireland to become the king's chief adviser, 
to turn again to parliament for assistance as the last resource, 



qo8 



CHARLES II 



[ENGLAND 



and on the 13th of April 1640 the Short Parliament assembled. 
But on its discussing grievances before granting supplies and 
finally refusing subsidies till peace was made with the Scots; it 
was dissolved on the 5 th of May. Charles returned once more 
to measures of repression, and on the 10th imprisoned some of 
the London aldermen who refused to lend money. He prepared 
for war, scraping together what money be could and obtaining 
a grant through Strafford from Ireland. His position, however, 
was hopeless; his forces were totally undisciplined, and the 
Scots were supported by the parliamentary opposition in England. 
On the 20th of August the Scots crossed the Tweed, beginning 
the so-called second Bishops' War, defeated the king's army 
at Newburn on the 28th, and subsequently occupied Newcastle 
and Durham. Charles at this juncture, on the 24th of September, 
summoned a great council of the peers; and on the 21st of 
October a cessation of arms was agreed to by the treaty of Ripon, 
the Scots receiving £850 a day for the maintenance of the army, 
and further negotiations being transferred to London. On the 
3rd of November the king summoned the Long Parliament. 

Such was the final issue of Charles's attempt to govern without 
parliaments — Scotland in triumphant rebellion, Ireland only 
waiting for a signal to rise, and in England the parliament revived 
with almost irresistible strength, in spite of the king, by the force 
of circumstances alone. At this great crisis, which would indeed 
have taxed the resolution and resource of the most cool-headed 
and sagacious statesman, Charles failed signally. Two alternative 
courses were open to him, either of which still offered good 
chances of success. He might have taken his stand on the ancient 
and undoubted prerogative of the crown, resisted all encroach- 
ments on the executive by the parliament by legal and con- 
stitutional means, which were probably ample, and in case of 
necessity have appealed to the loyalty of the nation to support 
him in arms; or he might have waived his rights, and, acknow- 
ledging the mistakes of his past administration, have united 
with the parliament and created once more that union of interests 
and sentiment of the monarchy with the nation which had made 
England so powerful. Charles, however, pretended to do both 
simultaneously or by turns, and therefore accomplished neither. 
The illegally imprisoned members of the last parliament, now 
smarting with the sense of their wrongs, were set free to stimulate 
the violence of the opposition to the king in the new assembly. 
Of Charles's double statecraft, however, the series of incidents 
which terminated the career of the great Strafford form the most 
terrible example. Strafford had come to London in November, 
having been assured by Charles that he " should not suffer in his 
person, honour or fortune," but was impeached and thrown into 
the Tower almost immediately. Charles took no steps to hinder 
the progress of the proceedings against him, but entered into 
schemes for saving him by bringing up an army to London, and 
this step exasperated Strafford's enemies and added new zeal to 
the prosecution. On the 23rd of April, after the passing of the 
attainder by the Commons, he repeated to Strafford his former 
assurances of protection. On the 1st of May he appealed to 
the Lords to spare his life and be satisfied with rendering him 
incapable of holding office. On the 2nd he made an attempt 
to seize the Tower by force. On the 10th, yielding to the 
queen's fears and to the mob surging round his palace, he signed 
his death-warrant. " If my own person only were in danger," he 
declared to the council, " I would gladly venture it to save my 
Lord Strafford's life; but seeing my wife, children, all my 
kingdom are concerned in it, I am forced to give way unto it." 
On the nth he sent to the peers a petition for Strafford's life, 
the force of which was completely annulled by the strange post- 
script: " If he must die, it were a charity to reprieve'him until 
Saturday." This tragic surrender of his great and devoted 
servant left an indelible stain upon the king's character, and he 
lived to repent it bitterly. One of his last admonitions to the 
prince of Wales was " never to give way to the punishment 
of any for their faithful service to the crown." It was regarded 
by Charles as the cause of his own subsequent misfortunes, 
and on tha scaffold the remembrance of it disturbed his own last 
moments. The surrender of Strafford was followed by another 



stupendous concession by Charles, the surrender of his right 
to dissolve the parliament without its own consent, and the parlia- 
ment immediately proceeded, with Charles's consent, to sweep 
away the star-chamber, high commission and other extra-legal 
courts, and all extra-parliamentary taxation. Charles, however, 
did not remain long or consistently in the yielding mood. In 
June 1641 he engaged in a second army plot for bringing up the 
forces to London, and on the 10th of August he set out for 
Scotland in order to obtain the Scottish army against the 
parliament in England; this plan was obviously doomed to 
failure and was interrupted by another appeal to force, the so- 
called Incident, at which Charles was suspected (in all prob- 
ability unjustly) of having connived, consisting in an attempt 
to kidnap and murder Argyll, Hamilton and Lanark, with whom 
he was negotiating. Charles had also apparently been intriguing 
with Irish Roman Catholic lords for military help in return 
for concessions, and he was suspected of complicity in the Irish 
rebellion which now broke out. He left Scotland more dis- 
credited than ever, having by his concessions made, to Use 
Hyde's words, " a perfect deed of gift of that kingdom," and 
without gaining any advantage. 

Charles returned to London on the 2 5 th of November 1641 and 
was immediately confronted by the Grand Remonstrance 
(passed on the 2 2nd), in which, after reciting the chief pointsof the 
king's misgovernment, the parliament demanded the appoint- 
ment of acceptable ministers and the constitution of an assembly 
of divines to settle the religious question. On the 2nd of January 
1642 Charles gave office to the opposition members Colepeper 
and Falkland, and at the same time Hyde left the opposition 
party to serve the king. Charles promised to take no serious 
step without their advice. Nevertheless, entirely without their 
knowledge, through the influence of the queen whose impeach- 
ment was intended, Charles on the 4th made the rash and fataj 
attempt to seize with an armed force the five members of the 
Commons, Pym, Hampden, Holies, Hesilrige and Strode, whom, 
together with Mandeville (afterwards earl of Manchester) in the 
Lords, he had impeached of high treason. No English sovereign 
ever had (or has since that time) penetrated into the House of 
Commons. So complete and flagrant a violation of parliamentary 
liberties, and an appeal so crude and glaring to brute force, could 
only be justified by complete success; but the court plans had 
been betrayed, and were known to the offending members, who, 
by order of the House, had taken refuge in the city before the 
king's arrival with the soldiers. Charles, on entering the House, 
found " the birds flown," and returned baffled, having thrown 
away the last chance of a peaceful settlement (see Lenthall, 
William). The next day Charles was equally unsuccessful in 
obtaining their surrender in the city. " The king had the worst 
day in London yesterday," wrote a spectator of the scene, " that 
ever he had, the people crying ' privilege of parliament ' by 
thousands and prayed God to turn the heart of the king, shutting 
up their shops and standing at their doors with swords and hal- 
berds." x On the 10th, amidst general manifestations of hostility, 
Charles left Whitehall to prepare for war, destined never to return 
till he was brought back by his victorious enemies to die. 

Several months followed spent in manceuvres to obtain the 
control of the forces and in a paper war of controversy. On the 
23rd of April Charles was refused entry into Hull, and on the 
2nd of June the parliament sent to him the " Nineteen Propo- 
sitions," claiming the whole sovereignty and government for the 
parliament, including the choice of the ministers, the judges, and 
the control of the army, and the execution of the laws against the 
Roman Catholics. The military events of the war are described 
in the article Great Rebellion. On the 22nd of August the 
king set up his standard at Nottingham, and on the 23rd of 
October he fought the indecisive battle of Edgehill, occupying 
Oxford and advancing as far as Brentford. It seemed possible 
that the war might immediately be ended by Charles penetrating 
to the heart of the enemy's position and occupying London, but 
he drew back on the 13th of November before the parliamentary 
force at Turnham Green, and avoided a decisive contest. 
1 Hist. MSS. Comm.: MSS. of Lord Montagu of Beaulieu, 141. 



ENGLAND] 



CHARLES I. 



,909 



Next year (1643) another campaign, for surrounding instead of 
penetrating into London, was projected. Newcastle and Hopton 
were to advance from the north and west, seize the north and 
south banks of the river below the city, destroy its commerce, 
and combine with Charles at Oxford. The royalist force, however, 
in spite of victories at Adwalton Moor (June 30th) and Roundway 
Down (July 13th), did not succeed in combining with Charles, 
Newcastle in the north being kept back by the Eastern Associa- 
tion and the presence of the enemy at Hull, and Hopton in the 
west being detained by their successful holding out at Plymouth. 
Being too weak to attempt anything alone against London, 
Charles marched to besiege Gloucester, Essex following him and 
relieving the place. Subsequently the rival forces fought the 
indecisive first battle of Newbury, and Charles failed in prevent- 
ing the return of Essex to London. Meanwhile on the 1st of 
February the parliament had submitted proposals to Charles 
at Oxford, but the negotiations came to nothing, and Charles's 
unwise attempt at the same time to stir up a rising in his favour 
in the city, known as Waller's Plot, injured his cause considerably. 
He once more turned for help to Ireland, where the cessation of 
the campaign against the rebels was agreed upon on the 1 5th of 
September 1643, and several English regiments became thereby 
available for employment by the king in England. Charles also 
accepted the proposal for bringing over 2000 Irish. On the 22nd 
of January 1644 the king opened the rival parliament at Oxford. 

The campaign of 1644 began far less favourably for Charles 
than the two last, principally owing to the alliance now made 
between the Scots and the parliament, the parliament taking the 
Solemn League and Covenant on the 25 th of September 1643, 
and the Scottish army crossing the border on the 19th of January 
1644. No attempt was this year made against London, and 
Rupert was sent to Newcastle's succour in the north, where the 
great disaster of Marston Moor on the 2nd of July ruined Charles's 
last chances in that quarter. Meanwhile Charles himself had 
defeated Waller at Cropredy Bridge on the 20th of June, and he 
subsequently followed Essex to the west, compelling the surrender 
of Essex's infantry at Lostwithiel on the 2nd of September. 
With an ill-timed leniency he allowed the men to go free after 
giving up their stores and arms, and on his return towards 
Oxford he was confronted again by Essex's army at Newbury, 
combined now with that of Waller and of Manchester. Charles 
owed his escape here from complete annihilation only to 
Manchester's unwillingness to inflict a total defeat, and he was 
allowed to get away with his artillery to Oxford and to revictual 
Donnington Castle and Basing House. 

The negotiations carried on at Uxbridge during January and 
February 1645 failed to secure a settlement, and On the 14th of 
June the crushing defeat of the king's forces by the new model 
army at Naseby practically ended the civil war. Charles, how- 
ever, refused to make peace on Rupert's advice, and considered 
it a point of honour " neither to abandon God's cause, injure my 
successors, nor forsake my friends." His chief hope was to join 
Montrose in Scotland, but his march north was prevented by the 
parliamentary forces, and on the 24th of September he witnessed 
from the walls of Chester the rout of his followers at Rowton 
Heath. He now entered into a series of intrigues, mutually 
destructive, which, becoming known to the different parties, 
exasperated all and diminished still further the king's credit. 
One proposal was the levy of a foreign force to reduce the kingdom ; 
another, the supply through the marquis of Ormonde of 10,000 
Irish. Correspondence relating to these schemes, fatally com- 
promising as they were if Charles hoped ever to rule England 
again, was discovered by his enemies, including the Glamorgan 
treaty, which went much further than the instructions to 
Ormonde, but of which the full responsibility has never been 
really traced to Charles, who on the 29th of January 1646 dis- 
avowed his agent's proceedings. He simultaneously treated with 
the parliament, and promised toleration to the Roman Catholics 
if they and the pope would aid in the restoration of the monarchy 
and the church. Nor was this all. ' The parliamentary forces had 
been closing round Oxford. On the 27 th of April the king left 
the city, and on the 5th of May gave himself up to the Scottish 



army at Newark, arriving on the 13th with them at Newcastle. 
On the 13th of July the parliament sent to Charles the 
" Newcastle Propositions," which included the extreme demands 
of Charles'sacceptanceoftheCovenants,theabolitionof episcopacy 
and establishment of Presbyterianism, severer laws against the 
Roman Catholics and parliamentary control of the forces, with 
the withdrawal of the Irish Cessation, and a long list of royalists 
to be exempted from pardon. Charles returned no definite answer 
for several months. He imagined that he might now find support 
in Scottish royalism, encouraged by Montrose's series of brilliant 
victories, but these hopes were destroyed by the latter's defeat at 
Philiphaugh on the 3rd of September. The Scots insisted on the 
Covenant and on the permanent establishment of Presbyterianism, 
while Charles would only consent to a temporary maintenance 
for three years. Accordingly the Scots, in return for the payment 
of part of their army arrears by the parliament, marched home on 
the 30th of January 1647, leaving Charles behind, who under the 
care of the parliamentary commissioners was conducted to 
Holmby House. Thence on the 12 th of May he sent his answer 
to the Newcastle Propositions, offering the militia to the parlia- 
ment for ten years and the establishment of Presbyterianism for 
three, while a final settlement on religion was to be reached 
through an assembly of twenty divines at Westminster. But in 
the midst of the negotiation with the parliament Charles's person 
was seized, on the 3rd of June 1647, by Cornet Joyce under instruct- 
ions of the army, which soon afterwards occupied London and 
overpowered the parliament, placing Charles at Hampton Court. 
If Charles could have remained firm to either one or the other 
faction, and have made concessions either to Presbyterianism 
or on the subject of the militia, he might even now have pre- 
vailed. But he had learned nothing by experience, and continued 
at this juncture his characteristic policy of intrigue and double- 
dealing, " playing his game," to use his own words, negotiating 
with both parties at once, not with the object or wish to arrive 
at a settlement with either, but to augment their disputes, gain 
time and profit ultimately by their divisions. The " Heads of the 
Proposals," submitted to Charles by the army on the 28th of 
July 1647, were terms conceived on a basis far broader and more 
statesmanlike than the Newcastle Propositions, and such as 
Charles might well have accepted. The proposals on religion 
anticipated the Toleration Act of 1689. There was no mention 
of episcopacy, and its existence was thereby indirectly admitted, 
but complete religious freedom for all Protestant denominations 
was provided, and the power of the church to inflict civil penalties 
abolished, while it was also suggested that dangers from Roman 
Catholics and Jesuits might be avoided by means other than 
enforcing attendance at church. The parliament was to dissolve 
itself and be succeeded by biennial assemblies elected on a re- 
formed franchise, not to be dissolved without their own consent 
before 120 days, and not to sit more than 240 days in the two 
years. A council of state was to conduct the foreign policy 
of the state and conclude peace and war subject to the approval 
of parliament, and to control the militia for ten years, the com- 
manders being appointed by parliament, as also the officers of 
state for ten years. No peer created since May the 21st, 1642, 
was to sit in parliament without -consent of both Houses, and 
the judicial decisions of the House of Lords were to be ratified 
by the Commons. Only five persons were excepted from am- 
nesty, but royalists were not to hold office for five years and 
not to sit in the Commons till the end of the second biennial 
parliament. Proposals for a series of reforms were also added. 
Charles, however, was at the same time negotiating with Lauder- 
dale for an invasion of England by the Scots, and imagined he 
could win over Cromwell and Fairfax by " proffers of advantage 
to themselves." The precious opportunity was therefore allowed 
to slip by. On the 9th of September he rejected the proposals 
of the parliament for the establishment of Presbyterianism. 
His hopes of gaining advantages by playing upon the differences 
of his opponents proved a complete failure. Fresh terms were 
drawn up by the army and parliament together on the 10th of 
November, but before these could be presented, Charles, on the 
nth, had escaped to Carisbrooke Castle in the Isle of Wight 



910 



CHARLES I. 



[ENGLAND 



Thence on the 16th he sent a message offering Presbytarianism 
for three years and the militia for his lifetime to the parliament, 
but insisting on the maintenance of episcopacy. On the 28th 
of December he refused his assent to the Four Bills, which de- 
manded the militia for parliament for twenty years and prac- 
tically for ever, annulled the honours recently granted by the 
king and his declarations against the Houses, and gave to parlia- 
ment the right to adjourn to any place it wished. On the 3rd 
of January 1648 the Commons agreed to a resolution to address 
the king no further, in which they were joined by the Lords on 
the 15th. 

Charles had meanwhile taken a further fatal step which 
brought about his total destruction. On the 26th of December 
1647 he had signed at Carisbrooke with the Scottish commis- 
sioners the secret treaty called the " Engagement," whereby 
the Scots undertook to invade England on his behalf and restore 
him to the throne on condition of the establishment of Presby- 
terianism for three years and the suppression of the sectarians. 
In consequence the second civil war broke out and the Scots 
invaded England under Hamilton. The royalist risings in 
England were soon suppressed, and Cromwell gained an easy 
and decisive victory over the Scots at Preston. Charles was 
now left alone to face his enemies, with the whole tale of his 
intrigues and deceptions unmasked and exposed. The last 
intrigue with the Scots was the most unpardonable in the eyes 
of his contemporaries, no less wicked and monstrous than his 
design to conquer England by the Irish soldiers; " a more 
prodigious treason," said Cromwell, " than any that had been 
perfected before; because the former quarrel was that English- 
men might rule over one another; this to vassalize us to a 
foreign nation." Cromwell, who up to this point had shown 
himself foremost in supporting the negotiations with the king, 
now spoke of the treaty of Newport, which he found the parlia- 
ment in the act of negotiating on his return from Scotland, as 
" this ruining hypocritical agreement." Charles had engaged 
in these negotiations only to gain time and find opportunity to 
escape. " The great concession I made this day," he wrote on 
the 7th of October, " was made merely in order to my escape." 
At the beginning he had stipulated that no concession from, him 
should be valid unless an agreement were reached upon every 
point. He had now consented to most of the demands of the 
parliament, including the repudiation of the Irish Cessation, the 
surrender of the delinquents and the cession of the militia for 
twenty years, and of the offices of state to parliament, but re- 
mained firm in his refusal to abolish episcopacy, consenting 
only to Presbyterianism for three years. Charles's devotion to 
the church is undoubted. In April 1646, before his flight from 
Oxford, inspired perhaps by superstitious fears as to the origin 
of his misfortunes, he had delivered to Sheldon, afterwards arch- 
bishop of Canterbury, a written vow (now in the library of 
St Paul's cathedral) to restore all church lands held by the 
crown on his restoration to the throne; and almost his last 
injunction to the prince of Wales was that of fidelity to the 
national church. His present firmness, however, in its support 
was caused probably less by his devotion to it than by his desire 
to secure the failure of the whole treaty, and his attempts to 
escape naturally weakened the chances of success. Cromwell 
now supported the petitions of the army against the treaty. On 
the 16th of November the council of officers demanded the trial 
of the king, " the capital and grand author of our troubles," 
and on the 27 th of November the parliamentary commissioners 
returned from Newport without having secured Charles's 
consent. Charles was removed to Hurst Castle on the 1st of 
December, where he remained till the 19th, thence being taken 
to Windsor, where he arrived on the 23rd. On the 6th " Pride's 
Purge " had removed from the Commons all those who might 
show any favour to the king. On the 25th a last attempt by the 
council of officers to come to terms with him was repulsed. On 
the 1st of January the remnant of the Commons resolved that 
Charles was guilty of treason by " levying war against the parlia- 
ment and kingdom of England"; on the 4th they declared 
their own power to make laws without the lords or the sovereign, 



and on the 6th established a " high court of justice " to try the 
king. On the 19th Charles was brought to St James's Palace, 
and on the next day his trial began in Westminster Hall, without 
the assistance of any of the judges, who all refused to take part 
in the proceedings. He laughed aloud at hearing himself called 
a traitor, and immediately demanded by what authority he was 
tried. He had been in treaty with the parliament in the Isle of 
Wight and taken thence by force; he saw no lords present. 
He was told by Bradshaw, the president of the court, that he 
was tried by the authority of the people of England, who had 
elected him king; Charles making the obvious reply that he was 
king by inheritance and not by election, that England had been 
for more than 1000 years an hereditary kingdom, and Bradshaw 
cutting short the discussion by adjourning the court. On the 
22nd Charles repeated his reasoning, adding, " It is not my case 
alone; it is the freedom and liberty of the people of England, 
and do you pretend what you will, I stand more for their liberties, 
for if power without law may make laws ... I do not know 
what subject he is in England that can be sure of his life or any- 
thing that he calls his own." On the 23rd he again refused to 
plead. The court was adjourned, and there were several signs 
that the army in their prosecution of the king had not the nation 
at their back. While the soldiers had shouted "Justice" 
justice!" as the king passed through their ranks, the civilian 
spectators from the end of the hall had cried " God save the 
king!" There was considerable opposition and reluctance to 
proceed among the members of the court. On the 26th, however, 
the court decided unanimously upon his execution, and on the 
27th Charles was brought into court for the last time to hear 
his sentence. His request to be heard before the Lords and 
Commons was rejected, and his attempts to answer the charges 
of the president were silenced. Sentence was pronounced, and 
the king was removed by the soldiers, uttering his last broken 
protest: " I am not suffered to speak. Expect what justice 
other people will have." 

In these last hours Charles, who was probably weary of 
life, showed a remarkable dignity and self-possession, and a firm 
resignation supported by religious faith and by the absolute 
conviction of his own innocence, which, says Burnet, " amazed 
all people and that so much the more because it was not natural 
to him. It was imputed to a very extraordinary measure of 
supernatural assistance . . . ; it was owing to something 
within himself that he went through so many indignities with 
so much true greatness without disorder or any sort of affecta- 
tion." Nothing in his life became Charles like the leaving it. 
" He nothing common did or mean Upon that-memorable scene." 
On the morning of the 29th of January he said his last sad 
farewell to his younger children, Elizabeth and Henry, duke 
of Gloucester. On the 30th at ten o'clock he walked across 
from St James's to Whitehall, calling on his guard " in a 
pleasant manner " to walk apace, and at two he stepped upon 
the scaffold from a window, probably the middle one, of the 
Banqueting House (see Architecture, Plate VI., fig. 75). He 
was separated from the people by large ranks of soldiers, 
and his last speech only reached Juxon and those with him 
on the scaffold. He declared that he had desired the liberty 
and freedom of the people as much as any; " but I must tell 
you that their liberty and freedom consists in having govern- 
ment. ... It is not their having a share in the government; 
that is nothing appertaining unto them. A subject and a 
sovereign are clean different things." These, together with his 
declaration that he died a member of the Church of England, 
and the mysterious " Remember," spoken to Juxon, were 
Charles's last words. " It much discontents the citizens," 
wrote a spectator; " ye manner of his deportment was very 
resolutely with some smiling countenances, intimating his 
willingness to be out of his troubles." x " The blow I saw given," 
wrote another, Philip Henry, " and can truly say with a sad 
heart, at the instant whereof, I remember well, there was such 
a grone by the Thousands then present as I never heard before 
and desire I may never hear again. There was according to 
1 Notes and Queries, 7th ser., viii. 326. 



ENGLAND] 



CHARLES I. 



911 



order one Troop immediately marching fromwards Charing-Cross 
to Westminster and another fromwards Westminster to Charing- 
Cross, purposely to masker " (i.e. to overpower) " the people 
and to disperse and scatter them, so that I had much adoe 
amongst the rest to escape home without hurt." 1 

Amidst such scenes of violence was at last effected the destruc- 
tion of Charles. " It is lawful," wrote Milton, " and hath been 
held so through all ages for any one who have the power to call 
to account a Tyrant or wicked King and after due conviction to 
depose and put him to death." 2 But here (it might well be 
contended) there had been no " due conviction." The execution 
had been the act of the king's personal enemies, of " only some 
fifty or sixty governing Englishmen with Oliver Cromwell in the 
midst of them" an act technically illegal, morally unjustifiable 
because the supposed crimes of Charles had been condoned by 
the later negotiations with him, and indefensible on the ground of 
public expediency, for the king's death proved a far greater 
obstacle to the re-establishment of settled government than his 
life could have been. The result was an extraordinary revulsion 
of feeling in favour of Charles and the monarchy, in which the 
incidents of his misgovernment were completely forgotten. He 
soon became in the popular veneration a martyr and a saint. 
His fate was compared with the Crucifixion, and his trials and 
sufferings to those of the Saviour. Handkerchiefs dipped in his 
blood wrought " miracles," and the Eikon Basilike, published 
on the day of his funeral, presented to the public a touching 
if not a genuine portrait of the unfortunate sovereign. At the 
Restoration the anniversary of his death was ordered to be kept 
as a day of fasting and humiliation, and the service appointed 
for use on the occasion was only removed from the prayer-book 
in 1859. The same conception of Charles as a martyr for religion 
appeals still to many, and has been stimulated by modern 
writers. " Had Charles been willing to abandon the church and 
give up episcopacy," says Bishop Creighton, " he might have 
saved his throne and his life. But on this point Charles stood 
firm, for this he died and by dying saved it for the future." 3 
Gladstone, Keble, Newman write in the same strain. " It was 
for the Church," says Gladstone, " that Charles shed his blood 
upon the scaffold." 4 "I rest," says Newman, "on the scenes 
of past years, from the Upper Room in Acts to the Court of 
Carisbrooke and Uxbridge." The injustice and violence of the 
king's death, however, the pathetic dignity of his last days, and 
the many noble traits in his character, cannot blind us to the 
real causes of his downfall and destruction, and a sober judgment 
cannot allow that Charles was really a martyr either for the 
church or for the popular liberties. 

The constitutional struggle between the crown and parliament 
had not been initiated by Charles I. It was in full existence in 
the reign of James I., and distinct traces appear towards the 
latter part of that of Elizabeth. Charles, therefore, in some 
degree inherited a situation for which he was not responsible, 
nor can he be justly blamed, according to the ideas of kingship 
which then prevailed, for defending the prerogatives of the 
crown as precious and sacred personal possessions which it was 
his duty to hand down intact to his successors. Neither will 
his persistence in refusing to yield up the control of the executive 
to the parliament or the army, or his zeal in defending the 
national church, be altogether censured. In the event the parlia- 
ment proved quite incapable of governing, an army uncontrolled 
by the sovereign was shown to constitute a more grievous 
tyranny than Charles's most arbitrary rule, and the downfall 
of the church seen to make room only for a sectarian despotism 
as intolerable as the Laudian. The natural inference might be 
that both conceptions of government had much to support 
them, that they were bound sooner or later to come into collision, 
and that the actual individuals in the drama, including the king 
himself, were rather the victims of the greatness of events than 
real actors in the scene, still less the controllers of their own 

1 Letters and Diaries of P. Henry (1882), 12. 

- Tenure of Kings and Magistrates. 
3 Lectures on Archbishop Laud (1895), p. 25. 
* Remarks on the Royal Supremacy (1850), p. 57. 



and the national destiny. A closer insight, however, shows that 
biographical more than abstract historical elements determined 
the actual course and issue of the Rebellion. The great con- 
stitutional and religious points of dispute between the king and 
parliament, though doubtless involving principles vital to the 
national interests, would not alone have sufficed to destroy 
Charles. Monarchy was too much venerated, was too deeply 
rooted in the national life, to be hastily and easily extirpated; 
the perils of removing the foundation of all government, law 
and order were too obvious not to be shunned at almost all costs. 
Still less can the crowning tragedy of the king's death find its 
real explanation or justification in these disputes and antagon- 
isms. The real cause was the complete discredit into which 
Charles had brought himself and the monarchy. The ordinary 
routine of daily life and of business cannot continue without 
some degree of mutual confidence between the individuals 
brought into contact, far less could relations be maintained by 
subjects with a king endowed with the enormous powers then 
attached to the kingship, and with whom agreements, promises, 
negotiations were merely subterfuges and prevarications. We 
have seen the series of unhappy falsehoods and deceptions 
which constituted Charles's statecraft, beginning with the 
fraud concerning the concessions to the Roman Catholics at his 
marriage, the evasions with which he met the Petition of Right, 
the abandonment of Strafford, the simultaneous negotiation 
with, and betrayal of, all parties. Strafford's reported words 
on hearing of his desertion by Charles, " Put not your trust in 
princes," re-echo through the whole of Charles's reign. It was 
the degradation and dishonour of the kingship, and the personal 
loss of credit which Charles suffered through these transactions — ■ 
which never appear to have caused him a moment's regret or 
uneasiness, but the fatal consequences of which were seen only 
too clearly by men like Hyde and Falkland — that were the real 
causes of the rebellion and of the king's execution. The con- 
stitutional and religious grievances were the outward and 
visible sign of the corroding suspicions which slowly consumed 
the national loyalty. In themselves there was nothing incapable 
of settlement either through the spirit of union which existed 
between Elizabeth and her subjects, or by the principle of 
compromise which formed the basis of the constitutional settle- 
ment in 1688. The bond of union between his people and 
himself Charles had, however, early broken, and compromise 
is only possible between parties both of whom can acknowledge 
to some extent the force of the other's position, which can trust 
one another, and which are sincere in their endeavour to reach 
agreement. Thus on Charles himself chiefly falls the responsi- 
bility for the catastrophe. 

His character and motives fill a large place in English history, 
but they have never been fully understood and possibly were 
largely due to physical causes. His weakness as a child was so 
extreme that his life was despaired of. He outgrew physical 
defects, and as a young man excelled in horsemanship and in 
the sports of the times, but always retained an impediment of 
speech. At the time of his accession his reserve and reticence 
were especially noticed. Buckingham was the only person who 
ever enjoyed his friendship, and after his death Charles placed 
entire confidence in no man. This isolation was the cause of an 
ignorance of men and of the world, and of an incapacity to 
appreciate the ideas, principles and motives of others, while it 
prepared at the same time a fertile soil for receiving those 
exalted conceptions of kingship, of divine right and prerogative, 
which came into vogue at this period, together with those 
exaggerated ideas of his own personal supremacy and importance 
to which minds not quite normal are always especially inclined. 
His character was marked by a weakness which shirked and 
postponed the settlement of difficulties, by a meanness and 
ingratitude even when dealing with his most devoted followers, 
by an obstinacy which only feigned compliance and by an untruth- 
fulness which differed widely from his son's unblushing deceit, 
which found always some reservation or excuse, but which while 
more scrupulous was also more dangerous and insidious because 
employed continually as a principle of conduct. Yet Charles, in 



912 



CHARLES II. 



[ENGLAND 



spite of his failings, had many fine qualities. Clarendon, who was 
fully conscious of them, who does not venture to call him a good 
king, and allows that " his kingly virtues had some mixture and 
alloy that hindered them from shining in full lustre," declares 
that " he was if ever any, the most worthy of the. title of an 
Honest Man, so great a lover of justice that no temptation could 
dispose him to a wrongful action except that it was; disguised to 
him that he believed it just," " the worthiest of gentlemen, the 
best master, the best friend, the best husband, the best father 
and the best Christian that the age in which he lived produced." 
With all its deplorable mistakes and failings Charles I. 's reign 
belongs to a sphere infinitely superior to that of his unscrupulous, 
corrupt, selfish but more successful son. His private life was with- 
out a blemish. Immediately on his accession he had suppressed 
the disorder which had existed in the household of James I., 
and let it be known that whoever had business with him 
" must never approach him by backstairs or private doors." 1 
He maintained a strict sobriety in food and dress. He had a 
fine artistic sense, and Milton reprehends him for having made 
Shakespeare " the closest companion.of his solitudes." " Mon- 
sieur le Prince de Galles," wrote Rubens in 1625, " est le prince 
le plus amateur de la peinture qui soit au monde." He succeeded 
in bringing together during twenty years an unrivalled collection, 
of which a great part was dispersed at his death. He showed 
a noble insensibility to flattery. He was deeply and sincerely 
religious. He wished to do right, and was conscious of the purity 
of his motives. Those who came into contact with him, even 
the most bitter of his opponents, were impressed with his good- 
ness. The great tragedy of his life, to be read in his well-known, 
dignified, but weak and unhappy features, and to be followed 
in his inexplicable and mysterious choice of baneful instruments, 
such as Rupert, Laud, Hamilton, Glamorgan, Henrietta Maria 
— all in their several ways working out his destruction— seems 
to have been inspired by a fateful insanity or infirmity of mind or 
will, recalling the great Greek dramas in which the poets depicted 
frenzied mortals rushing into their own destruction, impelled 
by the unseen and superior powers. 

The king's body, after being embalmed, was buried by the 
few followers who remained with him to the last, hastily and 
withoutanyfuneralservice.whichwasforbiddenbytheauthorities, 
in the tomb of Henry VIII. , in St George's Chapel, Windsor, 
where his coffin was identified and opened in 1813. An " account 
of what appeared " was published by Sir Henry Halford, and 
a bone abstracted on the occasion was replaced in the vault by 
the prince of Wales (afterwards Edward VH.) in 1888. Charles I. 
left, besides three children who died in infancy, Charles (after- 
wards Charles II.) ; James (afterwards James II.) ; Henry, duke 
of Gloucester (1630-1660); Mary (1631-1660), who married 
William of Orange; Elizabeth (1635-1650); and Henrietta, 
duchess of Orleans (1644-1670). 

Bibliography. — The leading authority for the life and reign of 
Charles I. is the History of England (1883) and History of the Great 
Civil War (1893), by S. R. Gardiner, with the references there given. 
Among recent works may be mentioned Memoirs of the Martyr 
King, by A. Fea (1905) ; Life of Charles I, 1600-162$, by E. B. 
Chancellor (1886); The Visits of Charles I. to Newcastle, by C. S. 
Terry (1898); Charles I., by Sir J. Skelton, valuable for its illus- 
trations (1898) ; The Manner of the Coronation of King Charles I., 
ed. by C. Wordsworth (Henry Bradshaw Soc, 1892); The Picture 
Gallery of Charles I., by C. Phillips (1896). See also Calendars of 
State Papers, Irish and Domestic Series; Hist. MSS. Comm. Series, 
esp. MSS. of J. Eliot Hodghin, F. J, Savile Foljambe, Lord Montagu 
of Beaulieu, Duke of Rutland at Belvoir Castle, Marquis of Ormonde, 
Earl Cowper (Coke MSS.), Earl of Lonsdale (note-books of parlia- 
ments of 1626 and 1628), Duke of Buccleuch at Montagu House, 
Duke of Portland, nth Rep. app. pt. vi., Duke of Hamilton, pt. i., 
Salvetti Correspondence, 10th Rep. pt. vi., Lord Braye; Add. MSS. 
Brit. Mus., 33,596 fols. 21-32 (keys to ciphers), 34,171, 35, 2 97; 
Notes and Queries, ser. vi., vii., viii., ix. indexes; Eng. Hist. Rev. 
ii. 687 (" Charles and Glamorgan" by S. R. Gardiner), vii. 176; 
Cornhill Mag. vol. 75, January 1897, " Execution of Charles," by 
C. H. Firth. (P. C. Y.) 

CHARLES II. (1630-1685), king of Great Britain and Ireland, 
second son of Charles I. and Queen Henrietta Maria, was born 
on the 29th of May 1630 at St James's Palace, and was brought 

l Salvetti's Corresp. in Hist. MSS.Comm.nth Rep. app. pt. i. p. 6. 



up under the care successively of the countess of Dorset, William 
Cavendish, duke of Newcastle, and the marquess of Hertford. 
He accompanied the king during the campaigns of the Civil War, 
and sat in the parliament at Oxford, but on the 4th of March 1645 
he was sent by Charles I. to the west, accompanied by Hyde and 
others who formed his council. Owing, however, to the mutual 
jealousies and misconduct of Goring and Grenville, and the 
prince's own disregard and contempt of the council, his presence 
was in no way advantageous, and could not prevent the final 
overthrow of the king's forces in 1646. He retired (17th of 
February) to Pendennis Castle at Falmouth, and on the approach 
of Fairfax (2nd of March) to Scilly, where he remained with 
Hyde till the 16th of April. Thence he fled to Jersey, and 
finally refusing all the overtures from the parliament, and in 
opposition to the counsels of Hyde, who desired the prince to 
remain on English territory, he repaired to the queen at Paris, 
where he remained for two years. He is described at this time 
by Mme de Motteville as "well-made, with a sv/arthy complexion 
agreeing well with his fine black eyes, a large ugly mouth, a 
graceful and dignified carriage and a fine figure "; and according 
to the description circulated later for his capture after the battle 
of Worcester, he was over six feet tall. He received instruction 
in mathematics from Hobbes, and was early initiated into all 
the vices of the age by Buckingham and Percy. In July 1648 
the prince joined the royalist fleet and blockaded the Thames 
with a fleet of eleven ships, returning to Holland, where he 
received the news of the final royalist defeats and afterwards of 
the execution of his father. On the 14th of January 1649 he 
had forwarded to the council a signed carte blanche, granting any 
conditions provided his father's life were spared. He immedi- 
ately assumed the title of kiAg, and was proclaimed in Scotland 
(5th of February) and in some parts of Ireland. On the 17th of 
September, after a visit to his mother at St Germain, Charles 
went to Jersey and issued a declaration proclaiming his rights; 
but, owing to the arrival of the fleet at Portsmouth, he was 
obliged, on the 13th of February 1650, to return again to Breda. 
The projected invasion of Ireland was delayed through want of 
funds till it was too late; Hyde's mission to Spain, in the midst 
of Cromwell's' successes, brought no assistance, and Charles now 
turned to Scotland for aid. Employing the same unscrupulous 
and treacherous methods which had proved so fatal to his father, 
he simultaneously supported and encouraged the expedition of 
Montrose and the royalists, and negotiated with the covenanters. 
On the 1st of May he signed the first draft of a treaty at Breda 
with the latter, in which he accepted the Solemn League and 
Covenant, conceded the control of public and church affairs to 
the parliament and the kirk, and undertook to establish Presby- 
terianism in the three kingdoms. He also signed privately a 
paper repudiating Ormonde and the loyal Irish, and recalling 
the commissions granted to them. In acting thus he did not 
scruple to desert his own royalist followers, and to repudiate 
and abandon the great and noble Montrose, whose heroic efforts 
he was apparently merely using in order to extort better terms 
from the covenanters, and who, having been captured on the 4th 
of May, was executed on the 21st in spite of some attempts by 
Charles to procure for him an indemnity. 

Thus perjured and disgraced the young king embarked for 
Scotland on the 2nd of June; on the nth when off Heligoland 
he signed the treaty, and on the 23rd, on his arrival at Speymouth, 
before landing, he swore to both the covenants. He proceeded 
to Falkland near Perth and passed through Aberdeen, where 
he saw the mutilated arm of Montrose suspended over the 
city gate. He was compelled to dismiss all his followers except 
Buckingham, and to submit to interminable sermons, which 
generally contained violent invectives against his parents and 
himself. To Argyll he promised the payment of £40,000 at his 
restoration, doubtless the sum owing as arrears of the Scottish 
army unpaid when Charles I. was surrendered to the English 
at Newcastle, and entered into negotiations for marrying his 
daughter. In August he was forced to sign a further declaration, 
confessing his own wickedness in dealing with the Irish, his father's 
blood-guiltiness, his mother's idolatry, and his abhorrence 



ENGLAND] 



CHARLES II; 



9 J 3 



o'i prelacy, besides ratifying his allegiance to the covenants 
and to Presbyterianism. At the same time he declared himself 
secretly to King, dean of Tuam, " a true child of the Church of 
England," " a true Cavalier," and avowed that " what concerns 
Ireland is in no ways binding "; while to the Roman Catholics 
in England he promised concessions and expressed his goodwill 
towards their church to Pope Innocent X. His attempt, called 
" The Start," on the 4th of October 1650, to escape from the 
faction at Perth and to join Huntly and the royalists in the 
north failed, and he was overtaken and compelled to return. 
On the 1st of January 1651 he was crowned at Scone, when he 
was forced to repeat his oaths to both the covenants. 

Meanwhile Cromwell had advanced and had defeated the 
Presbyterians at Dunbar on the 3rd of September 1650, sub- 
sequently occupying Edinburgh. This defeat was not wholly 
unwelcome to Charles in the circumstances; in the following 
summer, during Cromwell's advance to the north, he shook off 
the Presbyterian influence, and on the 31st of July 1651 marched 
south into England with an army of about 10,000 commanded 
by David Leslie. He was proclaimed king at Carlisle, joined 
by the earl of Derby in Lancashire, evaded the troops of Lambert 
and Harrison in Cheshire, marched through Shropshire, meeting 
with a rebuff at Shrewsbury, and entered Worcester with a 
small, tired and dispirited force of only 16,000 men (22nd of 
August). Here the decisive battle, which ruined his hopes, and 
in which Charles distinguished himself by conspicuous courage 
and fortitude, was fought on the 3rd of September. After leading 
an unsuccessful cavalry charge against the enemy he fled, about 
6 p.m., accompanied by Buckingham, Derby, Wilmot, Lauder- 
dale and others, towards Kidderminster, taking refuge at White- 
ladies, about 25 m. from Worcester, where he separated himself 
from all his followers except Wilmot, concealing himself in the 
famous oak during the 6th of September, moving subsequently 
to Boscobel, to Moseley and Bentley Hall, and thence, disguised 
as Miss Lane's attendant, to Abbots Leigh near Bristol, to Trent 
in Somersetshire, and finally to the George Inn at Brighton, 
having been recognized during the forty-one days of his wander- 
ings by about fifty persons, none of whom, in spite of the reward 
of £1000 offered for his capture, or of the death penalty threatened 
for aiding his concealment, had betrayed him. 
. He set sail from Shoreham on the 15th of October 1651, and 
landed at Fecamp in Normandy the next day. He resided 
at Paris at St Germain till June 1654, in inactivity, unable to 
make any further effort, and living with difficulty on a grant 
from Louis XIV. of 600 livres a month. Various missions to 
foreign powers met with failure; he was excluded from Holland 
by the treaty made with England in April 1654, and he antici- 
pated his expulsion from France, owing to the new relations of 
friendship established with Cromwell, by quitting the country 
in July. He visited his sister, the princess of Orange, at Spa, and 
went to Aix-la-Chapelle, thence finally proceeding in November 
to Cologne, where he was hospitably received. The conclusion 
of Cromwell's treaty with France in October 1655, and the 
war between England and Spain, gave hope of aid from the 
latter power. In April 1656 Charles went to Bruges, and on the 
7th of February 1658 to Brussels, where he signed a treaty with 
Don John of Austria, governor of the Spanish Netherlands, by 
which he received an allowance in place of his French pension 
and undertook to assemble all his subjects in France in aid of 
the Spanish against the French. This plan, however, came to 
nothing; projected risings in England were betrayed, and by 
the capture of Dunkirk in June 1658, after the battle of the 
Dunes, by the French and Cromwell's Ironsides, the Spanish 
cause in Flanders was ruined. 

As long as Cromwell lived there appeared little hope of the 
restoration of the monarchy, and Charles and Hyde had been 
aware of the plots for his assassination, which had aroused no 
disapproval. By the protector's death on the 3rd of September 
1658 the scene was wholly changed, and amidst the consequent 
confusion of factions the cry for the restoration of the monarchy 
grew daily in strength. The premature royalist rising, however. 
in August 1659 was defeated, and Charles, who hacl awaited 



the result on the coast of Brittany, proceeded to Fuenterrabia 
on the Spanish frontier, where Mazarin and Luis dc Haro were 
negotiating the treaty of the Pyrenees, to induce both powers to 
support his cause; but the failure of the attempt in England 
ensured the rejection of his request, and he returned to 
Brussels in December, visiting his mother at Paris on the way. 
Events had meanwhile developed fast in favour of a restoration. 
Charles, by Hyde's advice, had not interfered in the movement, 
and had avoided inconvenient concessions to the various factions 
by referring all to a " free parliament." He left Brussels for 
Breda, and issued in April 1660, together with the letters to the 
council, the officers of the army and the houses of parliament 
and the city, the declaration of an amnesty for all except those 
specially excluded afterwards by parliament, which referred to 
parliament the settlement of estates and promised a liberty to 
tender consciences in matters of religion not contrary to the 
peace of the kingdom. 

On the 8th of May Charles II. was proclaimed king in .West- 
minster Hall and elsewhere in London. On the 24th he sailed 
from the Hague, landing on the 26th at Dover, where he was met 
by Monk, whom he saluted as father, and by the mayor, from 
whom he accepted a " very rich bible," " the thing that he 
loved above all things in the world." He reached London on 
the 29th, his thirtieth birthday, arriving with the procession, 
amidst general rejoicings and " through a lane of happy faces," 
at seven in the evening at Whitehall, where the houses of 
parliament awaited his coming, to offer in the name of the 
nation their congratulations and allegiance. 

No event in the history of England had been attended with 
more lively and general rejoicing than Charles's restoration, and 
none was destined to cause greater subsequent disappointment 
and disillusion. Indolent, sensual and dissipated by nature, 
Charles's vices had greatly increased during his exile abroad, 
and were now, with the great turn of fortune which gave him 
full opportunity to indulge them, to surpass all the bounds of 
decency and control. A long residence till the age of thirty 
abroad, together with his French blood, had made him politically 
more of a foreigner than an Englishman, and he returned to 
England ignorant of the English constitution, a Roman Catholic 
and a secret adversary of the national religion, and untouched 
by the sentiment of England's greatness or of patriotism. Pure 
selfishness was the basis of his policy both in domestic and 
foreign affairs. Abroad the great national interests were eagerly 
sacrificed for the sake of a pension, and at home his personal 
ease and pleasure alone decided every measure, and the fate of 
every minister and subject. During his exile he had surrounded 
himself with young men of the same spirit as himself, such as 
Buckingham and Bennet, who, without having any claim to 
statesmanship, inattentive to business, neglectful of the national 
interests and national prejudices, became Charles's chief advisers. 
With them, as with their master, public office was only desirable 
as a means of procuring enjoyment, for which an absolute 
monarchy provided the most favourable conditions. Such 
persons were now, accordingly, destined to supplant the older 
and responsible ministers of the type of Clarendon and Ormonde, 
men of high character and patriotism, who followed definite lines 
of policy, while at the same time the younger men of ability and 
standing were shut out from office. 

The first period of Charles II. 's reign (1660-1667) was that of 
the administration of Lord Clarendon, the principal author of the 
Restoration settlement. The king was granted the large revenue 
of £1 ,300,000. The naval and military forces were disbanded, 
but Charles managed to retain under the name of guards three 
regiments, which remained the nucleus of a standing army. The 
settlement of estates on a legal basis provided ill for a large 
number of the king's adherents who had impoverished themselves 
in his cause. The king's honour was directly involved in their 
compensation and, except for the gratification of a few individuals, 
was tarnished by his neglect to afford them relief. Charles used 
his influence to carry through parliament the act of indemnity, 
and the execution of some of the regicides was a measure not more 
severe than was to be expected in the times and circumstances; 



914 



CHARLES II. 



[ENGLAND 



but that of Sir Henry Vane, who was not a regicide and whose life 
Charles had promised the parliament to spare in case of his con- 
demnation, was brought about by Charles's personal insistence 
in revenge for the victim's high bearing during his trial, and was 
an act of gross Cruelty and perfidy. Charles was in favour of 
religious toleration, and a declaration issued by him in October 
1660 aroused great hopes; but he made little effort to conciliate 
the Presbyterians or to effect a settlement through the Savoy 
conference, and his real object was to gain power over all the 
factions and to free his co-religionists, the Roman Catholics, in 
favour of whom he issued his first declaration of indulgence (26th 
of December 1662), the bill to give effect to it being opposed by 
Clarendon and defeated in the Lords, and being replied to by the 
passing of further acts against religious liberty. Meanwhile the 
plotof Vennerand of the Fifth Monarchy men had been suppressed 
in January 1661, and the king was crowned on the 23rd of April. 
The convention parliament had been dissolved on the 29th of 
December 1660, and Charles's first parliament, the Long Parlia- 
ment of the Restoration, which met on the 8th of May 1661 and 
continued till January 1679, declared the command of the forces 
inherent in the crown, repudiated the taking up of arms against 
the king, and repealed in 1664 the Triennial Act, adding only a 
provision that there should not be intermission of parliaments for 
more than three years. In Ireland the church was re-established, 
and a new settlement of land introduced by the Act of Settle- 
ment 1661 and the Act of Explanation 1665. The island was 
excluded from the benefit of the Navigation Laws, and in 1666 the 
importation of cattle and horses into England was forbidden. In 
Scotland episcopacy was set up, the covenant to which Charles 
had taken so many solemn oaths burnt by the common hangman, 
and Argyll brought to the scaffold, while the kingdom was given 
over to the savage and corrupt administration of Lauderdale. 
On the 2istof May 1662, in pursuance of the pro- French and anti- 
Spanish policy, Charles married Catherine of Braganza, daughter 
of John IV. of Portugal, by which alliance England obtained 
Tangier and Bombay. She brought him no children, and her 
attractions for Charles were inferior to those of his mistress, Lady 
Castlemaine, whom she was compelled to receive as a lady of her 
bedchamber. In February 1665 the ill-omened war with Holland 
was declared, during the progerss of which it became apparent 
how greatly the condition of the national services and the state 
of administration had deteriorated since the Commonwealth, 
and to what extent England was isolated and abandoned abroad, 
Michael de Ruyter, on the 13th of June 1667, carrying out his 
celebrated attack on Chatham and burning several warships. 
The disgrace was unprecedented. Charles did not show himself 
and it was reported thathe had abdicated, but to allay the popular 
panic it was given out " that he was very cheerful that night at 
supper with his mistresses." The treaty of Breda with Holland 
(21st of July 1667) removed the danger, but not the ignominy, 
and Charles showed the real baseness of his character when he 
joined in the popular outcry against Clarendon, the upright and 
devoted adherent of his father and himself during twenty-five 
years of misfortune, and drove him into poverty and exile in his 
old age, recalling ominously Charles I.'s betrayal of Strafford. 

To Clarendon now succeeded the ministry of Buckingham 
and Arlington, who with Lauderdale, Ashley (afterwards Lord 
Shaftesbury) and Cliff ord,constituted the so-called Cabal ministry 
in 1672. With these advisers Charles entered into those schemes 
so antagonistic to the national interests which have disgraced 
his reign. His plan was to render himself independent of parlia- 
ment and of the nation by binding himself to France and the 
French policy of aggrandizement, and receiving a French pen- 
sion with the secret intention as well of introducing the Roman 
Catholic religion again into England. In 1661 under Clarendon's 
rule, the evil precedent had been admitted of receiving money 
from France, in 1662 Dunkirk had been sold to Louis, and in 
February 1667 during the Dutch war a secret alliance had been 
made with Louis, Charles promising him a free hand in the 
Netherlands and Louis undertaking to support Charles's designs 
" in or out of the kingdom." In January 1668 Sir W. Temple 
had made with Sweden and Holland the Triple Alliance against 



the encroachments and aggrandizement of France, but this 
national policy was soon upset by the king's own secret plans. 
In 1668 the conversion of his brother James to Romanism became 
known to* Charles. Already in 1662 the kin^ had sent Sir Richard 
Bellings to Rome to arrange the terms of England's conversion, 
and now in 1668 he was in correspondence with Oliva, the general 
of the Jesuits in Rome, through James de la Cloche, the eldest 
of his natural sons, of whom he had become the father when 
scarcely sixteen during his residence at Jersey. On the 25 th of 
January 1669, at a secret meeting between the two royal brothers, 
with Arlington, Clifford and Arundell of Wardour, it was deter- 
mined to announce to Louis XIV. the projected conversion of 
Charles and the realm, and subsequent negotiations terminated 
in the two secret treaties of Dover. The first, signed only, among 
the ministers, by Arlington and Clifford, the rest not being 
initiated, on the 20th of May 1670, provided for the return of 
England to Rome and the joint attack of France and 
England upon Holland, England's ally, together with Charles's 
support of the Bourbon claims to the throne of Spain, while 
Charles received a pension of £200,000 a year. In the second, 
signed by Arlington, Buckingham, Lauderdale and Ashley on the 
31st of December i67o,nothing was said about the conversion, and 
the pension provided for that purpose was added to the military 
subsidy, neither of these treaties being communicated to parlia- 
ment or to the nation. An immediate gain to Charles was the 
acquisition of another mistress in the person of Louise de 
Keroualle,the so-called "Madam Carwell,"who had accompanied 
the duchess of Orleans, the king's sister, to Dover, at the time of 
the negotiations, and who joined Charles's seraglio, being created 
duchess of Portsmouth, and acting as the agent of the French 
alliance throughout the reign. 

On the 24th of October 1670, at the very time that these 
treaties were in progress, Charles opened parliament and obtained 
a vote of £800,000 on the plea of supporting the Triple Alliance. 
Parliament was prorogued in April 167 1, not assembling again 
till February 1673, and on the 2nd of January 1672 was announced 
the " stop of the exchequer," or national bankruptcy, one of 
the most blameworthy and unscrupulous acts of the reign, by 
which the payments from the exchequer ceased, and large 
numbers of persons who had lent to the government were thus 
ruined. On the reassembling of parliament on the 4th of 
February 1673 a strong opposition was shown to the Cabal 
ministry which had been constituted at the end of 1672. The 
Dutch War, declared on the 17th of March 1672, though the com- 
mercial and naval jealousies of Holland had certainly not dis- 
appeared in England, was unpopular because of the alliance with 
France and the attack upon Protestantism, While the king's 
second declaration of indulgence (15th of March 1672) aroused 
still further antagonism, was declared illegal by the parliament, 
and was followed up by the Test Act, which obliged James and 
Clifford to resign their offices. In February 1674 the war with 
Holland was closed by the treaty of London or of Westminster, 
though Charles still gave Louis a free hand in his aggressive 
policy towards the Netherlands, and the Cabal was driven 
from office. Danby (afterwards duke of Leeds) now became 
chief minister; but, though in reality a strong supporter of the 
national policy, he could not hope to keep his place without 
acquiescence in the king's schemes. In November 1675 Charles 
again prorogued parliament, and did not summon it again till 
February 1677, when it was almost immediately prorogued. 
On the 17th of February 1676 ,with Danby 's knowledge, Charles 
concluded a further treaty with Louis by which he undertook to 
subordinate entirely his foreign policy to that of France, and 
received an annual pension of £100,000. On the other hand, 
Danby succeeded in. effecting the marriage (4th of November 
1677) between William of'Orange and the princess Mary, which 
proved the most important political event in the whole reign. 
Louis revenged himself by intriguing with the Opposition and 
by turning his streams of gold in that direction, and a further 
treaty with France for the annual payment to Charles of £300,000 
and the dismissal of his parliament, concluded on the 17th of 
May 1678, was not executed. Louis made peace with Holland 



ENGLAND] 



CHARLES II. 



9i5 



at Nijmwegen on the 10th of August, and punished Danby by 
disclosing his secret negotiations, thus causing the minister's 
fall and impeachment. To save Danby Charles now prorogued 
the parliament on the 30th of December, dissolving it on the.24th 
of January 1679. 

Meanwhile the " Popish Plot," the creation of a band of 
impostors encouraged by Shaftesbury and the most violent 
and unscrupulous of the extreme Protestant party in order 
to exclude James from the throne, had thrown the whole 
country into a panic. Charles's conduct in this conjuncture 
was highly characteristic and was marked by his usual cynical 
selfishness. He carefully refrained, from incurring suspicion 
and unpopularity by opposing the general outcry, and though 
he saw through the imposture from the beginning he made no 
attempt to moderate the popular frenzy or to save the life of any 
of the victims, his co-religionists, not even intervening in the 
case of Lord Stafford, and allowing Titus Oates to be lodged 
at Whitehall with a pension. His policy was to take advantage 
of the violence of the faction, to " give them line enough," 
to use his own words, to encourage it rather than repress it, 
with the expectation of procuring finally a strong royalist re- 
action. In his resistance to the great movement for the exclusion 
of James from the succession, Charles was aided by moderate 
men such as Halifax, who desired only a restriction of James's 
powers, and still more by the violence of the extreme exclusionists 
themselves, who headed by Shaftesbury brought about their 
own downfall and that of their cause by their support of the 
legitimacy and claims of Charles's natural son, the duke of 
Monmouth. In 1679 Charles denied, in council, his supposed 
marriage with Lucy Walter, Monmouth's mother, his declarations 
being published in 1680 to refute the legend of the black box 
which was supposed to contain the contract of marriage, and 
(old Burnet he would rather see him hanged than legitimize him. 
He deprived him of his general's commission in consequence 
of his quasi-royal progresses about the country, and in December 
on Monmouth's return to England he was forbidden to appear at 
court. In February 1679 the king had consented to order James 
to go abroad, and even approved of the attempt of the primate 
and the bishop of Winchester to convert him to Protestantism. 
To weaken the opposition to his government Charles accepted 
Sir W Temple's new scheme of governing by a council which in- 
cluded the leaders of the Opposition, and which might have be- 
come a rival to the parliament, but this was an immediate failure. 
In May 1679 he prorogued the new parliament which had 
attainted Danby, and in July dissolved it, while in October he 
prorogued another parliament of the same mind till January and 
finally till October 1680, having resolved " to wait till this violence 
should wear off." He even made overtures to Shaftesbury in 
November 1679, but the latter insisted on the departure of both 
the queen and James. All attempts at compromise failed, and 
on the assembling of the parliament in October 1680 the Exclusion 
Bill passed the Commons, being, however, thrown out in the Lords 
through the influence of Halifax. Charles dissolved the parlia- 
ment in January 1681, declaring that he would never give his 
consent to the Exclusion Bill, and summoned another at Oxford, 
which met there on the 21st of March 1681, Shaftesbury's faction 
arriving accompanied by armed bands. Charles expressed his 
willingness to consent to the handing over of the administration 
to the control of a Protestant, in the case of a Roman Catholic 
sovereign, but the Opposition insisted on Charles's nomination 
of Monmouth as his successor, and the parliament was accordingly 
once more (28th of March) dissolved by Charles, while a royal 
proclamation ordered to be read in all the churches proclaimed 
the ill-deeds of the parliament and the king's affection for the 
Protestant religion. 

Charles's tenacity and clever tact were now rewarded. A 
great popular reaction ensued in favour of the monarchy, and 
a large number of loyal addresses were sent in, most of them 
condemning the Exclusion Bill. Shaftesbury was imprisoned, 
and though the Middlesex jury threw out his indictment and 
he was liberated, he never recovered his power, and in October 
^682 left England for ever. The Exclusion Bill and the limitation 



of James's powers were no more heard of, and full liberty was 
granted to the king to pursue the retrograde and arbitrary policy 
to which his disposition naturally inclined. In Scotland James 
set up a tyrannical administration of the worst type. The royal 
enmity towards William of Orange was increased by a visit of 
the latter to England in July. No more parliaments were called, 
and Charles subsisted on his permanent revenue and his French 
pensions. He continued the policy of double-dealing and 
treachery, deceiving his ministers as at the treaty of Dover, 
by pretending to support Holland and Spain while he was 
secretly engaged to Louis to betray them. On the 22nd of March 
1 68 1 he entered into a compact with Louis whereby he undertook 
to desert his allies and offer no resistance to French aggressions. 
In August he joined with Spain and Holland in a manifesto 
against France, while secretly for a million livres he engaged 
himself to Louis, and in 1682 he proposed himself as arbitrator 
with the intention of treacherously handing over Luxemburg 
to France, an offer which was rejected owing to Spanish suspicions 
of collusion. In the event, Charles's duplicity enabled Louis to 
seize Strassburg in 1681 and Luxemburg in 1684. The govern- 
ment at home was carried on principally by Rochester, Sunder- 
land and Godolphin, while Guilford was lord chancellor and 
Jeffreys lord chief justice. The laws against the Nonconformists 
were strictly enforced. In order to obtain servile parliaments and 
also obsequious juries, who with the co-operation of judges of the 
stamp of Jeffreys could be depended upon to carry out the wishes 
of the court, the borough charters were confiscated, the charter 
of the city of London being forfeited on the 12th of June 1683. 

The popularity of Charles, now greatly increased, was raised 
to national enthusiasm by the discovery of the Rye House plot 
in 1683, said to be a scheme to assassinate Charles and James 
at an isolated house on the high road near Hoddesdon in Hert- 
fordshire as they returned from Newmarket to London, among 
those implicated being Algernon Sidney, Lord Russell and 
Monmouth, the two former paying the death penalty and 
Monmouth being finally banished to the Hague. The administra- 
tion became more and more despotic, and Tangier was abandoned 
in order to reduce expenses and to increase the forces at home 
for overawing opposition. The first preliminary steps were now 
taken for the , reintroduction of the Roman Catholic religion. 
Danby and those confined on account of participation in the 
popish plot were liberated, and Titus Oates thrown into prison. 
A scheme was announced for withdrawing the control of the army 
in Ireland from Rochester, the lord-lieutenant, and placing it in 
the king's own hands, and the commission to which the king had 
delegated ecclesiastical patronage was revoked. In May 1684 
the office of lord high admiral, in spite of the Test Act, was again 
given to James, who had now returned from Scotland. To all 
appearances the same policy afterwards pursued so recklessly 
and disastrously by James was now cautiously initiated by 
Charles, who, however, not being inspired by the same religious 
zeal as his brother, and not desiring " to go on his travels again," 
would probably have drawn back prudently before his throne 
was endangered. The developments of this movement were, 
however, now interrupted by the death of Charles after a short 
illness on the 6th of February 1685. He was buried on the 17th 
in Henry VII. 's chapel in Westminster Abbey with funeral 
ceremonies criticized by contemporaries as mean and wanting 
in respect, but the scantiness of which was probably owing to 
the fact that he had died a Roman Catholic. 

On his death-bed Charles had at length declared himself an 
adherent of that religion and had received the last rites according 
to the Romanist usage. There appears to be no trustworthy 
record of his formal conversion, assigned to various times and 
various agencies. As a youth, says Clarendon, " the ill-bred 
familiarity of the Scotch divines had given him a distaste " for 
Presbyterianism, which he indeed declared " no religion for 
gentlemen," and the mean figure which the fallen national 
church made in exile repelled him at the same time that he was 
attracted by the " genteel part of the Catholic religion." With 
Charles religion was not the serious matter it was with James, 
and was largely regarded from the political aspect and from that 



916 



CHARLES I— III. 



[FRANCE 



of ease and personal convenience. Presbyterianism constituted 
a dangerous encroachment on the royal prerogative; the national 
church and the cavalier party were indeed the natural supporters 
of the authority of the crown, but on the other hand they refused 
to countenance the dependence upon France; Roman Catholi- 
cism at that moment was the obvious medium of governing 
without parliaments, of French pensions and of reigning without 
trouble, and was naturally the faith of Charles's choice. Of the 
two papers in defence of the Roman Catholic religion in Charles's 
own hand, published by James, Halifax says " though neither 
his temper nor education made him very fit to be an author, 
yet in this case ... he might write it all himself and yet not 
one word of it his own. . . ." 

Of his amours and mistresses the same shrewd observer of 
human character, who was also well acquainted with -the king, 
declares " that his inclinations to love were the effects of health 
and a good constitution with as little mixture of the seraphic 
part as ever man had. ... I am apt to think his stayed as much 
as any man's ever did in the lower region." His health was the 
one subject to which he gave unremitting attention, and his fine 
constitution and devotion to all kinds of sport and physical 
exercise kept off the effects of uncontrolled debauchery for 
thirty years. In later years the society of his mistresses seems 
to have been chiefly acceptable as a means to avoid business 
and petitioners, and in the case of the duchess of Portsmouth 
was the price paid for ease and the continuance of the French 
pensions. His ministers he never scrupled to sacrifice to his ease. 
The love of ease exercised an entire sovereignty in his thoughts. 
" The motive of his giving bounties was rather to make- men 
less uneasy to him than more easy to themselves." He "Would 
rob his own treasury and take bribes to press a measure through 
the council. He had a natural affability, but too general to be 
much valued, and he was fickle and deceitful. Neither gratitude 
nor revenge moved him, and good or ill services left little im- 
pression on his mind. Halifax, however, concludes by desiring 
to moderate the roughness of his picture by emphasizing the 
excellence of his intellect and memory and his mechanical talent, 
by deprecating a too censorious judgment and by dwelling upon 
the disadvantages of his bringing up, the difficulties and tempta- 
tions of his position, and on the fact that his viees were those 
common to human frailty. His capacity for king-craft, know- 
ledge of the world, and easy address enabled him to surmount 
difficulties and dangers which would have proved fatal to his 
father or to his brother. " It was a common saying that he 
could send away a person better pleased at receiving nothing 
than those in the good king his father's time that had requests 
granted them," 1 and his good-humoured tact and familiarity 
compensated for and concealed his ingratitude and perfidy and 
preserved his popularity. He had good taste in art and literature, 
was fond of chemistry and science, and the Royal Society was 
founded in his reign. According to Evelyn he was " debonnaire 
and easy of access, naturally kind-hearted and possessed an 
excellent temper," virtues which covered a multitude of sins. 

These small traits of amiability, however, which pleased his 
contemporaries, cannot disguise forus the broad lines of Charles's 
career and character. How far the extraordinary corruption 
of private morals which has gained for the restoration period 
so unenviable a notoriety was owing to the king's own example 
of flagrant debauchery, how far to the natural reaction from an 
artificial Puritanism, is uncertain, but it is incontestable that 
Charles's cynical selfishness was the chief cause of the degradation 
of public life which marks his reign, and of the disgraceful and- 
unscrupulous betrayal of the national interests which raised 
France to a threatening predominance and imperilled the very 
existence of Britain for generations. The reign of his predecessor 
Charles I., and even of that of his successor James II., with 
their mistaken principles and ideals, have a saving dignity 
wholly wanting in that of Charles II., and the administration 
of Cromwell, in spite of the popularity of the restoration, was 
soon regretted. " A lazy Prince," writes Pepys, "no Council, 
no money, no reputation at home or abroad. It is strange 
1 Mem. of Thomas, earl of Ailesbury, p. 95. 



how . . . everybody do nowadays reflect upon Oliver and 
commend him, what brave things he did and made all the 
neighbour princes fear him; while here a prince, come in with 
all the love and prayers and good liking of his people . . . hath 
lost all so soon. . . ." 

Charles II. had no children by his queen. By his numerous 
mistresses he had a large illegitimate progeny. By Barbara 
Villiers, Mrs Palmer, afterwards countess of Castlemaine and 
duchess of Cleveland, mistress en litre till she was superseded by 
the duchess of Portsmouth, he had Charles Fitzroy, duke of 
Southampton and Cleveland, Henry Fitzroy, duke of Grafton, 
George Fitzroy, duke of Northumberland, Anne, countess of 
Sussex, Charlotte, countess of Lichfield, and Barbara, a nun; 
by Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth, Charles Lennox, 
duke of Richmond; by Lucy Walter, James, duke of Monmouth 
and Buccleuch, and a daughter; by Nell Gwyn, Charles Beau- 
clerk, duke of St Albans, and James Beauclerk; by Catherine 
Peg, Charles Fitz Charles, earl of Plymouth; by Lady Shannon, 
Charlotte, countess of Yarmouth; by Mary Davis, Mary Tudor, 
countess of Derwentwater. 

Bibliography. — See the article in the Diet, of Nat. Biog. by A. W. 
Ward (1887), with authorities there given; Charles II., by O. Airy 
(1904); Life of Sir G. Savile, by H. C. Foxcroft, and esp. Halifax's 
Character of Charles II. printed in the appendix (1898) ; The Essex 
Papers (Camden Soc., 1890) ; Despatches of W. Perwich (Royal 
Hist. Soc. Pubtns., 1903) ; History of England, of the Civil War and 
of the Commonwealth, by S. R. Gardiner; Hist, of Scotland, by A. 
Lang, vol. iii. (1904); Macaulay's Hist, of England, vol. i. ; Notes 
which passed at Meetings of the privy Council between Charles II. and 
the Earl of Clarendon (Roxburghe Club, 1896) ; A French Ambassador 
at the Court of Charles II., by J. J. Jusserand (1902); The Story of 
Nell Gwyn and the Sayings of Charles II., by P. Cunningham, ed. 
by H. B. Wheatley (1892) ; for his adventures and period of exile 
see Memoiren der Herzogin Sophie, ed. by A. Kocher (1879) ; " Briefe 
der Elisabeth Stuart," by A. Wendland (Litter arischer Verein 
in Stuttgart, No. 228) ; Memoirs of Cardinal de Retz, Mile de 
Montpensier and Mme de Motteville; The King in Exile, by E. 
Scott (1905) ; Scottish History Pubtns. vols. 17 (Charles II. in Scot- 
land, by S. R. Gardiner, 1894) and 18 (Scotland and the Common- 
wealth, 1651-1653, ed. by C. H. Firth, 1895); Charles II. in the 
Channel Islands, by S. E. Hoskins (1854) i Boscobel, by T. Blount, 
&c, ed. by C. G. Thomas (1894); The Flight of the King (1897) and 
After Worcester Fight (1904), by A. Fea; Edinburgh i?eOTez<//(January 
1894); Eng. Hist. Rev. xix. (1904) 363; Revue historique, xxvih. 
and xxix. ; Art Journal (1889), p. 178 (" Boscobel and Whiteladies," 
by J. Penderel-Brodhurst) ; England under Charles II., by W. F. 
Taylor (1889), a collection of passages from contemporary writers; 
and R. Crawfurd, The Last Days of Charles II. (1909). (P. C. Y.) 

CHARLES I. and II., kings of France. By the French, Charles 
the Great, Roman emperor and king of the Franks, is reckoned the 
first of the series of French kings named Charles (see Charle- 
magne). Similarly the emperor Charles II. the Bald (q.v.) is 
reckoned as Charles II. of France. In some enumerations the 
emperor Charles III. the Fat (q.v.) is reckoned as Charles II. of 
France, Charlemagne not being included in the list, and Charles 
the Bald being styled Charles I. 

CHARLES III., the Simple (879-929), king of France, was a 
posthumous son of Louis the Stammerer and of his second wife 
Adelaide. On the deposition of Charles the Fat in 887 he was 
excluded from the throne by his youth; but during the reign of 
Odo, who had succeeded Charles, he succeeded in gaining the 
recognition of a certain number of notables and in securing his 
coronation at Reims on the 28th of January 893. He now 
obtained the alliance of the emperor, and forced Odo to cede 
part of Neustria. In 898, by the death of his rival (Jan. 1), he 
obtained possession of the whole kingdom. His most important 
act was the treaty of Saint-Clair-sur-Epte with the Normans in 
911. Some of them were baptized; the territory which was 
afterwards known as the duchy of Normandy was ceded to them; 
but the story of the marriage of their chief Rollo with a sister of 
the king, related by the chronicler Dudo of Saint Quentin, is 
very doubtful. The same year Charles, on the invitation of the 
barons, took possession of the kingdom of Lotharingia. In 920 
the barons, jealous of the growth of the royal authority and 
discontented with the favour shown by the king to his counsellor 
Hagano, rebelled, and in 922 elected Robert, brother of King 
Odo, in place of Charles. Robert was killed in the battle of 



FRANCE] 



CHARLES IV.-V. 



917 



Soissons, but the victory remained with his party, who elected 
Rudolph, duke of Burgundy, king. In his extremity Charles 
trusted himself to Herbert, count of Vermandois, who deceived 
him, and threw him into confinement at Chateau-Thierry and 
afterwards at Peronne. In the latter town he died on the 7 th 
of October 929. In 907 he had married Frederona, sister of 
Bovo, bishop of Chalons. After her death he married Eadgyfu 
(Odgiva), daughter of Edward the Elder, king of the English, who 
was the mother of Louis IV. 
See A. Eckel, Charles le Simple (Paris, 1899). 

CHARLES IV. (1294-1328), king of France, called The Fair, 
was the third and youngest son of Philip IV. and Jeanne of 
Navarre. In 1316 he was created count of La Marche, and 
succeeded his brother Philip V. as king of France and Navarre 
early in 1322. He followed the policy of his predecessors in 
enforcing the royal authority over the nobles, but the machinery 
of a centralized government strong enough to hold nobility 
in check increased the royal expenditure, to meet which Charles 
had recourse to doubtful financial expedients. At the beginning 
of his reign he ordered a recast of the coinage, with serious 
results to commerce; civil officials were deprived of offices, 
which had been conferred free, but were no%v put up to auction; 
duties were imposed on exported merchandise and on goods 
brought into Paris; the practice of exacting heavy fines was 
encouraged by making the salaries of the magistrates dependent 
on them ; and on the pretext of a crusade to free Armenia from 
the Turks, Charles obtained from the pope a tithe levied on the 
clergy, the proceeds of which he kept for his own use; he also 
confiscated the property of the Lombard bankers who had been 
invited to France by his father at a time of financial crisis. The 
history of the assemblies summoned by Charles IV. is obscure, 
but in 1326, on the outbreak of war with England, an assembly 
of prelates and barons met at Meaux. Commissioners were 
afterwards despatched to the provinces to state the position of 
affairs and to receive complaints. The king justified his failure 
to summon the estates on the ground of the expense incurred 
by provincial deputies. The external politics of his reign were 
not marked by any striking events. He maintained excellent 
relations with Pope John XXII., who made overtures to him, 
indirectly, offering his support in case of his candidature for the 
imperial crown. Charles tried to form a party in Italy in support 
of the pope against the emperor Louis IV. of Bavaria, but 
failed. A treaty with the English which secured the district 
of Agenais for France was followed by a feudal war in Guienne. 
Isabella, Charles's sister and the wife of Edward II., was sent 
to France to negotiate, and with her brother's help arranged the 
final conspiracy against her husband. Charles's first wife was 
Blanche, daughter of Otto IV., count of Burgundy, and of 
Matilda (Mahaut), countess of Artois, to whom he was married 
in 1307. In May 13 14, by order of King Philip IV., she was 
arrested and imprisoned in the Chateau-Gaillard with her sister- 
in-law Marguerite, daughter of Robert II., duke of Burgundy, 
and wife of Louis Hutin, on the charge of adultery with two 
gentlemen of the royal household, Philippe and Gautier d'Aunai. 
Jeanne, sister of Marguerite and wife of Philip the Tall, was 
also arrested for not having denounced the culprits, and im- 
prisoned at Dourdan. The two knights were put to the torture 
and executed, and their goods confiscated. It is impossible 
to say how far the charges were true. Tradition has involved 
and obscured the story, which is the origin of the legend of the 
tour de Nesle made famous by the drama of A. Dumas the elder. 
Marguerite died shortly in prison ; Jeanne was declared innocent 
by the parlement and returned to her husband. Blanche was 
still in prison when Charles became king. He induced Pope 
John XXII. to declare the marriage null, on the ground that 
Blanche's mother had been his godmother. Blanche died in 
1326, still in confinement, though at the last in the abbey of 
Maubuisson. 

In 1322, freed from his first marriage, Charles married his 
cousin Mary of Luxemburg, daughter of the emperor Henry VII., 
and upon her death, two years later, Jeanne, daughter of Louis, 
count of Evreux. Charles IV. died at Vincennes on the 1st of 



February 1328. He left no issue by his first two wives to succeed 
him, and daughters only by Jeanne of Evreux. He was the last 
of the direct line of Capetians. 

See A. d'Herbomey, " Notes et documents pour servir a l'histoire 
des rois fils de Philippe le Bel," in Bibl. de I'&ole des Charles (lix. 
pp. 479 seq. and 689 seq.) ; de Brequigny, " Memoire sur les 
differends entre la France et l'Angleterre sous le regne de Charles 
le Bel," in Mem. de I' Acad, des Inscriptions (xli. pp. 641-692); 
H. Lot, "Projets de crusade sous Charles le Bel et sous Philippe de 
Valois " (Bibl. de I'Sxole des Chartes, xx. pp. 503-509) ; " Chronique 
parisienne anonyme de 1316 a 1339 . . ." ed. Hellot in Mem. de 
la soc. de I'hist. de Paris (xi., 1884, pp. 1-207). 

CHARLES V. (1337-1380), king of France, called The Wise, 
was born at the chateau of Vincennes on the 21st of January 
1337, the son of John II. and Bonne of Luxemburg. In 1349 
he became dauphin of the Viennois by purchase from Humbert 
II., and in 1355 he was created duke of Normandy. At the battle 
of Poitiers (1356) his father ordered him to leave the field when 
the battle turned against the French, and he was thus saved 
from the imprisonment that overtook his father. After arranging 
for the government of Normandy he proceeded to Paris, where 
he took the title of lieutenant of the kingdom. During the years 
of John II. 's imprisonment in England Charles was virtually 
king of France. He summoned the states-general of northern 
France (Langue d'oil) to Paris in October 1356 to obtain men and 
money to carry on the war. But under the leadership of fitienne 
Marcel, provost of the Parisian merchants and president of the 
third estate, and Robert le Coq, bishop of Laon, president of the 
clergy, a partisan of Charles of Navarre, the states refused any 
" aid " except on conditions which Charles declined to accept. 
They demanded the dismissal of a number of the royal ministers; 
the establishment of a commission elected from the three estates 
to regulate the dauphin's administration, and of another board 
to act as council of war; also the release of Charles the Bad, 
king of Navarre, who had been imprisoned by King John. The 
estates of Languedoc, summoned to Toulouse, also made protests 
against misgovernment, but they agreed to raise a war-levy on 
terms to which the dauphin acceded. Charles sought the 
alliance of his uncle, the emperor Charles IV., to whom he did 
homage at Metz as dauphin of the Viennois, and he was also made 
imperial vicar of Dauphine, thus acknowledging the imperial 
jurisdiction. But he gained small material advantage from 
these proceedings. The states-general were again convoked 
in February 1357. Their demands were more moderate than 
in the preceding year, but they nominated members to replace 
certain obnoxious persons on the royal council, demanded the 
right to assemble without the royal summons, and certain 
administrative reforms. In return they promised to raise and 
finance an army of 30,000 men, but the money — a tithe levied 
on the annual revenues of the clergy and nobility — voted for 
this object was not to pass through the dauphin's hands. Charles 
appeared to consent, but the agreement was annulled by letters 
from King John, announcing at the same time the conclusion 
of a two years' truce, and the reformers failed to secure their 
ends. Charles had escaped from their power by leaving Paris, 
but he returned for a new meeting of the estates in the autumn 
of 1357- 

Meanwhile Charles of Navarre had been released by his parti- 
sans, and allying himself with Marcel had become a popular 
hero in Paris. The dauphin was obliged to receive him and to 
undergo an apparent reconciliation. In Paris Etienne Marcel 
was supreme. He forced his way into the dauphin's palace 
(February 1358), and Charles's servant, Jean de Conflans, 
marshal of Champagne, and Robert de Clermont, marshal of 
Normandy, were murdered before his eyes. Charles was power- 
less openly to resent these outrages, but he obtained from the 
provincial assemblies the money refused him by the states- 
general, and deferred his vengeance until the dissensions of his 
enemies should offer him an opportunity. Charles of Navarre, 
now in league with the English and master of lower Normandy 
and of the approaches to Paris, returned to the immediate 
neighbourhood of the city, and Marcel found himself driven to 
avowed co-operation with the dauphin's enemies, the English 



gi8 



CHARLES V. 



[FRANCE 



and the Navarrese. Charles had been compelled in March to 
take the title of regent to prevent the possibility of further inter- 
vention from King John. In defiance of a recent ordinance 
prohibiting provincial assemblies, he presided over the estates 
of Picardy and Artois, and then over those of Champagne. 
The states-general of 1358 were summoned to Compiegne instead 
of Paris, and granted a large aid. The condition of northern 
France was rendered more desperate by the outbreak (May- 
June 1358) of the peasant revolt known as the Jacquerie, which 
was repressed with a barbarity far exceeding the excesses of the 
rebels. Within the walls of Paris Jean Maillart had formed a 
royalist party; Marcel was assassinated (31st July 1358), and 
the dauphin entered Paris in the following month. A reaction 
in Charles's favour had set in, and from the estates of 1359 he 
regained the authority he had lost. It was with their full con- 
currence that he restored their honours to the officials who had 
been dismissed by the estates of 1356 and 1337. They supported 
him in repudiating the treaty of London (1359), which King John 
had signed in anxiety for his personal freedom, and voted money 
unconditionally for the continuation of the war. From this time 
the estates were only once convoked by Charles, who contented 
himself thenceforward by appeals to the assembly of notables 
or to the provincial bodies. Charles of Navarre was now at open 
war with the regent; Edward III. landed at Calais in October; 
and a great part of the country was exposed to double depreda- 
tions from the English and the Navarrese troops. In the scarcity 
of money Charles had recourse to the debasement of the coinage, 
which suffered no less than twenty-two variations in the two years 
before the treaty of Bretigny. This disastrous financial expedient 
was made good later, the coinage being established on a firm 
basis during the last sixteen years of Charles's reign in accordance 
with the principles of Nicolas Oresme. On the conclusion of 
peace King John was restored to France, but, being unable to 
raise his ransom, he returned in 1364 to England, where he died 
in April, leaving the crown to Charles, who was crowned at 
Reims on the 19th of May. 

The new king found an able servant in Bertrand du Guesclin, 
who won a victory over the Navarrese troops at Cocherel and 
took prisoner their best general, Jean de Grailli, captal of Buch. 
The establishment of Charles's brother, Philip the Bold, in the 
duchy of Burgundy, though it constituted in the event a serious 
menace to the monarchy, put an end to the king of Navarre's 
ambitions in that direction. A treaty of peace between the two 
kings was signed in 1365, by which Charles of Navarre gave up 
Mantes, Meulan and the county of Longueville in exchange for 
Montpellier. Negotiations were renewed in 1370 when Charles 
of Navarre did homage for his French possessions, though he 
was then considering an offensive and defensive alliance with 
Edward III. Du Guesclin undertook to free France from the 
depredations of the " free companies," mercenary soldiers put 
out of employment by the cessation of the war. An attempt 
to send them on a crusade against the Turks failed, and Du 
Guesclin led them to Spain to put Henry of Trastamara on the 
throne of Castile. By the marriage of his brother Philip the 
Bold with Margaret of Flanders, Charles detached the Flemings 
from the English alliance, and as soon as he had restored 
something like order in the internal affairs of the kingdom he 
provoked a quarrel with the English. The text of the treaty of 
Bretigny presented technical difficulties of which Charles was 
not slow to avail himself. The English power in Guienne was 
weakened by the disastrous Spanish expedition of the Black 
Prince, whom Charles summoned before the parlement of Paris 
in January 1369 to answer the charges preferred against him 
by his subjects, thus expressly repudiating the English supre- 
macy in Guienne. War was renewed in May after a meeting of 
the states-general. Between 1371 and 1373 Poitou and Sain- 
tonge were reconquered by Du Guesclin, and soon the English 
had to abandon all their territory north of the Garonne. John 
IV. of Brittany (Jean de Montfort) had won his duchy with 
English help by the defeat of Charles of Blois, the French 
nominee, at Auray in 1364. His sympathies remained English, 
but he was now (1373) obliged to take refuge in England, and 



later in Flanders, while the English only retained a footing in 
two or three coast towns. Charles's generals avoided pitched 
battles, and contented themselves with defensive and guerrilla 
tactics, with the result that in 1380 only Bayonne, Bordeaux, 
Brest and Calais were still in English hands. 

Charles had in 1378 obtained proof of Charles of Navarre's 
treasonable designs. He seized the Norman towns held by the 
Navarrese, while Henry of Trastamara invaded Navarre, and 
imposed conditions of peace which rendered his lifelong enemy 
at last powerless. A premature attempt to amalgamate the 
duchy of Brittany with the French crown failed. Charles sum- 
moned the duke to Paris in 1378, and on his non-appearance 
committed one of his rare errors of policy by confiscating his 
duchy. But the Bretons rose to defend their independence, and 
recalled their duke. The matter was still unsettled when Charles 
died at Vincennes on the 16th of September 1380. His health, 
always delicate, had been further weakened, according to 
popular report, by a slow poison prepared for him by the king 
of Navarre. His wife, Jeanne of Bourbon, died in 1378, and 
the succession devolved on their elder son Charles, a boy of 
twelve. Their younger son was Louis, duke of Orleans. 

Personally Charles was no soldier. He owed the signal suc- 
cesses of his reign partly to his skilful choice of advisers and 
administrators, to his chancellors Jean and Guillaume de Dor- 
mans and-Pierre d'Orgemont, to Hugues Aubriot, provost of 
Paris, Bureau de la Riviere and others; partly to a singular 
coolness and subtlety in the exercise of a not over-scrupulous 
diplomacy, which made him a dangerous enemy. He had learnt 
prudence and self-restraint in the troubled times of the regency, 
and did not lose his moderation in success. He modelled his 
private life on that of his predecessor Saint Louis, but was no 
fanatic in religion, for he refused his support to the violent 
methods of the Inquisition in southern France, and allowed the 
Jews to return to the country, at the same time confirming their 
privileges. His support of the schismatic pope Clement VII. 
at Avignon was doubtless due to political considerations, as 
favouring the independence of the Gallican church. Charles V. 
was a student of astrology, medicine, law and philosophy, and 
collected a large and valuable library at the Louvre. He 
gathered round him a group of distinguished writers and thinkers, 
among whom were Raoul de Presles, Philippe de Mezieres, 
Nicolas Oresme and others. The ideas of these men were applied 
by him to the practical work of administration, though he con- 
fined himself chiefly to the consolidation and improvement of 
existing institutions. The power of the nobility was lessened 
by restrictions which, without prohibiting private wars, made 
them practically impossible. The feudal fortresses were regu- 
larly inspected by the central authority, and the nobles them- 
selves became in many cases paid officers of the king. Charles 
established a merchant marine and a formidable navy, which 
under Jean de Vienne threatened the English coast between 
1377 and 1380.- The states-general were silenced and the royal 
prerogative increased; the royal domains were extended, and 
the wealth of the crown was augmented; additions were made 
to the revenue by the sale of municipal charters and patents; 
and taxation became heavier, since Charles set no limits to the 
gratification of his tastes either in the collection of jewels and 
precious objects, of books, or of his love of building, examples 
of which are the renovation of the Louvre and the erection of 
the palace of Saint Paul in Paris. 

See the chronicles of Froissart, and of Pierre d'Orgemont (Grandes 
Chroniques de Saint Denis, Paris, vol. vi., 1838) ; Christine de Pisan, 
Le Livre des fais et bonnes rruzurs du sage toy Charles V, written in 
1404, ed. Michaud and Poujoulat, vol. ii. (1836) ; L. Delisle, Mande- 
ments et actes divers de Charles V (1886); letters of Charles V. from 
the English archives in Champollion-Figeac, Lettres de rois et de 
reines, ii. pp. 167 seq. ; the anonymous Songe du vergier or Somnium 
viridarii, written in 1376 and giving the political ideas of Charles V. 
and his advisers; " Relation de la mort de Charles V " in Haureau, 
Notices et extraits, xxxi. pp. 278-284 ; Ch. Benoist, La Politique du roi 
Charles V (1874) ; S. Luce, La France pendant la guerre de cent ans; 
G. Clement Simon, La Rupture du traite de Bretigny (1898) ; A. Vuitry, 
Htudes sur le regime financier de la France, vols. i. and ii. (1883) ; and 
R. Delachenal, Histoire de Charles V (Paris. 1908). , 



FRANCE] 



CHARLES VI. 



919 



CHARLES VI. (1368-1422), king of France, son of Charles V. 
and Jeanne of Bourbon, was born in Paris on the 3rd of December 
1368. He received the appanage of Dauphin6 at his birth, and 
was thus the first of the princes of France to bear the title of 
dauphin from infancy. Charles V. had entrusted his education 
to Philippe de Mezieres, and had fixed his majority at fourteen. 
He succeeded to the throne in 1380, at the age of twelve, and 
the royal authority was divided between his paternal uncles, 
Louis, duke of Anjou, John, duke of Berry, Philip the Bold, duke 
of Burgundy , and his mother's brother,Louis II. ,duke of Bourbon. 
In accordance with an ordinance of the late king the duke of 
Anjou became regent, while the guardianship of the young king, 
together with the control of Paris and Normandy, passed to the 
dukes of Burgundy and Bourbon, who were to be assisted by 
certain of the councillors of Charles V. The duke of Berry, 
excluded by this arrangement, was compensated by the govern- 
ment of Languedoc and Guienne. Anjou held the regency for 
a few months only,until the king's coronation in November 1380. 
He enriched himself from the estate of Charles V. and by exces- 
sive exactions, before he set out in 1382 for Italy to effect the 
conquest of Naples. Considerable discontent existed in the south 
of France at the time of the death of Charles V., and when the 
duke of Anjou re-imposed certain taxes which the late king had 
remitted at the end of his reign, there were revolts at Puy and 
Montpellier. Paris, Rouen, the cities of Flanders, with Amiens, 
Orleans, Reims and other French towns, also rose (1382) in revolt 
against their masters. The Maillotins, as the Parisian insur- 
gents were named from the weapon they used, gained the upper 
hand in Paris, and were able temporarily to make terms, but 
the commune of Rouen was abolished, and the Tuchins, as 
the marauders in Languedoc were called, were pitilessly hunted 
down. Charles VI. marched to the help of the count of Flanders 
against the insurgents headed by Philip van Artevelde, and 
gained a complete victory at Roosebeke (November 27th, 1382). 
Strengthened by this success the king, on his return to Paris 
in the following January, exacted vengeance on the citizens by 
fines, executions and the suppression of the privileges of the city. 
The help sent by the English to the Flemish cities resulted 
in a second Flemish campaign. In 1385 Jean de Vienne made 
an unsuccessful descent on the Scottish coast, and Charles 
equipped a fleet at Sluys for the invasion of England,, but 
a series of delays ended in the destruction of the ships by the 
English. 

In 1385 Charles VI. married Elizabeth, daughter of Stephen II., 
duke of Bavaria, her name being gallicized as Isabeau. Three 
years later, with the help of his brother, Louis of Orleans, duke 
of Touraine, he threw off the tutelage of his uncles, whom he 
replaced by Bureau de la Riviere and others among his father's 
counsellors, nicknamed by the royal princes the marmousets 
because of their humble origin. Two years later he deprived 
the duke of Berry of the government of Languedoc. The opening 
years of Charles VI. 's effective rule promised well, but excess in 
gaiety of all kinds undermined his constitution, and in 1302 he 
had an attack of madness at Le Mans, when on his way to 
Brittany to force from John V. the surrender of his cousin 
Pierre de Craon, who had tried to assassinate the constable 
Olivier de Clisson in the streets of Paris. Other attacks followed, 
and it became evident that Charles was unable permanently to 
sustain the royal authority. Clisson, Bureau de la Riviere, 
Jean de Merrier, and the other marmousets were driven from 
office, and the royal dukes regained their power. The rivalries 
between the most powerful of these — the duke of Burgundy, 
who during the king's attacks of madness practically ruled the 
country, and the duke of Orleans — were a constant menace to 
peace. In 1396 peace with England seemed assured by the 
marriage of Richard II. with Charles VI. 's daughter Isabella, 
but the Lancastrian revolution of 1399 destroyed the diplomatic 
advantages gained by this union. In France the country was 
disturbed by the papal schism. At an assembly of the clergy 
held in Paris in 1398 it was resolved to refuse to recognize the 
authority of Benedict XIII., who succeeded Clement VII. as 
schismatic pope at Avignon. The question became a party 



one; Benedict was supported by<Louis of Orleans, while Philip 
the Bold and the university of Paris opposed him. Obedience 
to Benedict's authority was resumed in 1403, only to be with- 
drawn again in 1408, when the king declared himself the guardian 
and protector of the French church, which was indeed for a 
time self-governing. Edicts further extending the royal power 
in ecclesiastical affairs were even issued in 1418, after the schism 
was at an end. 

The king's intelligence became yearly feebler, and in 1404 
the death of Philip the Bold aggravated the position of affairs. 
The new duke, John the Fearless, did not immediately replace his 
father in general affairs, and the influence of the duke of Orleans 
increased. Queen Isabeau, who had generally supported the 
Burgundian party, was now practically separated from her 
husband, whose madness had become pronounced. She was 
replaced by a young Burgundian lady, Odette de Champdivers, 
called by her contemporaries la petite reine, who rescued the king 
from the state of neglect into which he had fallen. Isabeau of 
Bavaria was freely accused of intrigue with the duke of Orleans. 
She was from time to time regent of France, and as her policy 
was directed by personal considerations and by her love of 
splendour she further added to the general distress. The relations 
between John the Fearless and the duke of Orleans became more 
embittered, and on the 23rd of November 1407 Orleans was 
murdered in the streets of Paris at the instigation of his rival. 
The young duke Charles of Orleans married the daughter of the 
Gascon count Bernard VII. of Armagnac, and presently formed 
alliances with the dukes of Berry, Bourbon and Brittany, and 
others who formed the party known as the Armagnacs (see 
Armagnac), against the Burgundians who had gained the upper 
hand in the royal council. In 141 1 John the Fearless contracted 
an alliance with Henry IV. of England, and civil war began in 
the autumn, but in 141 2 the Armagnacs in their turn sought 
English aid, and, by promising the sovereignty of Aquitaine 
to the English king, gave John the opportunity of posing as 
defender of France. In Paris the Burgundians were hand 
in hand with the corporation of the butchers, who were the 
leaders of the Parisian populace. The malcontents, who took 
their name from one of their number, Caboche, penetrated into 
the palace of the dauphin Louis, and demanded the surrender 
of the unpopular members of his household. A royal ordinance, 
promising reforms in administration, was promulgated on the 
27th of May 1413, and some of the royal advisers were executed. 
The king and the dauphin, powerless in the hands of Duke 
John and the Parisians, appealed secretly to the Armagnac 
princes for deliverance. They entered Paris in September; the 
ordinance extracted by the Cabochiens was rescinded; and 
numbers of the insurgents were banished the city. 

In the next year Henry V. of England, after concluding an 
alliance with Burgundy, resumed the pretensions of Edward III. 
to the crown of France, and in 141 5 followed the disastrous 
battle of Agincourt. The two elder sons of Charles VI., Louis, 
duke of Guienne, and John, duke of Touraine, died in 1415 and 
1417, and Charles, count of Ponthieu, became heir apparent. 
Paris was governed by Bernard of Armagnac, constable of 
France, who expelled all suspected of Burgundian sympathies 
and treated Paris like a conquered city. Queen Isabeau was 
imprisoned at Tours, but escaped to Burgundy. The capture 
of Paris by the Burgundians on the 29th of May 1418 was 
followed by a series of horrible massacres of the Armagnacs; 
and in July Duke John and Isabeau, who assumed the title 
of regent, entered Paris. Meanwhile Henry V. had completed 
the conquest of Normandy. The murder of John the Fearless in 
1419 under the eyes of the dauphin Charles threw the Bur- 
gundians definitely into the arms of the English, and his suc- 
cessor Philip the Good, in concert with Queen Isabeau, concluded 
(1420) the treaty of Troyes with Henry V., who became master 
of France. Charles VI. had long been of no account in the 
government, and the state of neglect in which he existed at 
Senlis induced Henry V. to undertake the re-organization of 
his household. He came to Paris in September 1422, and died 
on the 21st of October. 



920 



CHARLES VII. 



[FRANCE 



The chief authorities for the reign of Charles VI. are: — Chronica 
Caroli VI., written by a monk of Saint Denis, commissioned officially 
to write the history of his time, edited by C. Bellaguet with a French 
translation (6 vols., 1 839-1 852) ; Jean Juvenal des Ursins, Chronique, 
printed by D. Godefroy in Histoire de Charles VI (1653), chiefly an 
abridgment of the monk of St Denis's narrative; a fragment of the 
Grandes Chroniques de Saint Denis covering the years 1381 to 1383 
(ed. J. Pichon 1864) ; correspondence of Charles VI. printed by 
Champollion-Figeac in Lettres de rois, vol. ii. ; Choix de pieces 
inSdites rel. au regne de Charles VI (2 vols., 1863-1864), edited by 
L. Douet d'Arcq for the Societe de l'Histoire de France; J. Froissart, 
Chroniques; Enguerrand de Monstrelet, Chroniques, covering the 
first half of the 15th century (Eng. trans., 4 vols., 1 809) ; Chronique 
des quatre premiers Valois, by an unknown author, ed. S. Luce (1862). 
See also E. Lavisse, Hist, de France, iv. 267 seq.; E. Petit, 
" Sejours de Charles VI," Bull, du com. des travaux hist. (1893); 
Vallet de Viriville, " Isabeau de Baviere," Revue jrancaise (1858- 
1859) ; M. Tbibaut, Isabeau de Baviere (1903). 

CHARLES VII. (1403-1461), king of France, fifth son of 
Charles VI. and Isabeau of Bavaria, was bora in Paris on the 
22nd of February 1403. The count of Ponthieu, as he was 
called in his boyhood, was betrothed in 1413 to Mary of Anjou, 
daughter of Louis II., duke of Anjou and king of Sicily, and 
spent the next two years at the Angevin court. He received 
the duchy of Touraine in 1416, and in the next year the death 
of his brother John made him dauphin of France. He became 
lieutenant-general of the kingdom in 141 7, and made active 
efforts to combat the complaisance of his mother. He assumed 
the title of regent in December 1418, but his authority in northern 
France was paralysed in 1419 by the murder of John the Fearless, 
duke of Burgundy, in his presence at Montereau. Although the 
deed was not apparently premeditated, as the English and 
Burgundians declared, it ruined Charles's cause for the time. 
He was disinherited by the treaty of Troyes in 1420, and at the 
time of his father's death in 1422 had retired to Mehun-sur-Yevre, 
near Bourges, which had been the nominal seat of government 
since 141 8. He was recognized as king in Touraine, Berry and 
Poitou, in Languedoc and other provinces of southern France; 
but the English power in the north was presently increased by 
the provinces of Champagne and Maine, as the result of the 
victories of Crevant (1423) and Verneuil (1424). . The Armagnac 
administrators who had been driven out of Paris by the duke 
of Bedford gathered round the young king, nicknamed the 
" king of Bourges," but he was weak in body and mind, and was 
under the domination of Jean Louvet and Tanguy du Chastel, 
the instigators of the murder of John the Fearless, and other 
discredited partisans. The power of these favourites was shaken 
by the influence of the queen's mother, Yolande of Aragon, 
duchess of Anjou. She sought the alliance of John, V., duke of 
Brittany, who, however, vacillated throughout his life between 
the English and French alliance, concerned chiefly to maintain 
the independence of his duchy. His brother, Arthur of Brittany, 
earl of Richmond (comte de Richemont) , was reconciled with the 
king, and became constable in 1425, with the avowed intention 
of making peace between Charles VII. and the duke of Burgundy. 
Richemont caused the assassination of Charles's favourites 
Pierre de Giac and Le Camus de Beaulieu, and imposed one of 
his own choosing, Georges de la Tremoille, an adventurer who 
rapidly usurped the constable's power. For five years (1427- 
1432) a private war between these two exhausted the Armagnac 
forces, and central France returned to anarchy. 

Meanwhile Bedford had established settled government 
throughout the north of France, and in 1428 he advanced to 
the siege of Orleans. For the movement which was to lead to 
the deliverance of France from the English invaders, see Joan 
oy Arc. The siege of Orleans was raised by her efforts on the 
8th of May 1429, and two months later Charles VII. was crowned 
at Reims. Charles's intimate counsellors, La Tremoille and 
Regnault de Chartres, archbishop of Reims, saw their profits 
menaced by the triumphs of Joan of Arc, and accordingly the 
court put every difficulty in the way of her military career, and 
received the news of her capture before Compiegne (1430) with 
indifference. No measures were taken for her deliverance or her 
ransom, and Normandy and the Isle of France remained in 
English hands. Fifteen years of anarchy and civil war intervened 



before peace was restored. Bands of armed men fighting for 
their own hand traversed the country, and in the ten years 
between 1434 and 1444 the provinces were terrorized by these 
icorchews, who, with the decline of discipline in the English army, 
were also recruited from the ranks of the invaders. The duke of 
Bedford died in i43S> and in the same year Philip the Good of 
Burgundy concluded a treaty with Charles VII. at Arras, after 
fruitless negotiations for an English treaty. From this time 
Charles's policy was strengthened. La Tremoille had been 
assassinated in 1433 by the constable's orders, with the con- 
nivance of Yolande of Aragon. For his former favourites were 
substituted energetic advisers, his brother-in-law Charles of 
Anjou, Dunois (the famous bastard of Orleans), Pierre de Breze, 
Richemont and others. Richemont entered Paris on the 13th 
of April 1436) an d in the next five years the finance of the 
country was re-established on a settled basis. .Charles himself 
commanded the troops who captured Pontoise in 1441, and in 
the next year he made a successful expedition in the south. 

Meanwhile the princes of the blood and the great nobles 
resented the ascendancy of councillors and soldiers drawn from 
the smaller nobility and the bourgeoisie. They made a formidable 
league against the crown in 1440 which included Charles I., 
duke of Bourbon, John II., duke of Alencon, John IV. of 
Armagnac, and the dauphin, afterwards Louis XI. The revolt 
broke out in Poitou in 1440 and was known as the Praguerie. 
Charles VII. repressed the rising, and showed great skill with 
the rebel nobles, finally buying them over individually by con- 
siderable concessions. In 1444 a truce was concluded with 
England at Tours, and Charles proceeded to organize a regular 
army. The central authority was gradually made effective, and 
a definite system of payment, by removing the original cause of 
brigandage, and the establishment of a strict discipline learnt 
perhaps from the English troops, gradually stamped out the most 
serious of the many evils under which the country had suffered. 
Pierre Bessonneau, and the brothers Gaspard and Jean Bureau 
created a considerable force of artillery. Domestic troubles in 
their own country weakened the English in France. The con- 
quest of Normandy was completed by the battle of Formigny 
(1 5th of April 1450). Guienne was conquered in 1451 by Duncis, 
but not subdued, and another expedition was necessary in 1453, 
when Talbot was defeated and slain at Castillon. Meanwhile 
in 1450 Charles VII. had resolved on the rehabilitation of Joan 
of Arc, thus rendering a tardy recognition of her services. This 
was granted in 1456 by the Holy See. The only foothold retained 
by the English on French ground was Calais. In its earlier 
stages the deliverance of France from the English had been the 
work of the people themselves. The change which made Charles 
take an active part in public affairs is said to have been largely 
due to the influence of Agnes Sorel, who became his mistress in 
1444 and died in 1450. She was the first to play a public and 
political r61e as mistress of a king of France, and may be said to 
have established a tradition. Pierre de Brez6, who had had a 
large share in the repression of the Praguerie, obtained through 
her a dominating influence over the king, and he inspired the 
monarch himself and the whole administration with new vigour. 
Charles and Rene of Anjou retired from court, and the greater 
part of the members of the king's council were drawn from the 
bourgeois classes. The most famous of all these was Jacques 
Cceur (q.v.). It was by the zeal of these councillors that Charles 
obtained the surname of " The Well-Served." 

Charles VII. continued his father's general policy in church 
matters. He desired to lessen the power of the Holy See in 
France and to preserve as far as possible the liberties of the 
Gallican church. With the council of Constance (1414-1418) 
the great schism was practically healed. Charles, while careful 
to protest against its renewal, supported the anti-papal con- 
tentions of the French members of the council of Basel (1431- 
1449), and in 1438 he promulgated the Pragmatic Sanction at 
Bourges, by which the patronage of ecclesiastical benefices was 
removed from the Holy See, while certain interventions of the 
royal power were admitted. Bishops and abbots were to be 
elected, in accordance with ancient custom, by their clergy. 



FRANCE] 



CHARLES VIII.-X. 



921 



After the English had evacuated French territory Charles still 
had to cope with feudal revolt, and with the hostility of the 
dauphin, who was in open revolt in 1446, and for the next ten 
years ruled like an independent sovereign in Dauphine. He took 
refuge in 1457 with Charles's most formidable enemy, Philip 
of Burgundy. Charles VII. nevertheless found means to prevent 
Philip from attaining his ambitions in Lorraine and in Germany. 
But the dauphin succeeded in embarrassing his father's policy 
at home and abroad, and had his own party in the court itself. 
Charles VII. died at Mehun-sur-Yevre on the 22nd of July 146 1. 
He believed that he was poisoned by his son, who cannot, how- 
ever, be accused of anything more than an eager expectation 
of his death. 

Authorities. — The history of the reign of Charles VII. has been 
written by two modern historians, — Vallet de Viriville, Histoire de 
Charles VII . . . et de son ipoque (Paris, 3 vols., 1862-1865), and 
G. du Fresne de Beaucourt, Hist, de Charles VII (Paris, 6 vols., 
1881-1891). There is abundant contemporary material. The 
herald, Jacques le Bouvier or Berry (b. 1386), whose Chronicques du 
feu roi Charles VII was first printed in 1528 as the work of Alain 
Chartier, was an eye-witness of many of the events he described. 
His Recouvrement de Normandie, with other material on the same 
subject, was edited for the " Rolls " series {Chronicles and Memorials) 
by Joseph Stevenson in 1863. The Histoire de Charles VII by Jean 
Chartier, historiographer-royal from 1437, was included in the 
Grandes Chroniques de Saint-Denis, and was first printed under 
Chartier'snameby Denis Godefroy, together with other contemporary 
narratives, in 1661. It was re-edited by Vallet de Viriville (Paris, 
3 vols., 1858-1859). With these must be considered the Burgundian 
chroniclers Enguerrand de Monstrelet, whose chronicle (ed. L. Douet 
dArcq; Paris, 6 vols., 1857-1862) covers the years 1400-1444, and 
Georges Chastellain, the existing fragments of whose chronicle are 
published in his CEuwes (ed. Kervyn de Lettenhove; Brussels, 
8 vols., 1 863-1 866). For a detailed bibliography and an account 
of printed and MS. documents see du Fresne de Beaucourt, already 
cited, also A. Molinier, Manuel de bibliographie historique, iv. 
240-306. * 

CHARLES VIII. (1470-1498), king of France, was the only son 
of Louis XL During the whole of his childhood Charles lived far 
from his father at the chateau of Amboise, which was throughout 
his life his favourite residence. On the death of Louis XL in 1483 
Charles, a lad of thirteen, was of age, but was absolutely incapable 
of governing. Until 1492 he abandoned the government to his 
sister Anne of Beaujeu. In 1491 he married Anne, duchess of 
Brittany, who was already betrothed to Maximilian of Austria. 
Urged by his favourite, Etienne de Vesc, he then, at the age of 
twenty-two, threw off the yoke of the Beaujeus, and at the same 
time discarded their wise and able policy. But he was a thoroughly 
worthless man with a weak and ill-balanced intellect. He had a 
romantic imagination and conceived vast projects. He proposed 
at first to claim the rights of the house of Anjou, to which Louis 
XL had succeeded, on the kingdom of Naples, and to use this as a 
stepping-stone to the capture of Constantinople from the Turks 
and his own coronation as emperor of the East. He sacrificed 
everything to this adventurous policy, signed disastrous treaties 
to keep his hands free, and set out for Italy in 1494. The cere- 
monial side of the expedition being in his eyes the most important, 
he allowed himself to be intoxicated by his easy triumph and 
duped by the Italians. On the 12th of May 1495 he entered 
Naples in great pomp, clothed in the imperial insignia. A general 
coalition was, however, formed against him, and he was forced 
to return precipitately to France. It cannot be denied that he 
showed bravery at the battle of Fornovo (the 5th of July 1495). 
He was preparing a fresh expedition to Italy, when he died on the 
8th of April 1498, from the results of an accident, at the chateau 
of Amboise. 

See Histoire de Charles VIII, ray de France, by G. de Jaligny, 
Andre de la Vigne, &c, edited by Godefroy (Paris, 1684); De 
Cherrier, Histoire de Charles VIII (Paris, 1868); H. Fr. Delaborde, 
Expedition de Charles VIII en Italic (Paris, 1888). For a complete 
bibliography see H. Hauser, Les Sources de Vhistoire de France, 
1494-1610, vol. i. (Paris, 1906) ; and E. Lavisse, Histoire de France, 
vol. v. part i., by H. Lemonnier (Paris, 1903). 

CHARLES IX. (1 550-1 574), king of France, was the third son 
of Henry II. and Catherine de 'Medici. At first he bore the title of 
duke of Orleans. He became king in 1560 by the death of his 
brother Francis II., but as he was only ten years old the power 



was in the hands of the queen-mother, Catherine. Charles seems 
to have been a youth of good parts, lively and agreeable, but he 
had a weak, passionate and fantastic nature. His education had 
spoiled him. He was left to his whims— even the strangest — and 
to his taste for violent exercises; and the excesses to which he 
gave himself up ruined his health. Proclaimed of age on the 17 th 
of August 1563, he continued to be absorbed in his fantasies and 
his hunting, and submitted docilely to the authority of his mother. 
In 1570 he was married to Elizabeth of Austria, daughter of 
Maximilian II. It was about this time that he dreamed of making 
a figure in the world. The successes of his brother, the duke of 
Anjou, at Jarnac and Moncontour had already caused him some 
jealousy. When Coligny came to court, he received him very 
warmly, and seemed at first to accept the idea of an intervention 
in the Netherlands against the Spaniards. For the upshot of this 
adventure see the article St Bartholomew, Massacre or. 
Charles was in these circumstances no hypocrite, but weak, 
hesitating and ill-balanced. Moreover, the terrible events in 
which he had played a part transformed his character. He 
became melancholy, severe and taciturn. " It is feared," said the 
Venetian ambassador, " that he may become cruel." Under- 
mined by fever, at the age of twenty he had the appearance of an 
old man, and night and day he was haunted with nightmares. 
He died on the 30th of May 1574. By his mistress, Marie 
Touchet, he had one son, Charles, duke of Angouleme. Charles 
IX. had a sincere love of letters, himself practised poetry, was the 
patron of Ronsard and the poets of the Pleiad, and granted 
privileges to the first academy founded by Antoine de Ba'if 
(afterwards the Academie du Palais). He left a work on hunting, 
Traiti de la chasse royale, which was published in 1625, and 
reprinted in 1859. 

Authorities. — The principal sources are the contemporary 
memoirs and chronicles of T. A. d'Aubigne, Brantdme, Castelnau, 
Haton, la Place, Montluc, la Noue, l'Estoile, Ste Foy, de Thou, 
Tavannes, &c. ; the published correspondence of Catherine de' 
Medici, Marguerite de Valois, and the Venetian ambassadors; 
and Calendars of State Papers, &c. See also Abel Desjardins, 
Charles IX, deux annees de rigne (Paris, 1873) i de la Ferriere, Le 
XVI' siecle et les Valois (Paris, 1879) ; H. Mariejol, La Rijorme et la 
Ligue (Paris, 1904), in vol. v. of the Histoire de France, by E. Lavisse, 
which contains a bibliography for the reign. 

CHARLES X. (1757-1836), king of France from 1824 to 1830, 
was the fourth child of the dauphin, son of Louis XV. and of 
Marie Josephe of Saxony, and consequently brother of Louis XVI. 
He was known before his accession as Charles Philippe, count of 
Artois. At the age of sixteen he married Marie Therese of 
Savoy, sister-in-law of his brother, the count of Provence (Louis 
XVIII.) . His youth was passed in scandalous dissipation, which 
drew upon himself and his coterie the detestation of the people of 
Paris. Although lacking military tastes, he joined the French 
army at the siege of Gibraltar in 1772, merely for distraction. 
In a few years he had incurred a debt of 56 million francs, a burden 
assumed by the impoverished state. Prior to the Revolution he 
took only a minor part in politics, but when it broke out he soon 
became, with the queen, the chief of the reactionary party at 
court. In July 1 789 he left France, became leader of the emigre's, 
and visited several of the courts of Europe in the interest of the 
royalist cause. After the execution of Louis XVI: he received 
from his brother, the count of Provence, the title of lieutenant- 
general of the realm, and, on the death of Louis XVII. , that of 
" Monsieur." In 1795 he attempted to aid the royalist rising of 
La Vendee, landing at the island of Yeu. But he refused to 
advance farther and to put himself resolutely at the head of his 
party, although warmly acclaimed by it, and courage failing him, 
he returned to England, settling first in London, then in Holyrood 
Palace at Edinburgh and afterwards at Hartwell. There he 
remained until 1813, returning to France in February 1814, 
and entering Paris in April, in the track of the Allies. 

During the reign of his brother, Louis XVIIL, he was the 
leader of the ultra-royalists, the party of extreme reaction. On 
succeeding to the throne in September 1824 the dignity of his 
address and his affable condescension won him a passing popu- 
larity. But his coronation at Reims, with all the gorgeous 



922 



CHARLES I. 



[HUNGARY 



ceremonial of the old regime, proclaimed his intention of ruling, 
as the Most Christian King, by divine right. His first acts, 
indeed, allayed the worst alarms of the Liberals; but it was soon 
apparent that the weight of the crown would be consistently 
thrown into the scale of the reactionary forces. The imigr&s were 
awarded a milliard as compensation for their confiscated lands; 
and Gallicans and Liberals alike were offended by measures 
which threw increased power into the hands of the Jesuits and 
Ultramontanes. In a few months there were disquieting signs of 
the growing unpopularity of the king. The royal princesses were 
insulted in the streets; and on the 29th of April 1825 Charles, 
when reviewing the National Guard, was met with cries from 
the ranks of " Down with the ministers ! " His reply was, next 
day, a decree disbanding the citizen army. 

It was not till 1829, when the result of the elections had proved 
the futility of Villele's policy of repression, that Charles consented 
unwillingly to try a policy of compromise. It was, however, too 
late. Villele's successor was the vicomte de Martignac, who took 
Decazes for his model; and in the speech from the throne Charles 
declared that the happiness of France depended on " the sincere 
union of the royal authority with the liberties consecrated by the 
charter." But Charles had none of the patience and common- 
sense which had enabled Louis XVIII. to play with decency the 
part of a constitutional king. " I would rather hew wood," he 
exclaimed, " than be a king under the conditions of the king 
of England "; and when the Liberal opposition obstructed all 
the measures proposed by a ministry not selected from the 
parliamentary majority, he lost patience. " I told you," 
he said, " that there was no coming to terms with these men." 
Martignac was dismissed; and Prince Jules de Polignac, the 
very incarnation of clericalism and reaction, was called to the 
helm of state. 

The inevitable result was obvious to all the world. " There 
is no such thing as political experience," wrote Wellington, 
certainly no friend of Liberalism; " with the warning of James II. 
before him, Charles X. was setting up a government by priests, 
through priests, for priests." A formidable agitation sprang 
up in France, which only served to make the king more obstinate. 
In opening the session of 1830 he declared that he would " find 
the power " to overcome the obstacles placed in his path by 
" culpable manoeuvres." The reply of the chambers was a 
protest against " the unjust distrust of the sentiment and reason 
of France "; whereupon they were first prorogued, and on the 
1 6th of May dissolved. The result of the new elections was 
what might have been foreseen: a large increase in the Oppo- 
sition; and Charles, on the advice of his ministers, determined 
on a virtual suspension of the constitution. On the 25th of 
July were issued the famous " four ordinances " which were the 
immediate cause of the revolution that followed. 

With singular fatuity Charles had taken no precautions in view 
of a violent outbreak. Marshal Marmont, who commanded the 
scattered troops in Paris, had received no orders, beyond a jesting 
command from the duke of Angouleme to place them under arms 
" as some windows might be broken." At the beginning of the 
revolution Charles was at St Cloud, whence on the news of the 
fighting he withdrew first to Versailles and then to Rambouillet. 
So little did he understand the seriousness of the situation that, 
when the laconic message " All is over!" was brought to him, 
he believed that the insurrection had been suppressed. On 
realizing the truth he hastily abdicated in favour of his grand- 
son, the duke of Bordeaux (comte de Chambord), and appointed 
Louis Philippe, duke of Orleans, lieutenant-general of the king- 
dom (July 30th). But, on the news of Louis Philippe's accept- 
ance of the crown, he gave up the contest and began a dignified 
retreat to the sea-coast, followed by his suite, and surrounded 
by the infantry, cavalry and artillery of the guard. Beyond 
sending a corps of observation to follow his movements, the new 
government did nothing to arrest his escape. At Maintenon 
Charles took leave of the bulk of his troops, and proceeding with 
an escort of some 1200 men to Cherbourg, took ship there for 
England on the 16th of August. For a time he returned to Holy- 
rood Palace at Edinburgh, which was again placed at his dis- 



posal. He died at Goritz, whither he had gone for his health, 
on the 6th of November 1836. 

The best that can be said of Charles X. is that, if he did not 
know how to rule, he knew how to cease to rule. The dignity 
of his exit was more worthy of the ancient splendour of the royal 
house of France than the theatrical humility of Louis Philippe's 
entrance. But Charles was an impossible monarch for the 19th 
century, or perhaps for any other century. He was a typical 
Bourbon, unable either to learn or to forget; and the closing 
years of his life he spent in religious austerities, intended to 
expiate, not his failure to grasp a great opportunity, but the 
comparatively venial excesses of his youth. 1 

See Achille de Vaulabelle, Chute de I 'empire: histoire des deux 
restaurations (Paris, 1847-1857); Louis de Vielcaste!, Hist, de la 
restauration (Paris, 1860-1878); Alphonse de Lamartine, Hist, de la 
restauration (Paris, 1851-1852); Louis Blanc, Hist, de dix ans, 
1830-1840 (5 vols., 1842-1844); G. I. de Montbel, Derniere Upoqtie 
de I'hist. de Charles X (5th ed., Paris, 1840); Theodore Anne, 
Memoires, souvenirs, et anecdotes sur I'interieur du palais de Charles X 
et les evenements de 1815 d, 1830 (2 vols., Paris, 1831); ib., Journal 
de Saint-Cloud & Cherbourg; Vedrenne, Vie de Charles X (3 vols., 
Paris, 1879); Petit, Charles X (Paris, 1886); Villeneuve, Charles X 
et Louis XIX en exil. Memoires inedits (Paris, 1889); Imbert de 
Saint- Amand, La Cow de Charles X (Paris, 1892). 

CHARLES I. ( 1 288-1342), king of Hungary, the son of Charles 
Martell of Naples, and Clemencia, daughter of the emperor 
Rudolph, was known as Charles Robert previously to being 
enthroned king of Hungary in 1309. He claimed the Hungarian 
crown, as the grandson of Stephen V., under the banner of the 
pope, and in August 1300 proceeded from Naples to Dalmatia 
to make good his claim. He was crowned at Esztergom after 
the death of the last Arpad, Andrew III. (1301), but was forced 
the same year to surrender the crown to Wenceslaus II. of 
Bohemia (1 289-1306). His failure only made Pope Boniface 
VIII. still more zealous on his behalf, and at the diet of Pressburg 

(1304) his Magyar adherents induced him to attempt to recover 
the crown of St Stephen from the Czechs. But in the meantime 

(1305) Wenceslaus transferred his rights to Duke Otto of Bavaria, 
who in his turn was taken prisoner by the Hungarian rebels. 
Charles's prospects now improved, and he was enthroned at Buda 
on the 15th of June 1309, though his installation was not re- 
garded as valid till he was crowned with the sacred crown (which 
was at last recovered from the robber-barons) at Szekesfehervar 
on the 27 th of August 13 10. For the next three years Charles 
had to contend with rebellion after rebellion, and it was only 
after his great victory over all the elements of rapine and dis- 
order at Rozgony (June 15,1312) that he was really master in his 
own land. His foreign policy aimed at the aggrandizement of 
his family, but his plans were prudent as well as ambitious, and 
Hungary benefited by them greatly. His most successful 
achievement was the union with Poland for mutual defence 
against the Habsburgs and the Czechs. This was accomplished 
by the convention of Trencsen (1335), confirmed the same year 
at the brilliant congress of Visegrad, where all the princes of 
central Europe met to compose their differences and were 
splendidly entertained during the months of October and 
November. The immediate result of the congress was a combined 
attack by the Magyars and Poles upon the emperor Louis and 
his ally Albert of Austria, which resulted in favour of Charles 
in 1337. Charles's desire to unite the kingdoms of Hungary 
and Naples under the eldest son Louis was frustrated by Venice 
and the pope, from fear lest Hungary might become the dominant 

1 This, at any rate, represents the general verdict of history. 
It is interesting, however, to note that so liberal-minded and shrewd 
a critic of men as King Leopold I. of the Belgians formed a different 
estimate. In a letter of the 18th of November 1836 addressed to 
Princess (afterwards Queen) Victoria he writes: — " History will 
state that Louis XVIII. was a most liberal monarch, reigning with 
great mildness and justice to his end, but that his brother, from his 
despotic and harsh disposition, upset all the other had done, and lost 
the throne. Louis XVIII. was a clever, hard-hearted man, shackled 
by no principle, very proud and false. Charles X. an honest man, 
a kind friend, an honourable master, sincere in his opinions, and 
inclined to do everything that is right. That teaches us what we 
ought to believe in history as it is compiled according to ostensible 
events and results known to the generality of people." 



NAPLES] 



CHARLES I. — II. 



9 2 3 



Adriatic power. He was, however, more than compensated for 
this disappointment by his compact (1339) with his ally and 
brother-in-law, Casimir of Poland, whereby it was agreed that 
Louis should succeed to the Polish throne on the death of the 
childless Casimir. For an account of the numerous important 
reforms effected by Charles see Hungary: History. A states- 
man of the first rank, he not only raised Hungary once more to 
the rank of a great power, but enriched and civilized her. In 
character he was pious, courtly and valiant, popular alike with 
the nobility and the middle classes, whose increasing welfare 
he did so much to promote, and much beloved by the clergy. 
His court was famous throughout Europe as a school of chivalry. 
Charles was married thrice. His first wife was Maria, daughter 
of Duke Casimir of Teschen, whom he wedded in 1306. On her 
death in 13 18 he married Beatrice, daughter of the emperor 
Henry VII. On her decease two years later he gave his hand 
to Elizabeth, daughter of Wladislaus Lokietek, king of Poland. 
Five sons were the fruit of these marriages, of whom three, 
Louis, Andrew and Stephen, survived him. He died on the 16th 
of July 1342, and was laid beside the high altar at Szekesfeh6rvar, 
the ancient burial-place of the Arpads. 

See Bela Kerekgyarto, The Hungarian Royal Court under the 
House of Anjou (Hung.) (Budapest, 1881); Rationes Collectorum 
Pontif. in Hungaria (Budapest, 1887); Diplomas of the Angevin 
Period, edited by Imre Nagy (Hung, and Lat.), vols, i.-iii. (Budapest, 
1878, &c.).. (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES I. (1226-1285), king of Naples and Sicily and 
count of Anjou, was the seventh child of Louis VIII. of France 
and Blanche of Castile. Louis died a few months after Charles's 
birth and was succeeded by his son Louis IX. (St Louis), and on 
the death in 1232 of the third son John, count of Anjou and 
Maine, those fiefs were conferred on Charles. In 1 246 he married 
Beatrice, daughter and heiress of Raymond Berenger V., the 
last count of Provence, and after defeating James I. of Aragon 
and other rivals with the help of his brother the French king, 
he took possession of his new county. In 1 248 he accompanied 
Louis in the crusade to Egypt, but on the defeat of the Crusaders 
he was taken prisoner with his brother. Shortly afterwards 
he was ransomed, and returned to Provence in 1230. During 
his absence several towns had asserted their independence; but 
he succeeded in subduing them without much difficulty and 
gradually suppressed their communal liberties. Charles's 
ambition aimed at wider fields, and when Margaret, countess of 
Flanders, asked help of the French court against the German 
king William of Holland, by whom she had been defeated, he 
gladly accepted her offer of the county of Hainaut in exchange 
for his assistance (1253); this arrangement was, however, 
rescinded by Louis of France, who returned from captivity in 
1254, and Charles gave up Hainaut for an immense sum of 
money. He extended his influence by the subjugation of Mar- 
seilles in 1257, then one of the most important maritime cities 
of the world, and two years later several communes of Pied- 
mont recognized Charles's suzerainty In 1262 Pope Urban IV. 
determined to destroy the power of the Hohenstaufen in Italy, 
and offered the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, in consideration 
of a yearly tribute, to Charles of Anjou, in opposition to Manfred, 
the bastard son of the late emperor Frederick II. The next year 
Charles succeeded in getting himself elected senator of Rome, 
which gave him an advantage in dealing with the pope. After 
long negotiations he accepted the Sicilian and Neapolitan 
crowns, and in 1264 he sent a first expedition of Provencals to 
Italy, he also collected a large army and navy in Provence 
and France with the help of King Louis, and by an alliance with 
the cities of Lombardy was able to send part of his force overland. 
Pope Clement IV. confirmed the Sicilian agreement on conditions 
even more favourable to Charles, who sailed in 1265, and con- 
ferred on the expedition all the privileges of a crusade. After 
narrowly escaping capture by Manfred's fleet he reached Rome 
safely, where he was crowned king of the Two Sicilies. The land 
army arrived soon afterwards, and on the 26th of February 1 266 
Charles encountered Manfred at Benevento, where after a hard- 
fought battle Manfred was defeated and killed, and the whole 



kingdom was soon in Charles's possession. Then Conradin, 
Frederick's grandson and last legitimate descendant of the 
Hohenstaufen, came into Italy, where he found many partisans 
among the Ghibellines of Lombardy and Tuscany, and among 
Manfred's former adherents in the south. He gathered a large 
army consisting partly of Germans and Saracens, but was totally 
defeated by Charles at Tagliacozzo (23rd of August 1268); 
taken prisoner, he was tried as a rebel and executed at Naples. 
Charles, in a spirit of the most vindictive cruelty, had large 
numbers of Conradin's barons put to death and their estates 
confiscated, and the whole population of several towns massacred. 

He was now one of the most powerful sovereigns of Europe, 
for besides ruling over Provence and Anjou and the kingdom 
of the Two Sicilies, he was imperial vicar of Tuscany, lord of 
many cities of Lombardy and Piedmont, and as the pope's 
favourite practically arbiter of the papal states, especially during 
the interregnum between the death of Clement IV. (1268) and 
the election of Gregory X. (1272). But his ambition was by no 
means satisfied, and he even aspired to the crown of the East 
Roman empire. In 1272 he took part with Louis IX. in a 
crusade to north Africa, where the French king died of fever, 
and Charles, after defeating the soldan of Tunis, returned to 
Sicily. The election of Rudolph of Habsburg as German king 
after a long interregnum, and that of Nicholas III. to the Holy 
See (1277), diminished Charles's power, for the new pope set 
himself to compose the difference between Guelphs and Ghibel- 
lines in the Italian cities, but at his death Charles secured the 
election of his henchman Martin IV. (1281), who recommenced 
persecuting the Ghibellines, excommunicated the Greek emperor, 
Michael Palaeologus, proclaimed a crusade against the Greeks, 
filled every appointment in the papal states with Charles's 
vassals, and reappointed the Angevin king senator of Rome. 
But the cruelty of the French rulers of Sicily drove the people 
of the island to despair, and a Neapolitan nobleman, Giovanni da 
Procida, organized the rebellion known as the Sicilian Vespers 
(see Vespers, Sicilian), in which the French in Sicily were all 
massacred or expelled (1282). Charles determined to subjugate 
the island and sailed with his fleet for Messina. The city held 
out until Peter III. of Aragon, whose wife Constance was a 
daughter of Manfred, arrived in Sicily, and a Sicilian-Catalan 
fleet under the Calabrese admiral,' Ruggiero di Lauria, completely 
destroyed that of Charles. " If thou art determined, O God, 
to destroy me," the unhappy Angevin exclaimed, " let my fall 
be gradual !" He was forced to abandon all attempts at 
reconquest, but proposed to decide the question by single 
combat between himself and Peter, to take place at Bordeaux 
under English protection. The Aragonese accepted, but fearing 
treachery, as the French army was in the neighbourhood, he 
failed to appear on the appointed day. In the meanwhile 
Ruggiero di Lauria appeared before Naples and destroyed 
another Angevin fleet commanded by Charles's son, who was 
taken prisoner (May 1 284). Charles came to Naples with a new 
fleet from Provence, and was preparing to invade Sicily again, 
when he contracted a fever and died at Foggia on the 7th of 
January 1285. He was undoubtedly an extremely able soldier 
and a skilful statesman, and much of his legislation shows a 
real political sense; but his inordinate ambition, his oppressive 
methods of government and taxation, and his cruelty created 
enemies on all sides, and led to the collapse of the edifice of 
dominion which he had raised. 

CHARLES II. (1250-1309), king of Naples and Sicily, son of 
Charles I., had been captured by Ruggiero di Lauria in the naval 
battle at Naples in 1284, and when his father died he was still a 
prisoner in the hands of Peter of Aragon. In 1 288 King Edward I. 
of England had mediated to make peace, and Charles was 
liberated on the understanding that he was to retain Naples 
alone, Sicily being left to the Aragonese; Charles was also to 
induce his cousin Charles of Valois to renounce for twenty 
thousand pounds of silver the kingdom of Aragon which had 
been given to him by Pope Martin IV. to punish Peter for having 
invaded Sicily, but which the Valois had never effectively 
occupied. The Angevin king was thereupon set free, leaving 



924 



CHARLES II. 



[NAVARRE 



three of his sons and sixty Provencal nobles as hostages, promis- 
ing to pay 30,000 marks and to return a prisoner if the conditions 
were not fulfilled within three years. He went to Rieti, where 
the new pope Nicholas IV. immediately absolved him from all 
the conditions he had sworn to observe, crowned him king of 
the Two Sicilies (1289), and excommunicated Alphonso, while 
Charles of Valois, in alliance with Castile, prepared to take 
possession of Aragon. Alphonso III , the Aragonese king, being 
hard pressed, had to promise to withdraw the troops he had 
sent to help his brother James in Sicily, to renounce all rights 
over the island, and pay a tribute to the Holy See. But Alphonso 
died childless in 1291 before the treaty could be carried out, and 
James took possession of Aragon, leaving the government of 
Sicily to the third brother Frederick. The new pope Boniface 
VIII., elected in 1294 at Naples under the auspices of King 
Charles, mediated between the latter and James, and a most 
dishonourable treaty was sighed : James was to marry Charles's 
daughter Bianca and was promised the investiture by the pope 
of Sardinia and Corsica, while he was to leave the Angevin a free 
hand in Sicily and even to assist him if the Sicilians resisted. An 
attempt was made to bribe Frederick into consenting to this 
arrangement, but being backed up by his people he refused, and 
was afterwards crowned king of Sicily. The war was fought with 
great fury on land and sea, but Charles, although aided by the 
pope, by Charles of Valois, and by James II. of Aragon, was 
unable to conquer the island, and his son the prince of Taranto 
was taken prisoner at the battle of La Falconara in 1 299. Peace 
was at last made in 1302 at Caltabellotta, Charles II. giving up 
all rights to Sicily and agreeing to the marriage of his daughter 
Leonora to King Frederick; the treaty was ratified by the 
pope in 1303. Charles spent his last years quietly in Naples, 
which city he improved and embellished. He died in August 
1309, and was succeeded by his son Robert. 

Bibliography. — A. de Saint-Priest, Histoire de la conque'te de 
Naples par Charles d'Anjou (4 vols., Paris, 1847-1849), is still of use 
for the documents from the archives of Barcelona, but it needs to 
be collated with more recent works; S. de Sismondi, in vol. ii. of 
his Histoire des republiques italiennes (Brussels, 1838), gives a good 
general sketch of the reigns of Charles I. and II., but is occasionally 
inaccurate as to details; the best authority on the early life of 
Charles I. is R. Sternfeld, Karl von Anjou als Graf von Provence 
(Berlin, 1888) ; Charles's connexion with north Italy is dealt with in 
Merkel's La Dominazione di Carlo d'Angib in Piemonie e in Lornbardia 
(Turin, 1891), while the R. Deputazione di Storia Patria Toscana 
has recently published a Codice diplomatico delle relazioni di Carlo 
d'Angib con la Toscana; the contents of the Angevin archives at 
Naples have been published by Durrien, Archives angevines de Naples 
(Toulouse, 1866-1867). M. Amari's La Guerra del Vespro Sicihano 
(8th ed., Florence, 1876) is a valuable history, but the author is too 
bitterly prejudiced against the French to be quite impartial; his 
work should be compared with L. Cadier's Essai sur l' administration 
du royaume de Sicile sous Charles I et Charles II d'Anjou (Paris, 
1 89 1, Bibl. des ecoles francaises d'Athenes et de Rome, fasc. 59), which 
contains many documents, and tends somewhat to rehabilitate the 
Angevin rule. 

CHARLES II. (1332-1387), called The Bad, king of Navarre 
and count of Evreux, was a son of Jeanne II., queen of Navarre, 
by her marriage with Philip, count of Evreux (d. 1343). Having 
become king of Navarre on Jeanne's death in 1349, he sup- 
pressed a rising at Pampeluna with much cruelty, and by this and 
similar actions thoroughly earned his surname of " The Bad." In 
1352 he married Jeanne (d. 1393), a daughter of John II., king of 
France, a union which made his relationship to the French crown 
still more complicated. Through his mother he was a grandson of 
Louis X. and through his father a great-grandson of Philip III., 
having thus a better claim to the throne of France than Edward 
III. of England; and, moreover, he held lands under the suzerainty 
of the French king, whose son-in-law he now became. Charles 
was a man of great ability, possessing popular manners and con- 
siderable eloquence, but he was singularly unscrupulous, a quality 
which was revealed during the years in which he played an im- 
portant part in the internal affairs of France. Trouble soon arose 
between King John and his son-in-law. The promised dowry had 
not been paid, and the county of Angouleme, which had formerly 
belonged to Jeanne of Navarre, was now in the possession of the 
French king's favourite, the constable Charles la Cerda. In 



January 1354 the constable was assassinated by order of Charles, 
and preparations for war were begun. The king of Navarre , who 
defended this deed, had, however, many friends in France and was 
in communication with Edward III. ; and consequently John was 
forced to make a treaty at Mantes and to compensate him for the 
loss of Angouleme by a large grant of lands, chiefly in Normandy. 
This peace did not last long, and in 1355 John was compelled to 
confirm the treaty of Mantes. Returning to Normandy, Charles 
was partly responsible for some unrest in the duchy, and in April 
1356 he was treacherously seized by the French king at Rouen, 
remaining in captivity until November 1357, when John, after 
his defeat at Poitiers, was a prisoner in England. Charles was 
regarded with much favour in France, and the states-general 
demanded his release, which, however, was effected by a surprise. 
Owing to his popularity he was considered by Etienne Marcel 
and his party as a suitable rival to the dauphin, afterwards King 
Charles V., and on entering Paris he was well received and 
delivered an eloquent harangue to the Parisians. Subsequently 
peace was made with the dauphin, who promised to restore to 
Charles his confiscated estates. This peace was not enduring, and 
as his lands were not given back Charles had some ground for 
complaint. War again broke out, quickly followed by a new 
treaty, after which the king of Navarre took part in suppressing 
the peasant rising known as the Jacquerie. Answering the en- 
treaties of Marcel he returned to Paris on June 1358, and became 
captain-general of the city, which was soon besieged by the 
dauphin. This position, however, did not prevent him from 
negotiating both with the dauphin and with the English; terms 
were soon arranged with the former, and Charles, having lost 
much of his popularity, left Paris just before the murder of 
Marcel in July 1358. He continued his alternate policy of war 
and peace, meanwhile adding if possible by his depredations to 
the misery of France, until the conclusion of the treaty of 
Br6tignyin May 1360 deprived him of the alliance of the English, 
and compelled him to make peace with King John in the following 
October. A new cause of trouble arose when the duchy of 
Burgundy was left without a ruler in November 1361, and was 
claimed by Charles; but, lacking both allies and money, he was 
unable to prevent the French king from seizing Burgundy, while 
he himself returned to Navarre. 

In his own kingdom Charles took some steps to reform the 
financial and judicial administration and so to increase his 
revenue; but he was soon occupied once more with foreign 
entanglements, and in July 1362, in alliance with Peter the Cruel, 
king of Castile, he invaded Aragon, deserting his new ally soon 
afterwards for Peter IV., king of Aragon. Meanwhile the war 
with the dauphin had been renewed. Still hankering after 
Burgundy, Charles saw his French estates again seized; but after 
some desultory warfare, chiefly in Normandy, peace was made 
in March 1365, and he returned to his work of interference in the 
politics of the Spanish kingdoms. In turn he made treaties with 
the kings of Castile and Aragon, who were at war with each 
other; promising to assist Peter the Cruel to regain his throne, 
from which he had been driven in 1366 by his half-brother Henry 
of Trastamara, and then assuring Henry and his ally Peter of 
Aragon that he would aid them to retain Castile. He continued 
this treacherous policy when Edward the Black Prince advanced 
to succour Peter the Cruel; then signed a treaty with Edward 
of England, and then in 1371 allied himself with Charles V. of 
France. His next important move was to offer his assistance to 
Richard II. of England for an attack upon France. About this 
time serious charges were brought against him. Accused of 
attempting to poison the king of France and other prominent 
persons, and of other crimes, his French estates were seized by 
order of Charles V. , and soon afterwards Navarre was invaded by 
the Castilians. Won over by the surrender of Cherbourg in July 
1378, the English under John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, came 
to his aid; but a heavy price had to be paid for the neutrality 
of the king of Castile. After the death of Charles V. in 1380, the 
king of Navarre did not interfere in the internal affairs of France, 
although he endeavoured vainly again to obtain aid from Richard 
II., and to regain Cherbourg. His lands in France were handed 



NAVARRE— SPAIN] 



CHARLES III.— CHARLES II. 



92 5 



over to his eldest son Charles, who governed them with the consent 
of the new king Charles VI. Charles died on the 1st of January 
1387, and many stories are current regarding the manner of his 
death. Froissart relates that he was burned to death through his 
bedclothes catching iire; Secousse says that he died in peace 
with many signs of contrition; another story says he died of 
leprosy; and a popular legend tells how he expired by a divine 
judgment through the burning of the clothes steeped in sulphur 
and spirits in which he had been wrapped as a cure for a loath- 
some disease caused by his debauchery. He had three sons and 
four daughters, and was succeeded by his eldest son Charles; one 
of his daughters, Jeanne, became the wife of Henry IV. of 
England. 

See Jean Froissart, Chroniques, edited by S. Luce and G. Raynaud 
(Paris, 1869-1897); D. F. Secousse, Memoires pour servir d, I'histoire 
de Charles II, rot de Navarre (Paris, 1755-1768); E. Meyer, Charles 
II, rot de Navarre et la Normandie au XIV' slide (Paris, 1898); 
F. T. Perrens, Ulienne Marcel (Paris, 1874) ; R. Delachenal, Premieres 
negotiations de Charles le Mauvais avec les Anglais (Paris, 1900) ; 
and E. Lavisse, Histoire de France, tome iv. (Paris, 1902). 

CHARLES III. (1361-1425), called The Noble, king of Navarre 
and count of Evreux, was the eldest son of Charles II. the Bad, 
king of Navarre, by his marriage with Jeanne, daughter of John 
II., king of France, and was married in 1375 to Leonora (d. 141 5), 
daughter of Henry II., king of Castile. Having passed much of 
his early life in France, he became king of Navarre on the death of 
Charles II. in January 1387, and his reign was a period of peace 
and order, thus contrasting sharply with the long and calamitous 
reign of his father. In 1393 he regained Cherbourg, which had 
been handed over by Charles II. to Richard II. of England, and 
in 1403 he came to an arrangement with the representatives of 
Charles VI. of France concerning the extensive lands which he 
claimed in .that country. Cherbourg was given to the French 
king; certain exchanges of land were made; and in the following 
year Charles III. surrendered the county of Evreux, and was 
created duke of Nemours and made a peer of France. After this 
his only interference in the internal affairs of France was when he 
sought to make peace between the rival factions in that country. 
Charles sought to improve the condition of Navarre by making 
canals and rendering the rivers navigable, and in other ways. 
He died at Olite on the 8th of September 1425 and was buried at 
Pampeluna. After the death of his two sons in 1402 the king 
decreed that his kingdom should pass to his daughter Blanche 
(d. 1441), who took for her second husband John, afterwards 
John II., king of Aragon; and the cortes of Navarre swore to 
recognize Charles (q.v.), prince of Viana, her son by this marriage, 
as king after his mother's death. 

CHARLES (Karl Eitel Zephyrin Ludwig; in Rum. 
Carol), king of Rumania (1839- )> second son of Prince Karl 
Anton of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, was born on the 20th of 
April 1839. He was educated at Dresden (1850-1856), and 
passed through his university course at Bonn. Entering the 
Prussian army in 1857, he won considerable distinction in the 
Danish war of 1864, and received instruction in strategy from 
General von Moltke. He afterwards travelled in France, Italy, 
Spain and Algeria. He was a captain in the 2nd regiment of 
Prussian Dragoon Guards when he was elected hospodar or 
prince of Rumania on the 20th of April 1866, after the compulsory 
abdication of Prince Alexander John Cuza. Regarded at first 
with distrust by Turkey, Russia and Austria, he succeeded in 
gaining general recognition in six months; but he had to con- 
tend for ten years with fierce party struggles between the 
Conservatives and the Liberals. 

During this period, however, Charles displayed great tact in 
his dealings with both parties, and kept his country in the path 
of administrative and economic reform, organizing the army, 
developing the railways, and establishing commercial relations 
with foreign powers. The sympathy of Rumania with France 
in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, and the consequent inter- 
ruption of certain commercial undertakings, led to a hostile 
movement against Prince Charles, which, being fostered by 
Russia, made him resolve to abdicate; and it was with difficulty 
that he was persuaded to remain. In the Russo-Turkish War 



of 1877--78 he joined the Russians before Plevna (q.v.), and 
being placed in command of H the combined Russian and 
Rumanian forces, forced Osman Pasha to surrender. As a con- 
sequence of the prince's vigorous action the independence of 
Rumania, which had been proclaimed in May 1877, was con- 
firmed by various treaties in 1878, and recognized by Great 
Britain, France and Germany in 1880. On the 26th of March 
1881 he was proclaimed king of Rumania, and, with his consort, 
was crowned on the 22nd of May following. From that time he 
pursued a successful career in home and foreign policy, and 
greatly improved the financial amd military position of his 
country; while his appreciation of the fine arts was shown by 
his formation of an important collection of paintings of all 
schools in his palaces at Sinaiia and Bucharest. For a detailed 
account of his reign, see Rumania. On the 1st of November 
1869 he married Princess Elizabeth (q.v.), a daughter of Prince 
Hermann of Wied, widely known under her literary name of 
" Carmen Sylva." As the only child of the marriage, a daughter, 
dded in 1874, the succession was finally settled upon the king's 
nephew, Prince Ferdinand of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, who 
was created prince of Rumania on the 18th of March 1889, 
and married, on the 10th of January 1893, Princess Marie, 
daughter of Alfred, duke of Saxe-Coburg, their children being 
Prince Carol (b. 1893) and Princess Elizabeth (b. 1894). 

The official life of King Charles, mainly his own composition, 
Aus dem Leben Kbnig Karls von Rumanien (Stuttgart, 1894-1900, 
4 vols.), deals mainly with political history. See for an account of 
his domestic life, M. Kremnitz, K6nig Karl von Rumanien. Ein 
Lebensbild (Breslau, 1903). 

CHARLES II. (1661-1700), king of Spain, known among 
Spanish kings as "The Desired "and "The Bewitched," was the 
son of Philip IV. by his second marriage with Maria, daughter 
of the emperor Ferdinand III., his niece. He was born on the 
nth of November 1661, and was the only surviving son of his 
father's two marriages — a child of old age and disease, in 
whom the constant intermarriages of the Habsburgs had de- 
veloped the family type to deformity. His birth was greeted 
with joy by the Spaniards, who feared the dispute as to the 
succession which must have ensued if Philip IV. left no male 
issue. The boy was so feeble that till the age of five or six he 
was fed only from the breast of a nurse. For years afterwards 
it was not thought safe to allow him to walk. That he might not 
be overtaxed he was left entirely uneducated, and his indolence 
was indulged to such an extent that he was not even expected 
to be clean. When his brother, the younger Don John of Austria, 
a natural son of Philip IV., obtained power by exiling the queen 
mother from court he insisted that at least the king's hair should 
be combed. Charles made the malicious remark that nothing 
was safe from Don John — not even vermin. The king was then 
fifteen, and, according to Spanish law, of age. But he never 
became a man in body or mind. The personages who ruled in 
his name arranged a marriage for him with Maria Louisa of 
Orleans. The French princess, a lively young woman of no 
sense, died in the stifling atmosphere of the Spanish court, and 
from the attendance of Spanish doctors. Again his advisers 
arranged a marriage with Maria Ana of Neuburg. The Bavarian 
wife stood the strain and survived him. Both marriages were 
merely political — the first a victory for the French, and the 
second for the Austrian party. France and Austria were alike 
preparing for the day when the Spanish succession would have 
to be fought for. The king was a mere puppet in the hands of 
each alternately. By natural instinct he hated the French, but 
there was no room in his nearly imbecile mind for more thari 
childish superstition, insane pride of birth, and an interest in 
court etiquette. The only touch of manhood was a taste for 
shooting which he occasionally indulged in the preserves of the 
Escorial. In his later days he suffered much pain, and was driven 
wild by the conflict between his wish to transmit his inheritance 
to " the illustrious house of Austria," his own kin, and the belief 
instilled into him by the partisans of the French claimant that 
only the power of Louis XIV. could avert the dismemberment 
of the empire. A silly fanatic made the discovery that the king 
was bewitched, and his confessor Froilan Diaz supported the 



926 



CHARLES III.— IV. 



[SPAIN 



belief. The king was exorcised, and the exorcists of the king- 
dom were called upon to put stringent questions to the devils 
they cast out. The Inquisition interfered, and the dying king 
was driven mad among them. Very near his end he had the 
lugubrious curiosity to cause the coffins of his embalmed an- 
cestors to be opened at the Escorial. The sight of the body of 
his first wife, at whom he also insisted on looking, provoked a 
passion of tears and despair. Under severe pressure from the 
cardinal archbishop of Toledo, Portocarrero, he finally made a 
will in favour of Philip, duke of Anjou, grandson of Louis XIV., 
and died on the 1st of November 1700, after a lifetime of senile 
decay. 

The best picture of Charles II. is to be found in Les Memoires de la 
cour d'Espagne of the Marquis de Villars (London, 1861), and the 
Letters of the Marquise de Villars (Paris, 1868). 

CHARLES III. (1716-^788), king of Spain, born on the 20th 
January 17 16, was the first son of the second marriage of Philip 
V. with Elizabeth Farnese of Parma. It was his good fortune 
to be sent to rule as duke of Parma by right of his mother at the 
age of sixteen, and thus came under more intelligent influence 
than he could have found in Spain. In 1734 he made himself 
master of Naples and Sicily by arms. Charles had, however, no 
military tastes, seldom wore uniform, and could with difficulty 
be persuaded to witness a review. The peremptory action of 
the British admiral commanding in the Mediterranean at the 
approach of the War of the Austrian Succession, who forced 
him to promise to observe neutrality under a threat to bombard 
Naples, made a deep impression on his mind. It gave him a 
feeling of hostility to England which in after-times influenced 
his policy. 

As king of the Two Sicilies Charles began there the work 
of internal reform which he afterwards continued in Spain. 
Foreign ministers who dealt with him agreed that he had no great 
natural ability, but he was honestly desirous to do his duty as 
king, and he showed good judgment in his choice of ministers. 
The chief minister in Naples, Tanucci, had a considerable in- 
fluence over him. On the death of his half-brother Ferdinand VI. 
he became king of Spain, and resigned the Two Sicilies to his 
third son Ferdinand. As king of Spain his foreign policy was 
disastrous. His strong family feeling and his detestation of 
England, which was unchecked after the death of his wife, Maria 
Amelia, daughter of Frederick Augustus II. of Saxony, led him 
into the Family Compact with France. Spain was entangled in 
the close of the Seven Years' War, to her great loss. In 1770 he 
almost ran into another war over the barren Falkland Islands. 
In 1779 he was, somewhat reluctantly, led to join France and 
the American insurgents against England, though he well knew 
that the independence of the English colonies must have a 
ruinous influence on his own American dominions. For his army 
he did practically nothing, and for his fleet very little except 
build fine ships without taking measures to train officers and 
men. 

But his internal government was on the whole beneficial to the 
country. He began by compelling the people of Madrid to give 
up emptying their slops out of the windows, and when they 
objected he said they were like children who cried when their 
faces were washed. In 1766 his attempt to force the Madrilenos 
to adopt the French dress led to a riot during which he did not 
display much personal courage. For a long time after it he 
remained at Aranjuez, leaving the government in the hands 
of his minister Aranda. All his reforms were not of this formal 
kind. Charles was a thorough despot of the benevolent order, 
and had been deeply offended by the real or suspected share of 
the Jesuits in the riot of 1766. He therefore consented to the 
expulsion of the order, and was then the main advocate for its 
suppression. His quarrel with the Jesuits, and the recollection 
of some disputes with the pope he had had when king of Naples, 
turned him towards a general policy of restriction of the over- 
grown power of the church. The number of the idle clergy, and 
more particularly of the monastic orders, was reduced, and the 
Inquisition, though not abolished, was rendered torpid. In the 
meantime much antiquated legislation which tended to restrict 



trade and industry was abolished; roads, canals and drainage 
works were carried out. Many of his paternal ventures led to 
little more than waste of money, or the creation of hotbeds of 
jobbery. Yet on the whole the country prospered. The result 
was largely due to the king, who even when he was i'1-advised 
did at least work steadily at his task of government. His 
example was not without effect on some at least of the nobles. 
In his domestic life King Charles was regular, and was a con- 
siderate master, though he had a somewhat caustic tongue 
and took a rather cynical view of mankind. He was passionately 
fond of hunting. During his later years he had some trouble 
with his eldest son and his daughter-in-law. If Charles had lived 
to see the beginning of the French Revolution he would probably 
have been frightened into reaction. As he died on the 14th of 
December 1788 he left the reputation of a philanthropic and 
" philosophic " king. In spite of his hostility to the Jesuits, his 
dislike of friars in general, and his jealousy of the Inquisition, 
he was a very sincere Roman Catholic, and showed much zeal in 
endeavouring to persuade the pope to proclaim the Immaculate 
Conception as a dogma necessary to salvation. 

See the Reign of Charles III., by M. Danvila y Collado (6 vols.), 
in the Historia General de Espana de la Real Academia de la Historia 
(Madrid, 1892, &c); and F. Rousseau, Regne de Charles III 
d'Espagne (Paris, 1907). 

- CHARLES IV. (i748-i8io),kingof Spain, second son of Charles 
III. and his wife Maria Amelia of Saxony, was born at Portici 
on the nth of November 1748, while his father was king of the 
Two Sicilies. The elder brother was set aside as imbecile and 
epileptic. Charles had inherited a great frame and immense 
physical strength from the Saxon line of his mother. When 
young he was fond of wrestling with the strongest countrymen 
he could find. In character he was not malignant, but he was 
intellectually torpid, and of a credulity which almost passes 
belief. His wife, Maria Luisa of Parma, his first cousin, a 
thoroughly coarse and vicious woman, ruled him completely, 
though he was capable of obstinacy at times. During his father's 
lifetime he was led by her into court intrigues which aimed 
at driving the king's favourite minister, Floridablanca, from 
office, and replacing him by Aranda, the chief of the "Aragonese" 
party. After he succeeded to the throne in 1788 his one serious 
occupation was hunting. Affairs were left to be directed by his 
wife and her lover Godoy (q.v.). For Godoy the king had an 
unaffected liking, and the lifelong favour he showed him is almost 
pathetic. When terrified by the French Revolution he turned 
to the Inquisition to help him against the party which would have 
carried the reforming policy of Charles III. much further. But 
he was too slothful to have more than a passive part in the 
direction of his own government. He simply obeyed the impulse 
given him by the queen and Godoy. If he ever knew his wife's 
real character he thought it more consistent with his dignity 
to shut his eyes. For he had a profound belief in his divine right 
and the sanctity of his person. If he understood that his king- 
dom was treated as a mere dependence by France, he also thought 
it due to his " face " to make believe that he was a powerful 
monarch. Royalty never wore a more silly aspect than in the 
person of Charles IV., and it is highly credible that he never 
knew what his wife was, or what was the position of his kingdom. 
When he was told that his son Ferdinand was appealing to the 
emperor Napoleon against Godoy, he took the side of the favourite. 
When the populace rose at Aranjuez in 1808 he abdicated to save 
the minister. He took refuge in France, and when he and 
Ferdinand were both prisoners of Napoleon's, he was with 
difficulty restrained from assaulting his son. Then he abdicated 
in favour of Napoleon, handing over his people like a herd of 
cattle. He accepted a pension from the French emperor and 
spent the rest of his life between his wife and Godoy. He died 
at Rome on the 20th of January 1819, probably without having 
once suspected that he had done anything unbecoming a king 
by divine right and a gentleman. 

See Historia del Reinado de Carlos IV., by General Gomez de 
Arteche (3 vols.), in the Historia General de Espana de la Real 
Academia de la Historia (Madrid, 1892, &c). 



SWEDEN] 



CHARLES IX.— X. 



927 



CHARLES IX. (1550-1611), king of Sweden, was the youngest 
son of Gustavus Vasa and Margareto Lejonhufrud. By his 
father's will he got, by way of appanage, the duchy of Soderman- 
land, which included the provinces of Nerike and Vermland; 
but he did not come into actual possession of them till after the 
fall of Eric XIV. (1569). In 1568 he was the real leader of the 
rebellion against Eric, but took no part in the designs of his 
brother John against the unhappy king after his deposition. 
Indeed, Charles's relations with John III. were always more or 
less strained. He had no sympathy with John's high-church 
tendencies on the one hand, and he sturdily resisted all the king's 
endeavours to restrict his authority as duke of Sodermanland 
(Sudermania) on the other. The nobility and the majority of 
the Riksdag supported John, however, in his endeavours to unify 
the realm, and Charles had consequently (1587) to resign his 
pretensions to autonomy within his duchy; but, fanatical 
Calvinist as he was, on the religious question he was immovable. 
The matter came to a crisis on the death of John III. (1592). 
The heir to the throne was John's eldest son, Sigismund, already 
king of Poland and a devoted Catholic. The fear lest Sigismund 
might re-catholicize the land alarmed the Protestant majority 
in Sweden, and Charles came forward as their champion, and also 
as the defender of the Vasa dynasty against foreign interference. 
It was due entirely to him that Sigismund was forced to confirm 
the resolutions of the council of Upsala, thereby recognizing 
the fact that Sweden was essentially a Protestant state (see 
Sweden: History). In the ensuing years Charles's task was 
extraordinarily difficult. He had steadily to oppose Sigismund 's 
reactionary tendencies; he had also to curb the nobility, which 
he did with cruel rigour. Necessity compelled him to work 
rather with the people than the gentry; hence it was that the 
Riksdag assumed under his government a power and an im- 
portance which it had never possessed before. In 1595 the 
Riksdag of Soderkoping elected Charles regent, and his attempt 
to force Klas Flemming, governor of Finland, to submit to his 
authority, rather than to that of the king, provoked a civil war. 
Technically Charles was, without doubt, guilty of high treason, 
and the considerable minority of all classes which adhered to 
Sigismund on his landing in Sweden in 1598 indisputably behaved 
like loyal subjects. But Sigismund was both an alien and a 
heretic to the majority of the Swedish nation, and his formal 
deposition by the Riksdag in 1599 was, in effect, a natural vindica- 
tion and legitimation of Charles's position. Finally, the diet of 
Linkoping (Feb. 24, 1600) declared that Sigismund and his 
posterity had forfeited the Swedish throne, and, passing over 
duke John, the second son of John III., a youth of ten, recognized 
duke Charles as their sovereign under the title of Charles IX. 

Charles's short reign was an uninterrupted warfare. The hos- 
tility of Poland and the break up of Russia involved him in two 
overseas contests for the possession of Livonia and Ingria, 
while his pretensions to Lapland brought uponjiim a war with 
Denmark in the last year of his reign. In all these struggles 
he was more or less unsuccessful, owing partly to the fact that 
he had to do with superior generals (e.g. Chodkiewicz and 
Christian IV.) and partly to sheer ill-luck. Compared with his 
foreign policy, the domestic policy of Charles IX. was com- 
paratively unimportant. It aimed at confirming and supple- 
menting what had already been done during his regency. Not 
till the 6th of March 1604, after Duke John had formally 
renounced his rights to the throne, did Charles IX. begin to style 
himself king. The first deed in which the title appears is dated 
the 20th of March 1604; but he was not crowned till the 15th of 
March 1607. Four and a half years later Charles IX. died at 
Nykbping (Oct. 30, 161 1). As a ruler he is the link between 
his great father and his still greater son. He consolidated the 
work of Gustavus Vasa, the creation of a great Protestant state: 
he prepared the way for the erection of the Protestant empire 
of Gustavus Adolphus. Swedish historians have been excusably 
indulgent to the father of their greatest ruler. Indisputably 
Charles was cruel, ungenerous and vindictive; yet he seems, 
at all hazards, strenuously to have endeavoured to do his duty 
during a period of political and religious transition, and, despite 



his violence and brutality, possessed many of the qualities of a 
wise and courageous statesman. By his first wife Marie, daughter 
of the elector palatine Louis VI., he had six children, of whom 
only one daughter, Catherine, survived; by his second wife, 
Christina, daughter of Adolphus, duke of Holstein-Gottorp, 
he had five children, including Gustavus Adolphus and Charles 
Philip, duke of Finland. 

See Sveriges Historia, vol. iii. (Stockholm, 1878) ; Robert Nisbet 
Bain, Scandinavia (Cambridge, 1905), caps. 5-7. (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES X. [Charles Gustavus] (1622-1660), king of 
Sweden, son of John Casimir, count palatine of Zweibriicken, 
and Catherine, sister of Gustavus Adolphus, was born at Nykop- 
ing Castle on the 8th of November 1622. He learnt the art of 
war under the great Lennart Torstensson, being present at the 
second battle of Breitenfeld and at Jankowitz. From 1646 
to 1648 he frequented the Swedish court. It was supposed that 
he would marry the queen regnant, Christina, but her unsur- 
mountable objection to wedlock put an end to these anticipations, 
and to compensate her cousin for a broken half-promise she 
declared him (1649) her successor, despite the opposition of the 
senate headed by the venerable Axel Oxenstjerna. In 1648 he 
was appointed generalissimo of the Swedish forces in Germany. 
The conclusion of the treaties of Westphalia prevented him from 
winning the military laurels he so ardently desired, but as the 
Swedish plenipotentiary at the executive congress of Nuremberg, 
he had unrivalled opportunities of learning diplomacy, in which 
science he speedily became a past-master. As the recognized 
heir to the throne, his position on his return to Sweden was not 
without danger, for the growing discontent with the queen 
turned the eyes of thousands to him as a possible deliverer. 
He therefore withdrew to the isle of Oland till the abdication of 
Christina (June 5, 1654) called him to the throne. 

The beginning of his reign was devoted to the healing of 
domestic discords, and the rallying of all the forces of the nation 
round his standard for a new policy of conquest. He contracted 
a political marriage (Oct. 24, 1654) with Hedwig Leonora, the 
daughter of Frederick III., duke of Holstein-Gottorp, by way of 
securing a future ally against Denmark. The two great pressing 
national questions, war and the restitution of the alienated crown 
lands, were duly considered at the Riksdag which assembled 
at Stockholm in March 1655. The war question was decided in 
three days by a secret committee presided over by the king, who 
easily persuaded the delegates that a war with Poland was 
necessary and might prove very advantageous; but the con- 
sideration of the question of the subsidies due to the crown 
for military purposes was postponed to the following Riksdag 
(see Sweden: History). On the 10th of July Charles quitted 
Sweden to engage in his Polish adventure. By the time war was 
declared he had at his disposal 50,000 men and 50 warships. 
Hostilities had already begun with the occupation of Dunaburg 
(Dvinsk) in Polish Livonia by the Swedes (July 1, 1655), and 
the Polish army encamped among the marshes of the Netze 
concluded a convention (July 25) whereby the palatinates of 
Posen and Kalisz placed themselves under the protection of the 
Swedish king. Thereupon the Swedes entered Warsaw without 
opposition and occupied the whole of Great Poland. The Polish 
king, John Casimir, fled to Silesia. Meanwhile Charles pressed 
on towards Cracow, which was captured after a two months' 
siege. The fall of Cracow extinguished the last hope of the 
boldest Pole; but before the end of the year an extraordinary 
reaction began in Poland itself. On the 18th of October the 
Swedes invested the fortress-monastery of Czenstochowa, but 
the place was heroically defended; and after a seventy days' 
siege the besiegers were compelled to retire with great loss. 

This astounding success elicited an outburst of popular 
enthusiasm which gave the war a national and religious character. 
The tactlessness of Charles, the rapacity of his generals, the 
barbarity of his mercenaries, his refusal to legalize his position 
by summoning the Polish diet, his negotiations for the partition 
of the very state he affected to befriend, awoke the long slumber- 
ing public spirit of the country. In the beginning of 1656 John 
Casimir returned from exile and the Polish army was reorganized 



928 



CHARLES X. 



[SWEDEN 



and increased. By this time Charles had discovered that it 
was easier to defeat the Poles than to conquer Poland. His 
chief object, the conquest of Prussia, was still unaccomplished, 
and a new foe arose in the elector of Brandenburg, alarmed by 
the ambition of the Swedish king. Charles forced the elector, 
indeed, at the point of the sword to become his ally and 
vassal (treaty of Konigsberg, Jan. 17, 1656); but the Polish 
national rising now imperatively demanded his presence in the 
south. For weeks he scoured the interminable snow-covered 
plains of Poland in pursuit of the Polish guerillas, penetrating 
as far south as Jaroslau in Galicia, by which time he had lost 
two-thirds of his 15,000 men with no apparent result. His 
retreat from Jaroslau to Warsaw, with the fragments of his host, 
amidst three converging armies, in a marshy forest region, 
intersected in every direction by well-guarded rivers, was one 
of his most brilliant achievements. But his necessities were 
overwhelming. On the 21st of June Warsaw was retaken by 
the Poles, and four days later Charles was obliged to purchase 
the assistance of Frederick William by the treaty of Marienburg. 
On July 18-20 the combined Swedes and Brandenburgers, 
18,000 strong, after a three days' battle, defeated John Casimir's 
army of 100,000 at Warsaw and reoccupied the Polish capital; 
but this brilliant feat of arms was altogether useless, and when 
the suspicious attitude of Frederick William compelled the 
Swedish king at last to open negotiations with the Poles, they 
refused the terms offered, the war was resumed, and Charles 
concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with the elector 
of Brandenburg (treaty of Labiau, Nov. 20) whereby it was 
agreed that Frederick William and his heirs should henceforth 
possess the full sovereignty of East Prussia. 

This was an essential modification of Charles's Baltic policy; 
but the alliance of the elector had now become indispensable 
on almost any terms. So serious, indeed, were the difficulties 
of Charles X. in Poland that it was with extreme satisfaction 
that he received the tidings of the Danish declaration of war 
(June 1, 1657). The hostile action of Denmark enabled him 
honourably to emerge from the inglorious Polish imbroglio, and 
he was certain of the zealous support of his own people. He had 
learnt from Torstensson that Denmark was most vulnerable 
if attacked from the south, and, imitating the strategy of his 
master, he fell upon her with a velocity which paralysed resist- 
ance. At the end of June 1657, at the head of 8000 seasoned 
veterans, he broke up from Bromberg in Prussia and reached 
the borders of Holstein on the 18th of July. The Danish army 
at once dispersed and the duchy of Bremen was recovered by 
the Swedes, who in the early autumn swarmed over Jutland and 
firmly established themselves in the duchies. But the fortress 
of Fredriksodde (Fredericia) held Charles's little army at bay 
from mid-August to mid-October, while the fleet of Denmark, 
after a stubborn two days' battle, compelled the Swedish fleet 
to abandon its projected attack on the Danish islands. The 
position of the Swedish king had now become critical. In July 
an offensive and defensive alliance was concluded between Den- 
mark and Poland. Still more ominously, the elector of Branden- 
burg, perceiving Sweden to be in difficulties, joined the league 
against her and compelled Charles to accept the proffered 
mediation of Cromwell and Mazarin. The negotiations foundered, 
however, upon the refusal of Sweden to refer the points in 
dispute to a general peace-congress, and Charles was still further 
encouraged by the capture of Fredriksodde (Oct. 23-24), 
whereupon he began to make preparations for conveying his 
troops over to Funen in transport vessels. But soon another 
and cheaper expedient presented itself. In the middle of 
December 1657 began the great frost which was to be so fatal 
to Denmark. In a few weeks the cold had grown so intense that 
e^en the freezing of an arm of the sea with so rapid a current as 
the Little Belt became a conceivable possibility; and hence- 
forth meteorological observations formed an essential part of 
the strategy of the Swedes. On the 28th of January 1658, 
Charles X. arrived at Haderslev (Hadersleben) in South Jutland, 
when it was estimated that in a couple of days the ice of the 
Little Belt would be firm enough to bear even the passage of a 



mail-clad host. The cold during the night of the 20th of January 
was most severe; and early in the morning of the 30th the 
Swedish king gave the order to start, the horsemen dismounting 
where the ice was weakest, and cautiously leading their horses 
as far apart as possible, when they swung into their saddles 
again, closed their ranks and made a dash for the shore. The 
Danish troops lining the opposite coast were quickly over- 
powered, and the whole of Funen was won with the loss of only 
two companies of cavalry, which disappeared under the ice 
while fighting with the Danish left wing. Pursuing his irresistible 
march, Charles X., with his eyes fixed steadily on Copenhagen, 
resolved to cross the frozen Great Belt also. After some hesita- 
tion, he accepted the advice of his chief engineer officer Eric 
Dahlberg, who acted as pioneer throughout and chose the more 
circuitous route from Svendborg, by the islands of Langeland, 
Laaland and Falster, in preference to the direct route from 
Nyborg to Korsor, which would have been across a broad, 
almost uninterrupted expanse of ice. Yet this second adventure 
was not embarked upon without much anxious consideration. 
A council of war, which met at two o'clock in the morning to 
consider the practicability of Dahlberg's proposal, at once 
dismissed it as criminally hazardous. Even the king wavered 
for an instant; but, Dahlberg persisting in his opinion, Charles 
overruled the objections of the commanders. On the night of 
the 5 th of February the transit began, the cavalry leading the 
way through the snow-covered ice, which quickly thawed 
beneath the horses' hoofs so that the infantry which followed 
after had to wade through half an ell of sludge, fearing every 
moment lest the rotting ice should break beneath their feet. 
At three o'clock in the afternoon, Dahlberg leading the way, 
the army reached Grimsted in Laaland without losing a man 
On the 8th of February Charles reached Falster. On the nth 
he stood safely on the s6il of Sjaelland (Zealand). Not without 
reason did the medal struck to commemorate " the glorious 
transit of the Baltic Sea " bear the haughty inscription: Natura 
hoc debuit uni. An exploit unique in history had been achieved. 
The crushing effect of this unheard-of achievement on the 
Danish government found expression in the treaties of Taastrup 
(Feb. 18) and Roskilde (Feb. 26, 1658), whereby Denmark 
sacrificed nearly half her territory to save the rest (see 
Denmark: History). But even this was not enough for the 
conqueror. Military ambition and greed of conquest moved 
Charles X. to what, divested of all its pomp and circumstance, 
was an outrageous act of political brigandage. At a council held 
at Gottorp (July 7), Charles X. resolved to wipe from the map 
of Europe an inconvenient rival, and without any warning, in 
defiance of all international equity, let loose his veterans upon 
Denmark a second time. For the details of this second struggle, 
with the concomitant diplomatic intervention of the western 
powers, see Denmark: History, and Sweden: History. Only 
after great hesitation would Charles X. consent to reopen 
negotiations with Denmark direct, at the same time proposing 
to exercise pressure upon the enemy by a simultaneous winter 
campaign in Norway. Such an enterprise necessitated fresh 
subsidies from his already impoverished people, and obliged 
him in December 1659 to cross over to Sweden to meet the 
estates, whom he had summoned to Gothenburg. The lower 
estates murmured at the imposition of fresh burdens; and 
Charles had need of all his adroitness to persuade them that his 
demands were reasonable and necessary. At the very beginning 
of the Riksdag, in January 1660, it was noticed that the king 
was ill; but he spared himself as little in the council-chamber 
as in the battle-field, till death suddenly overtook him on the 
night of the 13 th of February 1660, in his thirty-eighth year. 
The abrupt cessation of such an inexhaustible fount of enterprise 
and energy was a distinct loss to Sweden; and signs are not 
wanting that, in his latter years, Charles had begun to feel the 
need and value of repose. Had he lived long enough to overcome 
his martial ardour, and develop and organize the empire he 
helped to create, Sweden might perhaps have remained a great 
power to this day. Even so she owes her natural frontiers in 
the Scandinavian peninsula to Charles X. 



SWEDEN] 

See Martin Veibull, Sveriges Storhedstid (Stockholm, 1881); 
Frederick Ferdinand Carlson, Sveriges Historia under Konungarne af 
Pfalziska Huset (Stockholm, 1 883-1 885) ; E. Haumant, La Guerre du 
nord et la paix d'Oliva (Paris, 1893); Robert Nisbet Bam, Scandi- 
navia (Cambridge, 1905) ; G. Jones, The Diplomatic Relations 
between Cromwell and Charles X (Lincoln, Nebraska, 1897). (R.N.B.) 

CHARLES XI. (1655-1697), king of Sweden, the only son of 
Charles X., and Hedwig Leonora of Holstein-Gottorp, was born 
in the palace at Stockholm, on the 24th of November 1655. 
His father, who died when the child was in his fourth year, 
left the care of his education to the regents whom he had ap- 
pointed. So shamefully did they neglect their duty that when, 
at the age of seventeen, Charles XL attained his majority, 
he was ignorant of the very rudiments of state-craft and almost 
illiterate. Yet those nearest to him had great hopes of him. 
He was known to be truthful, upright and God-fearing; if he 
had neglected his studies it was to devote himself to manly 
sports and exercises; and in the pursuit of his favourite pastime, 
bear-hunting, he had already given proofs of the most splendid 
courage. It was the general disaster produced by the speculative 
policy of his former guardians which first called forth his sterling 
qualities and hardened him into a premature manhood. With 
indefatigable energy he at once attempted to grapple with the 
difficulties of the situation, waging an almost desperate struggle 
with sloth, corruption and incompetence. Amidst universal 
anarchy, the young king, barely twenty years of age, inex- 
perienced, ill-served, snatching at every expedient, worked day 
and night in his newly-formed camp in Scania (Skane) to arm 
the nation for its mortal struggle. The victory of Fyllebro 
(Aug. 17, 1676), when Charles and his commander-in-chief 
S. G. Helmfeld routed a Danish division, was the first gleam 
of good luck, and on the 4th of December, on the tableland 
of Helgonaback, near Lund, the young Swedish monarch defeated 
Christian V. of Denmark, who also commanded his army in 
person. After a ferocious contest, the Danes were practically 
annihilated. The battle of Lund was, relatively to the number 
engaged, one of the bloodiest engagements of modern times. 
More than half the combatants (8357, of whom 3000 were 
Swedes) actually perished on the battle-field. All the Swedish 
commanders showed remarkable ability, but the chief glory 
of the day indisputably belongs to Charles XL This great victory 
restored to the Swedes their self-confidence and prestige. In 
the following year, Charles with 9000 men routed 12,000 Danes 
near Malmo (July 15, 1678). This proved to be the last pitched 
battle of the war, the Danes never again venturing to attack 
their once more invincible enemy in the open field. In 1679 Louis 
XIV. dictated the terms of a general pacification, and Charles XL, 
who bitterly resented " the insufferable tutelage " of the French 
king, was forced at last to acquiesce in a peace which at least 
left his empire practically intact. Charles devoted the rest of his 
life to the gigantic task of rehabilitating Sweden by means of a 
reduktion, or recovery of alienated crown lands, a process which 
involved the examination of every title deed in the kingdom, 
and resulted in the complete readjustment of the finances. 
But vast as it was, the reduktion represents only a tithe of Charles 
XL 's immense activity. The constructive part of his administra- 
tion was equally thorough-going, and entirely beneficial. Here, 
too, everything was due to his personal initiative. Finance, 
commerce, the national armaments by sea and land, judicial 
procedure, church government, education, even art and science — 
everything, in short — emerged recast from his shaping hand. 
Charles XL died on the 5th of April 1697, in his forty-first year. 
By his beloved consort Ulrica Leonora of Denmark, from the 
shock of whose death in July 1693 he never recovered, he had 
seven children, of whom only three survived him, a son Charles, 
and two daughters, Hedwig Sophia, duchess of Holstein, and 
Ulrica Leonora, who ultimately succeeded her brother on the 
Swedish throne. After Gustavus Vasa and Gustavus Adolphus 
Charles XL was, perhaps, the greatest of all the kings of Sweden. 
His modest, homespun figure has indeed been unduly eclipsed by 
the brilliant and colossal shapes of his heroic father and his 
meteoric son; yet in reality Charles XL is far worthier of 
admiration than either Charles X. or Charles XII. He was in 



CHARLES XL— XII. 



929 



an eminent degree a great master-builder. He found Sweden 
in ruins, and devoted his whole life to laying the solid founda- 
tions of a new order of things which, in its essential features, 
has endured to the present day. 

See Martin Veibull, Sveriges Storhedstid (Stockholm, 1881); 
Frederick Ferdinand Carlson, Sveriges Historia under Konungarne af 
Pfalziska Huset (Stockholm, 1883-1885); Robert Nisbet Bain, 
Scandinavia (Cambridge, 1905); O. Sjogren, Karl den Elfte och 
Svenska Folket (Stockholm, 1897); S. Jacobsen, Den nordiske 
Kriegs Kronicke, 1675-1679 (Copenhagen, 1897); J. A. de Mesmes 
d'Avaux, Neeociations du comte d'Avaux, 1603, 1697, 1698 (Utrecht, 
1882, &c). (R- N. B.) 

CHARLES XII. ( 1682-1 7 1 8) , king of Sweden, the only surviving 
son of Charles XL and Ulrica Leonora, daughter of Frederick III. 
of Denmark, was born on the 17th of June 1682. He was care- 
fully educated by excellent tutors under the watchful eyes of his 
parents. His natural parts were excellent; and a strong bias 
in the direction of abstract thought, and mathematics in particular, 
was noticeable at an early date. His memory was astonishing. 
He could translate Latin into Swedish or German, or Swedish 
or German into Latin at sight. Charles XL personally supervised 
his son's physical training. He was taught to ride before he was 
four, at eight was quite at home in his saddle, and when only 
eleven, brought down his first bear at a single shot. As he grew 
older his father took him on all his rounds, reviewing troops, 
inspecting studs, foundries, dockyards and granaries. Thus the 
lad was gradually initiated into all the minutiae of administration. 
The influence of Charles XL over his son was, indeed, far greater 
than is commonly supposed, and it accounts for much in Charles 
XII. 's character which is otherwise inexplicable, for instance 
his precocious reserve and taciturnity, his dislike of everything 
French, and his inordinate contempt for purely diplomatic 
methods. On the whole, his early training was admirable; but 
the young prince was not allowed the opportunity of gradually 
gaining experience under his guardians. At the Riksdag assembled 
at Stockholm in 1697, the estates, jealous of the influence of the 
regents, offered full sovereignty to the young monarch, the senate 
acquiesced, and, after some hesitation, Charles at last declared 
that he could not resist the urgent appeal of- his subjects and 
would take over the government of the realm " in God's name." 
The subsequent coronation was marked by portentous novelties, 
the most significant of which was the king's omission to take 
the usual coronation oath, which omission was interpreted to 
mean that he considered himself under no obligation to his 
subjects. The general opinion of the young king was, however, 
still favourable. His conduct was evidently regulated by strict 
principle and not by mere caprice. His refusal to counte- 
nance torture as an instrument of judicial investigation, on the 
ground that " confessions so extorted give no sure criteria for 
forming a judgment," showed him to be more humane as well 
as more enlightened than the majority of his council, which had 
defended the contrary opinion. His intense application to affairs 
is noted by the English minister, John Robinson (1650-1723), 
who informed his court that there was every prospect of a happy 
reign in Sweden, provided his majesty were well served and did 
not injure his health by too much work. 

The coalition formed against Sweden by Johann Reinhold 
Patkul, which resulted in the outbreak of the Great Northern War 
(1699) , abruptly put an end to Charles XII.'s political apprentice- 
ship, and forced into his hand the sword he was never again to 
relinquish. The young king resolved to attack the nearest 
of ■ his three enemies — Denmark — first. The timidity of the 
Danish admiral Ulrik C. Gyldenlove, and the daring of Charles, 
who forced his nervous and protesting admiral to attempt the 
passage of the eastern channel of the Sound, the dangerous 
flinterend, hitherto reputed to be unnavigable, enabled the Swedish 
king to effect a landing at Humleback in Sjaelland (Zealand), 
a few miles north of Copenhagen (Aug. 4, 1700). He now 
hoped to accomplish what his grandfather, fifty years before, had 
vainly attempted — the destruction of the Danish-Norwegian 
monarchy by capturing its capital. But for once prudential 
considerations prevailed, and the short and bloodless war 
was terminated by the peace of Travendal (Aug. 18), whereby 



930 



CHARLES XII. 



[SWEDEN 



Frederick IV. conceded full sovereignty to Charles's ally and 
kinsman the duke of Gottorp, besides paying him an indemnity 
of 200,000 rix-dollars and solemnly engaging to commit no 
hostilities against Sweden in future. From Sjaelland Charles 
now hastened to Livonia with 8000 men. On the 6th of October 
he had reached Pernau, with the intention of first relieving Riga, 
but, hearing that Narva was in great straits, he decided to turn 
northwards against the tsar. He set out for Narva on the 13th 
of November, against the advice of all his generals, who feared 
the effect on untried troops of a week's march through a wasted 
land, along boggy roads guarded by no fewer than three formid- 
able passes which a little engineering skill could easily have 
made impregnable. Fortunately, the two first passes were 
unoccupied; and the third, Pyhajoggi, was captured by Charles, 
who with 400 horsemen put 6000 Russian cavalry to flight. 
On the 19th of November the little army reached Lagena, a 
village about 9 m. from Narva, whence it signalled its approach 
to the beleaguered fortress, and early on the following morning 
it advanced in battle array. The attack on the Russian fortified 
camp began at two o'clock in the afternoon, in the midst of a 
violent snowstorm; and by nightfall the whole position was in 
the hands of the Swedes: the Russian army was annihilated. 
The triumph was as cheap as it was crushing; it cost Charles 
less than 2000 men. 

After Narva, Charles XII. stood at the parting of ways. His 
best advisers urged him to turn all his forces against the panic- 
stricken Muscovites; to go into winter-quarters amongst them 
and live at their expense; to fan into a flame the smouldering 
discontent caused by the reforms of Peter the Great, and so 
disable Russia for some time to come. But Charles's determina- 
tion promptly to punish the treachery of Augustus prevailed 
over every other consideration. It is easy from the vantage- 
point of two centuries to criticize Charles XII. for neglecting 
the Russians to pursue the Saxons; but at the beginning of the 
18th century his decision was natural enough. The real question 
was, which of the two foes was the more dangerous, and Charles 
had many reasons to think the civilized and martial Saxons far 
more formidable than the imbecile Muscovites. Charles also 
rightly felt that he could never trust the treacherous Augustus 
to remain quiet, even if he made peace with him. To leave 
such a foe in his rear, while he plunged into the heart of Russia 
would have been hazardous indeed. From this point of view 
Charles's whole Polish policy, which has been blamed so long 
and so loudly— the policy of placing a nominee of his own on the 
Polish throne — takes quite another complexion: it was a policy 
not of overvaulting ambition, but of prudential self-defence. 

First, however, Charles cleared Livonia of the invader (July 
1 701), subsequently occupying the duchy of Courland and 
converting it into a Swedish governor-generalship. In January 
1702 Charles established himself at Bielowice in Lithuania, and, 
after issuing a proclamation declaring that " the elector of 
Saxony " had forfeited the Polish crown, set out for Warsaw, 
which he reached on the 14th of May. The cardinal-primate 
was then sent for and commanded to summon a diet, for the 
purpose of deposing Augustus. A fortnight later Charles quitted 
Warsaw, to seek the elector; on the 2nd of July routed the 
combined Poles and Saxons at Klissow; and three weeks later, 
captured the fortress of Cracow by an act of almost fabulous 
audacity. Thus, within four months of the opening of the 
campaign, the Polish capital and the coronation city were both 
in the possession of the Swedes. After Klissow, Augustus made 
every effort to put an end to the war, but Charles would not even 
consider his offers. By this time, too, he had conceived a passion 
for the perils and adventures of warfare. His character was 
hardening, and he deliberately adopted the most barbarous 
expedients for converting the Augustan Poles to his views. 
Such commands as " ravage, singe, and burn all about, and 
reduce the whole district to a wilderness! " " sweat contribu- 
tions well out of them!" "rather let the innocent suffer than 
the guilty escape!" became painfully frequent in the mouth 
of the young commander, not yet 21, who was far from being 
naturally cruel. 



The campaign of 1703 was remarkable for Charles's victory 
at Pultusk (April 21) and the long siege of Thorn, which occupied 
him eight months but cost him only 50 men. On the 2nd of 
July 1704, with the assistance of a bribing fund, Charles's 
ambassador at Warsaw, Count Arvid Bernard Horn, succeeded 
in forcing through the election of Charles's candidate to the 
Polish throne, Stanislaus Leszczynski, who could not be crowned 
however till the 24th of September 1705, by which time the 
Saxons had again been defeated at Punitz. From the autumn 
of 1705 to the spring of 1706, Charles was occupied in pursuing 
the Russian auxiliary army under Ogilvie through the forests 
of Lithuania. On the 5 th of August, he recrossed the Vistula 
and established himself in Saxony, where his presence in the 
heart of Europe, at the very crisis of the war of the Spanish 
Succession, fluttered all the western diplomats. The allies, 
in particular, at once suspected that Louis XIV. had bought 
the Swedes. Marlborough was forthwith sent from the Hague 
to the castle of Altranstadt near Leipzig, where Charles had 
fixed his headquarters, " to endeavour to penetrate the designs " 
of the king of Sweden. He soon convinced himself that western 
Europe had nothing to fear from Charles, and that no bribes 
were necessary to turn the Swedish arms from Germany to 
Russia. Five months later (Sept. 1707) Augustus was 
forced to sign the peace of Altranstadt, whereby he resigned the 
Polish throne and renounced every anti-Swedish alliance. 
Charles's departure from Saxony was delayed for twelve months 
by a quarrel with the emperor. The court of Vienna had treated 
the Silesian Protestants with tyrannical severity, in direct 
contravention of the treaty of Osnabriick, of which Sweden was 
one of the guarantors; and Charles demanded summary and 
complete restitution so dictatorially that the emperor prepared 
for war. But the allies interfered in Charles's favour, lest he 
might be tempted to aid France, and induced the emperor to 
satisfy all the Swedish king's demands, the maritime Powers 
at the same time agreeing to guarantee the provisions of the 
peace of Altranstadt. 

Nothing now prevented Charles from turning his victorious 
arms against the tsar; and on the 13th of August 1707, he 
evacuated Saxony at the head of the largest host he ever com- 
manded, consisting of 24,000 horse and 20,000 foot. Delayed 
during the autumn months in Poland by the tardy arrival of 
reinforcements from Pomerania, it was not till November 1707 
that Charles was able to take the field. On New Year's Day 
1708 he crossed the Vistula, though the ice was in a dangerous 
condition. On the 4th of July 1 708 he cut in two the line of the 
Russian army, 6 m. long, which barred his progress on the Wabis, 
near Holowczyn, and compelled it to retreat. The victory of 
Holowczyn, memorable besides as the last pitched battle won 
by Charles XII., opened up the way to the Dnieper. The 
Swedish army now began to suffer severely, bread and fodder 
running short, and the soldiers subsisting entirely on captured 
bullocks. The Russians slowly retired before the invader, 
burning and destroying everything in his path. On the 20th of 
December it was plain to Charles himself that Moscow was 
inaccessible. But the idea of a retreat was intolerable to him, 
so he determined to march southwards instead of northwards 
as suggested by his generals, and join his forces with those of the 
hetman of the Dnieperian Cossacks, Ivan Mazepa, who had 
100,000 horsemen and a fresh and fruitful land at his disposal. 
Short of falling back upon Livonia, it was the best plan adoptable 
in the circumstances, but it was rendered abortive by Peter's 
destruction of Mazepa's capital Baturin, so that when Mazepa 
joined Charles at Horki, on the 8th of November 1708, it was as a 
ruined man with little more than 1300 personal attendants (see 
Mazepa-Koledinsky). A still more serious blow was the 
destruction of the relief army which Levenhaupt was bringing to 
Charles from Livonia, and which, hampered by hundreds of 
loaded wagons, was overtaken and almost destroyed by Peter at 
Lyesna after a two days' battle against fourfold odds (October), 
The very elements now began to fight against the perishing but 
still unconquered host. The winter of 1708 was the severest 
that Europe had known for a century. By the 1st of November 



SWEDEN] 



CHARLES XIIL— XIV. 



93* 



firewood would not ignite in the open air, and the soldiers 
warmed themselves over big bonfires of straw. By the time the 
army reached the little Ukrainian fortress of Hadjacz in January 
1709, wine and spirits froze into solid masses of ice; birds on 
the wing fell dead; saliva congealed on its passage from the 
mouth to the ground. " Nevertheless," says an eye-witness, 
" though earth, sea and sky were against us, the king's orders 
had to be obeyed and the daily march made." 

Never had Charles XII. seemed so superhuman as during 
these awful days. It is not too much to say that his imperturb- 
able equanimity, his serene bonhomie kept the host together. 
The frost broke at the end of February 1 709, and then the spring 
floods put an end to all active operations till May, when Charles 
began the siege of the fortress of Poltava, which he wished to 
make a base for subsequent operations while awaiting reinforce- 
ments from Sweden and Poland. On the 7 th of June a bullet 
wound put Charles hors de combat, whereupon Peter threw the 
greater part of his forces over the river Vorskla, which separated 
the two armies (June 19-25). On the 26th of June Charles held 
a council of war, at which it was resolved to attack the Russians 
in their entrenchments on the following day. The Swedes 
joyfully accepted the chances of battle and, advancing with 
irresistible elan, were, at first, successful on both wings. Then 
one or two tactical blunders were committed; and the tsar, 
taking courage, enveloped the little band in a vast semicircle 
bristling with the most modern guns, which fired five times to 
the Swedes' once, and swept away the guards before they 
could draw their swords. The Swedish infantry was well nigh 
annihilated, while the 14,000 cavalry, exhausted and demoralized, 
surrendered two days later at Perevolochna on Dnieper. Char! es 
himself with 1 500 horsemen took refuge in Turkish territory. 

For the first time in his life Charles was now obliged to have 
recourse to diplomacy; and his pen proved almost as formid- 
able as his sword. He procured the dismissal of four Russo-phil 
grand- viziers in succession, and between 17 10 and 1712 induced 
the Porte to declare war against the tsar three times. But after 
November 171 2 the Porte had no more money to spare; and, 
the tsar making a show of submission, the sultan began to regard 
Charles as a troublesome guest. On the 1st of February 17 13 
he was attacked by the Turks in his camp at Bender, and made 
prisoner after a contest which reads more like an extravagant 
episode from some heroic folk-tale than an incident of sober 
18th-century history. Charles lingered on in Turkey fifteen 
months longer, in the hope of obtaining a cavalry escort suffi- 
ciently strong to enable him to restore his credit in Poland. 
Disappointed of this last hope, and moved by the despairing 
appeals of his sister Ulrica and the senate to return to Sweden 
while there was still a Sweden to return to, he quitted Demotika 
on the 20th of September 17 14, and attended by a single squire 
arrived unexpectedly at midnight, on the 1 ith of November, 
at Stralsund, which, excepting Wismar, was now all that remained 
to him on German soil. 

For the diplomatic events of these critical years see Sweden: 
History. Here it need only be said that Sweden, during the 
course of the Great Northern War, had innumerable opportunities 
of obtaining an honourable and even advantageous peace, but 
they all foundered oh the dogged refusal of Charles to consent 
to the smallest concession to his despoilers. Even now he would 
listen to no offers of compromise, and after defending Stralsund 
with desperate courage till it was a mere rubbish heap, returned 
to Sweden after an absence of 14 years. Here he collected 
another army of 20,000 men, with which he so strongly entrenched 
himself on the Scanian coast in 17 16 that his combined enemies 
shrank from attacking him, whereupon he assumed the offensive 
by attacking Norway in 17 17, and again in 17 18, in order to 
conquer sufficient territory to enable him to extort better terms 
from his enemies. It was during this second adventure that he 
met his death. On the nth of December, when the Swedish 
approaches had come within 280 paces of the fortress of Fredrik- 
sten, which the Swedes were closely besieging, Charles looked 
over the parapet of the foremost trench, and was shot through 
the head by a bullet from the fortress. 



See Charles XII., Die eigenhandigen Briefe Kbnig Karls XII. 
(Berlin, 1894) ; Friedrich Ferdinand Carlson, Sveriges Historia under 
Konungarne af Pfalziska Huset (Stockholm, 1883-1885); Robert 
Nisbet Bain, Charles XII. and the Collapse of the Swedish Empire 
(London and Oxford, 1895) ; Bidrag til den Store Nordiske Krigs 
Historic (Copenhagen, 1899-1900); G. Syveton, Louis XIV et 
Charles XII (Paris, 1900) ; Daniel Krmann, Historia ablegationis 
D. Krmann ad regent Sueciae Carolum XII. (Budapest, 1894); 
Oscar II., N&gra bidrag till Sveriges Krigshistoria Aren 1711-1713 
(Stockholm, 1892); Martin Weibull, Sveriges Storhedstid (Stockholm, 
1881). (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES XIIL (1748-1818), king of Sweden and Norway, 
the second son of Adolphus Frederick, king of Sweden, and 
Louisa Ulrica, sister of Frederick the Great, was born at Stock- 
holm on the 7th of October 1748. In 1772 he co-operated in the 
revolutionary plans of his brother Gustavus III. (q.v.). On the 
outbreak of the Russo-Swedish War of 1788 he served with 
distinction as admiral of the fleet, especially at the battles of 
Hogland (June 17, 1788) and Oland (July 26, 1789). On the 
latter occasion he would have won a signal victory but for the 
unaccountable remissness of his second-in-command, Admiral 
Liljehorn. On the death of Gustavus III., Charles, now duke 
of Sudermania, acted as regent of Sweden till 1796; but the real 
ruler of the country was the narrow-minded and vindictive 
Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm (q.v.), whose mischievous influence 
over him was supreme. These four years were perhaps the most 
miserable and degrading in Swedish history (an age of lead 
succeeding an age of gold, as it has well been called) and may be 
briefly described as alternations of fantastic jacobinism and 
ruthless despotism. On the accession of Gustavus IV. (November 
1796), the duke became a mere cipher in politics till the 13th of 
March 1809, when those who had dethroned Gustavus IV. 
appointed him regent, and finally elected him king. But by this 
time he was prematurely decrepit, and Bernadotte (see Charles 
XIV.) took over the government as soon as he landed in Sweden 
(1810). By the union of 1814 Charles became the first king of 
Sweden and Norway. He married his cousin Hedwig Elizabeth 
Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp (1759-1818), but their only child, 
Carl Adolf, duke of Vermland, died in infancy (1798). Charles 
XIIL, who for eight years had been king only in title, died on 
the 5th of February 18 18. 

See Sveriges Historia vol. v. (Stockholm, 1884) ; Drottning Hedwig 
Charlottes Dagbokshandteckningar (Stockholm, 1898); Robert Nisbet 
Bain, Gustavus III. and his Contemporaries (London, 1895); ib. 
Scandinavia (Cambridge, 1905). (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES XIV. (1763-1844), king of Sweden and Norway, 
born at Pau on the 26th of January 1763, was the son of Henri 
Bernadotte (1711-1780), procurator at Pau, and Jeanne St Jean 
(1725-1809). The family name was originally Deu Pouey, 
but was changed into Bernadotte in the beginning of the 17th 
century. Bernadotte's christian names were Jean Baptiste; 
he added the name Jules subsequently. He entered the French 
army on the 3rd of September 1780, and first saw service in 
Corsica. On the outbreak of the Revolution his eminent military 
qualities brought him speedy promotion. In 1794 we find him 
as brigadier attached to the army of the Sambre et Meuse, and 
after Jourdan's victory at Fleurus he was appointed a general 
of division. At the battle of Theiningen, 1796, he contributed, 
more than any one else, to the successful retreat of the French 
army over the Rhine after its defeat by the archduke Charles. 
In 1797 he brought reinforcements from the Rhine to Bonaparte's 
army in Italy, distinguishing himself greatly at the passage of the 
Tagliamento, and in 1798 was sent as ambassador to Vienna, 
but was compelled to quit his post owing to the disturbances 
caused by his hoisting the tricolor over the embassy. On the 
16th of August 1798 he married Desiree Clary (1777-1860), 
the daughter of a Marseilles banker, and sister of Joseph Bona- 
parte's wife. From the 2nd of July to the 14th of September 
he was war minister, in which capacity he displayed great ability. 
About this time he held aloof from Bonaparte, but though he 
declined to help Napoleon in the preparations for the coup d'etat 
of November 1 799, he accepted employment from the Consulate, 
and from April 1800 till the 18th of August 1801 commanded 
the army in La Vendee. On the introduction of the empire he 



932 



CHARLES XV.— CHARLES THE BOLD 



was made one of the eighteen marshals of France, and, from 
June 1804 to September 1805, acted as governor of the recently- 
occupied Hanover. During the campaign of 1805, Bernadotte 
with an army corps from Hanover co-operated in the great 
movement which resulted in the shutting up of Mack in Ulm. 
He was rewarded for his services at Austerlitz (December 2, 1805) 
by the principality of Ponte Corvo (June 5, 1806), but during the 
campaign against Prussia, the same year, was severely reproached 
by Napoleon for not participating with his army corps in the 
battles of Jena and Auerstadt, though close at hand. In 1808, 
as governor of the Hanse towns, he was to have directed the 
expedition against Sweden, via the Danish islands, but the plan 
came to nought because of the want of transports and the 
defection of the Spanish contingent. In the war against Austria, 
Bernadotte led the Saxon contingent at the battle of Wagram, 
on which occasion, on his own initiative he issued an order of 
the day, attributing the victory principally to the valour of his 
Saxons, which Napoleon at once disavowed. 

Bernadotte, considerably piqued, thereupon returned to Paris, 
where the council of ministers entrusted him with the defence 
of the Netherlands against the English. In 1810 he was about 
to enter upon his new post of governor of Rome when he was, 
unexpectedly, elected successor to the Swedish throne, partly 
because a large part of the Swedish army, in view of future 
complications with Russia, were in favour of electing a soldier, 
and partly because Bernadotte was very popular in Sweden, 
owing to the kindness he had shown to the Swedish prisoners 
during the late war with Denmark. The matter was decided 
by one of the Swedish couriers, Baron Karl Otto Morner, 
who, entirely on his own initiative, offered the succession to 
the Swedish crown to Bernadotte. Bernadotte communicated 
Morner's offer to Napoleon, who treated the whole affair as an 
absurdity. Bernadotte thereupon informed Morner that he 
would not refuse the honour if he were duly elected. Although 
the Swedish government, amazed at Morner's effrontery, at once 
placed him under arrest on his return to Sweden, the candidature 
of Bernadotte gradually gained favour there, and, on the 21st 
of August 1810, he was elected crown-prince. 

On the 2nd of November Bernadotte made his solemn entry 
into Stockholm, and on the 5th he received the homage of the 
estates and was adopted by Charles XIII. under the name of 
Charles John. The new crown-prince was very soon the most 
popular and the most powerful man in Sweden. The infirmity 
of the old king and the dissensions in the council of state placed 
the government, and especially the control of foreign affairs, 
entirely in his hands. The keynote of his whole policy was the 
acquisition of Norway, a policy which led him into many tortuous 
ways (see Sweden: History), and made him a very tricky ally 
during the struggle with Napoleon in 18 13. Great Britain and 
Prussia very properly insisted that Charles John's first duty 
was to them, the former power rigorously protesting against 
the ^expenditure of her subsidies on the nefarious Norwegian 
adventure before the common enemy had been crushed. After 
the defeats of Ltitzen and Bautzen, it was the Swedish crown- 
prince who put fresh heart into the allies; and at the conference 
of Trachenberg he drew up the general plan for the campaign 
which began after the expiration of the truce of Plaswitz. 
Though undoubtedly sparing his Swedes unduly, to the just 
displeasure of the allies, Charles John, as commander-in-chief 
of the northern army, successfully defended the approaches to 
Berlin against Oudinot in August and against Ney in September; 
but after Leipzig he went his own way, determined at all 
hazards to cripple Denmark and secure Norway. For the events 
which led to the union of Norway and Sweden, see Sweden: 
History and Norway: History. As unional king, Charles XIV. 
(who succeeded to that title in 1 8 1 8 on the death of Charles XIII . ) 
was popular in both countries. Though his ultra-conservative 
views were detested, and as far as possible opposed (especially 
after 1823), his dynasty was never in serious danger, and Swedes 
and Norsemen alike were proud of a monarch with a European 
reputation. It is true that the Riksdag of 1840 meditated com- 
pelling him to abdicate, but the storm blew over and his jubilee 



was celebrated with great enthusiasm in 1843. He died at 
Stockholm on the 8th of March 1844. His reign was one of un- 
interrupted peace, and the great material development of the 
two kingdoms during the first half of the 19th century was 
largely due to his energy and foresight. 

See J. E. Sars, Norges politiske Mstoria (Christiania, 1899) ; Yngvar 
Nielsen, Carl Johan som han virkelig var (Christiania, 1897) ; Johan 
Almen, Alien Bernadotte (Stockholm, 1893); C. Schefer, Bernadotte 
roi (Paris, 1899); G. R. Lagerhjelm, Napoleon och Carl Johan under 
Kriget i Tyskland, 1813 (Stockholm, 1891). (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES XV. (1826-1872), king of Sweden and Norway, 
eldest son of Oscar I., king of Sweden and Norway, and Josephine 
Beauharnais of Leuchtenberg, was born on the 3rd of May 1826. 
On the 19th of June 1850 he married Louisa, daughter of Prince 
Frederick of the Netherlands. He became regent on the 25th 
of September 1857, and king on the death of his father (8th of 
July 1859). As crown-prince, Charles's brusque and downright 
manners had led many to regard his future accession with some 
apprehension, yet he proved to be one of the most popular of 
Scandinavian kings and a constitutional ruler in the best sense 
of the word. His reign was remarkable for its manifold and 
far-reaching reforms. Sweden's existing communal law (1862), 
ecclesiastical law (1863) and criminal law (1864) were enacted 
appropriately enough under the direction of a king whose motto 
was: "Build up the land upon the laws!" Charles XV. also 
materially assisted De Geer (q.v.) to carry through his memorable 
reform of the constitution in 1863. Charles was a warm advocate 
of " Scandinavianism " and the political solidarity of the three 
northern kingdoms, and his warm friendship for Frederick VII., 
it is said, led him to give half promises of help to Denmark on 
the eve of the war of 1864, which, in the circumstances, were 
perhaps misleading and unjustifiable. In view, however, of the 
unpreparedness of the Swedish army and the difficulties of the 
situation, Charles was forced to observe a strict neutrality. 
He died at Malmo on the 18th of September 1872. Charles XV. 
was highly gifted in many directions. Pie attained to some 
eminence as a painter, and his Digte show him to have been 
a true poet. He left but one child, a daughter, Louisa Josephina 
Eugenia, who in 1869 married the crown-prince Frederick of 
Denmark. 

See Cecilia Baath-Holmberg, Carl XV., som enskild man, konung 
och konstndr (Stockholm, 1891); Yngvar Nielsen, Det nor she og 
svenske Kongehus fra 1S18 (Christiania, 1883). (R. N. B.) 

CHARLES (c. 1310-1364), duke of Brittany, known as 
Charles or Blois and Charles of Chatillon, was the son of 
Guy of Ch&tillon, count of Blois (d. 1342), and of Marguerite of 
Valois, sister of Philip VI. of France. In 1337 he married Jeanne 
of Penthievre (d. 1384), daughter of Guy of Brittany, count of 
Penthievre (d. 133 1), and thus acquired a right to the succession 
of the duchy of Brittany. On the death of John III., duke of 
Brittany, in April 1341, his brother John, count of Montfort- 
l'Amaury, and his niece Jeanne, wife of Charles of Blois, disputed 
the succession. Charles of Blois, sustained by Philip VI., cap- 
tured John of Montfort, who was supported by King Edward III. 
at Nantes, besieged his wife Jeanne of Flanders at Hennebont, 
and took Quimper and Guerande (1344). But next year his 
partisans were defeated at Cadoret, and in June 1347 he was 
himself wounded and taken prisoner at Roche-Derrien. He was 
not liberated until 1356, when he continued the war against the 
young John of Montfort, and perished in the battle of Auray, on 
the 29th of September 1364. Charles bore a high reputation for 
piety, and was believed to have performed miracles. The 
Roman Church has canonized him. 

See Simeon Luce, Histoire de Bertrand du Guesclin et de son 
epoque (Paris, 1876). 

CHARLES, called The Bold (1433-147 7), duke of Burgundy, 
son of Philip the Good of Burgundy and Isabella of Portugal, was 
born at Dijon on the 10th of November 1433. In his father's 
lifetime he bore the title of count of Charolais. He was brought 
up under the direction of the seigneur d'Auxy, and early showed 
great application to studyand also to warlike exercises. Although 
he was on familiar terms with the dauphin (afterwards Louis XL), 
when the latter was a refugee at the court of Burgundy, he could 



CHARLES THE DANE 



933 



not but view with chagrin the repurchase by the king of France 
of the towns on the Somme, which had been temporarily ceded 
to Philip the Good by the treaty of Arras; and when his father's 
failing health enabled him to take into his hands the reins of 
government (which Philip abandoned to him completely by an 
act of the 12th of April 1465), he entered upon his lifelong 
struggle against Louis XI., and became one of the principal 
leaders of the League of the Public Weal. His brilliant bravery 
at the battle of Montlhery (16th of July 1465), where he was 
wounded and was left master of the field, neither prevented the 
king frem re-entering Paris nor assured Charles a decisive 
victory. He succeeded, however, in forcing upon Louis the 
treaty of Conflans (1466), by which the king restored to him 
the towns on the Somme, and promised him the hand of his infant 
daughter Catherine, with Champagne as dowry. In the mean- 
while the count of Charolais obtained the surrender of Ponthieu. 
The revolt of Liege and Dinant intervened to divert his attention 
from the affairs of France. On the 25th of August 1466 Charles 
took possession of Dinant, which he pillaged and sacked, and 
succeeded in treating at the same time with the Liegeois. After 
the death of Philip the Good (15th June 1467), the Liegeois 
renewed hostilities, but Charles defeated them at St Trond, and 
made a victorious entry into Liege, which he dismantled and 
deprived of some of its privileges. 

Alarmed by these early successes of the duke of Burgundy, and 
anxious to settle various questions relating to the execution of 
the treaty of Conflans, Louis requested a meeting with Charles 
and placed himself in his hands at Peronne. In the course of the 
negotiations the duke was informed of a fresh revolt of the 
Liegeois secretly fomented by Louis. After deliberating for four 
days how to deal with his adversary, who had thus mala- 
droitly placed himself at his mercy, Charles decided to respect 
the parole he had given and to treat with Louis (October 1468), 
at the same time forcing him to assist in quelling the revolt. 
The town was carried by assault and the inhabitants were 
massacred, Louis not having the courage to intervene on behalf 
of his ancient allies. At the expiry of the one year's truce which 
followed the treaty of Peronne, the king accused Charles of 
treason, cited him to appear before the parlement, and seized 
some of the towns on the Somme (1471). The duke retaliated by 
invading France with a large army, taking possession of Nesle 
and massacring its inhabitants. He failed, however, in an 
attack on Beauvais, and had to content himself with ravaging 
the country as far as Rouen, eventually retiring without having 
attained any useful result. 

Other matters, moreover, engaged his attention. Relin- 
quishing, if not the stately magnificence, at least the gay and 
wasteful profusion which had characterized the court of Bur- 
gundy under the preceding duke, he had bent all his efforts 
towards the development of his military and political power. 
Since the beginning of his reign he had employed himself in 
reorganizing his army and the administration of his territories. 
While retaining the principles of feudal recruiting, he had en- 
deavoured to establish a system of rigid discipline among his 
troops, which he had strengthened by taking into his pay 
foreign mercenaries, particularly Englishmen and Italians, and by 
developing his artillery. Furthermore, he had lost no oppor- 
tunity of extending his power. In 1469 the archduke of Austria, 
Sigismund, had sold him the county of Ferrette, and the land- 
graviate of Alsace and some other towns, reserving to himself the 
right to repurchase. In 147 2-1473 Charles bought the reversion 
of the duchy of Gelderland from its old duke, Arnold, whom 
he had supported against the rebellion of his son. Not content 
with being " the grand duke of the West," he conceived the 
project of forming a kingdom of Burgundy or Aries with him- 
self as independent sovereign, and even persuaded the emperor 
Frederick to assent to crown him king at Trier. The ceremony, 
however, did not take place owing to the emperor's precipitate 
flight by night (September 1473), occasioned by his displeasure 
at the duke's attitude. In the following year Charles involved 
himself in a series of difficulties and struggles which ultimately 
brought about his downfall. He embroiled himself successively 
v. 30 



with Sigismund of Austria, to whom he refused to restore his 
possessions in Alsace for the stipulated sum; with the Swiss, 
who supported the free towns of Alsace in their revolt against 
the tyranny of the ducal governor, Peter von Hagenbach (who 
was condemned and executed by the rebels in May 1474) ; and 
finally, with Rene of Lorraine, with whom he disputed the 
succession of Lorraine, the possession of which had united the 
two principal portions of Charles's territories — Flanders and the 
duchy and county of Burgundy. All these enemies, incited 
and supported as they were by Louis, were not long in joining 
forces against their common adversary. ' Charles suffered a first 
rebuff in endeavouring to protect his kinsman, the archbishop 
of Cologne, against his rebel subjects. He spent ten months 
(July 1474- June 1475) in besieging the little town of Neuss on the 
Rhine, but was compelled by the approach of a powerful imperial 
army to raise the siege. Moreover, the expedition he had per- 
suaded his brother-in-law, Edward IV. of England, to undertake 
against Louis was stopped by the treaty of Picquigny (29th of 
August 147s)- He was more successful in Lorraine, where he 
seized Nancy (30th of November 1475). From Nancy he marched 
against the Swiss, hanging and drowning the garrison of Granson 
in spite of the capitulation. Some days later, however, he was 
attacked before Granson by the confederate army and suffered 
a shamful defeat, being compelled to fly with a handful of 
attendants, and leaving his artillery and an immense booty 
in the hands of the allies (February 1476). He succeeded in 
raising a fresh army of 30,000 men, with which he attacked 
Morat, but he was again defeated by the Swiss army, assisted 
by the cavalry of Rene of Lorraine (22nd of June 1476). On the 
6th of October Charles lost Nancy, which was re-entered by 
Rene. Making a last effort, Charles formed a new army and 
arrived in the depth of winter before the walls of Nancy. Having 
lost many of his troops through the severe cold, it was with only 
a few thousand men that he met the joint forces of the Lorrainers 
and the Swiss, who had come to the relief of the town (6th of 
January 1477). He himself perished in the fight, his mutilated 
body being discovered some days afterwards. 

Charles the Bold has often been regarded as the last repre- 
sentative of the feudal spirit— -a man who possessed no other 
quality than a blind bravery — and accordingly has often been 
contrasted with his rival Louis XL as representing modern 
politics. In reality, he was a prince of wide knowledge and 
culture, knowing several languages and austere in morals; and 
although he cannot be acquitted of occasional harshness, he 
had the secret of winning the hearts of his subjects, who never 
refused him their support in times of difficulty. He was thrice 
married — to Catherine (d, 1446), daughter of Charles VII. of 
France, by whom he had one daughter, Mary, afterwards the 
wife of the Emperor Maximilian I.; to Isabella (d. 1465), daughter 
of Charles I., duke of Bourbon; and to Margaret of York, sister 
of Edward IV. of England, whom he married in 1468. 

The original authorities for the life and times of Charles the Bold 
are the numerous French, Burgundian and Flemish chroniclers of 
the latter part of the 15th century. Special mention may be made of 
the Memoires of Philippe de Comines, and of the Memoires and other 
writings of Olivier de la Marche. See also A. Molinier, Les Sources 
de Vhistoire de France, tome iv. (1904), and the compendious biblio- 
graphy in U. Chevalier's Repertoire des sources historiques, part iii. 
(1904). Charles the Bold, by J. F. Kirk (1863-1868), is a good English 
biography for its date; a more recent life is R. Putnam's Charles 
the Bold (1908). For a general sketch of the relations between France 
and Burgundy at this time see E. Lavisse, Histoire de France, tome iv. 
(i9°2)- . (R. Po.) 

CHARLES, called The Good (le Bon), or The Dane (c. 1084- 
1127), count of Flanders, only son of St Canute or Knut IV., 
king of Denmark, by Adela, daughter of Robert the Frisian, 
count of Flanders, was born about 1084. After the assassination 
of Canute in 1086, his widow took refuge in Flanders, taking 
with her her son. Charles was brought up by his mother and 
grandfather, Robert the Frisian, on whose death he did great 
services to his uncle, Robert II., and his cousin, Baldwin VII., 
counts of Flanders. Baldwin died of a wound received in battle 
in 11 19, and, having no issue, left by will the succession to 
his countship to Charles the Dane. Charles did not secure his 



934- 



CHARLES (DUKE8 OF LORRAINE; PARMA) 



heritage without a civil war, but he was speedily victorious and 
made his position secure by treating his opponents with great 
clemency. He now devoted himself to promoting the welfare 
of his subjects, and did his utmost to support the cause of 
Christianity, both by his bounty and by his example. He 
well deserved the surname of Le Bon, by which he is known to 
posterity. He refused the offer of the crown of Jerusalem on 
the death of Baldwin, and declined to be nominated as a 
candidate for the imperial crown in succession to the emperor 
Henry V. He was murdered in the church of St Donat at 
Bruges on the 2nd of March 1127. 

See J. Perneel, Histoire du regne de Charles le Bon, precede d'un 
resume de I' histoire de Flandres (Brussels, 1830). 

CHARLES I. (c. 050-c. 992), duke of Lower Lorraine, was a 
younger son of the Frankish king Louis IV., and consequently 
a member of the Carolingian family. Unable to obtain the 
duchy of Burgundy owing to the opposition of his brother, King 
Lothair, he went to the court of his maternal uncle, the emperor 
Otto the Great, about 965, and in 977 received from the emperor 
Otto II. the duchy of Lower Lorraine. His authority in Lorraine 
was nominal; but he aided Otto in his struggle with Lothair, 
and on the death of his nephew, Louis V., made an effort to secure 
the Frankish crown. Hugh Capet, however, was the successful 
candidate and war broke out. Charles had gained some successes 
and had captured Reims, when in 991 he was treacherously 
seized by Adalberon, bishop of Laon, and handed over to Hugh. 
Imprisoned with his wife and children at Orleans, Charles did 
not long survive his humiliation. His eldest son Otto, duke of 
Lower Lorraine, died in 1005. 

CHARLES II. (d. 143 1), duke of Lorraine, called The Bold, 
is sometimes referred to as Charles I. A son of Duke John I., 
he succeeded his father in 1390; but he neglected his duchy 
and passed his life in warfare. He died on the 25th of January 
143 1, leaving two daughters, one of whom, Isabella (d. 1453), 
married Rene I. of Anjou (1409-14^0), king of Naples, who 
succeeded his father-in-law as duke of Lorraine. 

CHARLES III. or II. (1 543-1608), called The Great, duke of 
Lorraine, was a son of Duke Francis I. (d. 1545), and a de- 
scendant of Rene of Anjou. He was only an infant when he 
became duke, and was brought up at the court of Henry II. of 
France, marrying Henry's daughter Claude in 1559- He took 
part in the wars of religion in France, and was a member of the 
League; but he was overshadowed by his kinsmen the Guises, 
although he was a possible candidate for the French crown in 
1589. The duke, who was an excellent ruler of Lorraine, died 
at Nancy on the 14th of May 1608. He had three sons: Henry 
(d. 1624) and Francis (d. 1632), who became in turn dukes of 
Lorraine, and Charles (d. 1607), bishop of Metz and Strassburg. 

CHARLES IV. or III. (1604-1675), duke of Lorraine, was a 
son of Duke Francis II., and was born on the 5th of April 1604. 
He became duke on the abdication of his father in 1624, and 
obtained the duchy of Bar through his marriage with his cousin 
Nicole(d. i657),daughterof DukeHenry. Mixing in the tortuous 
politics of his time, he was in continual conflict with the crown 
of France, and spent much of his time in assisting her enemies 
and in losing and regaining his duchies (see Lorraine) . He lived 
an adventurous life, and in the intervals between his several 
struggles with France fought for the emperor Ferdinand II. at 
Nordlingen and elsewhere; talked of succouring Charles I. in 
England; and after the conclusion of the treaty of Westphalia 
in 1648 entered the service of Spain. He died on the 18th of ; 
September 1675, leaving by his second wife, Beatrix de Cusance 
(d. 1663), a son, Charles Henry, count of Vaudemont (1642- 

1723)- 

CHARLES V. or IV. (1643-1690), duke of Lorraine, nephew 
of Duke Charles IV., was born on the 3rd of April 1643, and in 
1664 received a colonelcy in the emperor's army. In the same 
year he fought with distinction at the battle of St Gotthard, in 
which he captured a standard from the Turks. He was a can- 
didate for the elective crown of Poland in 1668. In 1670 the 
emperor made him general of horse, and during the following 
years he was constantly on active service, first against the Turks 



and subsequently against the French. At Seneff (1674) he was 
wounded. In the same year he was again a candidate for the 
Polish crown, but was unsuccessful, John Sobieski, who was to 
be associated with him in his greatest feat of arms, being elected. 
In 167 s, on the death of Charles IV., he rode with a cavalry corps 
into the duchy of Lorraine, then occupied by the French, and 
secured the adhesion of the Lorraine troops to himself; a little 
after this he succeeded Montecucculi as general of the imperial 
army on the Rhine, and was made a field marshal. The chief 
success of his campaign of 1676 was the capture of Philipsburg, 
after a long and arduous siege. The war continued without 
decisive result for some time, and the fate of the duchy, which 
was still occupied by the French, was the subject of endless 
diplomacy. At the general peace Charles had to accept the hard 
conditions imposed by Louis XIV., and he never entered into 
effective possession of his sovereignty In 1678 he married the 
widowed queen of Poland, Eleonora Maria of Austria, and for 
nearly five years they lived quietly at Innsbruck. The Turkish 
invasion of 1683, the last great effort of the Turks to impose 
their will on Europe, called Charles into the field again. At the 
•head of a weak imperial army the duke offered the best resistance 
he could to the advance of the Turks on Vienna. But he had 
to fall back, contesting every position, and the Turks finally 
invested Vienna (July 13th, 1683). At this critical moment 
other powers came to the assistance of Austria, reinforcements 
poured into Charles's camp, and John Sobieski, king of Poland, 
brought 27,000 Poles. Sobieski and Charles had now over 
80,000 men, Poles, Austrians and Germans, and on the morning 
of the 1 2th of September they moved forward to the attack. 
By nightfall the Turks were in complete disorder, Vienna was 
relieved, and the danger was at an end. Soon the victors took 
the offensive and reconquered part of the kingdom of Hungary. 
The Germans and Poles went home in the winter, but Charles 
continued his offensive with the imperialists alone. Ofen 
(Buda) resisted his efforts in 1684, but in the campaign of 
1685 Neuhausel was taken by storm, and in 1686 Charles, now 
reinforced by German auxiliaries, resumed the siege of Ofen. 
All attempts to relieve the place were repulsed, and Ofen was 
stormed on the 2nd of September. In the following campaign 
the Austrians won a decisive victory on the famous battle-ground 
of Mohacs (August 18th, 1687). In 1689 Charles took the field 
on the Rhine against the forces of Louis XIV., the enemy of 
his house. Mainz and Bonn were taken in the first campaign, 
but Charles in travelling from Vienna to the front died suddenly 
at Wels on the 18th of April 1690. 

His eldest son, Leopold Joseph (1679-1729), at the peace of 
Ryswick in 1697 obtained the duchy, of which his father had 
been dispossessed by France, and was the father of Francis 
Stephen, duke of Lorraine, who became the husband of Maria 
Theresa {q.v.), and of Charles (Karl Alexander), a distinguished 
Austrian commander in the wars with Frederick the Great. 
The duchy was ceded by Francis Stephen to Stanislaus Leczynski, 
the dethroned king of Poland, in 1736, Francis receiving in- 
stead the grand-duchy of Tuscany. 

CHARLES II. [Charles Louis de Bourbon] (1799-1883), 
duke of Parma, succeeded his mother, Maria Louisa, duchess 
of Lucca, as duke of Lucca in 1824. He introduced economy 
into the administration, increased the schools, and in 1832 as 
a reaction against the bigotry of the priests and monks with 
which his mother had surrounded him, he became a Protestant. 
He at first evinced Liberal tendencies, gave asylum to the 
Modenese political refugees of 1831, and was indeed suspected 
of being a Carbonaro. But his profligacy and eccentricities 
soon made him the laughing-stock of Italy. In 1842 he returned 
to the Catholic Church and made Thomas Ward, an English 
groom, his prime minister, a man not without ability and tact. 
Charles gradually abandoned all his Liberal ideas, and in 1847 
declared himself hostile to the reforms introduced by Pius IX. 
The Lucchesi demanded the constitution of 1805, promised 
them by the treaty of Vienna, and a national guard, but the 
duke, in spite of the warnings of Ward, refused all concessions. 
A few weeks later he retired to Modena, selling his life-interest 



CHARLES (ARCHDUKE) 



935 



in the duchy to Tuscany. On the 17 th of October Maria Louisa 
of Austria, duchess of Parma, died, and Charles Louis succeeded 
to her throne by the terms of the Florence treaty, assuming the 
style of Charles II. His administration of Parma was character- 
ized by ruinous finance, debts, disorder and increased taxation, 
and he concluded an offensive and defensive alliance with 
Austria. But on the outbreak of the revolution of 1848 there 
were riots in his capital (19th of March), and he declared his 
readiness to throw in his lot with Charles Albert, the pope, and 
Leopold of Tuscany, repudiated the Austrian treaty and promised 
a constitution. Then he again changed his mind, abdicated in 
April, and left Parma in the hands of a provisional government, 
whereupon the people voted for union with Piedmont. After 
the armistice between Charles Albert and Austria (August 1848) 
the Austrian general Thurn occupied the duchy, and Charles II. 
issued an edict from Weistropp annulling the acts of the pro- 
visional government. When Piedmont attacked Austria again 
in 1849, Parma was evacuated, but reoccupied by General 
d'Aspre in April. 

In May 1849 Charles confirmed his abdication, and was 
succeeded by his son Charles III. (1823-1854), who, protected 
by Austrian troops, placed Parma under martial law, inflicted 
heavy penalties on the members of the late provisional govern- 
ment, closed the university, and instituted a regular policy of 
persecution. A violent ruler, a drunkard and a libertine, he was 
assassinated on the 26th of March 1854. At his death his 
widow Maria Louisa, sister of the comte de Chambord, became 
regent, during the minority of his son Robert. The duchess 
introduced some sort of order into the administration, seemed 
inclined to rule more mildly and dismissed some of her husband's 
more obnoxious ministers, but the riots of the Mazzinians in 
July 1854 were repressed with ruthless severity, and the rest 
of her reign was characterized by political trials, executions 
and imprisonments, to which the revolutionists replied with 
assassinations. 

Bibliography. — Massei, Storia civile di Lucca, vol. ii. (Lucca, 
1878); Anon., Y Borboni di Parma . . . del 1847 al 1859 (Parma, 
i860) ; N. Bianchi, Storia delta diplomazia europea in Italia (Turin, 
1865, &c), ; C. Tivaroni, V Italia sotto il dominio austriaco, ii. 96-101, 
i. 590-605 (Turin, 1892), and U Italia degli Italiani, i. 126-143 (Turin, 
1895) by the same; S. Lottici and G. Sitti, Bibliografia generate per 
la storia parmense (Parma, 1904). 

CHARLES [Karl Ludwig] (1771-1847), archduke of Austria 
and duke of Teschen, third son of the emperor Leopold II., was 
born at Florence (his father being then grand-duke of Tuscany) 
on the 5th of September 1 771. His youth was spent in Tuscany, 
at Vienna and in the Austrian Netherlands, where he began his 
career of military service in the war of the French Revolution. 
He commanded a brigade at Jemappes, and in the campaign of 
1793 distinguished himself at the action of Aldenhoven and the 
battle of Neerwinden. In this year he became Statthalter in 
Belgium and received the army rank of lieutenant field marshal, 
which promotion was soon followed by that to Feldzeugmeister. 
In the remainder of the war in the Low Countries he held high 
commands, and he was present at Fleurus. In 1795 he served 
on the Rhine, and in the following year was entrusted with the 
chief control of all the Austrian forces on that river. His conduct 
of the operations against Jourdan and Moreau in 1796 marked 
him out at once as one of the greatest generals in Europe. At 
first falling back carefully and avoiding a decision, he finally 
marched away, leaving a mere screen in front of Moreau; falling 
upon Jourdan he beat him in the battles of Amberg and Wiirz- 
burg, and drove him over the Rhine with great loss. He then 
turned upon Moreau's army, which he defeated and forced out 
of Germany. For this campaign, one of the most brilliant in 
•modern history, see French Revolutionary Wars. In 1797 
he was sent to arrest the victorious march of General Bonaparte 
in Italy, and he conducted the retreat of the over-matched 
Austrians with the highest skill. In the campaign of 1799 he 
was once more opposed to Jourdan, whom he defeated in the 
battles of Osterach and Stokach, following up his success by 
invading Switzerland and defeating Massena in the (first) 
battle of Zurich, after which he re-entered Germany and drove 



the French once more over the Rhine. Ill-health, however, 
forced him to retire to Bohemia, whence he was soon recalled to 
Undertake the task of checking Moreau's advance on Vienna. 
The result of the battle of Hohenlinden had, however, fore- 
doomed the attempt, and the archduke had to make the armistice 
of Steyer. His popularity was now such that the diet of 
Regensburg, which met in 1802, resolved to erect a statue in his 
honour and to give him the title of saviour of his country; but 
Charles refused both distinctions. 

In the short and disastrous war of 1805 the archduke Charles 
commanded what was intended to be the main army, in Italy, 
but events made Germany the decisive theatre of operations, 
and the defeats sustained on the Danube neutralized the success 
obtained by the archduke over Massena in the desperately fought 
battle of Caldiero. With the conclusion of peace began his active 
work of army reorganization, which was first tested on the field 
in 1809. As generalissimo of the army he had been made field 
marshal some years before. As president of the Council of War, 
and supported by the prestige of being the only general who 
had proved capable of defeating the French, he promptly initiated 
a far-reaching scheme of reform, which replaced the obsolete 
methods' of the 18th century, the chief characteristics of the 
new order being the adoption of the " nation in arms " principle 
and of the French war organization and tactics. The new army 
was surprised in the process of transition by the war of 1809, in 
which Charles commanded in chief; yet even so it proved a far 
more formidable opponent than the old, and, against the now 
heterogeneous army of which Napoleon disposed (see Napole- 
onic Campaigns) it succumbed only after a desperate struggle. 
Its initial successes were neutralized by the reverses of Abens- 
berg, Landshut and Eckmiihl; but, after the evacuation of 
Vienna, the archduke won the great battle of Aspern-Essling 
(q.v.) and soon afterwards fought the still more desperate battle 
of Wagram (q.v.), at the close of which the Austrians were de- 
feated but not routed; they had inflicted upon Napoleon a loss 
of over 50,000 men in the two battles. At the end of the cam- 
paign the archduke gave up all his military offices, and spent 
the rest of his life in retirement, except a short time in 1815. 
when he was governor of Mainz. In 1822 he succeeded to the 
duchy of Saxe-Teschen. The archduke Charles married, in 1815, 
Princess Henrietta of Nassau- Weilburg (d. 1829). He had four 
sons, the eldest of whom, the archduke Albert (q.v.) became one 
of the most celebrated generals in Europe, and two daughters, 
the elder of whom became queen of Naples. He died at Vienna 
on the 30th of April 1847. An equestrian statue was erected 
to his memory in Vienna, i860. 

The caution which the archduke preached so earnestly in his 
strategical works, he displayed in practice only when the situation 
seemed to demand it, though his education certainly prejudiced 
him in favour of. the defensive at all costs. He was at the same 
time capable of forming and executing the most daring offensive 
strategy, and his tactical skill in the handling of troops, whether 
in wide turning movements, as at Wiirzburg and Zurich, or 
in masses, as at Aspern and Wagram, was certainly equal to 
that of any leader of his time, Napoleon only excepted. The 
campaign of 1796 is considered almost faultless. That he sus- 
tained defeat in 1809 was due in part to the great numerical 
superiority of the French and their allies, and in part to the 
condition of his newly reorganized troops. His six weeks' 
inaction after the victory of Aspern is, however, open to un- 
favourable criticism. As a military writer, his position in the 
evolution of the art of war is very important, and his doctrines 
had naturally the greatest weight. Nevertheless they cannot 
but be considered as antiquated even in 1806. Caution and the 
importance of " strategic points " are the chief features of his 
system. The rigidity of his geographical strategy may be 
gathered from the prescription that " this principle is never to 
be departed from." Again and again he repeats the advice that 
nothing should be hazarded unless one's army is completely secure, 
a rule which he himself neglected with such brilliant results in 
1 796. " Strategic points," he says (not the defeat of the enemy's 
army), " decide the fate of one's own country, and must 



93^ 



CHARLES (CARDINAL)— CHARLES OF VALOIS 



constantly remain the general's main solicitude " — a maxim which 
was never more remarkably disproved than in the war of 1809. 
The editor of the archduke's work is able to make but a feeble 
defence against Clausewitz's reproach that Charles attached 
more value to ground than to the annihilation of the foe. In 
his tactical writings the same spirit is conspicuous. His reserve 
in battle is designed to " cover a retreat." The baneful influence 
of these antiquated principles was clearly shown in the main- 
tenance of Koniggratz-Josefstadt in 1866 as a " strategic point," 
which was preferred to the defeat of the separated Prussian 
armies; in the strange plans produced in Vienna for the cam- 
paign of 1859, and in the " almost unintelligible " battle of 
Montebello in the same year. The theory and the practice of 
the archduke Charles form one of the most curious contrasts in 
military history. In the one he is unreal, in the other he dis- 
played, along with the greatest skill, a vivid activity which made 
him for long the most formidable opponent of Napoleon. 

His writings were edited by the archduke Albert and his brother the 
archduke William in the Ausgewdhlte Schriften weiland Sr. K. 
Hoheit Erzh. Carl v. Osterreich (1862; reprinted 1893, Vienna and 
Leipzig), which includes the Grundsatze der Kriegskunst fur die 
Generate ( 1 806) , Grundsatze der Strategie erldutert durch die Darstellung 
des Feldzugs 1796 (1814), Gesch. des Feldzugs von 1799 (1819) — the 
two latter invaluable contributions to the history of the war, and 
papers " on the higher art of war," " on practical training in the 
field," &c. See, besides the histories of the period, C. von B(inder)- 
K(rieglstein), Geist und Stoff im Kriege (Vienna, 1895) ; Caemmerer, 
Development of Strategical Science (English transl.), ch. iv. ; M. Edler 
v. Angeli, Erzherzog Carl v. Osterr. (Vienna and Leipzig, 1896) ; 
Duller, Erzh._ Karl v. Osterr. (Vienna, 1845) ; Schneidawind, Karl, 
Erzherzog v. Osterr. und die osterr. Armee (Vienna, 1840) ; Das Buck 
vom Erzh. Carl (1848); Thielen, Erzh. Karl v. Osterr. (1858); 
Wolf, Erzh. Carl (i860); H. von Zeissberg, Erzh. Karl v. Osterr. 
(Vienna, 1895) ; M. von Angeli, Erzh. Karl als Feldherr und Organi- 
sator (Vienna, 1896). 

CHARLES (iS 2 5 _ iS74), cardinal of Lorraine, French states- 
man, was the second son of Claude of Lorraine, duke of Guise, 
and brother of Francis, duke of Guise. He was archbishop of 
Reims in 1538, and cardinal in 1547. At first he was called the 
cardinal of Guise, but in 1550, on the death of his uncle John, 
cardinal of Lorraine, he in his turn took the style of cardinal of 
Lorraine. Brilliant, cunning and a master of intrigue, he was, 
like all the Guises, devoured with ambition and devoid of scruples. 
He had, said Brant6me, " a soul exceeding smirched," and, he 
adds, " by nature he was exceeding craven." Together with 
his brother, Duke Francis, the cardinal of Lorraine was all- 
powerful during the reigns of Henry II. and Francis II.; in 
1558 and 1559 he was one of the negotiators of the treaty of 
Cateau-Cambresis; he fought and pitilessly persecuted the 
reformers, and by his intolerant policy helped to provoke the 
crisis of the wars of religion. The death of Francis II. deprived 
him of power, but he remained one of the principal leaders of the 
Catholic party. In 1561, at the Colloquy of Poissy, he was 
commissioned to reply to Theodore Beza. In 1 562 he went to the 
council of Trent, where he at first defended the rights of the 
Gallican Church against the pretensions of the pope; but after 
the assassination of his brother, he approached the court of 
Rome, and on his return to France he endeavoured, but without 
success, to obtain the promulgation of the decrees of the council 
(1564). In 1567, when the Protestants took up arms, he held 
for some time the first place in the king's council, but Catherine 
de' Medici soon grew weary of his arrogance, and in 1570 he had 
to leave the court. He endeavoured to regain favour by 
negotiating at Rome the dispensation for the marriage of Henry 
of Navarre with Margaret of Valois (1572). He died on the 26th 
of December 1574, at the beginning of the reign of Henry III. 
An orator of talent, he left several harangues or sermons, among 
them being Oraison prononcie au Colloque de Poissy (Paris, 1562) 
and Oratio habita in Concil. Trident. (Concil. Trident. Orationes, 
Louvain, 1567). 

A large amount of correspondence is preserved in the Biblioth£que 
Nationale, Paris. See also Rene de Bouillfe, Histoire des dues de 
Guise (Paris, 1849); H. Forneron, Les Guises et leur epoque (Paris, 
1877); Guillemin, Le Cardinal de Lorraine (1847). 

CHARLES [Karl Alexander] (1712-1780), prince of Lor- 
raine, was the youngest son of Leopold, duke of Lorraine, and 



grandson of Charles V., duke of Lorraine (see above), the famous 
general. He was born at Luneville on the 12 th of December 
1712, and educated for a military career; After his elder brother 
Francis, the duke, had exchanged Lorraine for Tuscany and 
married Maria Theresa, Charles became an Austrian officer, 
and he served in the campaigns of 1737 and 1738 against the 
Turks. At the outbreak of the Silesian wars in 1740 (see 
Austrian Succession, War. or. the), the queen made her 
brother-in-law a field marshal, though he was not yet thirty 
years old, and in 1742 Charles encountered Frederick the Great 
for the first time at the battle of Chotusitz (May 17th). The 
victory of the Prussians on that field was far from decisive, and 
Charles drew off his forces in good order. His conduct of the 
successful campaign of 1743 against the French and Bavarians 
heightened his reputation. He married, in January 1744, 
Marianne of Austria, sister of Maria Theresa, who made them 
jointly governors-general of the Austrian Netherlands. Very 
soon the war broke out afresh, and Charles, at the head of the 
Austrian army on the Rhine, won great renown by his brilliant 
crossing of the Rhine. Once more a Lorraine prince at the head 
of Austrian troops invaded the duchy and drove the French 
before him, but at this moment Frederick resumed the Silesian 
war, all available troops were called back to oppose him, and the 
French maintained their hold on Lorraine. Charles hurried to 
Bohemia, whence, aided by the advice of the veteran field 
marshal Traun, he quickly expelled the Prussians. At the close 
of his victorious campaign he received the news that his wife, 
to whom he was deeply attached, had died in childbirth on the 
16th of December 1744 at Brussels. He took the field again in 
1745 in Silesia, but this time without the advice of Traun, and 
he was twice severely defeated by Frederick, at Hohenf riedberg 
and at Soor. Subsequently, as commander-in-chief in the Low 
Countries he received, at Roucoux, a heavy defeat at the hands 
of Marshal Saxe. His government of the Austrian Netherlands 
during the peace of 1749-17 56 was marked by many reforms, 
and the prince won the regard of the people by his ceaseless 
activity on their behalf. After the first reverses of the Seven 
Years' War (q.v.), Maria Theresa called Charles again to the 
supreme command in the field. The campaign of 1757 opened 
with Frederick's great victory of Prague, and Prince Charles was 
shut up with his army in that fortress. In the victory of the 
relieving army under Daun at Kolin Charles had no part. Never- 
theless the battle of Breslau, in which the Prussians suffered a 
defeat even more serious than that of Kolin, was won by him, 
and great enthusiasm was displayed in Austria over the victory, 
which seemed to be the final blow to Frederick. But soon after- 
wards the king of Prussia routed the French at Rossbach, and, 
swiftly returning to Silesia, he inflicted on Charles the complete 
and crushing defeat of Leuthen (December 5, 1757). A mere 
remnant of the Austrian army reassembled after the pursuit, 
and Charles was relieved of his command. He received, however, 
from the hands of the empress the grand cross, of the newly 
founded order of Maria Theresa. For a year thereafter Prince 
Charles acted as a military adviser at Vienna, he then returned 
to Brussels, where, during the remainder of his life, he continued 
to govern in the same liberal spirit as before. The affection of 
the people for the prince was displayed during his dangerous 
illness in 1765, and in 1775 the estates of Brabant erected a 
statue in his honour at Brussels. He died on the 4th of July 
1780 at the castle of Tervoeren, and was buried with his Lorraine 
ancestors at Nancy. 

CHARLES (1270-13 25), count of Valois, of Maine, and of 
Anjou, third son of Philip III., king of France, surnamed the 
Bold, and of Isabella of Aragon, was born on the 12th of March 
1270. By his father's will he inherited the four lordships of 
Crepy, La Ferte-Milon, Pierrefonds and Bethisy, which together 
formed the countship of Valois. In 1284 Martin IV., having 
excommunicated Pedro III., king of Aragon, offered that 
kingdom to Charles. King Philip failed in an attempt to place 
his son on this throne, and died on the return of the expedition. 
In 1290 Charles married Margaret, daughter of Charles II., 
king of Naples, and renounced his pretensions to Aragon. In 



CHARLES OF VIANA— CHARLES, THOMAS 



937 



1294, at the beginning of the hostilities against England, he 
invaded Guienne and took La Reole and Saint-Sever. During 
the war Flanders (1300), he took Douai, B6thune and Dam, 
received the submission of Guy of Dampierre, and aided King 
Philip IV., the Fair, to gain the battle of Mons-en-P6vele, on the 
18th of August 1304. Asked by Boniface VIII. for his aid 
against the Ghibellines, he crossed the Alps in June 1301, entered 
Florence, and helped Charles II., the Lame, king of Sicily, to 
reconquer Calabria and Apulia from the house of Aragon, but 
was defeated in Sicily. As after the death of his first wife 
Charles had married Catherine de Courtenay, a granddaughter of 
Baldwin II., the last Latin emperor of Constantinople, he tried 
to assert his rights to that throne. Philip the Fair also wished 
to get him elected emperor; but Clement V. quashed his can- 
didature in favour of Henry of Luxemburg, afterwards the 
emperor Henry VII. Under Louis X. Charles headed the party 
of feudal reaction, and was among those who compassed the 
ruin of Enguerrand de Marigny. In the reign of Charles IV., 
the Fair, he fought yet again in Guienne (1324), and died at 
Perray (Seine-et-Oise) on the 16th of December 1325. His 
second wife had died in 1307, and in July 1308 he had married 
a third wife, Mahaut de Chatillon, countess of Saint-Pol. Philip, 
his eldest son, ascended the French throne in 1328, and from 
him sprang the royal house of Valois. 

See Joseph Petit, Charles de Valois (Paris, 1900). 

CHARLES (1421-1461), prince of Viana, sometimes called 
Charles IV. king of Navarre, was the son of John, afterwards 
John II., king of Aragon, by his marriage with Blanche, daughter 
and heiress of Charles III., king of Navasre. Both his grand- 
father Charles and his mother, who ruled over Navarre from 1425 
to 1441, had bequeathed this kingdom to Charles, whose right 
had also been recognized by the Cortes; but when Blanche 
died in 1441 her husband John seized the government to the 
exclusion of his son. The ill-feeling between father and son 
was increased when in 1447 John took for his second wife Joanna 
Henriquez, a Castilian princess, who soon bore him a son, 
afterwards Ferdinand I. king of Spain, and who regarded her 
stepson as an interloper. When Joanna began to interfere in 
the internal affairs of Navarre civil war broke out; and in 1452 
Charles, although aided by John II., king of Castile, was defeated 
and taken prisoner. Released upon promising not to take the 
kingly title until after his father's death, the prince, again 
unsuccessful in an appeal to arms, took refuge in Italy with 
Alphonso V., king of Aragon, Naples and Sicily. In 1458 
Alphonso died and John became king of Aragon, while Charles 
was offered the crowns of Naples and Sicily. He declined these 
proposals, and having been reconciled with his father returned 
to Navarre in 1459. Aspiring to marry a Castilian princess, 
he was then thrown into prison by his father, and the Catalans 
rose in his favour. This insurrection soon became general and 
John was obliged to yield. He released his son, and recognized 
him as perpetual governor of Catalonia, and heir to the kingdom. 
Soon afterwards, however, on the 23rd of September 1461, the 
prince died at Barcelona, not without a suspicion that he had 
been poisoned by his stepmother. Charles was a cultured and 
amiable prince, fond of music and literature. He translated 
the Ethics of Aristotle into Spanish, a work first published at 
Saragossa in 1509, and wrote a chronicle of the kings of Navarre, 
Crdnica de los reyes de Navarra, an edition which, edited by 
J. Yangues y Miranda, was published at Pampeluna in 1843. 

See J. de Moret and F. de Aleson, Anales del reyno de Navarra, 
tome iv. (Pampeluna, 1866); M. J. Quintana, Vidas de espanoles 
celebres (Paris, 1827) ; and G. Desdevises du Dezert, Carlos d' Aragon 
(Paris, 1889). 

CHARLES, ELIZABETH (1828-1896), English author, was 
born at Tavistock on the 2nd of January 1828, the daughter of 
John Rundle, M.P. Some of her youthful poems won the praise 
of Tennyson, who read them in manuscript. In 1 8 5 1 she married 
Andrew Paton Charles. Her best known book, written to order 
for an editor who wished for a story about Martin Luther, The 
Chronicles of the Schonberg-Cotta Family, was published in 1862, 
and was translated into most of the European languages, into 



Arabic, and into many Indian dialects. Mrs Charles wrote in all 
some fifty books, the majority of a semi-religious character. 
She took an active part in the work of various charitable institu- 
tions, and among her friends and correspondents were Dean 
Stanley, Archbishop Tait, Charles Kingsley, Jowett and Pusey. 
She died at Hampstead on the 28th of March 1896. 

CHARLES, JACQUES ALEXANDRE CESAR (1746-1823), 
French mathematician and physicist, was born at Beaugency, 
Loiret, on the 12th of November 1746. After spending some 
years as a clerk in the ministry of finance, he turned to scientific 
pursuits, and attracted considerable attention by his skilful and 
elaborate demonstrations of physical experiments. He was the 
first, in 1783, to employ hydrogen for the inflation of balloons 
(see Aeronautics), and about 1787 he anticipated Gay Lussac's 
law of the dilatation of gases with heat, which on that account 
is sometimes known by his name. In 1785 he was elected to 
the Academy of Sciences, and subsequently he became professor 
of physics at the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers. He died in 
Paris on the 7th of April 1823. His published papers are chiefly 
concerned with mathematical topics. 

CHARLES, THOMAS (1755-1814), Welsh Nonconformist 
divine, was born of humble parentage at Longmoor, in the parish 
of Llanfihangel Abercywyn, near St Clears, Carmarthenshire, 
on the 14th of October 1755. He was educated for the Anglican 
ministry at Llanddowror and Carmarthen, and at Jesus College, 
Oxford (1775-1778). In 1777 he studied theology under the 
evangelical John Newton at Olney. He was ordained deacon 
in 1778 on the title of the curacies of Shepton Beauchamp and 
Sparkford, Somerset; and took priest's orders in 1780. He 
afterwards added to his charge at Sparkford, Lovington, South 
Barrow and North Barrow, and in September 1782 was presented 
to the perpetual curacy of South Barrow by the Rev. John 
Hughes, Coin St Denys. But he never left Sparkford, though 
the contrary has been maintained, until he resigned all his 
curacies in June 1783, and returned to Wales, marrying (on 
August 20th) Sarah Jones of Bala, the orphan of a flourishing 
shopkeeper. He had early fallen under the influence of the 
great revival movement in Wales, and at the age of seventeen 
had been " converted " by a sermon of Daniel Rowland's. This 
was enough to make him unpopular with many of the Welsh 
clergy, and being denied the privilege of preaching for nothing 
at two churches, he helped his old Oxford friend John Mayor, 
now vicar of Shawbury, Shropshire, from October until January 
nth, 1784. On the 25th of January he took charge of Llan yn 
Mowddwy (14 m. from Bala), but was not allowed to continue 
there more than three months. Three influential people, among 
them the rector of Bala, agitated some of the parishioners 
against him, and persuaded his rector to dismiss him. His 
preaching, his catechizing of the children after evensong, and 
his connexion with the Bala Methodists — his wife's stepfather 
being a Methodist preacher — gave great offence. After a fort- 
night more at Shawbury, he wrote to John Newton and another 
clergyman friend in London for advice. The Church of England 
denied him employment, and the Methodists desired his services. 
His friends advised him to return to England, but it was too late. 
By September he had crossed the Rubicon, Henry Newman (his 
rector at Shepton Beauchamp and Sparkford) accompanying 
him on a tour in Carnarvonshire. InDecember,he was preaching 
at the BontUchel Association; so that he joined the Methodists 
(see Calvinistic Methodists) in 1784. 

Before taking this step, he had been wont in his enforced 
leisure to gather the poor children of Bala into his house for in- 
struction, and so thickly did they come that he had to adjourn 
with them to the chapel. This was the origin of the Welsh 
Circulating Schools, which he developed on the lines adopted by 
Griffith Jones (d. 1761), formerly vicar of Llanddowror. First 
one man was trained for the work by himself, then he was sent 
to a district for six months, where, (for £8 a year) he taught gratis 
the children and young people (in fact, all comers) reading and 
Christian principles. Writing was added later. The expenses 
were met by collections made in the Calvinistic Methodist 
Societies, and as the funds increased masters were multiplied, 



938 



CHARLES ALBERT 



until in 1786 Charles had seven masters to whom he paid £10 per 
annum; in 1787, twelve; in 1789, fifteen; in 1794, twenty. 
By this time the salary had been increased to £12; in 1801 it was 
£14. He had learnt of Raikes's Sunday Schools before he left 
the Establishment, but he rightly considered the system set on 
foot by himself far superior; the work and object being the same, 
he gave six days' tuition for every one given by them, and many 
people not only objected to working as teachers on Sunday, but 
thought the children forgot in the six days what they learnt on 
the one. But Sunday Schools were first adopted by Charles to 
meet the case of young people in service who could not attend 
during the week, and even in that form much opposition was 
shown to them because teaching was thought to be a form of 
Sabbath breaking. His first Sunday School was in 1787. Wilber- 
force, Charles Grant, John Thornton and his son Henry, were 
among the philanthropists who contributed to his funds; in 1798 
the Sunday School Society (established 1785) extended its 
operations to Wales, making him its agent, and Sunday Schools 
grew rapidly in number and favour. A powerful revival broke 
out at Bala in the autumn of 1791, and his account of it in letters 
to correspondents, sent without his knowledge to magazines, 
kindled a similar fire at Huntly. The scarcity of Welsh bibles 
was Charles's greatest difficulty in his work. John Thornton and 
Thomas Scott helped him to secure supplies from the Society for 
the Promotion of Christian Knowledge from 1787 to 1789, when 
the stock became all but exhausted. In 1799 a new edition was 
brought out by the Society, and he managed to secure 700 copies 
of the 10,000 issued; the Sunday School Society got 3000 testa- 
ments printed, and most of them passed into his hands in 1801. 

In 1800, when a frost-bitten thumb gave him great pain and 
much fear for his life, his friend, Rev. Philip Oliver of Chester, 
died, leaving him director and one of three trustees over his 
chapel at Boughton; and this added much to his anxiety. The 
Welsh causes at Manchester and London, too, gave him much 
uneasiness, and burdened him with great responsibilities at this 
juncture. In November 1802 he went to London, and on the 7th 
of December he sat at a committee meeting of the Religious 
Tract Society, as a country member, when his friend, Joseph 
Tarn — a member of the Spa Fields and Religious Tract Society 
committees — introduced the subject of a regular supply of 
bibles for Wales. Charles was asked to state his case to the 
committee, and so forcibly did he impress them, that it was there 
and then decided to move in the matter of a general dispersion 
of the bible. When he visited London a year later, his friends 
were ready to discuss the name of a new Society, and the sole object 
of which should be to supply bibles. Charles returned to Wales 
on the 30th of January 1804, and the British and Foreign Bible 
Society was formally and publicly inaugurated on March the 7th. 
The first Welsh testament issued by that Society appeared on the 
6th of May 1806, the bible on the 7th of May 1807 — both being 
edited by Charles. 

Between 1805 and 1811 he issued his Biblical Dictionary in 
four volumes, which still remains the standard work of its kind in 
Welsh. Three editions of his Welsh catechism were published 
for the use of his schools (1789, 1791 and 1794); an English 
catechism for the use of schools in Lady Huntingdon's Connexion 
was drawn up by him in 1797; his shorter catechism in Welsh 
appeared in 1799, and passed through several editions, in Welsh 
and English, before 1807, when his Instructor (still the Connexional 
catechism) appeared. From April 1799 to December 1801 six 
numbers of a Welsh magazine called Trysorfa Ysprydol 
(Spiritual Treasury) were edited by Thomas Jones of Mold and 
himself; in March 1809 the first number of the second volume 
appeared, and the twelfth and last in November 1813. 

The London Hibernian Society asked him to accompany Dr 
David Bogue, the Rev. Joseph Hughes, and Samuel Mills to 
Ireland in August 1807, to report on the state of Protestant 
religion in the country. Their report is still extant, and among 
the movements initiated as a result of their visit was the Circu- 
lating School system. In 1810, owing to the growthof Methodism 
and the lack of ordained ministers, he led the Connexion in the 
Movement for connexionally ordained ministers, and his influence 



was the chief factor in the success of that important step. From 
181 1 to 18 14 his energy was mainly devoted to establishing 
auxiliary Bible Societies. By correspondence he stimulated some 
friends in Edinburgh to establish charity schools in the High- 
lands, and the Gaelic School Society (1811) washisidea. Hislast 
work was a corrected edition of the Welsh Bible issued in small 
pica by the Bible Society. As a preacher he was in great request, 
though possessing but few of the qualities of the popular preacher. 
All his work received very small remuneration; the family was 
maintained by the profits of a business managed by Mrs Charles 
— a keen, active and good woman. He died on the 5th of 
October 1814. His influence is still felt, and he is rightly claimed 
as one of the makers of modern Wales. (D. E. J.) 

CHARLES ALBERT [Carlo Alberto] (1 798-1849), king of 
Sardinia (Piedmont), son of Prince Charles of Savoy- Carignano 
and Princess Albertine of Saxe-Courland, was born on the 2nd of 
October 1798, a few days before the French occupied Piedmont 
and forced his cousin King Charles Emmanuel to take refuge 
in Sardinia. Although Prince and Princess Carignano adhered 
to the French Republican regime, they soon fell under suspicion 
and were summoned to Paris. Prince Charles died in 1800, and 
his widow married a Count de Montleart and for some years led 
a wandering existence, chiefly in Switzerland, neglecting her son 
and giving him mere scraps of education, now under a devotee of 
J. J. Rousseau, now under a Genevan Calvinist. In 1802 King 
Charles Emmanuel abdicated in favour of his brother Victor 
Emmanuel L; the latter's only son being dead, his brother 
Charles Felix was heir to the throne, and after him Charles Albert. 
On the fall of Napolepn in 1814 the Piedmontese court returned 
to Turin and the king was anxious to secure the succession for 
Charles Albert, knowing that Austria meditated excluding him 
from it in favour of an Austrian archduke, but at the same time he 
regarded him as an objectionable person on account of his revolu- 
tionary upbringing. Charles Albert was summoned to Turin, 
given tutors to instruct him in legitimist principles, and on the 
1st of October 181 7 married the archduchess Maria Theresa of 
Tuscany, who, on the 14th of March 1820, gave birth to Victor 
Emmanuel, afterwards king of Italy. 

The Piedmontese government at this time was most re- 
actionary, and had made a clean sweep of all French institutions. 
But there were strong Italian nationalists and anti-Austrian 
tendencies among the younger nobles and army officers, and the 
Carbonari and other revolutionary societies had made much 
progress. 

Their hopes centred in the young Carignano, whose agreeable 
manners had endeared him to all, and who had many friends 
among the Liberals and Carbonari. Early in 18 20 a revolutionary 
movement was set on foot, and vague plans of combined risings 
all over Italy and a war with Austria were talked of. Charles 
Albert no doubt was aware of this, but he never actually became 
a Carbonaro, and was surprised and startled when after the 
outbreak of the Neapolitan revolution of 1820 some of the leading 
conspirators in the Piedmontese army, including Count Santorre 
di Santarosa and Count San Marzano, informed him that a 
military rising was ready and that they counted on his help 
(2nd March 1821). He induced them to delay the outbreak 
and informed the king, requesting him, however, not to punish 
anyone. On the 10th the garrison of Alessandria mutinied, 
and two days later Turin was in the hands of the insurgents, 
the people demanding the Spanish constitution. The king at 
once abdicated and appointed Charles Albert regent. The latter, 
pressed by the revolutionists and abandoned by his ministers, 
granted the constitution and sent to inform Charles Felix, who 
was now king, of the occurrence. Charles Felix, who was then 
at Modena, repudiated the regent's acts, accepted Austrian 
military assistance, with which the rising was easily quelled, 
and exiled Charles Albert to Florence. The young prince found 
himself the most unpopular man in Italy, for while the Liberals 
looked on him as a traitor, to the king and the Conservatives he 
was a dangerous revolutionist. At the Congress of Verona 
(1822) the Austrian chancellor, Prince Metternich, tried to induce 
Charles Felix to set aside Charles Albert's rights of succession. 



CHARLES AUGUSTUS 



939 



But the king was piqued by Austria's interference, and as both 
the grand-duke of Tuscany and the duke of Wellington supported 
him, Charles Albert's claims were respected. France having 
decided to intervene in the Spanish revolution on the side of 
autocracy, Charles Albert asked permission to join the due 
d'Angouleme's expedition. The king granted it and the young 
prince set out for Spain, where he fought with such gallantry 
at the storming of the Trocadero (ist of September 1823) that 
the French soldiers proclaimed him the " first Grenadier of 
France." But it was not until he had signed a secret under- 
taking binding himself, as soon as he ascended the throne, to place 
himself under the tutelage of a council composed of the higher 
clergy and the knights of the Annunziata, and to maintain the 
existing forms of the monarchy (D. Berti, Cesare Alfieri, xi. 77, 
Rome, 1871), that he was allowed to return to Turin and forgiven. 
On the death of Charles Felix (27th of April 1831) Charles 
Albert succeeded; he inherited a kingdom without an army, 
with an empty treasury, a chaotic administration and medieval 
laws. His first task was to set his house in order; he reorganized 
the finances, created the army,^nd started Piedmont on a path 
which if not liberalism was at least progress. " He was," wrote 
his reactionary minister, Count della Margherita, " hostile to 
Austria from the depths of his soul and full of illusions as to the 
possibility of freeing Italy from dependence on her. ... As 
for the revolutionaries, he detested them but feared them, and 
was convinced that sooner or later he would be their victim." 
In 1833 a conspiracy of the Giovane Italia Society, organized by 
Mazzini, was discovered, and a number of its members punished 
with ruthless severity. On the election in 1846 of Pius IX., who 
appeared to be a Liberal and an Italian patriot, the eyes of all 
Italy were turned on him as the heaven-born leader who was to 
rescue the country from the foreigner. This to some extent 
reconciled the king to the Liberal movement, for it accorded 
with his religious views. " I confess," he wrote to the marquis of 
Villamarina, in 1847, " that a war of national independence 
which should have for its object the defence of the pope would 
be the greatest happiness that could befall me." On the 30th of 
October he issued a decree granting wide reforms, and when 
risings broke out in other parts of Italy early in 1848 and further 
liberties were demanded, he was at last induced to grant the 
constitution (8th February). 

When the news of the Milanese revolt against the Austrians 
reached Turin (19th of March) public opinion demanded that the 
Piedmontese should succour their struggling brothers; and 
after some hesitation the king declared war. But much time 
had been wasted and many precious opportunities lost. With 
an army of 60,000 Piedmontese troops and 30,000 men from 
other parts of Italy the king took the field, and after defeating 
the Austrians at Pastrengo on the 30th of April, and at Goito 
on the 30th of May, where he was himself slightly wounded, 
more time was wasted in useless operations. Radetzky, the 
Austrian general, having received reinforcements, drove the 
centre of the extended Italian line back across the Mincio (23rd 
of July), and in the two days' fighting at Custozza( 24th and 25th 
of July) the Piedmontese were beaten, forced to retreat, and to 
ask for an armistice. On re-entering Milan Charles Albert was 
badly received and reviled as a traitor by the Republicans, 
and although he declared himself ready to die defending the 
city the municipality treated with Radetzky for a capitulation ; 
the mob, urged on by the demagogues, made a savage demonstra- 
tion against him at the Palazzo Greppi, whence he escaped in 
the night with difficulty and returned to Piedmont with his 
defeated armp. The French Republic offered to intervene in 
the spring of 1848, but Charles Albert did not desire foreign aid, 
the more so as in this case it would have had to be paid for by 
the cession of Nice and Savoy. The revolutionary movement 
throughout Italy was breaking down, but Charles Albert felt 
that while he possessed an army he could not abandon the 
Lombards and Venetians, and determined to stake all on a last 
chance. On the 12th of March 1849 he denounced the armistice 
and took the field again with an army of 80,000 men, but gave 
the chief command to the Polish general Chrzanowski. General 



Ramorino commanding the Lombard division proved unable 
to prevent the Austrians from crossing the Ticino (20th of April), 
and Chrzanowski was completely out-generalled and defeated 
at La Bicocca near Novara on the 23rd . The Piedmontese fought 
with great bravery, and the unhappy king sought death in vain. 
After the battle he asked terms of Radetzky, who demanded 
the occupation by Austria of a large part of Piedmont and the 
heir to the throne as a hostage. Thereupon, feeling himself to 
be the obstacle to better conditions, Charles Albert abdicated in 
favour of his son Victor Emmanuel. That same night he 
departed alone and made his way to Oporto, where he retired 
into a monastery and died on the 28th of July 1849. 

Charles Albert was not a man of first-rate ability; he was of 
a hopelessly vacillating character. Devout and mystical to an 
almost morbid degree, hating revolution and distrusting Liberal- 
ism, he was a confirmed pessimist, yet he had many noble 
qualities: he was brave to the verge of foolhardiness, devoted 
to his country, and ready to risk his crown to free Italy from 
the foreigner. To him the people of Italy owe a great debt, for 
if he failed in his object he at least materialized the idea of the 
Risorgimento in a practical shape, and the charges which the 
Republicans and demagogues brought against him were mon- 
strously unjust. 

Bibliography. — Besides the general works on modern Italy, see 
the Marquis Costa de Beauregard's interesting volumes La Jeunesse 
du roi Charles Albert (Paris, 1899) and Novare et Oporto (1890), based 
on the king's letters and the journal of Sylvain Costa, his faithful 
equerry, though the author's views are those of an old-fashioned 
Savoyard who dislikes the idea of Italian unity; Ernesto Masi's 
// Segreto del Re Carlo Alberto (Bologna, 1891) is a very illuminating 
essay; Domenico Perrero, Gli Ultimi Reali di Savoia (Turin, 1889); 
L. Cappelletti, Storia di Carlo Alberto (Rome, 1891); Nicomede 
Bianchi, Storia della diplomazia europea in Italia (8 vols., Turin, 
1865, &c), a most important work of a general character, and the 
same author's Scritti e lettere di Carlo Alberto (Rome, 1879) and his 
Storia della monarchia piemontese (Turin, 1877); Count S. della 
Margherita, Memorandum storico-politico (Turin, 1851). " 

CHARLES AUGUSTUS [Karl August] (1757-1828), grand- 
duke of Saxe- Weimar, son of Constantine, duke of Saxe- Weimar- 
Eisenach, and Anna Amalia of Brunswick, was born on the 3rd 
of September 1757. His father died when he was only nine 
months old, and the boy was brought up under the regency and 
supervision of his mother, a woman of enlightened but masterful 
temperament. His governor was Count Eustach von Gorz, 
a German nobleman of the old strait-laced school; but a more 
humane element was introduced into his training when, in 1771, 
Wieland was appointed his tutor. In 1 7 74 the poet Karl Lud wig 
von Knebel came to Weimar as tutor to the young Prince 
Constantine; and in the same year the two princes set out, 
with Count Gorz and Knebel, for Paris. At Frankfort, Knebel 
introduced Karl August to the young Goethe: the beginning 
of a momentous friendship. In 1775 Karl August returned 
to Weimar, and the same year came of age and married Princess 
Louise of Hesse-Darmstadt. 

One of the first acts of the young grand-duke was to summon 
Goethe to Weimar, and in 1776 he was made a member of the 
privy council. " People of discernment," he said, " congratulate 
me on possessing this man. His intellect, his genius is known. 
It makes no difference if the world is offended because I have 
made Dr Goethe a member of my most important collegium 
without his having passed through the stages of minor official 
professor and councillor of state." To the undiscerning, the 
beneficial effect of this appointment was not at once apparent. 
With Goethe the " storm and stress " spirit descended upon 
Weimar, and the stiff traditions of the little court dissolved in 
a riot of youthful exuberance. The duke was a deep drinker, 
but also a good sportsman; and the revels of the court were 
alternated with break-neck rides across country, ending in nights 
spent round the camp fire under the stars. Karl August, however, 
had more serious tastes. He was interested in literature, in art, 
in science; critics, unsuspected of flattery, praised his judgment 
in painting; biologists found in him an expert in anatomy. Nor 
did he neglect the government of his little state. His reforms 
were the outcome of something more than the spirit of the 



94° 



CHARLES EDWARD 



" enlightened despots " of the 18th century; for from the first 
he had realized that the powers of the prince to play " earthly 
providence " were strictly limited. His aim, then, was to 
educate his people to work out their own political and social 
salvation, the object of education being in his view, as he ex- 
plained later to the dismay of Metternich and his school, to help 
men to " independence of judgment." To this end Herder was 
summoned to Weimar to reform the educational system; and 
it is little wonder that, under a patron so enlightened, the 
university of Jena attained the zenith of its fame, and Weimar 
became the intellectual centre of Germany. 

Meanwhile, in the affairs of Germany and of Europe the 
character of Karl August gave him an influence out of all propor- 
tion to his position as a sovereign prince. He had early faced 
the problem presented by the decay of the Empire, and began 
to work for the unity of Germany. The plans of the emperor 
Joseph II., which threatened to absorb a great part of Germany 
into the heterogeneous Habsburg monarchy, threw him into the 
arms of Prussia, and he was the prime mover in the establish- 
ment of the league of princes (Fiirstenbund) in 1785, by which, 
under the leadership of Frederick the Great, Joseph's intrigues 
were frustrated. He was, however, under no illusion as to the 
power of Austria, and he wisely refused the offer of the Hun- 
garian crown, made to him in 1787 by Prussia at the instance 
of the Magyar malcontents, with the dry remark that he had no 
desire to be another " Winter King." In 1788 Karl August took 
service in the Prussian army as major-general in active command 
of a regiment. As such he was present, with Goethe, at the 
cannonade of Valmy in 1792, and in 1704 at the siege of Mainz 
and the battles of Pirmasenz (September 14) and Kaiserslautern 
(October 28-30). After this, dissatisfied with the attitude of the 
powers, he resigned; but rejoined on the accession of his friend 
King Frederick William III. to the Prussian throne. The 
disastrous campaign of Jena (1806) followed; on the 14th of 
October, the day after the battle, Weimar was sacked; and 
Karl August, to prevent the confiscation of his territories, was 
forced to join the Confederation of the Rhine. From this time 
till after the Moscow campaign of 1812 his contingent fought 
under the French flag in all Napoleon's wars. In 1813, however, 
he joined the Grand Alliance, and at the beginning of 1814 took 
the command of a corps of 30,000 men operating in the Nether- 
lands. 

At the congress of Vienna Karl August was present in person, 
and protested vainly against the narrow policy of the powers 
in confining their debates to the " rights of the princes " to the 
exclusion of the " rights of the people." His services in the war 
of liberation were rewarded with an extension of territory and 
the title of grand-duke; but his liberal attitude had already 
made him suspect, and his subsequent action brought him still 
further into antagonism to the reactionary powers. He was 
the first of the German princes to grant a liberal constitution to 
his state under Article XIII. of the Act of Confederation (May 5, 
1816); and his concession of full liberty to the press made 
Weimar for a while the focus of journalistic agitation against 
the existing order. Metternich dubbed him contemptuously 
" der grosse Bursche " for his patronage of the " revolutionary " 
Burschenschaften; and the celebrated " festival " held at the 
Wartburg by his permission in 1818, though in effect the mildest 
of political demonstrations, brought down upon him the wrath 
of the great powers. Karl August, against his better judgment, 
was compelled to yield to the remonstrances of Prussia, Austria 
and Russia; the liberty of the press was again restricted in the 
grand-duchy, but, thanks to the good understanding between 
the grand-duke and his people, the regime of the Carlsbad 
Decrees pressed less heavily upon Weimar than upon other 
German states. 

Karl August died on the 14th of June 1828. Upon his con- 
temporaries of the most various types his personality made a great 
impression. Karl von Dalberg, the prince-primate, who owed 
the coadjutorship of Mainz to the duke's friendship, said that 
he had never met a prince " with so much understanding, 
character, frankness and true-heartedness "; the Milanese, when 



he visited their city, called him the " uomo principe"; and 
Goethe himself said of him " he had the gift of discriminating 
intellects and characters and setting each one in his place. He 
was inspired by the noblest good-will, the purest humanity, and 
with his whole soul desired only what was best. There was in 
him something of the divine. He would gladly have wrought 
the happiness of all mankind. And finally, he was greater than 
his surroundings, . . . Everywhere he himself saw and judged, 
and in all circumstances his surest foundation was in himself." 
He left two sons: Charles Frederick (d. 1853), by whom he w?s 
succeeded, and Bernhard, duke of Saxe-Weimar (1792-1862), a 
distinguished soldier, who, after the congress of Vienna, became 
colonel of a regiment in the service of the king of the Netherlands, 
distinguished himself as commander of the Dutch troops in the 
Belgian campaign of 1830, and from 1847 to 1850 held the com- 
mand of the forces in the Dutch East Indies. Bernhard's son, 
William Augustus Edward, known as Prince Edward of Saxe- 
Weimar (1823-1902), entered the British army, served with 
much distinction in the Crimean War, and became colonel of the 
1st Life Guards and a field marshal; in 1851 he contracted 
a morganatic marriage with Lady Augusta Gordon-Lennox 
(d. 1904), daughter of the 5th duke of Richmond and Gordon, 
who in Germany received the title of countess of Dornburg, but 
was granted the rank of princess in Great Britain by royal 
decree in 1866. Karl August's only daughter, Caroline, married 
Frederick Louis, hereditary grand-duke of Mecklenburg- 
Schwerin, and was the mother of Helene (1814-1858), wife of 
Ferdinand, duke of Orleans, eldest son of King Louis Philippe. 

Karl August's correspondence with Goethe was published in 2 vols, 
at Weimar in 1863. See the biography by von Wegele in the Allgem. 
deutsche Biographic 

CHARLES EDWARD [Charles Edward Louis Philip 
Casimir StuartI (1720-1788), English prince, called the 
" Young Pretender " and also the " Young Chevalier," was 
born at Rome on December 31st, 1720. He was the grandson 
of King James II. of England and elder son of James, the " Old 
Pretender," by whom (as James III.) he was created at his birth 
prince of Wales, the title he bore among the English Jacobites 
during his father's lifetime. The young prince was educated at 
his father'? miniature court in Rome, with James Murray, 
Jacobite earl of Dunbar, for his governor, and under various 
tutors, amongst whom were the learned Chevalier Ramsay, 
Sir Thomas Sheridan and the abbe Legoux. He quickly became 
conversant with the English, French and Italian languages, 
but all his extant letters written in English appear singularly 
ill-spelt and illiterate. In 1734 his cousin, the duke of Liria, 
afterwards duke of Berwick, who was proceeding to join Don 
Carlos in his struggle for the crown of Naples, passed through 
Rome. He offered to take Charles on his expedition, and the 
boy of thirteen, having been appointed general of artillery by 
Don Carlos, shared with credit the dangers of the successful 
siege of Gaeta. 

The handsome and accomplished youth, whose doings were 
eagerly reported by the English ambassador at Florence and 
by the spy, John Walton, at Rome, was now introduced by his 
father and the pope to the highest Italian society, which he 
fascinated by the frankness of his manner and the grace and 
dignity of 'his bearing. In 1737 James despatched his son 
on a tour through the chief Italian cities, that his education as 
a prince and man of the world might be completed. The dis- 
tinction with which he was received on his journey, the royal 
honours paid to him in Venice, and the jealous interference of 
the English ambassador in regard to his reception by the grand- 
duke of Tuscany, show how great was the respect in which the 
exiled house was held at this period by foreign Catholic powers, 
as well as the watchful policy of England in regard to its fortunes. 
The Old Pretender himself calculated upon foreign aid in his 
attempts to restore the monarchy of the Stuarts; and the idea 
of rebellion unassisted by invasion or by support of any kind 
from abroad was one which it was left for Charles Edward to 
endeavour to realize. Of all the European nations France was 
the one on which Jacobite hopes mainly rested, and the warm 



CHARLES EDWARD 



941 



sympathy which Cardinal Tencin, who had succeeded Fleury 
as French minister, felt for the Old Pretender resulted in a 
definite scheme for an invasion of England to be timed simul- 
taneously with a prearranged Scottish rebellion. Charles was 
secretly despatched to Paris in January 1744. A squadron 
under Admiral Roquefeuil sailed from the coast of France. 
Transports containing 7000 troops, to be led by Marshal Saxe, 
accompanied by the young prince, were in readiness to set sail 
for England. A severe storm effected, however, a complete 
disaster without any actual engagement taking place. 

The loss in ships of the line, in transports, and in lives was a 
crushing blow to the hopes of Charles, who remained in France 
for over a year in a retirement which he keenly felt. He had 
at Rome already made the acquaintance of Lord Elcho and of 
John Murray of Broughton; at Paris he, had seen many sup- 
porters of the Stuart cause; he was aware that in every European 
court the Jacobites were represented in earnest intrigue; and 
he had now taken a considerable share in correspondence and 
other actual work connected with the promotion of his own and 
his father's interests. Although dissuaded by all his friends, 
on the 13th of July 1745 he sailed from Nantes for Scotland on 
board the small brig "La Doutelle," which was accompanied 
by a French man-of-war, the " Elisabeth," laden with arms and 
ammunition. The latter fell in with an English man-of-war, the 
" Lion," and had to return to France; Charles escaped during 
the engagement, and at length arrived on the 2nd of August off 
Erisca, a little island of the Hebrides. Receiving, however, but 
a cool reception from Macdonald of Boisdale, he set sail again 
and arrived at the bay of Lochnanuagh on the west coast of 
Inverness-shire. 

The Macdonalds of Clanranald and Kinloch Moidart, along 
with other chieftains, again attempted to dissuade him from 
the rashness of an unaided rising, but they yielded at last to the 
enthusiasm and charm of his manner, and Charles landed on 
Scottish soil in the company of the " Seven Men of Moidart " 
who had come with him from France. Everywhere, however, 
he met with discouragement among the chiefs, whose adherence 
he wished to secure; but 'at last, by enlisting the support of 
Cameron of Lochiel, he gained a footing for a serious rebellion. 
With secrecy and speed communications were entered into with 
the known leaders of the Highland clans, and on the 19th of 
August, in the valley of Glenfinnan, the standard of James III. 
and VIII. was raised in the midst of a motley but increasing 
crowd. On the same day Sir John Cope at the head of 1500 men 
left Edinburgh in search of Charles; but, fearing an attack in 
the Pass of Corryarrick, he changed his proposed route to 
Inverness, and Charles thus had the undefended south country 
before him. In the beginning of September he entered Perth, 
having gained numerous accessions to his forces on his march. 
Crossing the Forth unopposed at the Fords of Frew and passing 
through Stirling and Linlithgow, he arrived within a few miles 
of the astonished metropolis, and on the 16th of September a 
body of his skirmishers defeated the dragoons of Colonel Gardiner 
in what was known as the " Canter of Coltbrig." His success 
was still further augmented by his being enabled to enter the 
city, a few of Cameron's Highlanders having on the following 
morning, by a happy ruse, forced their way through the Canon- 
gate. On the 18th he publicly proclaimed James VIII. of Scot- 
land at the Market Cross and occupied Holyrood. 

Cope had by this time brought his disappointed forces by sea 
to Dunbar. On the 20th Charles met and defeated him at 
Prestonpans, and returned to prosecute the siege of Edinburgh 
Castle, which, however, he raised on General Guest's threatening 
to lay the city in ruins. In the beginning of November Charles 
left Edinburgh, never to return. He was at the head of at least 
6000 men; but the ranks were being gradually thinned by the 
desertion of Highlanders, whose traditions had led them to 
consider war merely as a raid and an immediate return with 
plunder. Having passed through Kelso, on the 9th of November 
he laid siege to Carlisle, which capitulated in a week. Manchester 
received the prince with a warm welcome and with 150 recruits 
under Francis Towneley. On the 4th of December he had reached 



Derby and was within ten days' march of London, where the 
inhabitants were terror-struck and a commercial panic immedi- 
ately ensued. Two armies under English leadership were now 
in the field against him, one under Marshal Wade, whom he 
had evaded by entering England by the west, and the other 
under William, duke of Cumberland, who had returned from the 
continent. London was not to be supposed helpless in such an 
emergency; Manchester, Glasgow and Dumfries, rid of his 
presence, had risen against him, and Charles paused. There was 
division among his advisers and desertion among his men, and 
on the 6th of December he reluctantly was forced to begin his 
retreat northward. Closely pursued by Cumberland, he marched 
by way of Carlisle across the border, and at last stopped to invest 
Stirling Castle. At Falkirk, on the 17th of January 1746, he 
defeated General Hawley, who had marched from Edinburgh 
to intercept his retreat. A fortnight later, however, Charles 
raised the siege of Stirling, and after a weary though successful 
march rested his troops at Inverness. Having taken Forts 
George and Augustus, and after varying success against the 
supporters of the government in the north, he at last prepared 
to face the duke of Cumberland, who had passed the early spring 
at Aberdeen. On the 8th of April the duke marched thence to 
meet Charles, whose little army, exhausted with a futile night 
march, half-starving, and broken by desertion, was completely 
worsted at Culloden on the i6thof April 1746. 

This decisive and cruel defeat sealed the fate of Charles Edward 
and the house of Stuart. Accompanied by the faithful Ned 
Burke and a few other followers, Charles at last gained the wild 
western coast. Hunted hither and thither, he wandered on foot 
or cruised restlessly in open boats among the many barren isles of 
the Scottish shore,enduring the greatest hardships with marvellous 
courage and cheerfulness. Charles, upon whose head a reward 
of £3°;°°° had a year before been set, was thus for over five 
months relentlessly pursued by the troops and spies of the 
government. Disguised in female attire and aided by a passport 
obtained by the devoted Flora Macdonald, he passed through 
Skye and parted from his gallant conductress at Portree. To- 
wards the end of July he took refuge in the cave of Coiraghoth 
in the Braes of Glenmoriston, and in August he joined Lochiel 
and Cluny Macpherson, with whom he remained in hiding until 
the news was brought that two French ships were in waiting 
for him at the place of his first arrival in Scotland — Lochnanuagh. 
He embarked with speed and sailed for France, reaching the 
little port of Roscoff, near Morlaix, on the 29th of September 
1746. He was warmly welcomed by Louis XV., and ere long 
he was again vigorously intriguing in Paris, and even in Madrid. 
So far as political assistance was concerned, his efforts proved 
fruitless, but he became at once the popular hero and idol of 
the people of Paris. So enraged was he with his brother 
Henry's acceptance of a cardinal's hat in July 1747, that he 
deliberately broke off communication with his father in Rome 
(who had approved the step), nor did he ever see him again. 
The enmity of the British government to Charles Edward made 
peace with France an impossibility so long as she continued to 
harbour the young prince. A condition of the treaty of Aix-la- 
Chapelle, concluded in October 1748, was that every member 
of the house of Stuart should be expelled the French dominions. 
Charles had forestalled the proclamation of the treaty by an 
indignant protest against its injustice, and a declaration that he 
would not be bound by its provisions. But his indignation and 
persistent refusal to comply with the request that he should 
voluntarily leave France had to be met at last with force: he 
was apprehended, imprisoned for a week at Vincennes, and on 
the 17th of December conducted to the French border. He 
lingered at Avignon; but the French, compelled to hard 
measures by the English, refused to be satisfied; and Pope 
Benedict XIV., alarmed by the threat of a bombardment of 
Civita Vecchia, advised the prince to withdraw. Charles quietly 
disappeared; for years Europe watched for him in vain. It is 
now established, almost with certainty, that he returned to 
the neighbourhood of Paris; and it is supposed that his resi- 
dence was known to the French ministers, who, however, firmly 



942 



CHARLES EMMANUEL I.— CHARLES MARTEL 



proclaimed their ignorance. In 1750, and again, it is thought, 
in 1754, he was in London, hatching futile plots and risking his 
safety for his hopeless cause, and even abjuring the Roman 
Catholic faith in order to further his political interests. 

During the next ten years of his life Charles Edward's illicit 
connexion with Miss Clementina Walkinshaw (d. 1802), whom 
he had first met at Bannockburn House while conducting the 
siege of Stirling, his imperious fretful temper, his drunken habits 
and debauched life, could no longer be concealed. He wandered 
over Europe in disguise, alienating the friends and crushing the 
hopes of his party; and in 1766, on returning to Rome at the 
death of his father, he was treated by Pope Clement XIII. with 
coldness, and his title as heir to the British throne was openly 
repudiated by all the great Catholic powers. It was probably 
through the influence of the French court, still intriguing against 
England, that the marriage between Charles (now self-styled 
count of Albany) and Princess Louise of Stolberg was arranged 
in 1772. The union proved childless and unhappy, and in 1780 
the countess fled for refuge from her husband's drunken violence 
to a convent in Florence, where Charles had been residing since 
1774. Later, the countess of Albany (q.v.) threw herself on the 
protection of her brother-in-law Henry, Cardinal York, at Rome, 
and the formal separation between the ill-matched pair was 
finally brought about in 1784, chiefly through the kind offices 
of King Gustavus III. of Sweden. Charles, lonely, ill, and 
evidently near death, now summoned to Florence his natural 
daughter, Charlotte Stuart, the child of Clementina Walkinshaw, 
born at Liege in October 1753 and hitherto neglected by the 
prince. Charlotte Stuart, who was declared legitimate and 
created duchess of Albany, tended her father for the remaining 
years of his life, during which she contrived to reconcile the two 
Stuart brothers, so that in 1785 Charles returned to Rome, where 
he died in the old Palazzo Muti on the 30th of January 1788. 
He was buried in his brother's cathedral church at Frascati, but 
in 1807 his remains were removed to the Grotte Vaticanc of 
St Peter's. His daughter Charlotte survived her father less than 
two years, dying unmarried at Bologna in November 1789, at 
the early age of thirty-six. 

See A. C. Ewald, Life and Times of Charles Stuart, the Young 
Pretender (2 vols., 1875) ; C. S. Terry, Life of the Young Pretender, 
and The Rising of 1745; with Bibliography of Jacobite History 1689- 
1788 (Scott. Hist. fr. Contemp. Writers, iii.)"(i90o) ; Earl Stanhope, 
History of England (1836) and Decline of the Last Stuarts (1854); 
Bishop R. Forbes, The Lyon in Mourning (1895-1896); Andrew 
Lang, Pickle, the Spy (1897), and Prince Charles Edward (1900); 
R. Chambers, History of the Rebellion in Scotland, &c. &c. 

(H. M. V.) 

CHARLES EMMANUEL I. [Carlo Emanuele] (1562-1630), 
duke of Savoy, succeeded his father, Emmanuel Philibert, 
in 1580. He continued the latter's policy of profiting by the 
rivalry of France and Spain in order to round off and extend 
his dominions. His three chief objects were the conquest of 
Geneva, of Saluzzo and of Monferrato. Saluzzo he succeeded 
in wresting from France in 1588. He intervened in the French 
religious wars, and also fought with Bern and other Swiss 
cantons, and on the murder of Henry III. of France in 1589 he 
aspired to the French throne on the strength of the claims, of his 
wife Catherine, sister of Henry of Navarre, afterwards King 
Henry IV. In 1590 he sent an expedition to Provence in the 
interests of the Catholic League, and followed it himself later, 
but the peace of 1593, by which Henry of Navarre was recognized 
as king of France, put an end to his ambitions. In the war 
between France and Spain Charles sided with the latter, with 
varying success. Finally, by the peace of Lyons (1601), he gave 
up all territories beyond the Rhone, but his possession of Saluzzo 
was confirmed. He now meditated a further enterprise against 
Geneva; but his attempt to capture the city by treachery and 
with the help of Spain (the famous escalade) in 1602 failed com- 
pletely. The next few years were filled with negotiations and 
intrigues with Spain and France which did not lead to any 
particular result, but on the death in 161 2 of Duke Francesco 
Gonzaga of Mantua, who was lord of Monferrato, Charles Em- 
manuel made a successful coup de main on that district. This 



arrayed the Venetians, Tuscany, the Empire and Spain against 
him, and he was obliged to relinquish his conquest. The 
Spaniards invaded the duchy from Lombardy, and although the 
duke was defeated several times he fought bravely, gained some 
successes, and the terms of the peace of 16 18 left him more or 
less in the status quo ante. We next find Charles Emmanuel 
aspiring to the imperial crown in 1619, but without success. 
In 1628 he was in alliance with Spain in the war against France; 
the French invaded the duchy, which, being abandoned by 
Spain, was overrun by their armies. The duke fought desper- 
ately, but was taken ill at Savigliano and died in 1630. He was 
succeeded by his son Victor Amedeo I., while his third son 
Tommaso founded the line of Savoy-Carignano from which the 
present royal house of Italy is descended. Charles Emmanuel 
achieved a great reputation as a statesman and warrior, and 
increased the prestige of Savoy, but he was 'too shifty and in- 
genious, and his schemes ended in disaster. 

See E. Ricotti, Storia delta monarchia piemontese, vols. iii. and iv. 
(Florence, 1865); T. Raulich, Storia di Carlo Emanuele I. (Milan, 
1 896-1902); G. Curti, Carlo Emanuele I. secondo; piu recenti studii 
(Milan, 1894). 

CHARLES MARTEL 1 (c. 688-741), Prankish ruler, was a 
natural son of Pippin II., mayor of the palace, and Chalpa'ida. 
Charles was baptized by St Rigobert, bishop of Reims. At the 
death of his father in 714, Pippin's widow Plectrude claimed the 
government in Austrasia and Neustria in the name of her grand- 
children, and had Charles thrown into prison. But the Neustrians 
threw off the Austrasian yoke and entered into an offensive 
alliance with the Frisians and Saxons. In the general anarchy 
Charles succeeded in escaping, defeated the Neustrians at 
Ambleve, south of Liege, in 716, and at Vincy, near Cambrai, in 
717, and forced them to come to terms. In Austrasia he wrested 
the power from Plectrude, and took the title of mayor of the 
palace, thus prejudicing the interests of his nephews. According 
to the Frankish custom he proclaimed a king in Austrasia in the 
person of the young Clotaire IV., but in reality Charles was the 
sole master — the entry in the annals for the year 717 being 
" Carolus regnare coepit." Once in possession of Austrasia, 
Charles sought to extend his dominion over Neustria also. In 
719 he defeated Ragenfrid, the Neustrian mayor of the palace, 
at Soissons, and forced him to retreat to Angers. Ragenfrid 
died in 731, and from that time Charles had no competitor in 
the western kingdom. He obliged the inhabitants of Burgundy 
to submit, and disposed of the Burgundian bishoprics and count- 
ships to his leudes. In Aquitaine Duke Odo (Eudes) exercised 
independent authority, but in 719 Charles forced him to recognize 
the suzerainty of northern France, at least nominally. After 
the alliance between Charles and Odo on the field of Poitiers, 
the mayor of the palace left Aquitaine to Odo's son Hunald, 
who paid homage to him. Besides establishing a certain unity 
in Gaul, Charles saved it from a very great peril. In 711 the 
Arabs had conquered Spain. In 720 they crossed the Pyrenees, 
seized Narbonensis, a dependency of the kingdom of the Visi- 
goths, and advanced on Gaul. By his able policy Odo succeeded 
in arresting their progress for some years; but a new vali, Abdur 
Rahman, a member of an extremely fanatical sect, resumed the 
attack, reached Poitiers, and advanced on Tours, the holy town 
of Gaul. In October 732 — just 100 years after the death of 
Mahomet — Charles gained a brilliant victory over Abdur 
Rahman, who was called back to Africa by the revolts of the 
Berbers and had to give up the struggle. This was the last of 
the great Arab invasions of Europe. After his victory Charles 
took the offensive, and endeavoured to wrest Narbonensis from 
the Mussulmans. Although he was not successful in his attempt 
to recover Narbonne (737), he destroyed the fortresses of Agde, 
Beziers and Maguelonne, and set fire to the amphitheatre at 
Nimes. He subdued also the Germanic tribes; annexed Frisia, 
where Christianity was beginning to make progress; put an end 
to the duchy of Alemannia; intervened in the internal affairs 
of the dukes of Bavaria; made expeditions into Saxony; and 
in 738 compelled some of the Saxon tribes to pay him tribute. 
1 Or " The Hammer." 



CHARLESTON 



943 



He also gave St Boniface a safe conduct for his missions in 
Thuringia, Alemannia and Bavaria. 

During the government of Charles Martel important changes 
appear to have been made in the internal administration. Under 
him began the great assemblies of nobles known as the champs 
de Mars. To attach his leud.es Charles had to give them church 
lands as precarium, and this had a very great influence in the 
development of the feudal system. It was from the precarium, 
or ecclesiastical benefice, that the feudal fief originated. Vassal- 
age, too, acquired a greater consistency at this period, and its 
rules began to crystallize. Under Charles occurred the first 
attempt at reconciliation between the papacy and the Franks. 
Pope Gregory III., menaced by the Lombatrds, invoked the aid 
of Charles (739), sent him a deputation with the keys of the 
Holy Sepulchre and the chains of St Peter, and offered to break 
with the emperor and Constantinople, and to give Charles the 
Roman consulate (ut a partibus imperatoris recederet et Romanum 
consulatum Carolo sanciret) . This proposal, though unsuccessful, 
was the starting-point of a new papal policy. Since the death of 
Theuderich IV. in 737 there had been no king of the Franks. 
In 741 Charles divided the kingdom between his two sons, as 
though he were himself master of the realm. To the elder, 
Carloman, he gave Austrasia, Alemannia and Thuringia, with 
suzerainty over Bavaria; the younger, Pippin, received' Neustria, 
Burgundy and Provence. Shortly after this division of the 
kingdom Charles died at Quierzy on the 22nd of October 741, 
and was buried at St Denis. The characters of Charles Martel 
and his grandson Charlemagne offer many striking points of 
resemblance. Both were men of courage and activity, and the 
two men are often confused in the chansons de geste. 

See T. Breysig, Jahrbiicher d. frank. Reichs, 714-741; die Zeit 
Karl Martells (Leipzig, 1869) ; A. A. Beugnot, " Sur la spoliation des 
biens du clerge attribute a Charles Martel," in the Mem. de VAcad. 
ties Inscr. et Belles-Lettres, vol. xix. (Paris, 1853); Ulysse Chevalier, 
Bio-bibliographie (2nd ed., Paris, 1904). (C. Pf.) 

CHARLESTON, a city and the county-seat of Coles county, 
Illinois, U.S.A., in the E. part of the state, about 45 m. W. 
of Terre Haute, Indiana. Pop. (1900) 5488; (1910) 5884. It 
is served by the Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St Louis, and 
the Toledo, St Louis & Western railways, and by interurban 
electric lines. It is the seat of the Eastern Illinois state normal 
school (opened in 1899). The city is situated in an important 
broom-corn raising district, and has broom factories, a tile 
factory and planing mills. The water-works are owned and 
operated by the municipality. Charleston was settled about 
1835, was incorporated in 1839, and was reincorporated in 1865. 
One of the Lincoln-Douglas debates was held here in 1858. 

CHARLESTON, the largest city of South Carolina, U.S.A., 
the county-seat of Charleston county, a port of entry, and an 
important South Atlantic seaport, on a narrow peninsula 
formed by the Cooper river on the E. and the Ashley on the W. 
and S.W., and within sight of the ocean about 7 m. distant. 
Pop. (1890) 54,955; (1900) 55,807, of whom 31,522 were of negro 
descent and 2592 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 58,833. 
It is served by the Atlantic Coast Line and the Southern railways, 
the Clyde Steamship Line to New York, Boston and Jackson- 
ville, the Baltimore & Carolina Steamship Co. to Baltimore and 
Georgetown, and a branch of the North German Lloyfl Steamship 
Co., which brings immigrants from Europe direct to the Southern 
states; there are freight boat lines to ports in the West Indies, 
Central America and other foreign countries. 

The city extends over 3.76 sq. m. of surface, nowhere rising 
more than 8 or 10 ft. above the rivers, and has about 9 m. of 
water front. In the middle of the harbour, on a small island 
near its entrance, is the famous Fort Sumter; a little to the 
north-east, on Sullivan's Island, is the scarcely less historic 
Fort Moultrie, as well as extensive modern fortifications; on 
James Island, opposite, is Fort Johnson, now the United States 
Quarantine Station, and farther up, on the other islands, are 
Fort Ripley and Castle Pinckney (now the United States buoy 
station). Viewed from any of these forts, Charleston's spires 
and public buildings seem to rise out of the sea. The streets 



are shaded with the live oak and the linden, and are ornamented 
with the palmetto; and the quaint specimens of colonial archi- 
tecture, numerous pillared porticoes, spacious verandas — both 
upper and lower — and flower gardens made beautiful with 
magnolias, palmettoes, azaleas, jessamines, camelias and roses, 
give the city a peculiarly picturesque character. 

King Street, running north and south through the middle 
of the peninsula, and Market Street, crossing it about 1 m.from 
its lower end, are lined with stores, shops or stalls; on Broad 
Street are many of the office buildings and banks; the wholesale 
houses are for the most part on Meeting Street, the first thorough- 
fare east of King; nearly all of the wharves are on the east side; 
the finest residences are at the lower end of the peninsula on 
East Battery and South Battery, on Meeting Street below 
Broad, on Legare Street, on Broad Street and on Rutledge 
Avenue to the west of King. At the south-east corner of Broad 
and Meeting streets is Saint Michael's (built in 1752-1761), 
the oldest church edifice in the city, and a fine specimen of colonial 
ecclesiastical architecture; in its tower is an excellent chime 
of eight bells. Beneath the vestry room lie the remains of 
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, and in the churchyard are the 
graves of John Rutledge, James Louis Petigru (1789-1863), and 
Robert Young Hayne. At the intersection of the same streets 
are also the massive United States post office building (Italian 
Renaissance in style), with walls of granite; the county court 
house, the city hall and Washington Square — in which stand a 
statue of William Pitt (one arm of which was broken off by a 
cannon shot during the British bombardment in 1780), and a 
monument to the memory of Henry Timrod (1829-1867), the 
poet. At the foot of Broad Street is the Colonial Exchange 
in which the South Carolina convention organized a new govern- 
ment during the War of Independence; and at the foot of 
Market Street is the large modern custom house of white marble, 
built in the Roman-Corinthian style. Saint Philip's church, 
with admirable architectural proportions, has a steeple nearly 
200 ft. in height, from which a beacon light shines for the guidance 
of mariners far out at sea. In the west cemetery of this church 
are the tombs of John C. Calhoun, and of Robert James Turnbull 
(1775-1833), who was prominent locally as a milliner and under 
the name of " Brutus " wrote ably on behalf of nullification, 
free trade and state's rights. The French Protestant Church, 
though small, is an attractive specimen of Gothic architecture; 
and the Unitarian, which is in the Perpendicular style and is 
modelled after the chapel of Edward VI. in Westminster, has 
a beautiful fan-tracery ceiling. 

Of the few small city squares, gardens or parks, the White 
Point Garden at the lower end of the peninsula is most frequented ; 
it is shaded with beautiful live oaks, is adorned with palmettoes 
and commands a fine view of the harbour. About i\ m. north 
of this on Meeting Street is Marion Square, with a tall graceful 
monument to the memory of John C. Calhoun on the south 
side, and the South Carolina Military Academy along the north 
border. The largest park in Charleston is Hampton Park, 
named in honour of General Wade Hampton. It is situated in 
the north-west part of the city and is beautifully laid out. The 
Isle of Palms, to the north of Sullivan's Island, has a large 
pavilion and a wide sandy beach with a fine surf for bathing, 
and is the most popular resort for visitors. The Magnolia 
Gardens are about 8 m. up the Ashley. Twenty-two miles 
beyond is the town of Summerville (pop. in 1900, 2420), a 
health resort in the pine lands, with one of the largest tea farms 
in the country. Magnolia Cemetery, the principal burial-place, 
is a short distance north of the city limits; in it are the graves 
of William Washington (1 732-1810) and Hugh Swinton Legare. 
Charleston was the home of the Pinckneys, the Rutledges, the 
Gadsdens, the Laurenses, and, in a later generation, of W. G. 
Simms. A trace of the early social organization of the brilliant 
colonial town remains in the St Cecilia Society, first formed in 
1737 as an amateur concert society. 

Charleston has an excellent system of public schools. Fore- 
most among the educational institutions is the college of Charles- 
ton, chartered in 1785 and again in 1791, and opened in 1790; 



944 



CHARLESTON 



it is supported by the city and by funds of its own, ranks high 
within the state, and has a large and well-equipped museum of 
natural history, probably founded as early as 1777 and transferred 
to the college in 1850. Here, too, are the Medical College of 
the state of South Carolina, which includes a department of 
pharmacy; the South Carolina Military Academy (opened in 
1843), which is a branch of the University of South Carolina; 
the Porter Military Academy (Protestant Episcopal), the 
Confederate home school for young women, the Charleston 
University School, and the Avery Normal Institute (Congrega- 
tionalist) for coloured students. In the Charleston library 
(about 25,000 volumes), founded in 1748, are important collec- 
tions of rare books and manuscripts; the rooms of the South 
Carolina Historical Society are in the same building. The 
Charleston News and Courier, published first as the Courier in 
1803 and combined with the Daily News (1865) in 1873, is one of 
the most influential newspapers in the South. The charitable 
institutions of the city include the Roper hospital, the Charles- 
ton Orphan Asylum (founded in 1792), the William Euston 
home for the aged, and a home for the widows of Confederate 
soldiers. 

In 1878 the United States government began the construction 
of jetties to remove the bar at the entrance to Charleston harbour, 
which was otherwise deep and spacious and well protected, and 
by means of these jetties the bar has been so far removed as to 
admit vessels drawing about 30 ft. of water. The result has been 
not only the promotion of the city's commerce, but the removal 
of the United States naval station and navy yard from Port 
Royal to what was formerly Chicora Park on the left bank of the 
Cooper river, a short distance above the city limits. The city's 
commerce consists largely in the export of cotton, 1 rice, fertil- 
izers, fruits, lumber and naval stores; the value of its exports, 
$10,794,000 in 1897, decreased to $2,196,596 in 1907 ($3,164,089 
in 1008), while that of the import trade ($1,255,483 in 1897) 
increased to $3,840,585 in 1907 ($3,323,844 in 1908). The 
principal industries are the preparation of fertilizers — largely 
from the extensive beds of phosphate rock along the banks of 
the Ashley river and from cotton-seed meal — cotton compressing, 
rice cleaning, canning oysters, fruits and vegetables, and the 
manufacture of cotton bagging, of lumber, of cooperage goods, 
clothing and carriages and wagons. Between 1880 and 1890 
the industrial development of the city was very rapid, the 
manufactures in 1890 showing an increase of 229-6% over those 
of 1880; the increase between 1890 and 1900 was only 6-2%. 
In 1900 the total value of the city's manufactures, 16-3% 
(in value) of the product of the entire state, was $9,562,387, the 
value of the fertilizer product alone, much the most important, 
being $3,697,ogo. 2 

History. — The first English settlement in South Carolina, 
established at Albemarle Point on the west bank of the Ashley 
river in 1670, was named Charles Town in honour of Charles II. 
The location proving undesirable, a new Charles Town on the 
site of the present city was begun about 1672, and the seat-of 
government was removed to it in 1 680. The name Charles Town 
became Charles town about 17 19 and Charleston in 1783. Among 
the early settlers were English Churchmen, New England 
Congregationalists, Scotch and Irish Presbyterians, Dutch and 
German Lutherans, Huguenots (especially in 1680-1688) from 
France and Switzerland, and a few Quakers; later the French 
element of the population was augmented by settlers from 
Acadia (1755) and from San Domingo (1793). Although it 
soon became the largest and the wealthiest settlement south of 
Philadelphia, Charleston did not receive a charter until 1783, 

1 At an early date cotton became an important article in Charles- 
ton's commerce; some was shipped so early as 1747. At the 
outbreak of the Civil War Charleston was one of the three most 
important cotton-shipping ports in the United States, being ex- 
ceeded in importance only by New Orleans and New York. 

2 The special census of 1905 dealt only with the factory product, 
that of 1905 ($6,007,094) showing an increase of 5-1 % over that of 
1900 ($5.7I3.3I5)- In 1905 the (factory) fertilizer product of 
Charleston was $1,291,859, which represented more than 35% of 
the (factory) fertilizer product of the whole state. 



and did not have even a township government. Local ordin- 
ances were passed by the provincial legislature and enforced 
partly by provincial officials and partly by the church wardens. 
It was, however, the political and social centre of the province, 
being not only the headquarters of the governor, council and 
colonial officials, but also the only place at which courts of 
justice were held until the complaints of the Up Country people 
led to the establishment of circuit courts in 1772. After the 
American War of Independence it continued to be the capital 
of South Carolina until 1790. The charter of 1783, though 
frequently amended and altered, is still in force. By an act of 
the state legislature passed in 1837 the terms " mayor " and 
" alderman " superseded the older terms " intendant " and 
" wardens." The city was the heart of the nullification move- 
ment of 1832-1833; and in St Andrew's Hall, in Broad Street, 
on the 20th of December i860, a convention called by the state 
legislature passed an ordinance of secession from the Union. 

Charleston has several times been attacked by naval forces 
and has suffered from many storms. Hurricane and epidemic 
together devastated the town both in 1699 and in 1854; the 
older and more thickly settled part of the town was burnt in 
1740, and a hurricane did great damage in 1752. In 1706, 
during the War of the Spanish Succession, a combined fleet of 
Spanish and French under Captain Le Feboure was repulsed 
by the forces of Governor Nathaniel Johnson (d, 17 13) and 
Colonel William Rhett (1666-1721). During the War of Inde- 
pendence Charleston withstood the attack of Sir Peter Parker 
and Sir Henry Clinton in 1776, and that of General Augustus 
Prevost in 1779, but shortly afterwards became the objective 
of a more formidable attack by Sir Henry Clinton, the 
commander-in-chief of the British forces in America. In the 
later years of the contest the British turned their attention to 
the reduction of the colonies in the south, and the prominent 
point and best base of operations in that section was the city 
of Charleston, which was occupied in the latter part of 1779 
by an American force under General Benjamin Lincoln. In 
December of that year Sir Henry Clinton embarked from New 
York with 8000 British troops and proceeded to invest Charleston 
by land. He entrenched himself west of the city between the 
Cooper and Ashley rivers, which bound it north and south, and 
thus hemmed Lincoln in a cul-de-sac. The latter made the mis- 
take of attempting to defend the city with an inferior force. 
Delays had occurred in the British operations and Clinton was 
not prepared to summon the Americans to surrender until the 
10th of April 1780. Lincoln refused, and Clinton advanced his 
trenches to the third parallel, rendering his enemy's works 
untenable. On the 12th of May Lincoln capitulated. About 
2000 American Continentals were made prisoners, and an equal 
number of militia and armed citizens. This success was regarded 
by the British as an offset against the loss of Burgoyne's army 
in 1777, and Charleston at once became the base of active 
operations in the Carolinas, which Clinton left Cornwallis to 
conduct. Thenceforward Charleston was under military rule 
until evacuated by the British on the 14th of December 1782. 

The bombardment and capture of Fort ,Sumter (garrisoned 
by Federal troops) by the South Carolinians, on the 12th and 
13 th of April 1 86 1, marked the actual beginning of the American 
Civil War. * From 1862 onwards Charleston was more or less 
under siege by the Federal naval and military forces until 1865. 
The Confederates repulsed a naval attack made by the Federals 
under Admiral S. F. Du Pont in April 1863, and a land attack 
under General Q. A. Gillmore in June of the same year. They 
were compelled to evacuate the city on the 17 th of February 
1865, after having burned a considerable amount of cotton and 
other supplies to prevent them from falling into the hands of the 
enemy. After the Civil War the wealth and the population 
steadily increased, in spite of the destruction wrought by the 
earthquake of 31st August 1886 (see Earthquake). In that 
catastrophe 27 persons were killed, many more were injured 
and died subsequently, 90% of the buildings were injured, and 
property to the value of more than $5,000,000 was destroyed. 
The South Carolina Interstate and West Indian Exposition, held 



CHARLESTON— CHARLEVILLE 



945 



here from the ist of December 1901 to the 1st of June 1902, 
called the attention of investors to the resources of the city and 
state, but was not successful financially, and Congress appro- 
priated $160,000 to make good the deficit. 

Much information concerning Charleston may be obtained in A. S. 
Salley's A Guide and Historical Sketch of Charleston (Charleston, 1903) , 
and in Mrs St Julien Ravenel's Charleston; The Place and the People 
(New York, 1906). The best history of Charleston is William A. 
Courtenay's Charleston, S.C.: The Centennial of Incorporation 
(Charleston, 1884). There is also a good sketch by Yates Snowden in 
L. P. PoweH's Historic Towns of the Southern States (New York, 1900). 
For the earthquake see the account by Carl McKinley in the Charleston 
Year-Book for 1886. See also South Carolina. 

CHARLESTON, the capital of West Virginia, U.S.A., and the 
county-seat of Kanawha county, situated near the centre of the 
state, on the N. bank of the Kanawha river, at the mouth of 
the Elk river, about 200 m. E. of Cincinnati, Ohio, and about 
130 m. S.W. of Wheeling. Pop. (1890) 6742; (1900) 11,099, 
of whom 1787 were negroes, and 353 were foreign-born; (1910 
census) 22,996' It is served by the Chesapeake & Ohio, the 
Toledo & Ohio Central, the Coal & Coke, and the Kanawha & 
West Virginia (39 m. to Blakeley) railways, and by several river 
transportation lines on the Kanawha river (navigable throughout 
the year by means of movable locks) connecting with Ohio and 
Mississippi river ports. The city is attractively built on high 
level land, above the river; in addition to a fine customs house, 
court house and high school, it contains the West Virginia state 
capitol, erected in 1880. The libraries include the state law 
library, with 14,000 volumes in 1908, and the library of the 
state Department of Archives and History, with about 11,000 
volumes. Charleston is in the midst of a region rich in bitu- 
minous coal, the shipment of which by river and rail constitutes 
one of its principal industries. Oil wells in the vicinity also 
furnish an important product for export, and there are iron and 
salt mines near. An ample supply of natural gas is utilized by 
its manufacturing establishments; and among its manufactures 
are axes, lumber, foundry and machine shop products, furniture, 
boilers, woollen goods, glass and chemical fire-engines. The value 
of the city's factory products increased from $1,261,815 m 1900 
to $2,728,074 in 1905, or 116.2%, a greater rate of increase 
than that of any other city (with 8000 or more inhabitants) 
in the state during this period. The first permanent white 
settlement at Charleston was made soon after the close of the 
War of Independence; it was one of the places through which 
the streams of immigrants entered the Ohio Valley, and it 
became of considerable importance as a centre of transfer and 
shipment, but it was not until the development of the coal- 
mining region that it became industrially important. Charleston 
was incorporated in 1794, and was chartered as a city in 1870. 
Since the latter year it has been the seat of government of West 
Virginia, with the exception of the decade 1875-1885, when 
Wheeling was the capital. 

CHARLESTOWN, formerly a separate city of Middlesex 
county, Massachusetts, U.S.A., but since 1874 a part of the city 
of Boston, with which it had long before been in many respects 
practically one. It is situated on a small peninsula on Boston 
harbour, between the mouths of the Mystic and Charles rivers; 
the first bridge across the Charles, built in 1786, connected 
Charlestown and Boston. A United States navy yard (1800), 
occupying about 87 acres, and the Massachusetts state prison 
(1805) are here; the old burying-ground contains the grave of 
John Harvard and that of Thomas Beecher, the first American 
member of the famous Beecher family; and there is a soldiers' 
and sailors' monument (1872), designed by Martin Milmore. 
Charlestown was founded in 1628 or 1629, being the oldest part 
of Boston, and soon rose into importance; it was organized 
as a township in 1630, and was chartered as a city in 1847. 
Within its limits was fought, on the 17th of June 1775, the battle 
of Bunker Hill (q.v.), when Charlestown was almost completely 
destroyed by the British. The Bunker Hill Monument com- 
memorates the battle; and the navy yard at Moulton's Point 
was the landing-place of the attacking British troops. Little 
was done toward the rebuilding of Charlestown until 1783. 



The original territory of the township was very large, and from 
parts of it were formed Woburn (1642), Maiden (1649), Stoneham 
(1725), and Somerville (1842); other parts were annexed to 
Cambridge, to Medford and to Arlington. S. F. B. Morse, the 
inventor of the electric telegraph, was born here ; and Charles- 
town was the birthplace and home of Nathaniel Gorham (1738- 
1796), a member of the Continental Congress in 1782-1783 and 
1 785-1 787, and its president in 1786; and was the home of 
Loammi Baldwin (1780-1838), a well-known civil engineer; of 
Samuel Dexter (1761-1816), an eminent lawyer, secretary of 
war and for a short time secretary of the treasury in the cabinet 
of President John Adams; and of Oliver Holden (1765-1831), a 
composer of hymn-tunes, including " Coronation." 

See R. Frothingham, History of Charlestown (Boston, 1845), 
covering 1629-1775; J. F. Hunnewell, A Century of Town Life . . . 
!775~i887 (Boston, 1888) ; and Timothy T. Sawyer, Old Charlestown 
(1902). 

CHARLET, NICOLAS TOUSSAINT (1792-1845), French de- 
signer and painter, more especially of military subjects, was 
born in Paris on the 20th of December 1792. He was the son of a 
dragoon in the Republican army, whose death in the ranks left 
the widow and orphan in very poor circumstances. Madame 
Charlet, however, a woman of determined spirit and an extreme 
Napoleonist, managed to give her boy a moderate education at 
the Lycee Napoleon, and was repaid by his lifelong affection. 
His first employment was in a Parisian mairie, where he had to 
register recruits: he served in the National Guard in 1814, 
fought bravely at the Barriere de Clichy, and, being thus un- 
acceptable to the Bourbon party, was dismissed from the mairie 
in 1 8 1 6. He then, having from a very early age had a propensity 
for drawing, entered the atelier of the distinguished painter 
Baron Gros, and soon began issuing the first of those lithographed 
designs which eventually brought him renown. His " Grenadier 
de Waterloo," 1817, with the motto " La Garde meurt et ne se 
rend pas " (a famous phrase frequently attributed to Cambronne, 
but which he never uttered, and which cannot, perhaps, be traced 
farther than to this lithograph by Charlet), was particularly 
popular. It was only towards 1822, however, that he began to 
be successful in a professional sense. Lithographs (about 2000 
altogether), water-colours, sepia-drawings, numerous oil sketches, 
and a few etchings followed one another rapidly; there were 
also three exhibited oil pictures, the first of which was especially 
admired — "Episode in the Campaign of Russia" (1836), the 
" Passage of the Rhine by Moreau " (1837), " Wounded Soldiers 
Halting in a Ravine " (1843). Besides the military subjects in 
which he peculiarly delighted, and which found an energetic 
response in the popular heart, and kept alive a feeling of regret 
for the recent past of the French nation and discontent with 
the present, — a feeling which increased upon the artist himself 
towards the close of his career,- — Charlet designed many subjects 
of town life and peasant life, the ways of children, &c, with much 
wit and whim in the descriptive mottoes. One of the most 
famous sets is the " Vie civile, politique, et militaire du Caporal 
Valentin," 50 lithographs, dating from 1838 to 1842. In 1838 
his health began to fail owing to an affection of the chest. He 
died in Paris on the 30th of October 1845. Charlet was an un- 
commonly tall man, with an expressive face, bantering and good 
natured; his character corresponded, full of boyish fun and 
high spirits, with manly independence, and a vein of religious 
feeling, and he was a hearty favourite among his intimates, one 
of whom was the painter Gericault. Charlet married in 1824, and 
two sons survived him. 

A life of Charlet was published in 1856 by a military friend, De la 
Combe. (W. M. R.) 

CHARLEVILLE, a town of north-eastern France, in the 
department of Ardennes, 151 m. N.E. of Paris on the Eastern 
railway. Pop. (1906) 19,693. Charleville is situated within 
a bend of the Meuse on its left bank, opposite Mezieres, with 
which it is united by a suspension bridge. The town was founded 
in 1606 by Charles III. (Gonzaga), duke of Nevers, afterwards 
duke of Mantua, and is laid out on a uniform plan. ' Its central 
and most interesting portion is the Place Ducale, a large square 



946 



CHARLEVOIX— CHARLOTTESVILLE 



surrounded by old houses with high-pitched roofs, the porches 
being arranged so as to form a continuous arcade; in the centre 
there is a fountain surmounted by a statue of the duke Charles. 
A handsome church in the Romanesque style and the other public 
buildings date from the 19th century. An old mill, standing on 
the bank of the river, dates from the early years of the 
town's existence. On the right bank of the Meuse is Mont 
Olympe, with the ruins of a fortress dismantled under Louis XIV. 
Charleville, which shares with Mezieres the administrative 
institutions of the department of Ardennes, has tribunals of first 
instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a board of 
trade-arbitrators and lycees and training colleges for both sexes. 
Its chief industries are metal-founding and the manufacture of 
nails, anvils, tools and other iron goods, and brush-making; 
leather-working and sugar-refining, and the making of bricks and 
clay pipes are also carried on. 

CHARLEVOIX, PIERRE FRANCOIS XAVIER DE (1682-1761), 
French Jesuit traveller and historian, was born at St Quentin on 
the 29th of October 1682. At the age of sixteen he entered the 
Society of Jesus; and at the age of twenty-three was sent to 
Canada, where he remained for four years as professor at Quebec. 
He then returned and became professor of belles lettres at home, 
and travelled on the errands of his society in various countries. 
In 1720-1722, under orders from the regent, he visited America 
lor the second time, and went along the Great Lakes and dpwn 
the Mississippi. In later years (1733-1755) he was one of the 
directors of the Journal de Trivoux. He died at La Fleche on 
the 1st of February 1761. His works, enumerated in the Biblio- 
graphic des Prers de la Compagnie de Jesus (by Carlos Sommer- 
vogel), fall into two groups. The first contains his Histoire de 
I'etablissemenl, du progres et de la decadence du Christianisme 
dans V empire du Japon (Rouen, 1715; English trans. History 
of the Church of Japan, 17 15), and his Histoire et description 
generate du Japon (1736), a compilation chiefly from Kampfer. 
The second group includes his historical work on America: 
Histoire de I'lsle Espagnole ou de Saint Domingue (1730), based 
on manuscript memoirs of P. Jean-Baptiste Le Pers and original 
sources; Histoire de Paraguay (1756); Vie de la Mere Marie 
de I' Incarnation, inslitulrice et premiere supirieure des Urselines 
de la Nouvelle-France (1724); Histoire et description ginerale 
de la Nouvelle-France (1744; in English 1769; tr. J. G. 
Shea, 1866-1872), a work of capital importance for Canadian 
history. 

CHARLEVOIX, a village and the county-seat of Charlevoix 
county, Michigan, U.S.A., 16 m. E.S.E. of Petoskey, on Lake 
Michigan and Pine Lake, which are connected by Pine river and 
Round Lake. Pop. (1890) 1496; (1900) 2079; (1904) 2395; 
(1910) 2420. It is on the main line of the Pere Marquette 
railway, and during the summer season is served by lake steamers. 
The village is best known as a summer resort; it is built on bluffs 
and on a series of terraces rising from Round and Pine lakes and 
affording extensive views; and there are a number of attractive 
summer residences. Charlevoix is an important hardwood 
lumber port, and the principal industries are the manufacture 
of lumber and of cement; fishing (especially for lake trout and 
white fish) ; the raising of sugar beets; and the manufacture 
of rustic and fancy wood-work. Charlevoix was settled about 
1866, and was incorporated as a village in 1879. 

CHARLOTTE, a city and the county-seat of Mecklenburg 
county, North Carolina, U.S.A., situated on Sugar Creek, in 
the south-west part of the state, about 175 m. south-west of 
Raleigh. Pop. (1890) 11,557; ( I 9o°) 18,091, of whom 7151 
were negroes; (1910 census) 34,014. It is served by the 
Seaboard Air Line and the Southern railways. Among the 
public buildings are a fine city hall, court-house, Federal and 
Young Men's Christian Association buildings, and a Carnegie 
library; several hospitals: St Peter's (Episcopal) for whites, 
Good Samaritan (Episcopal) for negroes, Mercy General (Roman 
Catholic) and a Presbyterian. The city is the seat of Elizabeth 
College and Conservatory of Music (1897), a non-sectarian 
institution for women, of the Presbyterian College for women, 
and of Biddle University (Presbyterian) for negroes, established 



in 1867. There is a United States assay office, established as a 
branch mint in 1837, during the days of North Carolina's great 
importance as a gold producing state, and closed from 1861 to 
1869. The city has large cotton, clothing, and knitting mills, 
and manufactories of cotton-seed oil, tools, machinery, fertilizers 
and furniture. The total value of its factory products was 
$4,849,630 in 1905. There are large electric power plants in 
and near the city. Printing and publishing are of some im- 
portance: Charlotte is the publication headquarters of the 
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church; and several textile 
trade journals and two medical periodicals are published here. 
The water-works are owned by the municipality. Charlotte 
was settled about 1750 and was incorporated in 1768. Here 
in May 1775 was adopted the " Mecklenburg Declaration of 
Independence " (see North Carolina), and in honour of its 
signers there is a monument in front of the court-house. Charlotte 
was occupied in September 1780 by Cornwallis, who left it after 
learning of the battle of King's Mountain, and subsequently 
it became the principal base and rendezvous of General Greene. 

CHARLOTTENBURG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom 
of Prussia, on the Spree, lying immediately west of Berlin, 
of which it forms practically the entire western suburb. The 
earlier name of the town was Lietzenburg. Pop. (1890) 76,859; 
(1900) 189,290; (1905) 237,231. It is governed by a council 
of 94 members. The central part of the town is connected with 
Berlin by a magnificent avenue, the Charlottenburger Chaussee, 
which runs from the Brandenburger Tor through the whole 
length of the Tiergarten. Although retaining its own municipal 
government, Charlottenburg,together with the adjacent suburban 
towns of Schoneberg and Rixdorf, was included in 1900 in the 
police district of the capital. The Schloss, built in 1696 for 
the electress Sophie Charlotte, queen of the elector Frederick, 
afterwards King Frederick I., after whom the town was named, 
contains a collection of antiquities and paintings. In the 
grounds stands a granite mausoleum, the work of Karl Friedrich 
Schinkel, with beautiful white marble recumbent statues of 
Frederick William III. and his queen Louise by Christian 
Daniel Rauch, and also those of the emperor William I. and 
the empress Augusta by Erdmann Encke. It was in the Schloss 
that the emperor Frederick III. took over the reins of govern- 
ment in 1888, and here he resided for nearly the whole of his 
three months' reign. The town contains an equestrian statue 
of Frederick. Of public buildings, the famous technical academy 
and the Kaiser Wilhelm memorial church are referred to in the 
article Berlin. In Charlottenburg is the Physikalisch-technische 
Reichsanstalt, a state institution for the carrying out of scientific 
experiments and measurements, and for testing instruments of 
precision, materials, &c. It was established in 1886 with money 
provided by Ernst Werner Siemens. In addition to the famous 
royal porcelain manufactory, Charlottenburg has many flourish- 
ing industries, notably iron-works grouped along the banks of 
the Spree. Its main thoroughfares are laid out on a spacious 
plan, while there are many quiet streets containing pretty villas. 

See F. Schultz, Chronik von Charlottenburg (Charlottenburg, 1888). 

CHARLOTTESVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Albemarle 
county, Virginia, U.S.A., picturesquely situated on ihe Rivanna 
river, 96 m. (by rail) N. W. of Richmond in the beautiful Piedmont 
region. Pop. (1890) 5591; (1900) 6449 (2613 being negroes); 
(r9io) 6765. Thecity is served by the Chesapeake & Ohio, and the 
Southern railways, and is best known as the seat of the University 
of Virginia (q.v.), which was founded by Thomas Jefferson. Here 
are also the Rawlings Institute for girls, founded as the Albemarle 
Female Institute in 1857, and a University school. Monticello, 
Jefferson's home, is still standing about 2 m. south-east of the 
city on a fine hill, called Little Mountain until Jefferson Italian- 
ised the name. The south pavilion of the present house is the 
original brick building, one and a half storeys high, first occupied 
by Jefferson in 1770. He was buried near the house, which was 
sold by his daughter some years after his death. George Rogers 
Clark was born near Monticello. Charlottesville is a trade 
centre for the surrounding country; among its manufactures 
are woollen goods, overalls, agricultural implements and 



CHARLOTTETOWN— CHARNOCKITE 



947 



cigars and tobacco. The city owns its water-supply system 
and owns and operates ite gas plant; an electric plant, privately 
owned, lights the streets and many houses. The site of the city 
was a part of the Castle Hill estate of Thomas Walker (1715- 
1794), an intimate friend of George Washington. The act 
establishing the town of Charlottesville was passed by the 
Assembly of Virginia inNovember 1762, when the name Charlottes- 
ville (in honour of Queen Charlotte, wife of George III.) first 
appeared. In 17 79-1 780 about 4000 of Burgoyne's troops, 
surrendered under the " Convention " of Saratoga, were 
quartered here; in October 1780 part of them were sent to 
Lancaster, Pa., and later the rest were sent north. In June 
1781 Tarleton raided Charlottesville and the vicinity, nearly 
captured Thomas Jefferson, and destroyed the public records 
and some arms and ammunition. In 1888 Charlottesville was 
chartered as a city administratively independent of the county. 

CHARLOTTETOWN, a city of Canada, the capital of Prince 
Edward Island, situated in Queen's county, on Hillsborough 
river. Pop. (1901) 12,080. It has a good harbour, and the 
river is navigable by large vessels for several miles. The export 
trade of the island centres here, and the city has regular communi- 
cation by steamer with the chief American and Canadian ports. 
Besides the government buildings and the court-house, it 
contains numerous churches, the Prince of Wales College, 
supported by the province, the Roman Catholic college of St 
Dunstan's and a normal school; among its manufactures are 
woollen goods, lumber, canned goods, and foundry products. 
The head office and. workshops of the Prince Edward Island 
railway are situated here. The town was founded in 1 750 by the 
French under the name of Port la Joie, but under British rule 
changed its name in honour of the queen of George III. 

CHARM (through the Fr. from the Lat. carmen, a song), an 
incantation, verses sung with supposed magical results, hence 
anything possessing powers of bringing good luck or averting 
evil, particularly articles worn with that purpose, such as an 
amulet. It is thus used of small trinkets attached to bracelets 
or chains. The word is also used, figuratively, of fascinating 
qualities of feature, voice or character. 

CHARNAY, (CLAUDE JOSEPH) DESIRE (1828- ), French 
traveller and archaeologist, was born in Fleurie (Rhone), on the 
2nd of May 1828. He studied at the Lycee Charlemagne, in 
1850 became a teacher in New Orleans, Louisiana, and there 
became acquainted with John Lloyd Stephens's books of travel 
in Yucatan. He travelled in Mexico, under a commission from 
the French ministry of education, in 1857-1861; in Madagascar 
in 1863; m South America, particularly Chile and Argentina, in 
1875; and in Java and Australia in 1878. In 1880-1883 he 
again visited the ruined cities of Mexico. Pierre Lorillard of 
New York contributed to defray the expense of this expedition, 
and Charnay named a great ruined city near the Guatemalan 
boundary line Ville Lorillard in his honour. Charnay went to 
Yucatan in 1886. The more important of his publications are 
Le Mexique, souvenirs et impressions de voyage (1863), being his 
personal report on the expedition of 1857-61, of which the 
official report is to be found in Viollet-le-Duc's Cites et mines 
amiricaines: Mitla, Palenque, Izamal, Chichen-Itza, Uxmal 
(1863), vol. 19 of Recueil des voyages et des documents; Les 
Anciennes Villes du Nouveau Monde (1885; English translation, 
The Ancient Cities of the New World, 1887, by Mmes. Gonino 
and Conant); a romance, Une Princesse indienne avant la 
conquete (1888); A travers les forets merges (1890); and Manu- 
scrit Ramirez: Histoire de I'origine des Indiens qui habitent la 
Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions (1903). He translated 
Cortez's letters into French, under the title Lettres de Fernand 
Cortes a Charles-quint sur la dexouverte et la conquete du Mexique 
(1896). He elaborated a theory of Toltec migrations and con- 
sidered the prehistoric Mexican to be of Asiatic origin, because 
of observed similarities to Japanese architecture, Chinese decora- 
tion, Malaysian language and Cambodian dress, &c. 

CHARNEL HOUSE (Med. Lat. carnarium), a place for deposit- 
ing the bones which might be thrown up in digging graves. 
Sometimes, as at Gloucester, Hythe and Ripon, it was a portion 



of the crypt; sometimes, as at Old St Paul's and Worcester 
(both now destroyed), it was a separate building in the church- 
yard; sometimes chantry chapels were attached to these build- 
ings. Viollet-le-Duc has given two very curious examples of 
such ossuaires (as the French call them) — one from Fleurance 
(Gers), the other from Faouet (Finistere). 

CHARNOCK, JOB (d. 1693), English founder of Calcutta, 
went out to India in 1655 or 1656, apparently not in the East 
India Company's service, but soon joined it. He was stationed 
at Cossimbazar, and subsequently at Patna. In 1685 he became 
chief agent at Hugli. Being besieged there by the Mogul viceroy 
of Bengal, he put the company's goods and servants on board 
his light vessels and dropped down the river 27 m. to the village 
of Sutanati, a place well chosen for the purpose of defence, which 
occupied the site of what is now Calcutta. It was only, however, 
at the third attempt that Charnock finally settled down at this 
spot, and the selection of the future capital of India was entirely 
due to his stubborn resolution. He was a silent morose man, not 
popular among his contemporaries, but " always a faithfull Man 
to the Company." He is said to have married a Hindu widow. 

CHARNOCK (or Chernock), ROBERT (c.i 663-1 696), English 
conspirator, belonged to a Warwickshire family, and was edu- 
cated at Magdalen College, Oxford, becoming a fellow of his 
college and a Roman Catholic priest. When in 1687 the dispute 
arose between James II. and the fellows of Magdalen over the 
election of a president Charnock favoured the first royal nominee, 
Anthony Farmer, and also the succeeding one, Samuel Parker, 
bishop of Oxford. Almost alone among the fellows he was not 
driven out in November 1687, and he became dean and then 
vice-president of the college under the new regime, but was 
expelled in October 1688. Residing at the court of the Stuarts 
in France, or conspiring in England, Charnock and Sir George 
Barclay appear to have arranged the details of the unsuccessful 
attempt to kill William III. near Turnham Green in February 
1696. Barclay escaped, but Charnock was arrested, was tried 
and found guilty, and was hanged on the 18th of March 1696. 

CHARNOCKITE, a series of foliated igneous rocks of wide 
distribution and great importance in India, Ceylon, Madagascar 
and Africa. The name was given by Dr T. H. Holland from the 
fact that the tombstone of Job Charnock, the founder of Calcutta, 
is made of a block of this rock. The charnockite series includes 
rocks of many different types, some being acid and rich in quartz 
and microcline, others basic and full of pyroxene and olivine, while 
there are also intermediate varieties corresponding minera- 
logically to norites, quartz-norites and diorites. A special 
feature, recurring in many members of the group, is the presence 
of strongly pleochroic, reddish or green hypersthene. Many of 
the minerals of these rocks are " schillerized," as they contain 
minute platy or rod-shaped enclosures, disposed parallel to 
certain crystallographic planes or axes. The reflection of light 
from the surfaces of these enclosures gives the minerals often 
a peculiar appearance, e.g. the quartz is blue and opalescent, the 
felspar has a milky shimmer like moonshine, the hypersthene has 
a bronzy metalloidal gleam. Very often the different rock types 
occur in close association as one set forms bands alternating with 
another set,or veins traversing it, and where one facies appears the 
others also usually are found. The term charnockite conse- 
quently is not the name of a rock, but of an assemblage of rock 
types, connected in their origin because arising by differentiation 
of the same parent magma. The banded structure which these 
rocks commonly present in the field is only in a small measure due 
to crushing, but is to a large extent original,and has been produced 
by fluxion in a viscous crystallizing intrusive magma, together 
with differentiation or segregation of the mass into bands of differ- 
ent chemical and mineralogical composition. There have also 
been, of course, earth movements acting on the solid rock at a 
later time and injection of dikes both parallel to and across the 
primary foliation. In fact, the history of the structures of the 
charnockite series is the history of the most primitive gneisses 
in all parts of the world, for which we cannot pretend to have 
as yet any thoroughly satisfactory explanations to offer. A 
striking fact is the very wide distribution of rocks of this group 



948 



CHARNWOOD FOREST— CHARRON 



in the southern hemisphere; but they also, or rocks very similar 
to them, occur in Norway, Fiance, Germany, Scotland and 
North America, though in these countries they have been mostly 
described as pyroxene granulites, pyroxene gneisses, anorthosites, 
&c. They are usually regarded as being of Archean age (pre- 
Cambrian), and in most cases this can be definitely proved, 
though not in all. It is astonishing to find that in spite of their 
great age their minerals are often in excellent preservation. In 
India they form the Nilgiri Hills, the Shevaroys and part of the 
Western Ghats, extending southward to Cape Comorin and re- 
appearing in Ceylon. Although they are certainly for the most 
part igneous gneisses (or orthogneisses), rocks occur along with 
them, such as marbles, scapolite limestones, and corundum rocks, 
which were probably of sedimentary origin. (J. S. F.) 

CHARNWOOD FOREST, an upland tract in the N.-W. of 
Leicestershire, England. It is undulating, rocky, picturesque, 
and in great part barren, though there are some extensive tracts 
of woodland; its elevation is generally 600 ft. and upwards, the 
area exceeding this height being about 6100 acres. The loftiest 
point, Bardon Hill, is 9 1 2 ft. On its western flank lies a coalfield, 
with Coalville and other mining towns, and granite and hone- 
stones are worked. 

CHAROLLES, a town of east-central France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Saone-et-Loire, situated 
at the confluence of the Semence and the Arconce, 39 m. W.N.W. 
of Macon on the Paris-Lyon railway. Pop. (1906) 3228. It has 
a sub-prefecture, tribunals of primary instance and commerce, 
and a communal college. There are stone quarries in the vicinity ; 
the town manufactures pottery, and is the centre for trade in the 
famous breed of Charolais cattle and in agricultural products. 
The ruins of the castle of the counts of Charolais occupy the 
summit of a hill in the immediate vicinity of the town. Charolles 
was the capital of Charolais, an old division of France, which 
from the early 14th century gave the title of count to its possessors. 
In 1327 the countship passed by marriage to the house of 
Armagnac, and in 1390 it was sold to Philip of Burgundy. After 
the death of Charles the Bold, who in his youth had borne the 
title of count of Charolais, it was seized by Louis XL of France, 
but in 1493 it was ceded by Charles VIII. to Maximilian of 
Austria, the representative of the Burgundian family. Ulti- 
mately passing to the Spanish kings, it became for a considerable 
period an object of dispute between France and Spain, until at 
length in 1684 it was assigned to the great Conde, a creditor of 
the king of Spain. It was united to the French crown in 1771. 

CHARON, in Greek mythology, the son of Erebus and Nyx 
(Night). It was his duty to ferry over the Styx (or Acheron) 
those souls of the deceased who had duly received the rites of 
burial, in payment for which service he received an obol, which 
was placed in the mouth of the corpse. It was only exceptionally 
that he carried living passengers (Aeneid, vi. 295 ff.). As 
ferryman of the dead he is not mentioned in Homer or Hesiod, 
and in this character is probably of Egyptian origin. He is 
represented as a morose and grisly old man in a black sailor's 
cape. By the Etruscans he was also supposed to be a kind of 
executioner of the powers- of the nether world, who, armed with 
an enormous hammer, was associated with Mars in the slaughter 
of battle. Finally he came to be regarded as the image of death 
and the world below. As such he survives in the Charos or 
Charontas of the modern Greeks — a black bird which darts down 
upon its prey, or a winged horseman who fastens his victims to 
the saddle and bears them away to the realms of the dead. 

See J. A. Ambrosch, De Charonte Etrusco (1837), a learned and 
exhaustive monograph; B. Schmidt, Volksleben der Neugriechen 
(1871), i. 222-251; O. Waser, Charon, Charun, Charos, mythologisch- 
archaologische Monographie (1898); S. Rocco, "Sufi" origine del 
Mito di Caronte," in Rivista di storia antica, ii. (1897), wn o considers 
Charon to be an old name for the sun-god Helios embarking during 
the night for the East. 

CHARONDAS, a celebrated lawgiver of Catina in Sicily. 
His date is uncertain. Some make him a pupil of Pythagoras 
(c. 580-504 B.C.) ; but all that can be said is that he was earlier 
than Anaxilaus of Rhegium (494-476), since his laws were in 
u«e amongst the Rhegians until they were abolished by that 



tyrant. His laws, originally written in verse, were adopted by 
the other Chalcidic colonies in Sicily and Italy. According to 
Aristotle there was nothing special about these laws, except 
that Charondas introduced actions for perjury; but he speaks 
highly of the precision with which they were drawn up (Politics, 
ii. 12). The story that Charondas killed himself because he 
entered the public assembly wearing a sword, which was a 
violation of his own law, is also told of Diodes and Zaleucus 
(Diod. Sic. xii. n-19). The fragments of laws attributed to him 
by Stobaeus and Diodorus are of late (neo-Pythagorean) origin. 

See Bentley, On Phalaris, which (according to B. Niese s.v. in 
Pauly, Realencyclopadie) contains what is even now the best account 
of Charondas; A. Holm, Geschichte Siciliens, i. ; F. D. Gerlach, 
Zaleukos, Charondas, und Pythagoras (1858) ; also art. Greek Law. 

CHARPENTIER, FRANCOIS (1620-1702), French archaeo- 
logist and man of letters, was born in Paris on the 15th of 
February 1620. He was intended for the bar, but was employed 
by Colbert, who had determined on the foundation of a French 
East India Company, to draw up an explanatory account of the 
project for Louis XIV. Charpentier regarded as absurd the use 
of Latin in monumental inscriptions, and to him was entrusted 
the task of supplying the paintings of Lebrun in the Versailles 
Gallery with appropriate legends. His verses were so indifferent 
that they had to be replaced by others, the work of Racine and 
Boileau, both enemies of his. Charpentier in his Excellence de la 
langae jrancaise (1683) had anticipated Perrault in the famous 
academical dispute concerning the relative merit of the ancients 
and moderns. He is credited with a share in the production of 
the magnificent series of medals that commemorate the prin- 
cipal events of the age of Louis XIV. Charpentier, who was 
long in receipt of a pension of 1200 livres from Colbert, was 
erudite and ingenious, but he was always heavy and common- 
place. His other works include a Vie de Soar ate (1650), a trans- 
lation of the Cyropaedia of Xenophon (1658), and the TrailS de 
la peinture parlante (1684). 

CHARRIERE, AGNES ISABELLE EMILIE DE (1 740-1805), 
Swiss author, was Dutch by birth, her maiden name being 
van Tuyll van Seeroskerken van Zuylen. She married in 1771 
her brother's tutor, M. de Charriere, and settled with him at 
Colombier, near Lausanne. She made her name by the publica- 
tion of her Letlres neuchdteloises (Amsterdam, 1784), offering a 
simple and attractive picture of French manners. This, with 
Caliste, ou lettres icrites de Lausanne (2 vols. Geneva, 1785-1788), 
was analysed and highly praised by Sainte-Beuve in his Portraits 
de femmes and in vol. iii of his Portraits litteraires. She wrote 
a number of other novels, and some political tracts; but is 
perhaps best remembered by her liaison with Benjamin Constant 
between 1787 and 1796. 

Her letters to Constant were printed in the Revue Suisse (April 
1844), her Lettres-Memoires by E. H. Gaullieur in the same review 
in 1857, and all the available material is utilized in a monograph 
on her and her work by P. Godet, Madame de Charriere et ses amis 
(2 vols., Geneva, 1906). ,. ^., 

CHARRON, PIERRE (1541-1603), French philosopher, born 
in Paris, was one of the twenty-five children of a bookseller. 
After studying law he practised at Paris as an advocate, but, 
having met with no great success, entered the church, and soon 
gained the highest popularity as a preacher, rising to the dignity 
of canon, and being appointed preacher in ordinary to Marguerite, 
wife of Henry IV. of Navarre. About 1588, he determined to 
fulfil a vow which he had once made to enter a cloister; but 
being rejected by the Carthusians and the Celestines, he held 
himself absolved, and continued to follow his old profession. 
He delivered a course of sermons at Angers, and in the next year 
passed to Bordeaux, where he formed a famous friendship with 
Montaigne. At the death of Montaigne, in 1592, Charron was 
requested in his will to bear the Montaigne arms. 

In 1594 Charron published (at first anonymously, afterwards 
under the name of " Benoit Vaillant, Advocate of the Holy 
Faith," and also, in 1594, in his own name) Les Trois Verites, in 
which by methodical and orthodox arguments, he seeks to prove 
that there is a God and a true religion, that the true religion is 
the Christian, and that the true church is the Roman Catholic. 



CHARRUA— CHART 



949 



The last book (which is three-fourths of the whole work) is 
chiefly an answer to the famous Protestant work entitled Le 
TraiiS de V Aglise by Du Plessis Mornay; and in the second 
edition (1595) there is an elaborate reply to an attack made on 
the third Vdrite by a Protestant writer. Les Trots V&rites ran 
through several editions, and obtained for its author the favour 
of the bishop of Cahors, who appointed him grand vicar and 
theological canon. It also led to his being chosen deputy to the 
general assembly of the clergy, of which body he became chief 
secretary. It was followed in 1600 by Discours chrestiens, a 
book of sermons, similar in tone, half of which treat of the 
Eucharist. In 1601 Charron published at Bordeaux his third 
and most remarkable work — the famous De la sagesse, a complete 
popular system of moral philosophy. Usually, and so far 
correctly, it is coupled with the Essays of Montaigne, to which 
the author is under very extensive obligations. There is, however, 
distinct individuality in the book. It is specially interesting 
from the time when it appeared, and the man by whom it was 
written. Conspicuous as a champion of orthodoxy against 
atheists, Jews and Protestants — without resigning this position, 
and still upholding practical orthodoxy — Charron suddenly 
stood forth as the representative of the most complete intellectual 
scepticism. The De la sagesse, which represented a considerable 
advance on the standpoint of the Trois VSrites, brought upon its 
author the most violent attacks, the chief being by the Jesuit 
Francois Garasse (1585-1631), who described him as a "brutal 
atheist." It received, however, the warm support of Henry IV. 
and of the president Pierre Jeannin (1540-1622). A second 
edition was soon called for. In 1603, notwithstanding much 
opposition, it began to appear; but only a few pages had been 
printed when Charron died suddenly in the street of apoplexy. 
His death was regarded as a judgment for his impiety. 

Charron's psychology is sensationalist. With sense all our 
knowledge commences, and into sense all may be resolved. 
The soul, located in the ventricles of the brain, is affected by the 
temperament of the individual; the dry temperament produces 
acute intelligence; the moist, memory; the hot, imagination. 
Dividing the intelligent soul into these three faculties, he shows — 
after the manner which Francis Bacon subsequently adopted — 
what branches of science correspond with each. With regard 
to the nature of the soul he merely quotes opinions. The 
belief in its immortality, he says, is the most universal of beliefs, 
but the most feebly supported by reason. As to man's power 
of attaining truth his scepticism is decided; and he plainly 
declares that none of our faculties enable us to distinguish 
truth from error. In comparing man with the lower animals, 
Charron insists that there are no breaks in nature. The latter 
have reason; nay, they have virtue; and, though inferior in 
some respects, in others they are superior. The estimate formed 
of man is not, indeed, flattering. His most essential qualities 
are vanity, weakness, inconstancy, presumption. Upon this 
view of human nature and the human lot Charron founds his 
moral system. Equally sceptical with Montaigne, and decidedly 
more cynical, he is distinguished by a deeper and sterner tone. 
Man comes into the world to endure; let him endure then, and 
that in silence. Our compassion should be like that of 
God, who succours the suffering without sharing in their pain. 
Avoid vulgar errors ; cherish universal sympathy. Let no passion 
or attachment become too powerful for restraint. Follow 
the customs and laws which surround you. Morality has no 
connexion with religion. Reason is the ultimate criterion. 

Special interest attaches to Charron's treatment of religion. 
He insists on the diversities in religions; he dwells also on what 
would indicate a common origin. All grow from small beginnings 
and increase by a sort of popular contagion; all teach that God 
is to be appeased by prayers, presents, vows, but especially, and 
most irrationally, by human suffering. Each is said by its 
devotees to have been given by inspiration. In fact, however, 
a man is a Christian, Jew, or Mahommedan, before he knows he 
is a man. One religion is built upon another. But while he 
openly declares religion to be " strange to common sense," 
the practical result at which Charron arrives is that one is not 



to sit in judgment on his faith, but to be " simple and obedient," 
and to allow himself to be led by public authority. This is one 
rule of wisdom with regard to religion; and another equally 
important is to avoid superstition, which he boldly defines as 
the belief that God is like a hard judge who, eager to find fault, 
narrowly examines our slightest act, that He is revengeful and 
hard to appease, and that therefore He must be flattered and 
importuned, and won over by pain and sacrifice. True piety, 
which is the first of duties, is, on the other hand, the knowledge 
of God and of one's self, the latter knowledge being necessary 
to the former. It is the abasing of man, the exalting of God, — 
the belief that what He sends is all good, and that all the bad is 
from ourselves. It leads to spiritual worship; for external 
ceremony is merely for our advantage, not for His glory. Charron 
is thus the founder of modern secularism. His political views 
are neither original nor independent. He pours much hackneyed 
scorn on the common herd, declares the sovereign to be the 
source of law, and asserts that popular freedom is dangerous. 

A summary and defence of the Sagesse, written shortly before his 
death, appeared in 1606. In 1604 his friend Michel de la Roche- 
maillet prefixed to an edition of the Sagesse a Life, which depicts 
Charron as a most amiable man of purest character. His complete 
works, with this Life, were published in 1635. An excellent 
abridgment of the Sagesse is given in Tennemann's Philosophie, 
vol. ix. ; an edition with notes by A. Duval appeared in 1820. 

See Liebscher, Charron u. sein Werk, De la sagesse (Leipzig, 1890); 
H. T. Buckle, Introd. to History of Civilization in England, vol. ii. 19; 
Abbe Lezat, De la predication sous Henri IV. c. vi. ; J. M. Robertson, 
Short History of Free Thought (London, 1906), vol. ii. p. 19; J. 
Owen, Skeptics of the French Renaissance (1893); Lecky, Rationalism 
in Europe (1865). 

CHARRUA, a tribe of South American Indians, wild and 
warlike, formerly ranging over Uruguay and part of S. Brazil. 
They were dark and heavily built, fought on horses and used 
the bolas or weighted lasso. They were always at war with 
the Spaniards, and Juan Diaz de Solis was killed by them in 
1 516. As a tribe they are now almost extinct, but the modern 
Gauchos of Uruguay have much Charrua blood in them. 

CHART (from Lat. carta, charta, a map). A chart is a marine 
map intended specially for the use of seamen (for history, see 
Map), though the word is also used loosely for other varieties 
of graphical representation. The marine or nautical chart is 
constructed for the purpose of ascertaining the position of a 
ship with reference to the land, of finding the direction in which 
she has to steer, the distance to sail or steam, and the hidden 
dangers to avoid. The surface of the sea on charts is studded 
with numerous small figures. These are known as the soundings, 
indicating in fathoms or in feet (as shown upon the title of the 
chart), at low water of ordinary spring tides, the least depth of 
water through which the ship may be sailing. Charts show the 
nature of the unseen bottom of the sea — with the irregularities 
in its character in the shape of hidden rocks or sand-banks, and 
give information of the greatest importance to the mariner. 
No matter how well the land maybe surveyed or finely delineated, 
unless the soundings are shown a chart is of little use. 

The British admiralty charts are compiled, drawn and issued 
by the hydrographic office. This department of the admiralty 
was established under Earl Spencer by an order in council in 
1795, consisting of the hydrographer, one assistant and a 
draughtsman. The first hydrographer was Alexander Dalrymple, 
a gentleman in the East India Company's civil service. From 
this small beginning arose the important department which is 
now the main source of the supply of hydrographical information 
to the whole of the maritime world. The charts prepared by the 
officers and draughtsmen of the hydrographic office, and pub- 
lished by order of the lords commissioners of the admiralty, are 
compiled chiefly from the labours of British naval officers em- 
ployed in the surveying service; and also from valuable con- 
tributions received from time to time from officers of the royal 
navy and mercantile marine. In addition to the work of British 
sailors, the labours of other nations have been collected and 
utilized. Charts of the coasts of Europe have naturally been 
taken from the surveys made by the various nations, and in 
' charts of other quarters of the world considerable assistance has 



95° 



CHARTER— CHARTERED COMPANIES 



been received from the labours of French, Spanish, Dutch and 
American surveyors. Important work is done by the Hydro- 
graphic Office of the American navy, and the U.S. Coast and 
Geodetic Survey. The admiralty charts are published with 
the view of meeting the wants of the sailor in all parts of the 
world. They may be classed under five heads, viz. ocean, general, 
and coast charts, harbour plans and physical charts; for 
instance, the Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean, approaches to 
Plymouth, Plymouth Sound and wind and current charts. The 
harbour plans and coast sheets are constructed on the simple 
principles of plane trigonometry by the surveying officers. (See 
Surveying: Nautical.) That important feature, the depth of 
the sea, is obtained by the ordinary sounding line or wire; all 
soundings are reduced to low water of ordinary spring tides. 
The times and heights of the tides, with the direction and velocity 
of the tidal streams, are also ascertained. These MS. charts 
are forwarded to the admiralty, and form the foundation of the 
hydrography of the world. The ocean and general charts are 
compiled and drawn at the hydrographic office, and as originals, 
existing charts, latest surveys and maps, have to be consulted, 
their compilation requires considerable experience and is a pains- 
taking work, for the compiler has to decide what to omit, what 
to insert, and to arrange the necessary names in such a manner 
that while full information is given, the features of the coast are 
not interfered with. As a very slight error in the position of a 
light or buoy, dot, cross or figure, might lead to grave disaster, 
every symbolon the admiralty chart has been delineated with 
great care and consideration, and no pains are spared in the 
effort to lay before the public the labours of the nautical surveyors 
and explorers not only of England, but of the maritime world; 
reducing their varions styles into a comprehensive system 
furnishing the intelligent seaman with an intelligible guide, 
which common industry will soon enable him to appreciate and 
take full advantage of. 

As certain abbreviations are used in the charts, attention is 
called to the " signs and abbreviations adopted in the charts 
published by the admiralty." Certain parts of the world are still 
unsurveyed, or not surveyed in sufficient detail for the require- 
ments that steamships now demand. Charts of these localities 
are therefore drawn in a light hair-line and unfinished manner, so 
that the experienced seaman sees at a glance that less trust is to 
be reposed upon charts drawn in this manner. The charts given 
to the public are only correct up to the time of their actual 
publication. They have to be kept up to date. Recent publi- 
cations by foreign governments, newly reported dangers, changes 
in character or position of lights and buoys, are as soon as 
practicable inserted on the charts and due notice given of 
such insertions in the admiralty " Notices to Mariners." 

The charts are supplemented by the Admiralty Pilots, or books 
of sailing directions, with tide tables, and lists of lighthouses, light 
vessels, &c, for the coasts to which a ship may be bound. The 
physical charts are the continuation of the work so ably begun by 
Maury of the United States and FitzRoy of the British navy, 
and give the sailor a good general idea of the world's ocean winds 
and currents at the different periods of the year; the probable 
tracks and seasons of the tropical revolving or cyclonic storms ; the 
coastal winds; the extent or months of the rainy seasons; localities 
and times where ice may be fallen in with ; and, lastly, the direction 
and force of the stream and drift currents of the oceans. (T. A. H.) 

CHARTER (Lat. charta, carta, from Gr. x^P Tr l s , originally for 
papyrus, material for writing, thence transferred to paper and 
from this material to the document, in O. Eng. hoc, book), a 
written instrument, contract or convention by which cessions 
of srJes of property or of rights and privileges are confirmed and 
held, and which may be produced by the grantees in proof of 
lawful possession. The use of the word for any written docu- 
ment is obsolete in England, but is preserved in France, e.g. the 
Ecole des Chartes at Paris. In feudal times charters of privileges 
were granted, not only by the crown, but by mesne lords both 
lay and ecclesiastical, as well to communities, such as boroughs, 
gilds and religious foundations, as to individuals. In modern 
usage grants by charter have become all but obsolete, though in 
England this form is still used in the incorporation by the crown 
of such societies as the British Academy. 



The grant of the Great Charter by King John in 121 5 (see 
Magna Carta), which guaranteed the preservation of English 
liberties, led to a special association of the word with consti- 
tutional privileges, and so in modern times it has been applied 
to constitutions granted by sovereigns to their subjects, in 
contradistinction to those based on " the will of the people." 
Such was the Charter (Charte) granted by Louis XVIII. to 
France in 1814. In Portugal the constitution granted by Dom 
Pedro in 1826 was called by the French party the " Charter," 
while that devised by the Cortes in 18 21 was known as the 
" Constitution." Magna Carta also suggested to the English 
radicals in 1838 the name " People's Charter," which they gave 
to their published programme of reforms (see Chartism). This 
association of the idea of liberty with the word charter led to its 
figurative use in the sense of freedom or licence. This is, however, 
rare; the most common use being in the phrase " chartered 
libertine " (Shakespeare, Henry V. Act i. Sc. 1) from the deri- 
vative verb " to charter," e.g, to grant a charter. The common 
colloquialism " to charter," in the sense of to take, or hire, is 
derived from the special use of " to charter " as to hire (a ship) 
by charter-party. 

CHARTERED COMPANIES. A chartered company is a 
trading corporation enjoying certain rights and privileges, and 
bound by certain obligations under a special charter granted to 
it by the sovereign authority of the state, such charter defining 
and limiting those rights, privileges and obligations, and the 
localities in which they are to be exercised. Such companies 
existed in early times, but have undergone changes and modi- 
fications in accordance with the developments which have taken 
place in the economic history of the states where they have 
existed. In Great Britain the first trading charters were granted, 
not to English companies, which were then non-existent, but 
to branches of the Hanseatic League (q.v.), and it was not till 
1597 that England was finally relieved from the presence of a 
foreign chartered company. In that year Queen Elizabeth closed 
the steel-yard where Teutons had been established for 700 years. 

The origin of all English trading companies is to be sought 
in the Merchants of the Staple. They lingered on into the 18th 
century, but only as a name, for their business was solely to 
export English products which, as English manufactures grew, 
were wanted at home. Of all early English chartered companies, 
the " Merchant Adventurers " conducted its operations the most 
widely. Itself a development of very early trading gilds, at the 
height of its prosperity it employed as many as 5°,°°° persons in 
the Netherlands, and the enormous influence it was able to 
exercise undoubtedly saved Antwerp from the institution of the 
Inquisition within its walls in the time of Charles V. In the reign 
of Elizabeth British trade with the Netherlands reached in one 
year 12,000,000 ducats, and in that of James I. the company's 
yearly commerce with Germany and the Netherlands was as much 
as £1,000,000. Hamburg afterwards was its principal depot, and 
it became known as the " Hamburg Company." In the " Mer- 
chant Adventurers' " enterprises is to be seen the germ of the 
trading companies which had so remarkable a development in the 
16th and 17th centuries. These old regulated trade gilds passed 
gradually into joint-stock associations, which were capable of far 
greater extension, both as to the number of members and amount 
of stock, each member being only accountable for the amount of 
his own stock, and being able to transfer it at will to any other 
person. 

It was in the age of Elizabeth and the early Stuarts that 
the chartered company, in the modern sense of the term, had 
its rise. The discovery of the New World, and the opening out 
of fresh trading routes to the Indies, gave an extraordinary 
impulse to shipping, commerce and industrial enterprise through- 
out western Europe. The English, French and Dutch govern- 
ments were ready to assist trade by the granting of charters to 
trading associations. It is to the " Russia Company," which 
received its first charter in 1554, that Great Britain owed its 
first intercourse with an empire then almost unknown. The 
first recorded instance of a purely chartered company annexing 
territory is to be found in the action of this company in setting 



CHARTERED COMPANIES 



95i 



up a cross at Spitzbergen in 1613 with King James's arms upon it. 
Among other associations trading to the continent of Europe, 
receiving charters at this time, were the Turkey Company 
(Levant Co.) and the Eastland Company. Both the Russia 
and Turkey Companies had an important effect upon British 
relations with those empires. They maintained British influence 
in those countries, and even paid the expenses of the embassies 
which were sent out by the English government to their courts. 
The Russia Company carried on a large trade with Persia through 
Russian territory; but from various causes their business 
gradually declined, though the Turkey Company existed in 
name until 1825. 

The chartered companies which were formed during this period 
for trade with the Indies and the New World have had a more 
wide-reaching influence in history. The extraordinary career 
of the East India Company (q.v.) is dealt with elsewhere. 

Charters were given to companies trading to Guinea, Morocco, 
Guiana and the Canaries, but none of these enjoyed a very long 
or prosperous existence, principally owing to the difficulties, 
caused by foreign competition. It is when we turn to North 
America that the importance of the chartered company, as a 
colonizing rather than a trading agency, is seen in its full develop- 
ment. The " Hudson's Bay Company," which still exists as a 
commercial concern, is dealt with under its own heading, but 
most of the thirteen British North American colonies were in 
their inception chartered companies very much in the modern 
acceptation of the term. The history of these companies will 
be found under the heading of the different colonies of which 
they were the origin. It is necessary, however, to bear in mind 
that two classes of charters are to be found in force among the 
early American colonies: (1) Those granted to trading associa- 
tions, which were often useful when the colony was first founded, 
but which formed a serious obstacle to its progress when the 
country had become settled and was looking forward to com- 
mercial expansion; the existence of these charters then often 
led to serious conflicts between the grantees of the charter and 
the colonies; ultimately elective assemblies everywhere super- 
seded control of trading companies. (2) The second class of 
charters were those granted to the settlers themselves, to protect 
them against the oppressions of the crown and the provincial 
governors. These were highly prized by the colonists. 

In France and Holland, no less than in England, the institution 
of chartered companies became a settled principle of the govern- 
ments of those countries during the whole of the period in 
question. In France from 1599 to 1789, more than 70 of such 
companies came into existence, but after 1770, when the great 
Compagnie des Indes orientates went into liquidation, they were 
almost abandoned, and finally perished in the general sweeping 
away of privileges which followed on the outbreak of the 
Revolution. 

If we inquire into the economic ideas which induced the 
granting of charters to these earlier companies and animated 
their promoters, we shall find that they were entirely consistent 
with the general principles of government at the time and what 
were then held to be sound commercial views. Under the old 
regime everything was a matter of monopoly and privilege, and 
to this state of things the constitution of the old companies 
corresponded, the sovereign rights accorded to them being also 
quite in accordance with the views of the time. It would have 
been thought impossible then that private individuals could 
have found the funds or maintained the magnitude of such 
enterprises. It was only this necessity which induced statesmen 
like Colbert to countenance them, and Montesquieu took the 
same view {Esprit des lois, t. xx. c. 10). John de Witt's view 
was that such companies were not useful for colonization properly 
so called, because they want quick returns to pay their dividends. 
So, even in France and Holland, opinion was by no means 
settled as to their utility. In England historic protests were 
made against such monopolies, but the chartered companies 
were less exclusive in England than in either France or Holland, 
the governors of provinces almost always allowing strangers to 
trade on receiving some pecuniary inducement. French com- 



mercial companies were more privileged, exclusive and artificial 
than those in Holland and England. Those of Holland may be 
said to have been national enterprises. French companies 
rested more than did their rivals on false principles; they were 
more fettered by the royal power, and had less initiative of their 
own, and therefore had less chance of surviving. As an example 
of the kind of rules which prevented the growth of the French 
companies, it may be pointed out that no Protestants were 
allowed to take part in them. State subventions, rather than 
commerce or colonization, were often their object; but that has 
been a characteristic of French colonial enterprise at all times. 

Such companies, however, under the old commercial system 
could hardly have come into existence without exclusive privi- 
leges. Their existence might have been prolonged had the 
whole people in time been allowed the chance of participating 
in them. 

To sum up the causes of failure of the old chartered companies, 
they are to be attributed to (1) bad administration; (2) want 
of capital and credit; (3) bad economic organization; (4) 
distribution of dividends made prematurely or fictitiously. 
But those survived the longest which extended the most widely 
their privileges to outsiders. According to contemporary pro- 
tests, they had a most injurious effect on the commerce of the 
countries where they had their rise. They were monopolies, 
and therefore, of course, obnoxious; and it is undoubted that 
the colonies they founded only became prosperous when they 
had escaped from their yoke. 

On the other hand, it must not be forgotten that they contri- 
buted in no small degree to the commercial progress of their 
own states. They gave colonies to the mother country, and an 
impulse to the development of its fleet. In the case of England 
and Holland, the enterprise of the companies saved them from 
suffering from the monopolies of Spain and Portugal, and the wars 
of the English, and those of the Dutch in the Indies with Spain 
and Portugal, were paid for by the companies^ They furnished 
the mother country with luxuries which, by the 18th century, 
had become necessaries. They offered a career for the younger 
sons of good families, and sometimes greatly assisted large and 
useful enterprises. 

During the last twenty years of the 19th century there was a 
great revival of the system of chartered companies in Great 
Britain. It is a feature of the general growth of interest in 
colonial expansion and commercial development which has 
made itself felt almost universally among European nations. 
Great Britain, however, alone has succeeded in establishing 
such companies as have materially contributed to the growth 
of her empire. These companies succeed or fail for reasons 
different from those which affected the chartered companies 
of former days, though there are points in common. Apart 
from causes inherent in the particular case of each company, 
which necessitates their being examined separately, recent 
experience leads us to lay down certain general principles 
regarding them. The modern companies are not like those of 
the 16th and 17th centuries. They are not privileged in the 
sense that those companies were. They are not monopolists; 
they have only a limited sovereignty, always being subject to 
the control of the home government. It is true that they have 
certain advantages given them, for without these advantages 
no capital would risk itself in the lands where they carry on their 
operations. They often have very heavy corresponding obliga- 
tions, as will be seen in the case of one (the East Africa) where 
the obligations were too onerous for the company to discharge, 
though they were inseparable from its position. The charters 
of modern companies differ in two points strongly from those of 
the old: they contain clauses prohibiting any monopoly of 
trade, and they generally confer some special political rights 
directly under the control of the secretary of state. The political 
freedom of the old companies was much greater. In these 
charters state control has been made a distinguishing feature. 
It is to be exercised in almost all directions in which the companies 
may come into contact with matters political. Of course, it is 
inevitable in all disputes of the companies with foreign powers, 



952 



CHARTERHOUSE 



and is extended over all decrees of the company regarding the 
administration of its territories, the taxation of natives, and 
mining regulations. In all cases of dispute between the com- 
panies and the natives the secretary of state is ex officio the 
judge, and to the secretary of state (in the case of the South 
Africa Company) the accounts of administration have to be 
submitted for his approbation. It is deserving of notice that the 
British character of the company is insisted upon in each case 
in the charter which calls it into life. The crown always retains 
complete control over the company by reserving to itself the 
power of revoking the charter in case of the neglect of its stipula- 
tions. Special clauses were inserted in the charters of the British 
East Africa and South Africa Companies enabling the government 
to forfeit their charters if they did not promote the objects 
alleged as reasons for demanding a charter. This bound them 
still more strongly; and in the case of the South Africa Company 
the duration of the charter was fixed at twenty-five years. 

The chartered company of these days is therefore very strongly 
fixed within limits imposed by law on its political action. As a 
whole, however, very remarkable results have been achieved. 
This may be attributed in no small degree to the personality of 
the men who have had the supreme direction at home and abroad, 
and who have, by their social position and personal qualities, 
acquired the confidence of the public. With the exception of the 
Royal Niger Company, it would be incorrect to say that they 
have been financially successful, but in the domain of government 
generally it may be said that they have added vast territories to 
the British empire (in Africa about 1,700,000 sq.m.), and in these 
territories they have acted as a civilizing force. They have made 
roads, opened facilities for trade, enforced peace, and laid at all 
events the foundation of settled administration. It is not too 
much to say that they have often acted unselfishly for the benefit 
of the mother country and even humanity. We may instance the 
antirslavery and anti-alcohol campaigns which have been carried 
on, the latter certainly being against the immediate pecuniary 
interests of the companies themselves. It must, of course, be 
recognized that to a certain extent this has been done under the 
influence of the home government. The occupation of Uganda 
certainly, and of the Nigerian territory and Rhodesia prob- 
ably, will prove to have been rather for the benefit of posterity 
than of the companies which effected it. In the two cases where 
the companies have been bought out by the state, they 
have had no compensation for much that they have expended. 
In fact, it would have been impossible to take into account 
actual expenditure day by day, and the cost of wars. To use the 
expression of Sir William Mackinnon, the shareholders have 
been compelled in some cases to " take out their dividends in 
philanthropy." 

The existence of such companies to-day is justified in certain 
political and economic conditions only. It may be highly desir- 
able for the government to occupy certain territories, but political 
exigencies at home will not permit it to incur the expenditure, or 
international relations may make such an undertaking inex- 
pedient at the time. In such a case the formation of a chartered 
company may be the best way out of the difficulty. But it has 
been demonstrated again and again that, directly, the company's 
interests begin to clash with those of foreign powers, the home 
government must assume a protectorate over its territories in 
order to simplify the situation and save perhaps disastrous 
collisions. So long as the political relations of such a company 
are with savages or semi-savages, it may be left free to act, but 
directly it becomes involved with a civilized power the state has 
(if it wishes to retain the territory) to acquire by purchase the 
political rights of the company, and it is obviously much easier to 
induce a popular assembly to grant money for the purpose of 
maintaining rights already existing than to acquire new ones. 
With the strict system of government supervision enforced by 
modern charters it is not easy for the state to be involved against 
its will in foreign complications. Economically such companies 
are also justifiable up to a certain point. When there is no other 
means of entering into commercial relations with remote and 
savage races save by enterprise of such magnitude that private I 



individuals could not incur the risk involved, then a company 
may be well entrusted with special privileges for the purpose, as 
an inventor is accorded a certain protection by law by means of a 
patent which enables him to bring out his invention at a profit if 
there is anything in it. But such privileges should not be con- 
tinued longer than is necessary for the purpose of reasonably 
recompensing the adventurers. A successful company, even 
when it has lost monopoly or privileges, has, by its command of 
; capital and general resources, established so strong a position that 
private individuals or new companies can rarely compete with it 
successfully. That this is so is clearly shown in the case of the 
Hudson's Bay Company as at present constituted. In colonizing 
new lands these companies often act successfully. They have 
proved more potent than the direct action of governments. 
This may be seen in Africa, where France and England have of 
late acquired vast areas, but have developed them with very 
different results, acting from the opposite principles of private 
and state promotion of colonization. Apart from national 
characteristics, the individual has far more to gain under the 
British system of private enterprise. A strong point in favour of 
some of the British companies has been that their undertakings 
have been practically extensions of existing British colonies 
rather than entirely isolated ventures. But a chartered company 
can never be anything but a transition stage of colonization; 
sooner or later the state must take the lead. A company may act 
beneficially so long as a country-is undeveloped, but as soon as it 
becomes even semi-civilized its conflicts with private interests 
become so frequent and serious that its authority has to make 
way for that of the central government. 

The companies which have been formed in France during 
recent years do not yet afford material for profitable study, for 
they have been subject to so much vexatious interference from 
home owing to lack of a fixed system of control sanctioned by 
government, that they have not been able, like the British, to 
develop along their own lines. 

, 'See also Borneo; Nigeria; Brit. East Africa; Rhodesia; &c. 
The following works deal with the subject of chartered companies 
generally : Bonnassieux, Les Grandes Compagnies de commerce (Paris, 
1892); Chailly-Bert, Les Compagnies de colonisation sous Vancien 
regime (Paris, 1898); Cawston and Keane, The Early Chartered 
Companies (London, 1896); W. Cunningham, A History of British 
Industry and, Commerce (Cambridge, 1890, 1892); Egerton, A Short 
History of British Colonial Policy (London, 1897); J- Scott Keltie, 
The Partition of Africa (London, 1895) ; Leroy-Beaulieu, De la 
colonisation chez les peuples modernes (Paris, 1898); Les Nouvelles 
Societes anglo-saxonnes (Paris, 1897); MacDonald, Select Charters 
illustrative of American History, 1606-1775 (New York, 1899); 
B. P. Poore>, Federal and State Constitutions, &c (Washington, 
1877; a more complete collection of American colonial charters); 
H. L. Osgood, American Colonies in the 17th Cent. (1904-7); 
Carton de Wiart, Les Grandes Compagnies coloniales anglaises au ig m " 
siicle (Paris, 1899). Also see articles " Compagnies de Charte," 
" Colonies," " Privilege," in Nouveau Diclionnaire d' economie politique 
(Paris, 1892); and article "Companies, Chartered," in Encyclo- 
paedia of the Laws of England, edited by A. Wood Renton (London, 
1907-1909). (W. B. Du.) 

CHARTERHOUSE. This name is an English corruption of 
the French maison chartreuse, a religious house of the Carthusian 
order. As such it occurs not uncommonly in England, in various 
places (e.g. Charterhouse-on-Mendip, Charterhouse Hinton) 
where the Carthusians were established. It is most familiar, 
however, in its application to the Charterhouse, London. On 
a site near the old city wall, west of the modern thoroughfare 
of Aldersgate, a Carthusian monastery was founded in 137 1 by 
Sir Walter de Manny, a knight of French birth. After its 
dissolution in 1535 the property passed through various hands.. 
In 1558, while in the possession of Lord North, it was occupied 
by Queen Elizabeth during the preparations for her coronation, 
and James I. held court here on his first entrance into London. 
The Charterhouse was then in the hands of Thomas Howard, 
earl of Suffolk, but in May 161 1 it came into those of Thomas 
Sutton (1532-1611) of Snaith, Lincolnshire. He acquired a 
fortune by the discovery of coal on two estates which he had 
leased near Newcastle-on-Tyne, and afterwards, removing to 
London, he carried on a commercial career. In the year of his 
death, which took place on the 12th of December 1611, he 



CHARTER-PARTY— CHARTISM 



953 



endowed a hospital on the site of the Charterhouse, calling it the 
hospital of King James; and in his will he bequeathed moneys 
to maintain a chapel, hospital (almshouse) and school. The will 
was hotly contested but upheld in court, and the foundation was 
finally constituted to afford a home for eighty male pensioners 
(" gentlemen by descent and in poverty, soldiers that have borne 
arms by sea or land, merchants decayed by piracy or shipwreck, 
or servants in household to the King or Queen's Majesty "), and 
to educate forty boys. The school developed beyond the original 
intentions of its founder, and now ranks among the most eminent 
public schools in England. In 1872 it was removed, during the 
headmastership (1863-1897) of the Rev. William Haig-Brown 
(d. 1907), to new buildings near Godalming in Surrey, which were 
opened on the 1 8th of June in that year. The number of founda- 
tion scholarships is increased to sixty. The scholars are not now 
distinguished by wearing a special dress or by forming a separate 
house, though one house is known as Gownboys, preserving 
the former title of the scholars. The land on which the old 
school buildings stood in London was sold for new buildings 
to accommodate the Merchant Taylors' school, but the pensioners 
still occupy their picturesque home, themselves picturesque 
figures in the black gowns designed for them under the founda- 
tion. The buildings, of mellowed red brick, include a panelled 
chapel, in which is the founder's tomb, a fine dining-hall, 
governors' room with ornate ceiling and tapestried walls, the old 
library, and the beautiful great staircase. 

CHARTER-PARTY (Lat. charta partita, a legal paper or 
instrument, " divided," i.e. written in duplicate so that each 
party retains half), a written, or partly written and partly 
printed, contract between merchant and shipowner, by which 
a ship is let or hired for the conveyance of goods on a specified 
voyage, or for a definite period. (See Affreightment.) 

CHARTERS TOWERS, a mining town of Devonport county, 
Queensland, Australia, 82 m. by rail S.W. of Townsville and 
820 m. direct N.N.W. of Brisbane. It is the centre of an im- 
portant gold-field, the reefs of which improve at the lower 
depths, the deepest shaft on the field being 2558 ft. below the 
surface-level. The gold is of a very fine quality. An abundant 
water-supply is obtained from the Burdekin river, some 8 m. 
distant. The population of the town in 1901 was 5523; but 
within a 5 m. radius it was 20,976. Charters Towers became 
a municipality in 1877. 

CHARTIER, ALAIN (c. 1392-C1430), French poet and political 
writer, was born at Bayeux about 1392. Chartier belonged 
to a family marked by considerable ability. His eldest brother 
Guillaume became bishop of Paris; and Thomas became notary 
to the king. Jean Chartier, a monk of St Denis, whose history 
of Charles VII. is printed in vol. iii. of Les Grands Chroniques de 
Saint-Denis (1477), was not, as is sometimes stated, also a 
brother of the poet Alain studied, as his elder brother had done, 
at the university of Paris. His earliest poem is the Livre des 
quatre dames, written after the battle of Agincourt. This was 
followed by the Debat du reveille-matin, La Belle Dame sans 
merci, and others. None of these poems show any very patriotic 
feeling, though Chartier's prose is evidence that he was not 
indifferent to the misfortunes of his country. He followed the 
fortunes of the dauphin, afterwards Charles VlL, acting in the 
triple capacity of clerk, notaryand financial secretary. In 1422 
he wrote the famous Quadrilogue-invectif. The interlocutors 
in this dialogue are France herself and the three orders of the 
state. Chartier lays bare the abuses of the feudal army and the 
sufferings of the peasants. He rendered an immense service to 
his country by maintaining that the cause of France, though 
desperate to all appearance, was not yet lost if the contending 
factions could lay aside their differences in the face of the common 
enemy. In 1424 Chartier was sent on an embassy to Germany, 
and three years later he accompanied to Scotland the mission 
sent to negotiate the marriage of Margaret of Scotland, then 
not four years old, with the dauphin, afterwards Louis XI. 
In 1429 he wrote the Livre d'esperance, which contains a fierce 
attack on the nobility and clergy. He was the author of a 
diatribe on the courtiers of Charles VII. entitled Le Curial, 



translated into English {Here foloweth the copy of a lettre 
whyche maistre A . Charetier wrote to his brother) "by Caxton 
about 1484. The date of his death is to be placed about 1430. 
A Latin epitaph, discovered in the 18th century, says, however, 
that he was archdeacon of Paris, and declares that he died in the 
city of Avignon in 1449. This is obviously not authentic, for 
Alain described himself as a simple clerc and certainly died long 
before 1449. The story of the famous kiss bestowed by Margaret 
of Scotland on la precieuse bouche de laquelle sont issus et'sortis 
tanl de bans mots et vertueuses paroles is mythical, for Margaret 
did not come to France till 1436, after the poet's death; but the 
story, first told by Guillaume Bouchet in his Annates d' Aquitaine 
(1524), is interesting, if only as a proof of the high degree of 
estimation in which the ugliest man of his day was held. Jean 
de Masles, who annotated a portion of his verse, has recorded 
how the pages and young gentlemen of that epoch were required 
daily to learn by heart passages of his Breviaire des nobles. 
John Lydgate studied him affectionately. His Belle Dame sans 
merci was translated into English by Sir Richard Ros about 
1640, with an introduction of his own; and Clement Marot and 
Octavien de Saint- Gelais, writing fifty years after his death, 
find many fair words for the old poet, their master and pre- 
decessor. • L ■ ' 

See Mancel, Alain Chartier, etude bibliographique et littSraire-, 8vo 
(Paris, 1849) ; D. Delaunay's Etude sur Alain Chartier (1876), with 
considerable extracts from his writings. His works were edited by 
A. Duchesne (Paris, 1617). On Jean Chartier see Vallet de Viriville, 
" Essais critiques sur les historiens originaux du regne de Charles 
VIII," in the Bibl. de l'£cole des Charles (July-August 1857). 

CHARTISM, the name given to a movement for political 
reform in England, from the so-called " People's Charter " or 
" National Charter," the document in which in 1838 the scheme 
of reforms was embodied. The movement itself may be traced 
to the latter years of the 18th century. Checked for a while by 
the reaction due to the excesses of the French Revolution, it 
received a fresh impetus from the awful misery that followed 
the Napoleonic wars and the economic changes due to the intro- 
duction of machinery. The Six Acts of 1819 were directed, 
not only against agrarian and industrial rioting, but against 
the political movement of which Sir Francis Burdett was the 
spokesman in the House of Commons, which demanded man- 
hood suffrage, the ballot, annual parliaments, the abolition of 
the property qualification for members of parliament and their 
payment. The movement was checked for a while by the 
Reform Bill of 1832; but it was soon discovered that, though 
the middle classes had been enfranchised, the economic and 
political grievances of the labouring population remained un- 
redressed. Two separate movements now developed: one 
socialistic, associated with the name of Robert Owen; the other 
radical, aiming at the enfranchisement of the "masses " as the 
first step to the amelioration of their condition. The latter was 
represented in the Working Men's Association, by which in 1838 
the " People's Charter " was drawn up. It embodied exactly 
the same programme as that of the radical reformers mentioned 
above, with the addition of a demand for equal electoral districts. 

In support of this programme a vigorous agitation began, the 
principal leader of which was Feargus O'Connor, whose irrespon- 
sible and erratic oratory produced a vast effect. Monster 
meetings were held, at which seditious language was occasionally 
used, and slight collisions with the military took place. Petitions 
of enormous size, signed in great part with fictitious names, were 
presented to parliament; and a great many newspapers were 
started, of which the Northern Star, conducted by Feargus 
O'Connor, had a circulation of 50,000. In November 1839 a 
Chartist mob consisting of miners and others made an attack 
on Newport, Mon. The rising was a total failure; the leaders, 
John Frost and two others, were seized, were found guilty of high 
treason, and were condemned to death. The sentence, however, 
was changed to one of transportation, and Frost spent over 
fourteen years in Van Diemen's Land. In 1854 he was pardoned, 
and from 1856 until his death on the 29th of July 1877 he lived 
in England. In 1840 the Chartist movement was still further 
organized by the inauguration at Manchester of the National 



954 



CHARTRES— CHARTREUSE 



Charter Association, which rapidly became powerful, being the 
head of about 400 sister societies, which are said to have num- 
bered 40,000 members. Some time after, efforts were made 
towards a coalition with the more moderate radicals, but these 
failed; and a land scheme was started by O'Connor, which 
prospered for a few years. In 1844 the uncompromising spirit 
of some of the leaders was well illustrated by their hostile attitude 
towards the Anti - Corn - Law League. O'Connor, especially, 
entered into a public controversy with Cobden and Bright, in 
which he was worsted. But it was not till 1848, during a season 
of great suffering among the, working classes, and under the 
influence of the revolution at Paris, that the real strength of the 
Chartist movement was discovered and the prevalent discon- 
tent became known. Early in March disturbances occurred in 
Glasgow which required the intervention of the military, while 
in the manufacturing districts all over the west of Scotland the 
operatives were ready to rise in the event of the main movement 
succeeding. Some agitation, too, took place in Edinburgh and 
in Manchester, but of a milder nature; in fact, while there was 
a real and widespread discontent, men were indisposed to resort 
to decided measures. 

The principal scene of intended Chartist demonstration was 
London. An enormous gathering of half a million was announced 
for the 10th of April on Kennington Common, from which they 
were to march to the Houses of Parliament to present a petition 
signed by nearly six million names, in order by this imposing 
display of numbers to secure the enactment of the six points. 
Probably some of the more violent members of the party thought 
to imitate the Parisian mob by taking power entirelyinto their own 
han'As. The announcement of the procession excited great alarm, 
and the most decided measures were taken by the authorities to 
prevent a rising. The procession was forbidden. The military 
were called out under the command of the duke of Wellington, 
and by him concealed near the bridges and other points where the 
procession might attempt to force its way. Even the Bank of 
England and other public buildings were put in a state of defence, 
and special constables, to the number, it is said, of 1 70,000, were 
enrolled, one of whom was destined shortly after to be the emperor 
of the French. After all these gigantic preparations on both sides 
the Chartist demonstration proved to be a very insignificant affair. 
Instead of half a million, only about 50,000 assembled on Ken- 
nington Common, and their leaders, Feargus O'Connor and 
Ernest Charles Jones, shrank from the responsibility of braving 
the authorities by conducting the procession to the Houses of 
Parliament. The monster petition was duly presented, and 
scrutinized, with the result that the number of signatures was 
found to have been grossly exaggerated, and that the most 
unheard-of falsification of names had been resorted to. There- 
after the movement specially called Chartism soon died out. 
It became merged, so far as its political programme is con- 
cerned, with the advancing radicalism of the general democratic 
movement. 

CHARTRES, a city of north-western France, capital of the 
department of Eure-et-Loir, 55 m. S.W. of Paris on the rail- 
way to Le Mans. Pop. (1906) 19,433. Chartres is built on the 
left bank of the Eure, on a hill crowned by its famous cathedral, 
the spires of which are a landmark in the surrounding country. 
To the south-east stretches the fruitful plain of Beauce, " the 
granary of France," of which the town is the commercial centre. 
The Eure, which at this point divides into three branches, 
is crossed by several bridges, some of them ancient, and is 
fringed in places by remains of the old fortifications, of which 
the Porte Guillaume (14th century) , a gateway flanked by towers, 
is the most complete specimen. The steep, narrow streets of the 
old town contrast with the wide, shady boulevards which encircle 
it and divide it from the suburbs. The Clos St Jean, a pleasant 
park, lies to the north-west, and squares and open spaces are 
numerous. The cathedral of Notre-Dame (see Architecture: 
Romanesque and Gothic Architecture in France; and Cathedral), 
one of the finest Gothic churches in France, was founded in the 
nth century by Bishop Fuibert on the site of an earlier church 
destroyed by fire. In n 94 another conflagration laid waste 



the new building then hardly completed; but clergy and people 
set zealously to work, and the main part of the present structure 
was finished by 1240. Though there have been numerous minor 
additions and alterations since that time, the general character 
of the cathedral is unimpaired. The upper woodwork was con- 
sumed by fire in 1836, but the rest of the building was saved. 
The statuary of the lateral portals, the stained glass of the 13th 
century, and the choir-screen of the Renaissance are all unique 
from the artistic standpoint. The cathedral is also renowned for 
the beauty and perfect proportions of its western towers. That 
to the south, the Clocher Vieux (351 ft. high), dates from the 12th 
century; its upper portion is lower and less rich in design than 
that of the Clocher Neuf (377 ft.), which was not completed till 
the 1 6th century. In length the cathedral measures 440 ft., its 
choir measures 150 ft. across, and the height of the vaulting is 
121 ft. The abbey church of St Pierre, dating chiefly from the 13th 
century, contains, besides some fine stained glass, twelve repre- 
sentations of the apostles in enamel, executed about 1547 by 
Leonard Limosin. Of the other churches of Chartres the chief 
are St Aignan (13th, 16th and 17th centuries) and St Martin-au- 
Val (12th century). The hotel de ville, a building of the 17th 
century, containing a museum and library, an older hotel de 
ville of the 13th century, and several medieval and Renaissance 
houses, are of interest. There is a statue of General F. S. 
Marceau-Desgraviers (b. 1769), a native of the town. 

The town is the seat of a bishop, a prefecture, a court of assizes, 
and has tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a chamber 
of commerce, training colleges, a lycee for boys, a communal 
college for girls, and a branch of the Bank of France. Its trade 
is carried on chiefly on market-days, when the peasants of the 
Beauce bring their crops and live-stock to be sold and make 
their purchases. The game-pies and other delicacies of Chartres 
are well known, and the industries also include flour-milling, 
brewing, distilling, iron-founding, leather manufacture, dyeing, 
and the manufacture of stained glass, billiard requisites, 
hosiery, &c. 

Chartres was one of the principal towns of the Carnutes, and 
by the Romans was called Autricum, from the river Autura 
(Eure), and afterwards civitas Carnutum. It was burnt by the 
Normans in 858, and unsuccessfully besieged by them in 911. 
In 141 7 it fell into the hands of the English, from whom it was 
recovered in 1432. It was attacked unsuccessfully by the 
Protestants in 1568, and was taken in 1591 by Henry IV., who 
was crowned there three years afterwards. In the Franco-German 
War it was seized by the Germans on the 21st of October 1870, 
and continued during the rest of the campaign an important 
centre of operations. During the middle ages it was the chief 
town of the district of Beauce, and gave its name to a countship 
which was held by the counts of Blois and Champagne and after- 
wards by the house of Chatillon, a member of which in 1286 sold 
it to the crown. It was raised to the rank of a duchy in 1528 by 
Francis I. After the time of Louis XIV. the title of duke of 
Chartres was hereditary in the family of Orleans. 

See M. T. Bulteau, Monographie de la cathidrale de Chartres (1887) ; 
A. Plerval, Chartres, sa cathedrale, ses monuments (1896); H. J. L. J. 
Masse, Chartres: its Cathedral and Churches (1900). 

CHARTREUSE, a liqueur, so called from having been made 
at the famous Carthusian monastery, La Grande Chartreuse, at 
Grenoble (see below). In consequence of the Associations Law, 
the Chartreux monks left France in 1904, and now continue the 
m anuf acture of this liqueur in Spain. There are two m ain varieties 
of Chartreuse, the green and the yellow. The green contains 
about 57, the yellow about 43% of alcohol. There are other 
differences due to the varying nature and quantity of the 
flavouring matters employed, but the secrets of manufacture are 
jealously guarded. The genuine liqueur is undoubtedly produced 
by means of a distillation process. 

CHARTREUSE, LA GRANDE, the mother house of the very 
severe order of Carthusian monks (see Carthusians). It is 
situated in the French department of the Is£re, about 12 J m. 
N. of Grenoble, at a height of 3205 ft. above the sea, in the heart 
of a group of limestone mountains, and not far from the source 



CHARWOMAN—CHASE, S. P. 



955 



of the Guiers Mort. The original settlement here was founded 
by St Bruno about 1084, and derived its name from the small 
village to the S.E., formerly known as Cartusia, and now as St 
Pierre de Chartreuse. The first convent on the present site was 
built between 113 2 and 113 7, but the actual buildings date only 
from about 1676, the older ones having been often burnt. The 
convent stands in a very picturesque position in a large meadow, 
sloping to the S.W., and watered by a tiny tributary of the Guiers 
Mort. On the north, fine forests extend to the Col de la Ruchere, 
and on the west rise well-wooded heights, while on the east 
tower white limestone ridges, culminating in the Grand Som 
(6670 ft.). One of the most famous of the early Carthusian 
monks was St Hugh of Lincoln, who lived here from 1160 to 
1 18 1, when he went to England to found the first Carthusian 
house at Witham in Somerset; in 1186 he became bishop of 
Lincoln, and before his death in 1 200 had built the angel choir 
and other portions of the wonderful cathedral there. 

The principal approach to the convent is from St Laurent du 
Pont, a village situated on the Guiers Mort, and largely built 
by the monks — it is connected by steam tramways with Voiron 
(for Grenoble) and St Beron (for Chambery). Among the other 
routes may be mentioned those from Grenoble by Le Sappey, or 
by the Col de la Charmette, or from Chambery by the Col de 
Couz and the village of Les Echelles. St Laurent is about 5 J m. 
from the convent. The road mounts along the Guiers Mort and 
soon reaches the hamlet of Fourvoirie, so called from forata via, 
as about 1510 the road was first pierced hence towards the 
convent. Here are iron forges, and here was formerly the chief 
centre of the manufacture of the famed Chartreuse liqueur. 
Beyond, the road enters the " Desert " and passes through most 
delightful scenery. Some way farther the Guiers Mort is crossed 
by the modern bridge of St Bruno, the older bridge of Parant 
being still visible higher up the stream. Here begins the splendid 
carriage road, constructed by M. E. Viaud between 1854 and 
1856. It soon passes beneath the bold pinnacle of the Oeillette 
or Aiguillette, beyond which formerly women were not allowed 
to penetrate. After passing through four tunnels the road bends 
north (leaving the Guiers Mort which flows past St Pierre de 
Chartreuse) , and the valley soon opens to form the upland hollow 
in which are the buildings of the convent. These are not very 
striking, the high roofs of dark slate, the cross-surmounted 
turrets and the lofty clock-tower being the chief features. But 
the situation is one of ideal peace and repose. Women were 
formerly lodged in the old infirmary, close to the main gate, 
which is now a hotel. Within the conventual buildings are four 
halls formerly used for the reception of the priors of the various 
branch houses in France, Italy, Burgundy and Germany. The 
very plain and unadorned chapel dates from the 15th century, 
but the cloisters, around which cluster the thirty-six small houses 
for the fully professed monks, are of later date. The library con- 
tained before the Revolution a very fine collection of books and 
MSS., now mostly in the town library at Grenoble. 

The monks were expelled in 1793, but allowed to return in 
1816, but then they had to pay rent for the use of the buildings 
and the forests around, though both one and the other were due 
to the industry of their predecessors. They were again expelled 
in 1904, and are dispersed in various houses in England, at 
Pinerolo (Italy) and at Tarragona (Spain). It is at the last- 
named spot that the" various pharmaceutical preparations are 
now manufactured for which they are famous (though sold only 
since about 1840) — the Elixir, the Boule d'acier (a mineral paste 
or salve) , and the celebrated liqueur. The magnificent revenues 
derived from the profits of this manufacture were devoted by the 
monks to various purposes of benevolence, especially in the 
neighbouring villages, which owe to this source their churches, 
schools, hospitals, &c, fee, built and maintained at the expense 
of the monks. 

See La Grande Chartreuse par un Charlreux (Grenoble, 1898) ; 
H. Ferrand, Guide a la Grande Chartreuse (1889) ; and Les Montagnes 
de la Chartreuse (1899) (W. A. B. C.) 

CHARWOMAN, one who is hired to do occasional household 
work. " Char " or " chare," which forms the first part of the 



word, is common, in many forms, to Teutonic languages, meaning 
a " turn," and, in this original sense, is seen in " ajar," properly 
" on char," of a door " on the turn " in the act of closing. It is 
thus applied to a " turn of work," an odd job, and is so used, in 
the form " chore," in America, and in dialects of the south-west 
of England. 

CHASE, SALMON PORTLAND (1808-1873), American states- 
man and jurist, was born in Cornish township, New Hampshire, 
on the 13th of January 1808. His father died in 1817, and the 
son passed several years (1820-1824) in Ohio with his uncle, 
Bishop Philander Chase (1775-1852), the foremost pioneer of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church in the West, the first bishop of 
Ohio (i8i9-i83i),andafter 1835 bishop of Illinois. He graduated 
at Dartmouth College in 1826, and after studying law under 
William Wirt, attorney-general of the United States, in 
Washington, D.C., was admitted to the bar in 1829, and removed 
to Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1830. Here he soon gained a position of 
prominence at the bar, and published an annotated edition, 
which long remained standard, of the laws of Ohio. At a time 
when public opinion in Cincinnati was largely dominated by 
Southern business connexions, Chase, influenced probably by 
James G. Birney, associated himself after about 1836 with the 
anti-slavery movement, and became recognized as the leader of 
the political reformers as opposed to the Garrisonian abolitionists. 
To the cause he freely gave his services as a lawyer, and was 
particularly conspicuous as counsel for fugitive slaves seized 
in Ohio for rendition to slavery under the Fugitive Slave Law 
of 1793 — indeed, he came to be known as the "attorney-general 
of fugitive slaves." His argument (184,7) in the famous Van 
Zandt case before the United States Supreme Court attracted 
particular attention, though in this as in other cases of the 
kind the judgment was against him. In brief he contended that 
slavery was " local, not national," that it could exist only by 
virtue of positive State Law, that the Federal government was 
not empowered by the Constitution to create slavery anywhere, 
and that " when a slave leaves the jurisdiction of a state he 
ceases to be a slave, because he continues to be a man and 
leaves behind him the law which made him a slave." In 1841 he 
abandoned the Whig party, with which he had previously been 
affiliated, and for seven years was the undisputed leader of the 
Liberty party in Ohio; he was remarkably skilful in drafting 
platforms and addresses, and it was he who prepared the national 
Liberty platform of 1843 and the Liberty address of 1845. 
Realizing in time that a third party movement could not succeed, 
he took the lead during the campaign of 1848 in combining the 
Liberty party with the Barnburners or Van Buren Democrats 
of New York to form the Free-Soilers. He drafted the famous 
Free-Soil platform, and it was largely through his influence that 
Van Buren was nominated for the presidency. His object, how- 
ever, was not to establish a permanent new party organization, 
but to bring pressure to bear upon Northern Democrats to force 
them to adopt a policy opposed to the further extension of 
slavery. 

In 1849 he was elected to the United States Senate as the 
result of a coalition between the Democrats and a small group 
of Free-Soilers in the state legislature; and for some years 
thereafter, except in 1852, when he rejoined the Free-Soilers, 
he classed himself as an Independent Democrat, though he 
was out of harmony with the leaders of the Democratic party. 
During his service in the Senate (1849-1855) he was pre-eminently 
the champion of anti-slavery in that body, and no one spoke 
more ably than he did against the Compromise Measures of 1850 
and the Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854. The Kansas-Nebraska 
legislation, and the subsequent troubles in Kansas, having 
convinced him of the futility of trying to influence the Democrats, 
he assumed the leadership in the North-west of the movement 
to form a new party to oppose the extension of slavery. The 
" Appeal of the Independent Democrats in Congress to the 
People of the United States," written by Chase and Giddings, 
and published in the New York Times of the 24th of January 
1854, may be regarded as the earliest draft of the Republican 
party creed. He was the first Republican governor of Ohio, 



956 



CHASE, S.— CHASING 



serving from 1855 to 1859. Although, with the exception of 
Seward, he was the most prominent Republican in the country, 
and had done more against slavery than any other Republican, 
he failed to secure the nomination for the presidency in i860, 
partly because his views on the question of protection were not 
orthodox from a Republican point of view, and partly because 
the old line Whig element could not forgive his coalition with the 
Democrats in the senatorial campaign of 1849; his uncom- 
promising and conspicuous anti-slavery record, too, was against 
him from the point of view of " availability." As secretary 
of the treasury in President Lincoln's cabinet in 1861-1864, 
during the first three years of the Civil War, he rendered services 
of the greatest value. That period of crisis witnessed two great 
changes in American financial policy, the establishment of a 
national banking system and the issue of a legal tender paper 
currency. The former was Chase's own particular measure. 
He suggested the idea, worked out all of the important principles 
and many of the details, and induced Congress to accept them. 
The success of that system alone warrants his being placed in 
the first rank of American financiers. It not only secured an 
immediate market for government bonds, but it also provided 
a permanent uniform national currency, which, though inelastic, 
is absolutely stable. The issue of legal tenders, the greatest 
financial blunder of the war, was made contrary to his wishes, 
although he did not, as he perhaps ought to have done, push 
his opposition to the point of resigning. 

Perhaps Chase's chief defect as a statesman was an insatiable 
desire for supreme office. It was partly this ambition, and 
also temperamental differences from the president, which led 
him to retire from the cabinet in June 1864. A few months 
later (December 6, 1864) he was appointed chief justice of the 
United States Supreme Court to succeed Judge Taney, a position 
which he held until his death in 1873. Among his most im- 
portant decisions were Texas v. White (7 Wallace, 700), 1869, in 
which he asserted that the Constitution provided for an " in- 
destructible union composed of indestructible states," Veazie 
Bank v. Fenno (8 Wallace, 533), 1869, in defence of that part 
of the banking legislation of the Civil War which imposed a 
tax of 10% on state bank-notes, and Hepburn v. Griswold (8 
Wallace, 603), 1869, which declared certain parts of the legal 
tender acts to be unconstitutional. When the legal tender 
decision was reversed after the appointment of new judges, 
1871-1872 (Legal Tender Cases, 12 Wallace, 457), Chase prepared 
a very able dissenting opinion. Toward the end of his life he 
gradually drifted back toward his old Democratic position, and 
made an unsuccessful effort to secure the nomination of the 
Democratic party for the presidency in 1872. He died in New 
York city on the 7th of May 1873. Chase was one of the ablest 
political leaders of the Civil War period, and deserves to be 
placed in the front rank of American statesmen. 

The- standard biography is A. B. Hart's Salmon Portland Chase 
in the " American Statesmen Series " (1899). Less philosophical, 
but containing a greater wealth of detail, is J. W. Shuckers' Life and 
Public Services of Salmon Portland Chase (New York, 1874). R. B. 
Warden's Account of the Private Life and Public Services of Salmon 
Portland Chase (Cincinnati, 1874) deals more fully with Chase's 
private life. 

CHASE, SAMUEL (1741-1811), American jurist, was bom in 
Somerset county, Maryland, on the 17th of April 1741. He was 
admitted to the bar at Annapolis in 1761, and for more than 
twenty years was a member of the Maryland legislature. He 
took an active part in the resistance to the Stamp Act, and from 
1774 to 1778 and 1784^0 1785 was a member of the Continental 
Congress. With Benjamin Franklin and Charles Carroll he was 
sent by Congress in 1776 to win over the Canadians to the side 
of the revolting colonies, and after his return did much to 
persuade Maryland to advocate a formal separation of the 
thirteen colonies from Great Britain, he himself being one of 
those who signed the Declaration of Independence on the 2nd 
of August 1776. In this year he was also a member of the 
convention which framed the first constitution for the state of 
Maryland. After serving in the Maryland convention which 
ratified for that state the Federal Constitution, and there 



vigorously opposing ratification, though afterwards he was an 
ardent Federalist, he became in 1791 chief judge of the Maryland 
general court, which position he resigned in 1796 for that of an 
associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. 
His radical Federalism, however, led him to continue active in 
politics, and he took advantage of every opportunity, on the 
bench and off, to promote the cause of his party. His over- 
bearing conduct while presiding at the trials of John Fries for 
treason, and of James Thompson Callender (d. 1813) for seditious 
libel in 1800, drove the lawyers for the defence from the court, 
and evoked the wrath of the Republicans, who were stirred to 
action by a political harangue on the evil tendencies of democracy 
which he delivered as a charge to a grand jury at Baltimore in 
1803. The House of Representatives adopted a resolution of 
impeachment in March 1804, and on the 7th of December 1804 
the House managers, chief among whom were John Randolph, 
Joseph H. Nicholson (1770-1817), and Caesar A. Rodney (1772- 
1824), laid their articles of impeachment before the Senate. 
The trial, with frequent interruptions and delays, lasted from 
the 2nd of January to the 1st of March 1805. Judge Chase was 
defended by the ablest lawyers in the country, including Luther 
Martin, Robert Goodloe Harper (1765-1825), Philip Barton Key 
(1757-1815), Charles Lee (1758-1815), and Joseph Hopkinson 
(1770-1842). The indictment, in eight articles, dealt with his 
conduct in the Fries and Callender trials, with his treatment of 
a Delaware grand jury, and (in article viii.) with his making 
" highly indecent, extra-judicial " reflections upon the national 
administration, probably the greatest offence in Republican eyes. 
On only three articles was there a majority against Judge Chase, 
the largest, on article viii., being four short of the necessary 
two-thirds to convict. " The case," says Henry Adams, "proved 
impeachment to be an impracticable thing for partisan purposes, 
and it decided the permanence of those lines of constitutional 
development which were a reflection of the common law." 
Judge Chase resumed his seat on the bench, and occupied it 
until his death on the 19th of June 181 1. 

See The Trial of Samuel Chase (2 vols., Washington, 1805), reported 
by Samuel H. Smith and Thomas Lloyd ; an article in The American 
Law Review, vol. xxxiii. (St Louis, Mo., 1899) ; and Henry Adams's 
History of the United Slates, vol. ii. (New York, 18 



CHASE, WILLIAM MERRITT (1849- ), American painter, 
was born at Franklin, Indiana, on the 1st of November 1849. 
He was a pupil of B. F. Hays at Indianapolis, of J. O. Eaton in 
New York, and subsequently of A. Wagner and Piloty in Munich. 
In New York he established a school of his own, after teaching 
with success for some years at the Art Students' League. A 
worker in all mediums — oils, water-colour, pastel and etching — • 
painting with distinction the figure, landscape and still-life, 
he is perhaps best known by his portraits, his sitters numbering 
some of the most important men and women of his time. Mr 
Chase won many honours at home and abroad, became a member 
of the National Academy of Design, New York, and for ten years 
was president of the Society of American Artists. Among his 
important canvases are " Ready for the Ride " (Union League 
Club, N.Y.), " The Apprentice," " Court Jester," and portraits 
of the painters Whistler and Duvenecls; of General Webb and 
of Peter Cooper. 

CHASE. (1) (Fr. ckasse, from Lat. captare, frequentative 
of caper e, to take), the pursuit of wild animals for food or 
sport (see Hunting). The word is used of the pursuit of any- 
thing, and also o.f the thing pursued, as, in naval warfare, of 
a ship. A transferred meaning is that of park land reserved 
for the breeding and hunting of wild animals, in which sense it 
appears in various place-names in England, as Cannock Chase. 
It is also a term for a stroke in tennis (g.v.). (2) (Fr. chdsse, 
Lat. capsa, a box, cf. caisse, and " chest "), an enclosure, such 
as the muzzle-end of a gun in front of the trunnions, a groove 
cut to hold a pipe, and, in typography, the frame enclosing the 
" forme." 

CHASING, or Enchasing, the art of producing figures and 
ornamental patterns, either raised or indented, on metallic 
surfaces by means of steel tools or punches. It is practised 



CHASLES— CHASSERIAU 



957 



extensively for the ornamentation of goldsmith and silversmith 
work, electro-plate and similar objects, being employed to 
produce bold flutings and bosses, and in another manner utilized 
for imitating engraved surfaces. Minute work can be produced 
by this method, perfect examples of which may be seen in the 
watch-cases chased by G. M. Moser, R.A. (i 704-1 783). The 
chaser first outlines the pattern on the surface he is to ornament, 
after which, if the work involves bold or high embossments, 
these are blocked out by a process termed " snarling." The 
snarling iron is a long iron tool turned up at the end, and made so 
that when securely fastened in a vise the upturned end can reach 
and press against any portion of the interior of the vase or other 
object to be chased. The part to be raised being held firmly 
against the upturned point of the snarling iron, the workman 
gives the shoulder or opposite end of the iron a sharp blow, 
which causes the point applied to the work to give it a percussive 
stroke, and thus throw up the surface of the metal held against 
the tool. When the blocking out from the interior is finished, 
or when no such embossing is required, the object to be chased 
is filled with molten pitch, which is allowed to harden. It is 
then fastened to a sandbag, and with hammer and a multitude 
of small punches of different outline the whole details of the 
pattern, lined, smooth or " matt," are worked out. Embossing 
and stamping from steel dies and rolled ornaments have long 
since taken the place of chased ornamentations in the cheaper 
kinds of plated works. (See Embossing.) 

CHASLES, VICTOR EUPHEMIEN PHILARETE (1 798-1873), 
French critic and man of letters, was born at Mainvilliers (Eure 
et Loir) on the 8th of October 1798. His father, Pierre Jacques 
Michel Chasles (1754-1826), was a member of the Convention, 
and was one of those who voted the death of Louis XVI. He 
brought up his son according to the principles of Rousseau's 
Emile, and the boy, after a regime of outdoor life, followed by 
some years' classical study, was apprenticed to a printer, so that 
he might make acquaintance with manual labour. His master 
was involved in one of the plots of 181 5, and Philarete suffered 
two months' imprisonment. On his release he was sent to 
London, where he worked for the printer Valpy on editions of 
classical authors. He wrote articles for the English reviews, 
and on his return to France did much to popularize the study 
of English authors. He was also one of the earliest to draw 
attention in France to Scandinavian and Russian literature. 
He contributed to the Revue des deux mondes, until he had a 
violent quarrel, terminating in a lawsuit, with Francois Buloz, 
who won his case. He became librarian of the Bibliotheque 
Mazarine, and from 1841 was professor of comparative literature 
at the College de France. During his active life he produced 
some fifty volumes of literary history and criticism, and of 
social history, much of which is extremely valuable. He died 
at Venice on the 18th of July 1873. His son, Emile Chasles 
(b. 1827), was a philologist of some reputation. 

Among his best critical works is Dix-huitieme Siecle en Angleterre 
. . . (1846), one of a series of 20 vols, of Etudes de litterature comparee 
(1846-1875), which he called later Trente ans de critique. An 
account of his strenuous boyhood is given in his Maison de mon pere. 
His Memoires (1876-1877) did not fulfil the expectations based on his 
brilliant talk. 

CHASSE (from the Fr., in full chasse-cafS, or " coffee-chaser "), 
a draught of spirit or liqueur, taken with or after coffee, &c. 

CHASSIS (Fr. for " chased "), a gliding step in dancing, so 
called since one foot is brought up behind or chases the other. 
The chasse croise is a double variety of the step. 

CHASSELOUP-LAUBAT, FRANCOIS, Marquis de (1754- 
1833), French general and military engineer, was born at St 
Sernin (Lower Charente) on the 18th of August 1754, of a noble 
family, and entered the French engineers in 1774. He was still 
a subaltern at the outbreak of the Revolution, becoming captain 
in 1 79 1. His ability as a military engineer was recognized in 
the campaigns of 1792 and 1793. In the following year he won 
distinction in various actions and was promoted successively 
chef de bataillon and colonel. He was chief of engineers at the 
siege of Mainz in 1796, after which he was sent to Italy. He 
there conducted the first siege of Mantua, and reconnoitred the 



positions and lines of advance of the army of Bonaparte. He 
was promoted general of brigade before the close of the campaign, 
and was subsequently employed in fortifying the new Rhine 
frontier of France. His work as chief of engineers in the army 
of Italy (1799) was conspicuously successful, and after the battle 
of Novi he was made general of division. When Napoleon took 
the field in 1800 to retrieve the disasters of 1-799, he again 
selected Chasseloup as his engineer general. During the peace of 
1801-1805 he was chiefly employed in reconstructing the defences 
of northern Italy, and in particular the afterwards famous 
Quadrilateral. His chef-d'oeuvre was the great fortress 'of Aless- 
andria on the Tanaro. In 1805 he remained in Italy with 
Massena, but at the end of 1806 Napoleon, then engaged in the 
Polish campaign, called him to the Grande Armee, with which 
he served in the campaign of 1806-07, directing the sieges of 
Colberg, Danzig and Stralsund. During the Napoleonic domina L 
tion in Germany, Chasseloup reconstructed many fortresses, 
in particular Magdeburg. In the campaign of 1809 he again 
served in Italy. In 1810 Napoleon made him a councillor of 
state. His last campaign was that of 1812 in Russia. He 
retired from active service soon afterwards, though in 18 14 he 
was occasionally engaged in the inspection and construction 
of fortifications. Louis XVIII. made him a peer of France and 
a,knight of St Louis. He refusedto join Napoleon in the Hundred 
Days, but after the second Restoration he voted in the chamber 
of peers against the condemnation of Marshal Ney. In politics 
he belonged to the constitutional party. The king created him 
a marquis. Chasseloup's later years were employed chiefly in 
putting in order his manuscripts, a task which he had to abandon 
owing to the failure of his sight. His only published work was 
Correspondance d'un giniral fran^ais, &c. sur divers sujets (Paris, 
1801, republished Milan, 1805 and i8ir, under the title Corre- 
spondance de deux ginSrals, &c, essais sur quelques parties d'ariil- 
lerie et de fortification) . The most important of his papers are 
in manuscript in the Dep6t of Fortifications, Paris. 

As an engineer Chasseloup was an adherent, though of ad- 
vanced views, of the old bastioned system. He followed in many 
respects the engineer Bousmard, whose work was published in 
1797 and who fell, as a Prussian officer, in the defence of Danzig 
in 1807 against Chasseloup's own attack. His front was applied 
to Alessandria, as has been stated, and contains many elabora- 
tions of the bastion trace, with, in particular, masked flanks in 
the tenaille, which served as extra flanks of the bastions. The 
bastion itself was carefully and minutely retrenched. The 
ordinary ravelin he replaced by a heavy casemated caponier 
after the example of Montalembert, and, like Bousmard's, his 
own ravelin was a large and powerful work pushed out beyond 
the glacis. 

CHASSEPOT, officially " fusil modele 1866," a military breech- 
loading rifle, famous as the arm of the French forces in the Franco- 
German War of 1870-71. It was so called after its inventor, 
Antoine Alphonse Chassepot (1833-1905), who, from 1857 on- 
wards, had constructed various experimental forms of breech- 
loader, and it became the French service weapon in 1866. In 
the following year it made its first appearance on the battlefield 
at Mentana (November 3rd, 1867), where it inflicted severe losses 
upon Garibaldi's troops. In the war of 1870 it proved very 
greatly superior to the German needle-gun. The breech was 
closed by a bolt very similar to those of more modern rifles, and 
amongst the technical features of interest were the method of 
obturation, which was similar in principle to the de Bange 
obturator for heavy guns (see Ordnance), and the retention 
of the paper cartridge. The principal details of the chassepot 
are: — weight of rifle, 9ft 5 oz.; length with bayonet, 6 ft. 2 in.; 
calibre, -433 in.; weight of bullet (lead), 386 grains; weight of 
charge (black powder), 86-4 grains; muzzle velocity, 1328 f.s.; 
sighted to 1312 yds. (1200 m.). The chassepot was replaced in 
1874 by the Gras rifle, which had a metal cartridge, and all rifles 
of the older model remaining in store were converted to take the 
same ammunition (fusil modele 1866/74) . 

CHASSERIAU, THEODORE (1819-1856), French painter, 
was born in the Antilles, and studied under Ingres at Paris and 



958 



CHASSIS-^-CHASTELLAIN 



at Rome, subsequently falling under the influence of Paul 
Delaroche. He was a well-known painter of portraits and his- 
torical pieces, his " Tepidarium at Pompeii " (1853) being now 
in the Louvre. 

CHASSIS (Fr. chdssis, a frame, from the Late. Lat. capsum, an 
enclosed space) , properly a window-frame, from which is derived 
the word " sash "; also the movable traversing frame of a gun, 
and more particularly that part of a motor vehicle consisting of 
the wheels, frame and machinery, on which the body or carriage 
part rests. 

CHASTELARD, PIERRE DE BOCSOZEL DE (1540-1563), 
French poet, was born in Dauphin6, a scion of the house of 
Bayard. His name is inseparably connected with Mary, queen 
of Scots. From the service of the Constable Montmorency, 
Chastelard, then a page, passed to the household of Marshal 
Damville, whom he accompanied in his journey to Scotland in 
escort of Mary (1 561). He returned to Parisin themarshal's train, 
but left for Scotland again shortly afterward, bearing letters of 
recommendation to Mary from his old protector, Montmorency, 
and the Regrets addressed to the ex-queen of France by Pierre 
Ronsard, his master in the art of song. He undertook to trans- 
mit to the poet the service of plate with which Mary rewarded 
him. But he had fallen in love with the queen, who is said to 
have encouraged his passion. Copies of verse passed between 
them; she lost no occasion of showing herself partial to his 
person and conversation. The young man hid himself under her 
bed, where he was discovered by her maids of honour. Mary 
pardoned the offence, and the old familiar terms between them 
were resumed. Chastelard was so rash as again to violate her 
privacy. He was discovered a second time, seized, sentenced 
and hanged the next morning. He met his fate valiantly and 
consistently, reading, on his way to the scaffold, his master's 
noble Hymne de la mort, and turning at the instant of doom 
towards the palace of Holyrood, to address to his unseen mistress 
the famous farewell — " Adieu, toi si belle et si cruelle, qui me 
tues et que je ne puis cesser d'aimer." This at least is the version 
of the Mfmoires of Brant6me, who is, however, notoriously 
untrustworthy. But for his madness of love, it is possible that 
Chastelard would have left no shadow or shred of himself behind. 
As it is, his life and death are of interest as illustrating the wild 
days in which his lot was cast. 

CHASTELLAIN, GEORGES (d. 1475), Burgundian chronicler, 
was a native of Alost in Flanders. He derived his surname from 
the fact that his ancestors were burgraves or chatelains of the 
town; his parents, who belonged to illustrious Flemish families, 
wfire probably the Jean Chastellain and his wife Marie de Mas- 
mines mentioned in the town records in 1425 and 1432. A copy 
of an epitaph originally at Valenciennes states that he died on 
the 20th of March 1474-5 aged seventy. But since he states 
that he was so young a child in 1430 that he could not recollect 
the details of events in that year, and since he was " tcolier " at 
Louvain in 1430, his birth may probably be placed nearer 141 5 
than 1405. He saw active service in the Anglo-French wars and 
probably elsewhere, winning the surname of L'adventureux. In 
1434 he received a gift from Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, 
for his military services, but on the conclusion of the peace of 
Arras in the next year he abandoned soldiering for diplomacy. 
The next ten years were spent in France, where he was connected 
with Georges de la Tremoille, and afterwards entered the house- 
hold of Pierre de Br6ze, at that time seneschal of Poitou, by 
whom he was employed on missions to the duke of Burgundy, 
in an attempt to establish better relations between Charles VII. 
and the duke. During these years Chastellain had ample oppor- 
tunity of obtaining an intimate knowledge of French affairs, but 
on the further breach between the two princes, Chastellain left 
the French service to enter Philip's household. He was at first 
pantler, then carver, titles which are misleading as to the nature 
of his services, which were those of a diplomatist; and in 1457 
he became a member of the ducal council. He was continually 
employed on diplomatic errands until 1455, when, owing appar- 
ently to ill-health, he received apartments in the palace of the 
counts of Hainaut at Salle-le-Comte, Valenciennes, with a con- 



siderable pension, on condition that the recipient should put in 
writing " choses nouvelles et morales," and a chronicle of notable 
events. That is to say, he was appointed Burgundian historio- 
grapher with a recommendation to write also on other subjects 
not strictly within the scope of a chronicler. From this time 
he worked hard at his Chronique, with occasional interruptions 
in his retreat to fulfil missions in France, or to visit the Bur- 
gundian court. He was assisted, from about 1463 onwards, by 
his disciple and continuator, Jean Molinet, whose rhetorical and 
redundant style may be fairly traced in some passages of the 
Chronique. Charles the Bold maintained the traditions of his 
house as a patron of literature, and showed special favour to 
Chastellain, who, after being constituted indiciaire or chronicler 
of the order of the Golden Fleece, was himself made a knight of 
the order on the 2nd of May 1473. He died at Valenciennes 
on the 13th of February (according to the treasury accounts), 
or on the 20th of March (according to his epitaph) 1475. He 
left an illegitimate son, to whom was paid in 1524 one hundred 
and twenty livres for a copy of the Chronique intended for 
Charles V.'s sister Mary, queen of Hungary. Only about one- 
third of the whole work, which extended from 1419 to 1474, is 
known to be in existence, but MSS. carried by the Habsburgs 
to Vienna or Madrid may possibly yet be discovered. 

Among his contemporaries Chastellain acquired a great 
reputation by his poems and occasional pieces now little con- 
sidered. The unfinished state of his Chronique at the time of 
his death, coupled with political considerations, may possibly 
account for the fact that it remained unprinted during the 
century that followed his death, and his historical work was only 
disinterred from the libraries of Arras, Paris and Brussels by the 
painstaking researches of M. Buchon in 1825. Chastellain was 
constantly engaged during the earlier part of his career in 
negotiations between the French and Burgundian courts, and 
thus had personal knowledge of the persons and events dealt 
with in his history. A partisan element in writing of French 
affairs was inevitable in a Burgundian chronicle. This defect 
appears most strongly in his treatment of Joan of Arc; and the 
attack on Agnes Sorel seems to have been dictated by the 
dauphin (afterwards Louis XL), then a refugee in Burgundy, of 
whom he was afterwards to become a severe critic. He was not, 
however, misled, as his more picturesque predecessor Froissart 
had been, by feudal and chivalric tradition into misconception 
of the radical injustice of the English cause in France; and 
except in isolated instances where Burgundian interests were at 
stake, he did full justice to the patriotism of Frenchmen. Among 
his most sympathetic portraits are those of his friend Pierre de 
Breze and of Jacques Cceur. His French style, based partly 
on his Latin reading, has, together with its undeniable vigour 
and picturesqueness, the characteristic redundance and rhetorical 
quality of the Burgundian school. Chastellain was no mere 
annalist, but proposed to fuse and shape his vast material to his 
own conclusions, in accordance with his political experience. 
The most interesting feature of his work is the skill with which 
he pictures the leading figures of his time. His " characters " 
are the fruit of acute and experienced observation, and abound 
in satirical traits, although the 42nd chapter of his second book, 
devoted expressly to portraiture, is headed " Comment Georges 
escrit et mentionne les louanges vertueuses des princes de son temps." 

The known extant fragments of Chastellain's Chroniques with 
his other works were edited by Kervyn de Lettenhove for the 
Brussels Academy in 1863-1866 (8 vols., Brussels) as CEuvres de 
Georges Chastellain. This edition includes all that had been already 
published by Buchon in his Collection de chroniques and Choix de 
chroniques (material subsequently incorporated in the Panthion 
litteraire), and portions printed by Renard in his Trteor national, 
vol. i. and by Quicherat in the Proces de la Pucelle vol. iv. Kervyn 
de Lettenhove's text includes the portions of the chronicle covering 
the periods September 1419, October 1422, January 1430 to December 
I431, 1451-1452, July 1454 to October 1458, July 1461 to July 1463, 
and, with omissions, June 1467 to September 1470 ; and three volumes 
of minor pieces of considerable interest, especially Le Temple de 
Boccace, dedicated to Margaret of Anjou, and the Deprecation for 
Pierre Breze, imprisoned by Louis XI. In the case of these minor 
works the attribution to Chastellain is in some cases erroneous, 
notably in the case of the Livre des fails de Jacques de Lalain, which 



CHASUBLE 



959 



is the work of Lefebvre de Saint- Remi, herald of the Golden Fleece. 
In the allegorical Oultre d 'amour it has been thought a real romance 
between Brez6 and a lady of the royal house is concealed. 

See A. Molinier, Les Sources de Vhistoire de France; as well as 
notices by Kervyn de Lettenhove prefixed to the CEuvres and in the 
Biographie nationale de Belgique; and an article (three parts) by 
Vallet de Viriville in the Journal des savants (1867). 

CHASUBLE (Fr. chasuble, Ger. Kasel, Span, casulla; Late 
Lat. casula, a little house, hut, from casa), a liturgical vestment 
of the Catholic Church. It is the outermost garment worn by 
bishops and priests at the celebration of the Mass, forming 
with the alb (q.v.) the most essential part of the eucharistic 
vestments. Since it is only used at the Mass, or rarely for 
functions intimately connected with the sacrament of the altar, 
it may be regarded as the Mass vestment par excellence. The 
chasuble is thus in a special sense the sacerdotal vestment, and 
at the ordination of priests, according to the Roman rite, the 
bishop places on the candidate a chasuble rolled up at the back 
{planeta plicata), with the words, " Take the sacerdotal robe, 
the symbol of love," &o; at the end of the ordination Mass the 

vestment is unrolled. 
The chasuble or 
planeta (as it is called 
in the Roman missal) , 
according to the pre- 
vailing model in the 
Roman Catholic 
Church, is a scapular- 
like cloak, with a hole 
in the middle for the 
head, falling down 
over breast and back, 
and leaving the arms 
uncovered at the sides. 
Its shape and size, 
however, differ con- 
siderably in various 
countries (see fig. 1), 
while some churches 
— e.g. those of certain 
monastic orders- 
have retained or re- 
verted to the earlier 
" Gothic " forms to 
be described later. 

From Braun's Liiurgische Gewandung, by permission According to the de- 
of the publisher, B. Herder. cisions of the Con- 

^ FlG vV _Comp " ative - shaRe and S1 ? e - oi gregation of Rites 
Chasubles as now in use in various countries. 6 , °, . 

, ~ t, j c • u chasubles must not 

a.o.German. c, Roman, d, Spanish. , , ,. 

be of linen, cotton or 

woollen stuffs, but of silk; though a mixture of wool (or linen 
and cotton) and silk is allowed if the silk completely cover the 
other material on the outer side; spun glass thread, as a sub- 
stitute for gold or silver thread, is also forbidden, owing to the 
possible danger to the priest's health through broken fragments 
falling into the chalice. 

The chasuble, like the kindred vestments (the 4>tk6viov, &c.) 
in the Eastern Churches, is derived from the Roman paenula or 
planeta, a cloak worn by all classes and both sexes in the Graeco- 
Roman world (see Vestments). Though early used in the 
celebration of the liturgy it had for several centuries no speci- 
fically liturgical character, the first clear instances of its ritual 
use being in a letter of St Germanus of Paris (d. 576), and the 
next in the twenty-eighth canon of the Council of Toledo (633). 
Much later than this, however, it was still an article of everyday 
clerical dress, and as such was prescribed by the German council 
convened by Carloman and presided over by St Boniface in 742. 
Amalarius of Metz, in his De ecclesiasticis qfficiis (ii. 19), tells us 
in 816 that the casula is the generate indumentum sacrorum 
ducum and " is proper generally to all the clergy." It was not 
until the nth century, when the cope (q.v.) had become estab- 
lished as a liturgical vestment, that the chasuble began to be 
reserved as special to the sacrifice of the Mass. As illustrating 




this process Father Braun (p. 170) cites an interesting corre- 
spondence between Archbishop Lanf ranc of Canterbury and John 
of Avranches, archbishop of Rouen, as to the propriety of a 
bishop wearing a chasuble at the consecration of a church, 
Lanfranc maintaining as an established principle that the 
vestment should be reserved for the Mass. By the 13th century, 
with the final development of the ritual of the Mass, the chasuble 
became definitely fixed as the vestment of the celebrating priest; 
though to this day in the Roman Church relics of the earlier 
general use of the chasuble survive in the planeta plicata worn 
by deacons and subdeacons in Lent and Advent, and other 
penitential seasons. 

At the Reformation the chasuble was rejected with the other 
vestments by the more extreme Protestants. Its use, however, 
survived in the Lutheran churches; and though in those of 
Germany it is no longer worn, it still forms part of the liturgical 
costume of the Scandinavian Evangelical churches. In the 
Church of England, though it was prescribed alternatively with 
the cope in the First Prayer-Book of Edward VI., it was ulti- 
mately discarded, with the other '.' Mass vestments," the cope 
being substituted for it at the celebration of the Holy Communion 
ia cathedral and collegiate churches; its use has, however, 
during the last fifty years been widely revived in connexion with 
the reactionary movement in the direction of the pre-Reformation 
doctrine of the eucharist. The difficult question of its legality 
is discussed in the article Vestments. 

Form. — The chasuble was originally a tent-like robe which 
fell in loose folds below the knee (see Plate I. fig. 4). Its obvious 
inconvenience for celebrating the holy mysteries, however, 
caused its gradual modification. The object of the change was 
primarily to leave the hands of the celebrant freer for the careful 
performance of the manual acts, and to this end a process of 
cutting away at the sides of the vestment began, which continued 
until the tent-shaped chasuble of the 12 th century had developed 
in the 16th into the scapular-like vestment at present in use. 
This process was, moreover, hastened by the substitution of 
costly and elaborately embroidered materials for the simple 
stuffs of which the vestment had originally been composed; 
for, as it became heavier and stiffer, it necessarily had to be 
made smaller. For the extremely exiguous proportions of some 
chasubles actually in use, which have been robbed of all the 
beauty of form they ever possessed, less respectable motives 
have sometimes been responsible, viz. the desire of their makers 
to save on the materials. The most beautiful form of the chasuble 
is undoubtedly the " Gothic " (see the figure of Bishop Johannes 
of Liibeck in the article Vestments), which is the form most 
affected by the Anglican clergy, as being that worn in the 
English Church before the Reformation. 

Decoration. — Though planetae decorated with narrow orphreys 
are occasionally met with in the monuments of the early centuries, 
these vestments were until the 10th century generally quite 
plain, and even at the close of this century, when the custom of 
decorating the chasuble with orphreys had become common, 
there was no definite rule as to their disposition; sometimes 
they were merely embroidered borders to the neck-opening or 
hem, sometimes a vertical strip down the back, less often a 
forked cross, the arms of which turned upwards over the 
shoulders. From this time onward, however, the embroidery 
became ever more and more elaborate, and with this tendency 
the orphreys were broadened to allow of their being decorated 
with figures. About the middle of the 13 th century, the cross 
with horizontal arms begins to appear on the back of the vest- 
ment, and by the 15th this had become the most usual form, 
though the forked. cross also survived — e.g. in England, where 
it is now considered distinctive of the chasuble as worn in the 
Anglican Church.- Where the forked cross is used it is placed 
both on the back and front of the vestment; the horizontal- 
armed cross, on the other hand, is placed only on the back, the 
front being decorated with a vertical strip extending to the 
lower hem (fig. 1, b,d). Sometimes the back of the chasuble has 
no cross, but only a vertical orphrey, and in this case the front, 
besides the vertical stripe, has a horizontal orphrey just below 



960 



CHATEAU— CHATEAUBRIAND 



the neck opening (see Plate I. fig. 2). This latter is the type 
used in the local Roman Church, which has been adopted in 
certain dioceses in South Germany and Switzerland, and of 
late years in the Roman Catholic churches in England, e.g. 
Westminster cathedral (see Plate I. figs. 3 and 5). 

It has been widely held that the forked cross was a conscious 
imitation of the archiepiscopal pallium (F. Bock, Gesch. der 
liturg. Gewdnder, ii. 107), and that the chasuble so decorated 
is proper to archbishops. Father Braun, however, makes it 
quite clear that this was not the case, and gives proof that this 
decoration was not even originally conceived as a cross at all, 
citing early instances of its having been worn by laymen and 
even by non-Christians (p. 210). Itwas not until the 13th century 
that the symbolical meaning of the cross began to be elaborated, 
and this was still further accentuated from the 14th century 
onward by the increasingly widespread custom of adding to it 
the figure of the crucified Christ and other symbols of the Passion. 
This, however, did not represent any definite rule; and the 
orphreys of chasubles were decorated with a great variety of 
pictorial subjects, scriptural or drawn from the stories of the 
saints, while the rest of the vestment was either left plain or, if 
embroidered, most usually decorated with arabesque patterns 
of foliage or animals. The local Roman Church, true to its 
ancient traditions, adhered to the simpler forms. The modern 
Roman chasuble pictured in Plate I. fig. 5, besides the conven- 
tional arabesque pattern, is decorated, according to rule, with 
the arms of the archbishop and his see. 

The Eastern Church. — The original equivalent of the chasuble 
is the phelonion (4>e\6viov, 4>t\6vT)S, <j>a.ivohu>v, from paenula). 
It is a full vestment of the type of the Western bell 
chasuble; but, instead of being cut away at the sides, it is 
for convenience' sake either gathered up or cut short in front. 
In the Armenian, Syrian, Chaldaean and Coptic rites it is cope- 
shaped. There is some difference of opinion as to the derivation 
of the vestment in the latter case; the Five Bishops (Report to 
Convocation, 1908) deriving it, like the cope, from the birrus, 
while Father Braun considers it, as well as the cope, to be a 
modification of the paenula. 1 The phelonion (Arm. shurtshar, 
Syr. phaina, Chald. maaphra or phaina, Copt, burnos, felonion, 
kuklion) is confined to the priests in the Armenian, Syrian, 
Chaldaean and Coptic rites; in the Greek rite it is worn also by 
the lectors. It is not in the East so specifically a eucharistic 
vestment as in the West, but is worn at other solemn functions 
besides the liturgy, e.g. marriages, processions, &c. 

Until the nth century the phelonion is always pictured as a 
perfectly plain dark robe, but at this period the custom arose 
of decorating the patriarchal phelonion with a number of 
crosses, whence its name of iro\v<7Tavpu)v. By the 14th century 
the use of these polystauria had been extended to metropolitans 
and later still to all bishops. The purple or black phelonion, 
however, remained plain in all cases. The Greeks and Greek 
Melchite metropolitans now wear the sakkos instead of the 
phelonion; and in the Russian, Ruthenian, Bulgarian and 
Italo-Greek churches this vestment has superseded the phelonion 
in the case of all bishops (see Dalmatic and Vestments). 

See J. Braun, S.J., Die liturgische Gewandung (Freiburg im 
Breisgau, 1907), pp. 149-247, and the bibliography to the article 

Vestments. (W. A. P.) 

1 The writer is indebted to the courtesy of Father Braun for the 
following note: — "That the Syrian phaina was formerly a closed 
mantle of the type of the bell chasuble is clearly proved by the 
evidence of the miniatures of a Syrian pontifical (dated 1239) in the 
Bibliotheque Nationale at Paris (cf. Bild 16, 112, 284, in Die litur- 
gische Gewandung) . The liturgical vestments of the Armenians are 
derived, like their rite, from the Greek rite ; so that in this case also 
there can be no doubt that the shurtshar was originally closed. The 
Coptic rite is in the same relation to the Syrian. Moreover, it would 
be further necessary to prove that the birrus, in contradistinction to 
the paenula, was always open in front ; whereas, per contra, the 
paenula, both as worn by soldiers and in ordinary life, was, like the 
modern Arab burnus, often slit up the front to the neck. For the 
rest, it is obvious that if the Syrian phaina was still quite closed in 
the 13th century, and was only provided with a slit since that time, 
the same is very probable in the case of the Armenian chasuble. 
The absence of the hood might also be taken as additional proof of 



CHATEAU (from Lat. castellum, fortress, through 0. Fr. 
chastel, chasteau), the French word for castle (q.v.). The develop- 
ment of the medieval castle, in the 15th and 16th centuries, 
into houses arranged rather for residence than defence led to a 
corresponding widening of the meaning of the term chdteau, 
which came to be applied to any seigniorial residence and so 
generally to all houses, especially country houses, of any pre- 
tensions (cf. the Ger. Schloss). The French distinguish the 
fortified castle from the residential mansion by describing the 
former as the chdteau fort, the latter as the chdteau de plaisance. 
The development of the one into the other is admirably illustrated 
by surviving buildings in France, especially in the chateaux 
scattered along the Loire. Of these Langeais, still in perfect 
preservation, is a fine type of the chdteau fort, with its 10th- 
century keep and 13th-century walls. Amboise (1490), Blois 
( 1 500-1 540) , Chambord (begun 1526), Chenonceaux (151 5-1 560) , 
Azay-le-Rideau (1521), may be taken as typical examples of the 
chdteau de plaisance of the transition period, all retaining in 
greater or less degree some of the architectural characteristics 
of the medieval castle. Some description of these is given under 
their several headings. In English the word chdteau is often 
used to translate foreign words (e.g. Schloss) meaning country 
house or mansion. 

For the Loire chateaux see Theodore Andrea Cook, Old Touraine 
(1892). 

CHATEAUBRIAND, FRANCOIS REN& Vicomte de (1768- 
1848), French author, youngest son of Rene Auguste de Chateau- 
briand, comte de Combourg, 2 was born at St Malo on the 4th of 
September 1768. He was a brilliant representative of the reaction 
against the ideas of the French Revolution, and the most con- 
spicuous figure in French literature during the First Empire. His 
naturally poetical temperament was fostered in childhood by 
picturesque influences, the mysterious reserve of his morose father, 
the ardent piety of his mother, the traditions of his ancient family, 
the legends and antiquated customs of the sequestered Breton 
district, above all, the vagueness and solemnity of the neighbour- 
ing ocean. His closest friend was his sister Lucile, 3 a passionate- 
hearted girl, divided between her devotion to him and to religion. 
Francois received his education at Dol and Rennes, where Jean 
Victor Moreau was among his fellow-students. From Rennes 
he proceeded to the College of Dinan, and passed some years in 
desultory study in preparation for the priesthood. He finally 
decided, after a year's holiday at the family chateau of Combourg, 
that he had no vocation for the Church, and was on the point of 
proceeding to try his fortune in India when he received (1786) a 
commission in the army. After a short visit to Paris he joined 
his regiment at Cambrai, and early in the following year was 
presented at court. In 1788 he received the tonsure in order 
to enter the order of the Knights of Malta. In Paris (1787-1789) 
he made acquaintance with the Parisian men of letters. He 
met la Harpe, Evariste Parny, " Pindare " Lebrun, Nicolas 
Chamfort, Pierre Louis Ginguene, and others, of whom he has 
left portraits in his memoirs. 

Chateaubriand was not unfavourable to the Revolution in its 
first stages, but he was disturbed by its early excesses; moreover, 
his regiment was disbanded, and his family belonged to the 
party of reaction. His political impartiality, he says, pleased 
no one. These causes and the restlessness of his spirit induced 
him to take part in a romantic scheme for the discovery of the 
North-West Passage, in pursuance of which he departed for 
America in the spring of 1791. The passage was not found or 
even attempted, but the adventurer returned enriched with the — 
to him — more important discovery of his own powers and 
vocation, conscious of his marvellous faculty for the delineation 
of nature, and stored with the new ideas and new imagery, 

the derivation of the phaina from the paenula, but I should not lay 
particular stress upon it. The question is settled by the above- 
mentioned miniatures." 

2 For full details of the Chateaubriand family see R. Kerviler, 
Essai d'une bio-biblio graphic de Chateaubriand el de safamille (Vannes, 

1895)- 

3 Her CEuvres were edited in 1879, with a memoir, by Anatoli 
France. 



CHASUBLE 



Plate I. 




Modern Roman Chasuble of Archbishop 
Bourne of Westminster. 



Fiu. 0.— Modern English Chasuble, used at St Paul's Church, 
Knightsbridgc, London. 



Plate II. 



CHASUBLE 




Fig. 7.— Back of a Chasuble of Italian Brocaded Damask (Red) with Embroidered Orphreys. The Vestment is of the early 
16th century, the Orphreys of the late 14th century. (English. In the Victoria and Albert Museum.) 



CHATEAUBRIAND 



961 



derived from the virgin forests and magnificent scenery of the 
western continent. That he actually lived among the Indians, 
however, is shown by Bedier to be doubtful, and the same critic 
has exposed the untrustworthiness of the autobiographical 
details of his American trip. His knowledge of America was 
mainly derived from the books of Charlevoix and others. 

The news of the arrest of Louis XVI. at Varennes in June 
1791 recalled him to France. In 1792 he married Mile Celeste 
Buisson de Lavigne, a girl of seventeen, who brought him a 
small fortune. This enabled him to join the ranks of the emi- 
grants, a course practically imposed on him by his birth and 
his profession as a soldier. After the failure of the duke of 
Brunswick's invasion he contrived to reach Brussels, where he 
was left wounded and apparently dying in the street. His 
brother succeeded in obtaining some shelter for him, and sent 
him to Jersey. The captain of the boat in which he travelled 
left him on the beach in Guernsey. He was once more rescued 
from death, this time by some fishermen. After spending some 
time in the Channel Islands under the care of an emigrant uncle, 
the comte de Bedee, he made his way to London. In England 
he lived obscurely for several years, gaining an intimate acquaint- 
ance with English literature and a practical acquaintance with 
poverty. His own account of this period has been exposed 
by A. le Braz, Au pays d'exil de Chateaubriand (1909), and by 
E. Dick, Revue d'histoire lilUraire de la France (1908), i. From 
his English exile dates the Natchez (first printed in his CEuvres 
completes, 1826-1831), a prose epic designed to portray the 
life of the Red Indians. Two brilliant episodes originally 
designed for this work, Atala and Rene, are among his most 
famous productions. Chateaubriand's first publication, however, 
was the Essai historique, politique et moral sur les revolutions . . . 
(London, 1797), which the author subsequently retracted, but 
took care not to suppress. In this volume he appears as a 
mediator between royalist and revolutionary ideas, a free- 
thinker in religion, and a philosopher imbued with the spirit of 
Rousseau. A great change in his views was, however, at hand, 
induced, according to his own statement, by a letter from his 
sister Julie (Mme de Farcy), telling him of the grief his views 
had caused his mother, who had died soon after her release from 
the Conciergerie in the same year. His brother had perished 
on the scaffold in April 1794, and both his sisters, Lucile and 
Julie, and his wife had been imprisoned at Rennes. Mme de 
Farcy did not long survive her imprisonment. 

Chateaubriand's thoughts turned to religion, and on his 
return to France in 1800 the Genie du christianisme was already 
in an advanced state. Louis de Fontanes had been a fellow-exile 
with Chateaubriand in London, and he now introduced him to 
the society of Mme de Stael, Mme Recamier, Benjamin Constant, 
Lucien Bonaparte and others. But Chateaubriand's favourite 
resort was the salon of Pauline de Beaumont, who was destined 
to fill a great place in his life, and gave him some help in the 
preparation of his w r ork on Christianity, part of the book being 
written at her house at Savigny. Atala, ou les amours de deux 
sauvages dans le desert, used as an episode in the GSnie du chris- 
tianisme, appeared separately in 1801 and immediately made his 
reputation. Exquisite style, impassioned eloquence and glowing 
descriptions of nature gained indulgence for the incongruity 
between the rudeness of the personages and the refinement of 
the sentiments, and for the distasteful blending of prudery with 
sensuousness. Alike in its merits and defects the piece is a more 
emphatic and highly coloured Paul et Virginie; it has been 
justly said that Bernardin Saint-Pierre models in marble and 
Chateaubriand in bronze. Encouraged by his success the 
author resumed his GSnie du christianisme, ou beautes de la 
religion chretienne, which appeared in 1802, just upon the eve of 
Napoleon's re-establishment of the Catholic religion in France, 
for which it thus seemed almost to have prepared the way. No 
coincidence could have been more opportune, and Chateau- 
briand came to esteem himself the counterpart of Napoleon in 
the intellectual order. In composing his work he had borne in 
mind the admonition of his friend Joseph Joubert, that the 
public would care very little for his erudition and very much 



for his eloquence. It is consequently an inefficient pro- 
duction from the point of view of serious argument. The con- 
siderations derived from natural theology are but commonplaces 
rendered dazzling by the magic of style; and the parallels 
between Christianity and antiquity, especially in arts and letters, 
are at best ingenious sophistries. The less polemical passages, 
however, where the author depicts the glories of the Catholic 
liturgy and its accessories, or expounds its symbolical significance, 
are splendid instances of the effect produced by the accumulation 
and judicious distribution of particulars gorgeous in the mass, 
and treated with the utmost refinement of detail. The work is 
a masterpiece of literary art, and its influence in French literature 
was immense. The Eloa of Alfred de Vigny, the Harmonies of 
Lamartine and even the Legende des siecles of Victor Hugo may 
be said to have been inspired by the Genie du christianisme. 
Its immediate effect was very considerable. It admirably sub- 
served the statecraft of Napoleon, and Talleyrand in 1803 
appointed the writer attacks to the French legation at Rome, 
whither he was followed by Mme de Beaumont, who died there. 

When his insubordinate and intriguing spirit compelled his 
recall he was transferred as envoy to the canton of the Valais, 
The murder of the duke of Enghien (21st of March 1804) took 
place before he took up this appointment. Chateaubriand, who 
was in Paris at the time, showed his courage and independence 
by immediately resigning his post. In 1807 he gave great 
offence to Napoleon by an article in the Mercure de France (4th 
of July), containing allusions to Nero which were rightly taken 
to refer to the emperor. The Mercure, of which he had become 
proprietor, was temporarily suppressed, and was in the next year 
amalgamated with the Decade. Chateaubriand states in his 
MSmoires that his life was threatened, but it is more than 
possible that he exaggerated the danger. Before this, in 1806, 
he made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, undertaken, as he subse- 
quently acknowledged, less in a devotional spirit than in quest 
of new imagery. He returned by way of Tunis, Carthage, Cadiz 
and Granada. At Granada he met Mme de Mouchy, and the 
place and the meeting apparently suggested the romantic tale of 
Le Dernier AbencSrage, which, for political reasons, remained 
unprinted until the publication of the CEuvres completes (1826- 
1831). The journey also produced L'ltinSraire de Paris a Jeru- 
salem . . . (3 vols., 1811), a record of travel distinguished by the 
writer's habitual picturesqueness; and inspired his prose epic,. 
Les Martyrs, ou le triomphe de la religion chretienne (2 vols., 1809). 
This work may be regarded as the argument of the Genie du 
christianisme thrown into an objective form. As in the Epi- 
curean of Thomas Moore, the professed design is the contrast 
between Paganism and Christianity, which fails of its purpose 
partly from the absence of real insight into the genius of antiquity, 
and partly because the heathen are the most interesting char- 
acters after all. RenS had appeared in 1802 as an episode of the 
Genie du christianisme, and was published separately at Leipzig 
without its author's consent in the same year. It was perhaps 
Chateaubriand's most characteristic production. The connect- 
ing link in European literature between Werther and Childe 
Harold, it paints the misery of a morbid and dissatisfied soul. 
The representation is mainly from the life. Chateaubriand be- 
trayed amazing egotism in describing his sister Lucile in the 
Amelie of the story, and much is obviously descriptive of his 
own early surroundings. With Les Natchez his career as an im- 
aginative writer is closed. In 1831 he published his Etudes ou 
discours historiques ... (4 vols.) dealing with the fall of the 
Roman Empire. 

As a politician Chateaubriand was equally formidable to his 
antagonists when in opposition and to his friends when in office. 
His poetical receptivity and impressionableness rendered him 
no doubt honestly inconsistent with himself; his vanity and 
ambition, too morbidly acute to be restrained by the ties of party 
allegiance, made him dangerous and untrustworthy as a political 
associate. He was forbidden to deliver the address he had pre- 
pared (181 1) for his reception to the Academy on M. J. Chenier 
on account of the bitter allusions to Napoleon contained in it. 
From this date until 18 14 Chateaubriand lived in seclusion at 



962 



CHATEAUBRIANT— CHATEAUDUN 



the Vallee-aux-loups, an estate he had bought in 1807 at Aulnay. 
His pamphlet De Bonaparte, des Bourbons, et de la nScessite de se 
rattier a nos princes legitimes, published on the 31st of March 
1814, the day of the entrance of the allies into Paris, was as 
opportune in the moment of its appearance as the Ginie du 
christianisme, and produced a hardly less signal effect. Louis 
XVIII. declared that it had been worth a hundred thousand 
men to him. Chateaubriand, as minister of the interior, accom- 
panied him to Ghent during the Hundred Days, and for a time 
associated himself with the excesses of the royalist reaction. 
Political bigotry, however, was not among his faults ; he rapidly 
drifted into liberalism and opposition, and was disgraced in 
September 1816 for his pamphlet De la monarckie selon la charte. 
He had to sell his library and his house of the Vallee-aux-loups. 

After the fall of his opponent, the due Decazes, Chateaubriand 
obtained the Berlin embassy (1821), from which he was trans- 
ferred to London (1822), and he also acted as French pleni- 
potentiary at the Congress of Verona (1822). He here made 
himself mainly responsible for the iniquitous invasion of Spain — 
an expedition undertaken, as he himself admits, with the idea 
of restoring French prestige by a military parade. He next re- 
ceived the portfolio of foreign affairs, which he soon lost by his 
desertion of his colleagues on the question of a reduction of the 
interest on the national debt. After another interlude of effective 
pamphleteering in opposition, he accepted the embassy to Rome 
in 1827, under the Martignac administration, but resigned it at 
Prince Polignac's accession to office. On the downfall of the 
elder branch of the Bourbons, he made a brilliant but inevitably 
fruitless protest from the tribune in defence of the principle of 
legitimacy. During the first half of Louis Philippe's reign he was 
still politically active with his pen, and published a Mimoire sur 
la captivite de madame la duchesse de Berry (1833) and other 
pamphlets in which he made himself the champion of the exiled 
dynasty; but as years increased upon him, and the prospect 
of his again performing a conspicuous part diminished, he re- 
lapsed into an attitude of complete discouragement. His Congres 
de Verone (1838), Vie de Ranct (1844), and his translation of 
Milton, Le Paradis perdu de Milton (1836), belong to the writings 
of these later days. He died on the 4th of July 1848, wholly 
exhausted and thoroughly discontented with himself and the 
world, but affectionately tended by his old friend Madame 
Recamier, herself deprived of sight. For the last fifteen years 
of his life he had been engaged on his MSmoires, and his chief 
distraction had been his daily visit to Madame Recamier, at 
whose house he met the European celebrities. He was buried 
in the Grand Be, an islet in the bay of St Malo. Shortly after his 
death his memory was revived, and at the same time exposed 
to much adverse criticism, by the publication, with sundry 
mutilations as has been suspected, of his celebrated Memoires 
d'outre-tombe (12 vols., 1849-1850). These memoirs undoubtedly 
reveal his vanity, his egotism, the frequent hollowness of his 
professed convictions, and his incapacity for sincere attach- 
ment, except, perhaps, in the case of Madame Recamier. Though 
the book must be read with the greatest caution, especially in 
regard to persons with whom Chateaubriand came into collision, 
it is perhaps now the most read of all his works. 

Chateaubriand ranks rather as a great rhetorician than as a 
great poet. Something of affectation or unreality commonly 
interferes with the enjoyment of his finest works. The Genie 
du christianisme is a brilliant piece of special pleading; Atala 
is marred by its unfaithfulness to the truth of uncivilized human 
nature, Rene by the perversion of sentiment which solicits sym- 
pathy for a contemptible character. Chateaubriand is chiefly 
significant as marking the transition from the old classical to the 
modern romantic school. The fertility of ideas, vehemence of 
expression and luxury of natural description, which he shares 
with the romanticists, are controlled by a discipline learnt in the 
school of their predecessors. His palette, always brilliant, is 
never gaudy; he is not merely a painter but an artist. He is 
also a master of epigrammatic and incisive sayings. Perhaps, 
however, the most truly characteristic feature of his genius is the 
peculiar magical touch which Matthew Arnold indicated as a 



note of Celtic extraction, which reveals some occult quality in a 
familiar object, or tinges it, one knows not how, with " the light 
that never was on sea or land." This incommunicable gift 
supplies an element of sincerity to Chateaubriand's writings 
which goes far to redeem the artificial effect of his calculated 
sophistry and set declamation. It is also fortunate for his fame 
that so large a part of his writings should directly or indirectly 
refer to himself, for on this theme he always writes well. Egotism 
was his master-passion, and beyond his intrepidity and the lofti- 
ness of his intellectual carriage his character presents little to 
admire. He is a signal instance of the compatibility of genuine 
poetic emotion, of sympathy with the grander aspects both of 
man and nature, and of munificence in pecuniary matters, with 
absorption in self and general sterility of heart. 

Bibliography. — The CEuvres completes of Chateaubriand were 
printed in 28 vols., 1826-1831; in 20 vols., 1829-1831 ; and in 
many later editions, notably in 1858-1861, in 20 volumes, with an 
introductory study by Sainte-Beuve. The principal authority for 
Chateaubriand's biography is the Memoires d'outre-tombe (1849- 
1850), of which there is an English translation, The Memoirs of . . . 
Chateaubriand (6 vols., 1902), by A. Teixeira de Mattos, based on the 
admirable edition (4 vols., 1899-1901) of Edmond Bire. This work 
should be supplemented by the Souvenirs et correspondances tires des 
papiers de M m " Recamier (2 vols., 1859, ed. Mme Ch. Lenormant). 
See also Comte de Marcellus, Chateaubriand et son temps (1859); 
the same editor's Souvenirs diplomatiques; correspondance intime de 
Chateaubriand (1858) ; C. A. Sainte-Beuve, Chateaubriand et son 
groupe litteraire sous I'empire (2 vols., 1861, new and revised ed., 
3 vols., 1872) ; other articles by Sainte-Beuve, who was in this case 
a somewhat prejudiced critic, in the Portraits contemporains, vols, 
i. andii..; Causeries du lundi, vols, i., ii. and x. ; Nouveaux Lundis, 
vol. iii.; Premiers Lundis, vol. iii. ; A. Vinet, Etudes sur la lilt, 
francaise au XIX" siecle (1849); M. de Lescure, Chateaubriand 
(1892), in the Grands ecrivains frangais; £mile Faguet, Eludes 
litteraires sur le XIX" siecle (1887) ; and Essai d'une bio-bibliographie 
de Chateaubriand et de sa famille (Vannes, 1896), by Rene Kerviler. 
Joseph Bedier, in Etudes critiques (1903), deals with the American 
writings. Some correspondence with Sainte-Beuve was edited by 
Louis Thomas in 1904, and some letters to Mme de Stael appeared 
in the Revue des deux mondes (Oct. 1903). 

CHATEAUBRIANT, a town of western France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Loire-Inferieure, on the 
left bank of the Chere, 40 m. N.N.E. of Nantes by rail. 
Pop. (1906) 5969. Chateaubriant takes its name from a castle 
founded in the nth century by Brient, count of Penthievre, 
remains of which, consisting of a square donjon and four towers, 
still exist. Adjoining it is another castle, built in the first half 
of the 1 6th century by Jean de Laval, and famous in history as 
the residence of Francoise de Foix, mistress of Francis I. Of 
this the most beautiful feature is the colonnade running at right 
angles to the main building, and connecting it with a graceful 
pavilion. It is occupied by a small museum and some of the 
public offices. There is also an interesting Romanesque church 
dedicated to St Jean de Bere. Chateaubriant is the seat of a 
subprefect and has a tribunal of first instance. It is an important 
centre on the Ouest-Etat railway, and has trade in agricultural 
products. The manufacture of leather, agricultural implements 
and preserved angelica are carried on. In 1551 Henry II. signed 
an edict against the reformed religion at Chateaubriant. 

CHATEAUDUN, a town of north central France, capital of 
an arrondissement in the department of Eure-et-Loir, 28 m. 
S.S.W. of Chartres by rail. Pop. (1906) 5805. It stands 
on an eminence near the left bank of the Loire. The streets, 
which are straight and regular, radiate from a central square, 
a uniformity due to the reconstruction of the town after 
fires in 1723 and 1870. The chateau, the most remarkable 
building in the town, was built in great part by Jean, count of 
Dunois, and his descendants. Founded in the 10th century, and 
rebuilt in the 12th and 15th centuries, it consists of a principal 
wing with a fine staircase of the 16th century, and, at right angles, 
a smaller wing adjoined by a chapel. To the left of the courtyard 
thus formed rises a lofty keep of the 12th century. The fine 
apartments and huge kitchens of the chateau are in keeping with 
its imposing exterior. The church of La Madeleine dates from 
the 1 2th century; the buildings of the abbey to which it be- 
longed are occupied by the subprefecture, the law court and the 
hospital. The medieval churches of St Valerien and St Jean 



CHATEAU-GONTIER— CHATEAUROUX 



9 6 3 



and the ruined chapel of Notre-Dame du Champde, of which the 
facade in the Renaissance style now forms the entrance to the 
cemetery, are other notable buildings. The public institutions 
include a tribunal of first instance and a communal college. 
Flour-milling, tanning and leather-dressing, and the manu- 
facture of blankets, silver jewelry, nails and machinery are the 
prominent industries. Trade is in cattle, grain, wool and hemp. 
Chateaudun (Castrodunum) , which dates from the Gallo-Roman 
period, was in the middle ages the capital of the countship of 
Dunois. 

CHATEAU-GONTIER, a town of western France, capital of 
an arrondissement in the department of Mayenne, on the 
Mayenne, 18 m. S. by E. of Laval by road. Pop. (1906) 6871. 
Of its churches, that of St Jean, a relic of the castle, dates 
from the nth century. Chateau- Gontier is the seat of a sub- 
prefect and has a tribunal of first instance, a communal college 
for boys and a small museum. It carries on wool- and cotton- 
spinning, the manufacture of serge, flannel and oil, and is an 
agricultural market. There are chalybeate springs close to the 
town. Chateau- Gontier owes its origin and its name to a castle 
erected in the first half of the nth century by Gunther, the 
steward of Fulk Nerra of Anjou, on the site of a farm belonging 
to the monks of St Aubin d' Angers. On the extinction of the 
family, the lordship was assigned by Louis XI. to Philippe de 
Comines. The town suffered severely during the wars of the 
League. In 1793 it was occupied by the Vendeans. 

CHATEAUNEUF, LA BELLE, the name popularly given to 
Renee de Rieux, daughter of Jean de Rieux, seigneur de 
Chateauneuf, who was descended from one of the greatest 
families of Brittany. The dates both of her birth and death 
are not known. She was maid of honour to the queen-mother 
Catherine de' Medici, and inspired an ardent passion in the duke 
of Anjou, brother of Charles IX. This intrigue deterred the duke 
from the marriage which it was desired to arrange for him with 
Elizabeth of England; but he soon abandoned La Belle Chateau- 
neuf for Marie of Cleves (1571). The court then wished to find 
a husband for Renee de Rieux, whose singular beauty gave her 
an influence which the queen-mother feared, and matches were 
in turn suggested with the voivode of Transylvania, the earl of 
Leicester, with Du Prat, provost of Paris, and with the count 
of Brienne, all of which came to nothing. Ultimately, on the 
ground that she had been lacking in respect towards the queen, 
Louise of Lorraine-Vaudemont, Renee was banished from the 
court. She married a Florentine named Antinotti, whom she 
stabbed in a fit of jealousy (1577); then she remarried, her 
husband being Philip Altoviti, who in 1586 was killed in a duel 
by the Grand Prior Henry of Angouleme, who was himself 
mortally wounded. 

CHATEAU-RENAULT, FRANCOIS LOUIS DE ROUSSELET, 
Marquis de (1637-1716), French admiral, was the fourth son 
of the third marquis of Chateau-Renault. The family was of 
Breton origin, but had been long settled near Blois. He entered 
the army in 1658, but in 1661 was transferred to the navy, which 
Louis XIV. was eager to raise to a high level of strength. After 
a short apprenticeship he was made captain in 1666. His early 
services were mostly performed in cruises against the Barbary 
pirates (1672). In 1673 he was named chef d'escadre, and he was 
promoted lieutenant gineral des armees navales in 1687. During 
the wars up to this date he had few chances of distinction, but 
he had been wounded in action with the pirates, and had been 
on a cruise to the West Indies. When war broke out between 
England and France after the revolution of 1688, he was in 
command at Brest, and was chosen to carry the troops and 
stores sent by the French king to the aid of James II. in Ireland. 
Although he was watched by Admiral Herbert (Lord Torrington, 
q.v.), with whom he fought an indecisive action in Bantry Bay, 
he executed his mission with success. Chateau-Renault com- 
manded a squadron under Tourville at the battle of Beachy 
Head in 1600. He was with Tourville in the attack of the 
Smyrna convoy in 1693, and was named grand cross of the 
order of Saint Louis in the same year. Though in constant 
service, the reduced state of the French navy (owing to the 



financial embarrassments of the treasury) gave him few openings 
for fighting at sea during the rest of the war. 

On the death of Tourville in 1701 he was named to the vacant 
post of vice-admiral of France. On the outbreak of the War of 
the Spanish Succession he was named for the difficult task of 
protecting the Spanish ships which were to bring the treasure 
from America. It was a duty of extreme delicacy, for the 
Spaniards were unwilling- to obey a foreigner, and the French 
king was anxious that the bullion should be brought to one of 
his own ports, a scheme which the Spanish officials were sure to 
resent if they were allowed to discover what was meant. With 
the utmost difficulty Chateau-Renault was able to bring the 
galleons as far as Vigo, to which port he steered when he learnt 
that a powerful English and Dutch armament was on the Spanish 
coast, and had to recognize that the Spanish officers would not 
consent to make for a French harbour or for Passages, which they 
thought too near France. His fleet of fifteen French and three 
Spanish war-ships, having under their care twelve galleons, had 
anchored on the 22nd of September in Vigo Bay. Obstacles, 
some of an official character, and others due to the poverty of 
the Spanish government in resources, arose to delay the landing 
of the treasure. There was no adequate garrison in the town, 
and the local militia was untrustworthy. Knowing that he 
would probably be attacked, Chateau-Renault strove to protect 
his fleet by means of a boom. The order to land the treasure 
was delayed, and until it came from Madrid nothing could be 
done, since according to law it should have been landed at Cadiz, 
which had a monopoly of the trade with America. At last the 
order came, and the bullion was landed under the care of the 
Gallician militia which was ordered to escort it to Lugo. A very 
large part, if not the whole, was plundered by the militiamen 
and the farmers whose carts had been commandeered for the 
service. But the bulk of the merchandise was on board of the 
galleons when the allied fleet appeared outside of the bay on the 
22nd of October 1702. Sir George Rooke and his colleagues 
resolved to attack. The fleet was carrying a body of troops 
which had been sent out to make a landing at Cadiz, and 
had been beaten off. The fortifications of Vigo were weak on the 
sea side, and on the land side there were none. There was 
therefore nothing to offer a serious resistance to the allies when 
they landed soldiers. The fleet of twenty-four sail was steered 
at the boom and broke through it, while the troops turned the 
forts and had no difficulty in scattering the Gallician militia. 
In the bay the action was utterly disastrous to the French and 
Spaniards. Their ships were all taken or destroyed. The booty 
gained was far less than the allies hoped, but the damage done 
to the French and Spanish governments was great. 

Chateau-Renault suffered no loss of his master's favour by his 
failure to save the treasure. The king considered him free from 
blame, and must indeed have known that the admiral had been 
trusted with too many secrets to make it safe to inflict a public 
rebuke. The Spanish government declined to give him the rank 
of grandee which was to have been the reward for bringing home 
the bullion safe. But in 1703 he was made a marshal of France, 
and shortly afterwards lieutenant-general of Brittany. The 
fight in Vigo Bay was the last piece of active service performed 
by Chateau-Renault. In 1708 on the death of his nephew he 
inherited the marquisate, and on the 15th of November 1716 
he died in Paris. He married in 1684 Marie-Anne-Renee de la 
Porte, daughter and heiress of the count of Crozon. His eldest 
son was killed at the battle of Malaga 1704, and another, also 
a naval officer, was killed by accident in 1708. A third son, 
who too was a naval officer, succeeded him in the title. 

A life of Chateau-Renault was published in 1903 by M. Calmon- 
Maison. There is a French as well as an English account of the part 
played by him at Bantry Bay and Beachy Head, and the controversy 
still continues. For the French history of the navy under Louis XIV. 
see Leon Guerin, Histoire maritime de la France (1863), vols, iii., iv. ; 
and his Les Marins illustres (1861). Also the naval history by 
Charles Bouzel de la Ronciere. (D. H.) 

CHATEAUROUX, MARIE ANNE DE MAILLY-NESLE, 

Duchesse de (1717-T744), mistress of Louis XV. of France, 
was the fourth daughter of Louis, marquis de Nesle, a descendant 



9 6 4 



CHATEAUROUX— CHATELAINE 



of a niece of Mazarin. In 1740, upon the death of her husband, 
the marquis de la Tournelle, she attracted the attention of Louis 
XV.; and by the aid of the due de Richelieu, who, dominated 
by Madame de Tencin, hoped to rule both the king and the state, 
she supplanted her sister, Madame de Mailly, as titular mistress 
in 1742. Directed by Richelieu, she tried to arouse the king, 
dragging him off to the armies, and negotiated the alliance 
with Frederick II, of Prussia, in 1 744. Her political role, however, 
has been exaggerated. Her triumph after the passing disgrace 
provoked by the king's illness at Metz did not last long, for she 
died on the 8th of December 1744. 

See Ed. and J. de Goncourt, La Duchesse de Chdteauroux et ses sceurs 
(Paris, 1879). 

CHATEAUROUX, a town of central France, capital of the 
department of Indre, situated in a plain on the left bank of the 
Indre, 88 m.S. of Orleans on the main line of the Orleans railway. 
Pop. (1906) 21,048. The old town, close to the river, forms a 
nucleus round which a newer and more extensive quarter, 
bordered by boulevards, has grown up; the suburbs of St 
Christophe and Deols (q.v.) lie on the right bank of the Indre. 
The principal buildings of Chateauroux are the handsome 
modern church of St Andre, in the Gothic style, and the Chateau 
Raoul, of the 14th and 15th centuries; the latter now forms 
part of the prefecture. The hotel de ville contains a library and 
a museum which possesses a collection of paintings of the 
Flemish school and some interesting souvenirs of Napoleon I. 
A statue of General Henri Bertrand (1773-1844) stands in one 
of the principal squares. Chateauroux is the seat of a prefect 
and of a court of assizes. It has tribunals of first instance and 
of commerce, a board of trade-arbitrators, a branch of the Bank 
of France, a chamber of commerce, a lycee, a college for girls 
and training colleges. The manufacture of coarse woollens for 
military clothing and other purposes, and a state tobacco-factory, 
occupy large numbers of the inhabitants. Wool-spinning, 
iron-founding, brewing, tanning, and the manufacture of agri- 
cultural implements are also carried on. Trade is in wool, iron, 
grain, sheep, lithographic stone and leather. The castle from 
which Chateauroux takes its name was founded about the 
middle of the 10th century by Raoul, prince of Deols, and 
during the middle ages was the seat of a seigniory, which was 
raised to the rank of countship in 1497, and in 1616, when it 
was held by Henry II., prince of Conde, to that of duchy. In 
1736 it returned to the crown, and was given by Louis XV. in 
1744 to his mistress, Marie Anne de Mailly-Nesle, duchess of 
Chateauroux. 

CHATEAU-THIERRY, a town of northern France, capital 
of an arrondissement in the department of Aisne, 59 m. E.N.E. 
of Paris on the Eastern railway to Nancy. Pop. (1906) 6872. 
Chateau-Thierry is built on rising ground on the right bank of 
the Marne, over which a fine stone bridge leads to the suburb 
of Marne. On the quay stands a marble statue erected to the 
memory of La Fontaine, who was born in the town in 162 1; 
his house is still preserved in the street that bears his name. 
On the top of a hill are the ruins of a castle, which is said to have 
been built by Charles Martel for the Frankish king, Thierry IV., 



and is plainly the origin of the name of the town. The chief relic 
is a gateway flanked by massive round towers, known as the 
Porte Saint-Pierre. A belfry of the 15th century and the church 
of St Crepin of the same period are of some interest. The town 
is the seat of a sub-prefect and has a tribunal of first instance and 
a communal college. The distinctive industry is the manufacture 
of mathematical and musical instruments. There is trade in the 
white wine of the neighbourhood, and in sheep, cattle and agricul- 
tural products. Gypsum, millstone and paving-stone are quarried 
in the vicinity. Chateau-Thierry was formerly the capital of the 
district of Brie Pouilleuse, and received the title of duchy from 
Charles IX. in 1566. It was captured by the English in 1421, 
by Charles V. in 1544, and sacked by the Spanish in 159 1. During 
the wars of the Fronde it was pillaged in 1652; and in the cam- 
paign of 1814 it suffered severely. On the 12th of February 
of the latter year the Russo-Prussian forces were beaten by 
Napoleon in the neighbourhood. 

CHATELAIN (Med. Lat. castellanus, from castellum, a castle), 
in France originally merely the equivalent of the English castellan, 
i.e. the commander of a castle. With the growth of the feudal 
system, however, the title gained in France a special significance 
which it never acquired in England, as implying the jurisdic- 
tion of which the castle became the centre. The chdtelain was 
originally, in Carolingian times, an official of the count; with 
the development of feudalism the office became a fief, and so 
ultimately hereditary. In this as in other respects the 
chatelain was the equivalent of the viscount {q.v-.) ; sometimes 
the two titles were combined, but more usually in those provinces 
where there were chatelains there were no viscounts, and vice 
versa. The title chatelain continued also to be applied to the 
inferior officer, or concierge chdtelain, who was merely a castellan 
in the English sense. The power and status of chatelains 
necessarily varied greatly at different periods and places. 
Usually their rank in the feudal hierarchy was equivalent to 
that of the simple sire {dominus), between the baron and the 
chevalier; but occasionally they were great nobles with an 
extensive jurisdiction, as in the Low Countries (see Burgrave). 
This variation was most marked in the cities, where in the struggle 
for power that of the chatelain depended on the success with 
which he could assert himself against his feudal superior, lay or 
ecclesiastical, or, from the 12th century onwards, against the 
rising power of the communes. The chdtellenie (castellania) , or 
jurisdiction of the chatelain, as a territorial division for certaih 
judicial and administrative purposes, survived the disappearance 
of the title and office of the chatelain in France, and continued 
till the Revolution. 

See Achille Luchaire, Manuel des institutions francaises (Paris, 
1892); Du Cange, Glossarium, s. "Castellanus." 

CHATELAINE (Fr. chdlelaine, the feminine form of chdtelain, 
a keeper of a castle), the mistress of a castle. From the custom 
of a chatelaine to carry the keys of the castle suspended from her 
girdle, the word is now applied to the collection of short chains, 
often worn by ladies, to which are attached various small 
articles of domestic and toilet use, as keys, penknife, needlecase, 
scissors, &c. 



MINTED IN U.S.A. 



