THE 

ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA 

A 

DICTIONARY 

OF 

ARTS, SCIENCES, LITERATURE AND GENERAL 

INFORMATION 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME V 

CALHOUN to CHATELAINE 



New York 

Encyclopaedia Britannica, Irtc 

342 Madison Avenue 



Copyright, in the United States of America, 1910, 

by 

The Encyclopaedia Britannica Company. 



A. 


M. 


C. 


A. 


M. 


CI. 


A. 


N. 




A. 


P. 


c. 


A. 


P. 


H. 



INITIALS USED IN VOLUME V. TO IDENTIFY INDIVIDUAL 

CONTRIBUTORS, 1 WITH THE HEADINGS OF THE 

ARTICLES IN THIS VOLUME SO SIGNED. 



A. BO.* AUGUSTE BOUDINHON, D.D., D.C.L. frannn Taw r 1 

Professor of Canon Law at the Catholic University of Paris. Honorary Canon of i Jf n .. , ' uenerM '> 
Paris. Editor of the Canoniste Contemporain. I Cardinal. 

A. C. S. Algernon Charles Swinburne. i"ni,„„ m .,„ n„„»„„ /• a ,v 

See the biographical article, Swinburne, Algernon Charles. \ Cna Pman George (m pari). 

A.E.H. A.E.Houghton. ,.„,„,,,._. . t . , - , ,. , .. J Camaoho; Canovas del Castillo; 

Formerly Correspondent of r he Standard, in Spain. Author of Restoration of the i r; a stplar v Rinnll 
Bourbons in Spain. I udslelar 3 Kipoil. 

A. E. S. Arthur Everett Shipley, F.R.S., F.Z.S., F.L.S. f 

Fellow, Tutor and Lecturer of Christ's College, Cambridge. University Reader I Chaetognatha; 
in Zoology. Formerly University Lecturer on the Advanced Morphology of the "j Chaetosomatida 
Invertebrata. Author of Zoology of the Invertebrata. Editor of the Pitt Press 
Natural Science Manuals, &c. ^ 

A. Go.* Rev. Alexander Gordon, M.A. J - 

Lecturer in Church History at the University of Manchester. \ ^arranza. 

A. H. J. G. Abel Hendy Jones Greenidge, D.Litt. (Oxon.), (d. 1905). r 

Formerly Fellow and Lecturer of Hertford College, Oxford, and of St John's College, 
Oxford. Author of Infamia in Roman Law, Handbook of Greek Constitutional -j Censor: Ancient. 
History; Roman Public Life, History of Rome. Joint-author of Sources of Roman 
History, 133-70 B.C. I 

A. H. S. Rev. Archibald Henry Sayce, D.Litt., LL.D. L . 

See the biographical article, Sayce, A. H. \ oana - 

A. J. G. Rev. Alexander James Grieve, M.A., B.D. f 

Professor of New Testament and Church History at the United Independent College, J Catechism; 
Bradford. Sometime Registrar of Madras University and Member of Mysore] Calvin (in -bart) 
Educational Service. L \ r )• 

A.L. Andrew Lang. ..,.,_. j Casket Letters. 

See the biographical article, Lang, Andrew. I 

A. Lo. Auguste Longnon. _ f 

Professor at the College de France. Director of the ficole des hautes 6tudes. 
Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Member of the Institute. Author of LivreA Champagne. 
des vassaux du Comte de Champagne et de Brie ; Geographic de la Gdule au VI Steele ; 
Atlas historique de la France depuis Cesar jusqu'a nos jours; &c. '- 



Cassini. 



Agnes Mary Clerke. 

See the biographical article, Clerke, A. M. 

Agnes Muriel Clay (Mrs Wilde). 

Late Resident Tutor of Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. Joint-author of Sources o/-{ Centumviri. 
Roman History, 133-70 B.C. 

Alfred Newton, F.R.S. /Canary; 

See the biographical article, Newton, Alfred. 1 Capereallv. 

Arthur Philemon Coleman, F.R.S. r 

Professor of Geology, University of Toronto. i Canada: Geography. 

Alfred Peter Hillier, M.D., M.P. r 

Author of South African Studies; The Commonweal; &c. Served in Kaffir War, Cane Colony § History (in 
1878-1879. Partner with Dr L. S. Jameson in medical practice in South Africa till < A 

1896. Member of Reform Committee, Johannesburg, and Political Prisoner at part). 

Pretoria, 1895-1896. M.P. for Hitchin division of Herts, 1910. { 

A. SI. Arthur Shadwell, M.A., M.D., LL.D., F.R.C.P. j 

Member of Council of Epidemiological Society. Author of The London Water- "1 Cancer. 
Supply; Industrial Efficiency; Drink, Temperance and Legislation. I 

J A complete list, showing all individual contributors, appears in the final volume. 



VI 

A. S. C, 

A. V. De P. 
A. Wa. 

A. W. H. * 

A. Z. 

B. Bl. 

B. Ra. 

C. F. A. 

C. F. C. 
C. J. J. 

C.L. 
C. Pf. 
C. R. B. 

C. S. L. 

D. E. J. 
D. F. T. 
D. G. H. 

D. H. 

D, LI. T. 

D. Mn. 

E. At. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 

Alan Summerly Cole, C.B. r 

Assistant Secretary for Art, Board of Education, 1900-1908. Took part in organiza- 
tion o( the Textile Manufacturers' Section, St Louis Exhibition, 1904. Author of -j Carpet. 
Ancient Needle Point and Pillow Lace; Embroidery and Lace; Ornament in European 
Silks ;&c. ' I 



Ceramics: §Hispano-Moresque. 



A. van de Put. 

Assistant, Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington. Author of Hispano- 
Moresque Ware of the XV. Century; The Aragonese Double-Crown and the Borja or' 
Borgia Device. I 

Arthur Waugh, M.A. f 

Managing Director of Chapman & Hall, Ltd., Publishers. Formerly literary ? dviser J f> a i vpr i- v n c 
to Kegan Paul & Co. Author of Alfred Lord Tennyson ; Legends of the Wheel ; Robert 1 *"" velle J» u - a - 
Browning in " Westminster Biographies." Editor of Johnson's Lives of the Poets. I 

Arthur William Holland. 

Formerly Scholar of St John's College, Oxford. 
1900. 

Alice Zimmern. f 

Author of Methods of Education in the United States ; The Renaissance of Girls' i Carpenter, Mary. 
Education in England; Women's Suffrage in Many Lands; &c. ^ 

Bertram Blount, F.C.S., F.I.C. r 

Consulting Chemist to the Crown Agents for the Colonies. 
Section of International Association for Testing Materials, Buda-Pesth. 
Practical Electro- Chemistry. 



Bacon Scholar of Gray's Inn, A Charlemagne. 



Hon. President, Cement I 
Author of -S 



Cement. 



Bernard Rackham, M.A. 

Assistant, Victoria and Albert Museum, South Kensington. 



f Ceramics: § German, Dutch 
\ and Scandinavian. 



Charles Francis Atkinson. r 

Formerly Scholar of Queen's College, Oxford. Captain, 1st City of London (Royal J. Castle (in part). 
Fusiliers). Author of The Wilderness and Cold Harbour. ^ 



C. 



-j Cellulose. 



F. Cross., B.Sc. (Lond.), F.C.S., F.I.C. 
Analytical and Consulting Chemist. 

Charles Jasper Joly, F.R.S., F.R.A.S. (1864-1906). r 

Royal Astronomer of Ireland and Andrews Professor of Astronomy in the University Camera Lucida* 

of Dublin, 1897-1906. Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. Secretary of the Royal i c amera Qbscur'a (in part) 



Author of Lord J Ceylon (in part). 

Author of I Capillary; Carolingians; 
|Charibert; Charles MarteL 



Irish Academy. 

H. Caldwell Lipsett. 

Formerly Editor of the Civil and Military Gazette, Lahore, India. 
Curzon in India ; &c. 

Christian Pfister, D-es-L. 

Professor at the Sorbonne, Paris. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. 

Etudes sur le regne de Robert le Pieux. 

Charles Raymond Beazley, M.A., D.Litt. r g am Dingo* 

Professor of Modern History in the University of Birmingham. Formerly Fellow of J r • • / • I 
Merton College, Oxford. University Lecturer in the History of Geography. Author ] ^arpini U» part) ; 
of Henry the Navigator ; The Dawn of Modern Geography ; &c. [ Chang Chun. 

Charles Stewart Loch, D.C.L. (Oxford), LL.D. (St Andrews). 

Secretary to the Council of the London Charity Organization Society since 1875. 
Member of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws. Dunkin Trust Lecturer, 
Manchester College, Oxford, 1896 and 1902. Vice-President, Royal Statistical 
Society, 1894-1895-1897-1901. Author of Charity Organization; Old Age Pensions 
and Pauperism; Methods of Social Advance; &c. 

Rev D.E. Jenkins (" Calvinistic Methodists; 

Calvinistic Methodist Minister, Denbigh. Author of Life of Lewis Charles 4 r i..i.. ti.«^.«>, 
Edwards of Bala. ^uianes, 1 nomas. 

Donald Francis Tovey. r 

Author of Essays in Musical Analysis: comprising The Classical Concerto, The < Cantata. 
Goldberg Variations, and analyses of many other classical works. (_ 

David George Hogarth, M.A. r 

Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Fellow of the British Academy. Keeper of the 

Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Excavated at Paphos, 1888 ; Naucratis, 1899 and 1903 ; i Cappadocia (in part). 
Ephesus, i904-i905;_Assiut^ 1906-1907^ Director, British School at Athens, 



Charity and Charities. 



1897-1900; Director, Cretan Exploration Fund, 1899. 



David Hannay. 

Formerly British Vice-Consul at Barcelona. 
Navy ; Life of Emilio Castelar ; &c. 

Daniel Lleufer Thomas. 

Barrister at law, Lincoln's Inn. 



Author of Short History of the Royal 



Carvajal, Luisa de; 
Chateau-Renault. 



Stipendiary Magistrate at Pontypridd and Rhondda 

Rev. Dugald Macfadyen, M.A. 

Minister of South Grove Congregational Church, Highgate. Author of Constructive 
Congregational Ideals ; &c. 

Edward Armstrong, M.A. 

Fellow of the British Academy. Fellow, Bursar and Lecturer in Modern History, 
Queen's College, Oxford. Warden of Bradfield College. Lecturer to the University 
in Foreign History, 1902-1904. Author of The Emperor Charles V.; Elisabeth 
Farnese ; Lorenzo de Medici ; The French Wars of Religion ; &c. 



j Cardiff. 

[Campbell, John McLeod; 
I Chalmers, Thomas (in part).. 



Charles V., Emperor. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



VII 



B. A. J. 
E. B.* 

E. C. 
E. C. B. 

E. C. Q. 



E. 


G. 




E. 


Gr 




E. 


H. 


B. 


E. 


H. 


G. 


E. 


H. 


M. 



E;L. W. 

Ed. M. 
E. 0.* 

E. Pr. 

E. Tn. 

E. V. 

F. C. C. 

F. J. H. 

F. LI. G. 
F. N. M. 



E. Alfred Jones. 

Author of Old English Gold Plate ; Old Church Plate of the Isle of Man ; Old Silver 
Sacramental Vessels of Foreign Protestant Churches in England ; Illustrated Catalogue - 
of Leopold de Rothschild's Collection of Old Plate ; A Private Catalogue of The Royal 
Plate at Windsor Castle; &c. 

Ernest Charles Francois Babelon. 

Professor at the College de France. Keeper of the department of Medals and 
Antiquities at the Bibliotheque Nationale. Member of the Academie des Inscrip- 
tions de Belles Lettres, Paris. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Author of 
Descriptions Historiques des Monnaies de la Republique Romaine ; Traites des Monnaies 
Grecques et Romaines; Catalogue des Camees de la Bibliotheque Nationale. 

Edward Caird, D.C.L., D.Litt. 

See the biographical article, Caird, Edward. 

Rt. Rev. Edward Cuthbert Butler, O.S.B., M.A., D.Litt. (Dublin). 

Abbot of Downside Abbey, Bath. Author of " The Lausiac History of Palladius," 
in Cambridge Texts and Studies, vol. vi. 

Edmund Crosby Quiggin, M.A. 

Fellow of, and Lecturer in Modern Languages and Monro Lecturer in Celtic at- 
Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. 

Edmund Gosse, LL.D. 

See the biographical article, Gosse, Edmund 

Ernest Arthur Gardner. 

See the biographical article, Gardner, Percy. 

Sir Edward Herbert Bunbury, Bart., M.A., F.R.G.S. (d. 1895). 

M.P. for Bury-St-Edmunds, 1847-1852. Author of a History of Ancient Geography, 
&c. 

E. H. Godfrey. 

Editor, Census and Statistics Office, Department of Agriculture, Ottawa. 

Ellis Hovell Minns, M.A. 

University Lecturer in Palaeography, Cambridge. Lecturer and Assistant Librarian 
at Pembroke College, Cambridge. Formerly Fellow of Pembroke College. 

Sir Edward Leader Williams (d. 1910).' 

Vice-President, Institute of Civil Engineers. Consulting Engineer, Manchester 
Ship Canal. Chief Engineer of the Manchester Ship Canal during its construction. 
Author of papers printed in Proceedings of Institute of Civil Engineers. I 

Eduard Meyer, Ph.D., D.Litt. (Oxon.), LL.D. (Chicago). r 

Professor of Ancient History in the University of Berlin. Author of Geschichte des \ 
Alterthums ; Geschichte des alien Aegyptens ; Die Israeliten und ihre Nachbarstdmme. [_ 

Edmund Owen, M.B., F.R.C.3., LL.D., D.Sc. 

Consulting Surgeon to St Mary's Hospital, London, and to the Children's Hospital, 
Great Ormond Street, London. Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Late Ex- 
aminer in Surgery at the Universities of Cambridge, London and Durham. Author 
of A Manual of Anatomy for Senior Students. 

Edgar Prestage. 

Special Lecturer in Portuguese Literature in the University of Manchester. Ex- 
aminer in Portuguese in the Universities of London, Manchester, &c. Commendador 
Portuguese Order of S. Thiago. Corresponding Member of Lisbon Royal Academy 
of Sciences, Lisbon Geographical Society, &c. Author of Letters of a Portuguese 
Nun; Azurara's Chronicle of Guinea; &c. 

Rev. Ethelred Leonard Taunton (d. 1907). 

Author of The English Black Monks of St Benedict ; History of the Jesuits in England ; 
&c. 

Rev. Edmund Venables, M.A., D.D. (1819-1895). 

Canon and Precentor of Lincoln. Author of Episcopal Palaces of England. 

Frederick Cornwallis Conybeare, M.A., D.Th. (Giessen). 

Fellow of the British Academy. Formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. 
Author of The Ancient Armenian Texts of Aristotle; Myth, Magic and Morals' 
(1909); &c. 

Francis John Haverfield, M.A., LL.D. (Aberdeen), F.S.A. 

Camden Professor of Ancient History at Oxford University. Fellow of Brasenose 
College, Oxford. Fellow of the British Academy. Member of the German Imperial 
Archaeological Institute. Formerly Senior Censor, Student, Tutor and Librari?n " 
of Christ Church, Oxford. Ford's Lecturer, 1906. Author of Monographs on 
Roman History, &c. 

Francis Llewelyn Griffith, M.A., Ph.D. (Leipzig), F.S.A. r 

Reader in Egyptology, Oxford University. Editor of the Archaeological Survey I fannnii<! 
and Archaeological Reports of the Egypt Exploration Fund. PVllr,™ <-,f T™™,-;,! -! v» n "PUS. 
German Archaeological Institute. 



Cellini, Benvenuto (in part). 



Carthage: Ancient. 



Cartesianism. 

Camaldulians; 
Canon: Church Dignitary; 
Capuchins; Carmelites; 
Carthusians; Celestines. 

Celt: Languages and Literature. 

Canzone; Carew, Thomas; 

Cavendish, George; Chansons 

de Geste; Chant Royal. 
"Calydon; Ceos. 
, Cephalonia. 

Cappadocia {in part). 



Canada: § Agriculture. 



Carpi: Ancient Tribes. 



Canal. 



Cambyses. 



Carbuncle. 



Camoens; 
Castello Branco; 
Castilho. 

Campeggio; 
Campion, Edmund; 
Cano, Melehior; 
Cassander, George; 
, Castellesi. 
Catacomb (in part). 

Cathars. 



Celtiberia; 
Cassiterides. 



Fellow of Imperial j 



Col. Frederic Natusch Maude, C.B. 

Lecturer in Military History at Manchester University. Author of War and the 
World' c Policy ; The Leipzig Campaign ; The Jena C.amt,n,{gn 



Cavalry. 



Vlll 




p. 


Px 


• 


F. 


R. 


C. 


F. 


W, 


. R.* 


G. 


A. 


B. 


G. 


G. 


Co. 


G. 


H. 


C. 


G. 


M. 


W. 


G. 


R. 


P. 


G. 


W. 


, T. 


H. 


A. 


M.S. 


H. 


B. 


Wa. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



H. 


Ch. 


H. 


De. 


H. 


F. G. 


H. 


L. C. 


H. 


M. V. 


H. 


P. B. 


H. 


R. H. 


H. 


Sy. 



H. T. A. 
H. W. R.* 

H. W. S. 

H. Y. 
J. A. B. 



Frank Puaux. 

President of the Society de l'Histoire du Protestantisme francais. Author of Les 
pr&curseurs frangais de la Tolerance ; Histoire de I'etablissement des protestants frangais 
en Suede ; L'Aglise r&formie de France ; &c. 

Frank R. Cana. 

Author of South Africa from the Great Trek to the Union. 

Frederick William Rudler, I.S.O., F.G.S. 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London, 1879-1902 
President of the Geologists' Association, 1 887-1 889. 

George A. Boulenger, F.R.S., D.Sc, Ph.D. (Giessen). 

Assistant in the Department of Zoology, Natural History Museum, South Kensing- 
ton. Vice-President of the Zoological Society. 

George Gordon Coulton, M.A. 

Birkbeck Lecturer in Ecclesiastical History, Trinity College, Cambridge. Author 
of Medieval Studies ; Chaucer and his England ; From St Francis to Dante ; &c. 

G. H. Carpenter, B.Sc. 

Professor of Zoology in the Royal College of Science, Dublin. Author of Insects: 
their Structure and Life. , • ' 

George McKinnon Wrong, M.A., F.R.S. (Canada). 

Professor of History at Toronto University. Author of A Canadian Manor and its 
Seigneurs: The British Nation: a History; &c. 



Camisards; 
i Cavalier, Jean. 

J" Cameroon; 

I Cape Colony. 

r Carbonado; Cassiterite; 

j Cat's Eye; Celestine; 

*- Chalcedony. 

Carp; 
Cat-Fish. 



Celibacy. 



i Chafer. 
Canada: History to Federation 



f Canada: History from Federa- 

I tion. 



Carmathians. 



< Calhoun, John C. 



Ceramics: Greek, Etruscan and 
Roman. 

Campbell Bannerman, Sir H.; 
Canon: Music; 
Chamberlain, J. 

Canonization. 



1 Chameleon. 

J Calibration; 
\ Calorimetry. 

"j Charles Edward. 

| Cartier, Jacques. 

Ceramics: Egypt and Western 

Asia. 

Formerly Lecturer in Greek and Roman History -j Chambord, Comte de. 



George Robert Parkin, LL.D., C.M.G. 
See the biographical article, Parkin, G. R. 

Rev. Griffithes Wheeler Thatcher, M.A., B.D. 

Warden of Camden College, Sydney, N.S.W. Formerly Tutor in Hebrew and Old 
Testament History at Mansfield College, Oxford. 

Henry A. M. Smith. 

Henry Beauchamp Walters, M.A., F.S.A. 

Assistant to Keeper of Greek and Roman Antiquities, British Museum. Author of 
The Art of the Greeks; History of Ancient Pottery; Catalogue of the Greek and- 
Etruscan Vases in the British Museum, vol. ii. ; Catalogue of Bronzes, Greek, Roman 
and Etruscan ; &c. 

Hugh Chisholm, M.A. 

Formerly Scholar of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Editor of the nth edition- 
of the Encyclopaedia Britannica ; co-editor of the loth edition. 

Hippolyte Delehaye, S.J. 

Assistant in the compilation of the Bollandist publications: Analecta Bollandiana' 
and Acta Sanctorum. 

Ha£js Friedrich Gadow, F.R.S., Ph.D. 

Strickland Curator and Lecturer on Zoology in the University of Cambridge. - 
Author of Amphibia and Reptiles. 

Hugh Longbourne Callendar, F.R.S. , LL.D. (McGill Univ.). 

Professor of Physics, Royal College of Science, London. Formerly Professor of 
Physics in McGill College, Montreal, and in University College, London. 

Herbert M. Vaughan, F.S.A. 

Keble College, Oxford. Author of The Last of the Royal Stuarts; The Medici Popes; 
The Last Stuart Queen. 

H. P. Biggar. 

Author of The Voyages of the Cabots to Greenland. 

Henry R. H. Hall, M.A 

Assistant in the Department of Egyptian and Assyrian Antiquities, British Museum. 

Henry Symons. 

Assistant in the British Museum. 
at Bedford College, London. 

Rev. Herbert Thomas Andrews. 

Professor of New Testament Exegesis, New College, London. Author of The Com- ^ 
mentary on Acts in the Westminster New Testament; Handbook on the Apocryphal" 
Books in the Century Bible. 

Rev. Henry Wheeler Robinson, M.A. 

Professor of Church History in Rawdon College, Leeds. Senior Kennicott Scholar, 
Oxford, 1901. Author of Hebrew Psychology in Relation to Pauline Anthropology 
(in Mansfield College Essays) ; &c. 

H. Wickham Steed. 

Correspondent of The Times at Vienna. 
1897-1902. 



Correspondent of The Times at Rome, ' 



Colonel Sir Henry Yule, K. C.S.I. 
See the biographical article, Yule, Sir H. 

Sir Jervoise Athelstane Baines, C.S.I. 

President, Royal Statistical Society, 1909-1910. Census Commissioner under the 
Government of India, 1889-1893. Employed at India Office as Secretary to Royal 
Commission on Opium, 1894-1895. Author of Official Reports on Provincial 
Administration on Indian Census Operations; &c. 



Catechumen. 
Canticles {in part). 

Cavallotti. 
\ Carpini {in part). 
1 Census. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



IX 



J. 


A. 


H. 


J. 


A. 


M'N 


J. 


Bt 


• 


J. 


C. 


M. 


J. 


D. 


Pr. 


J. 


P. 


D. 


J. 


F.- 


K. 



J. H. F. 
J. H. R. 

J. HI. R. 

J. M'D. 

J. P.-B. 
J. P. E. 

J. R. C. 
J. S. F. 

J. T. Be. 
J. T. C. 

J. Wa. 



J. W. D. 
J. W. He. 



Chaldaea. 



Editor and translator of theT Ceylon (in part). 



John Allen Howe, B.Sc. 

Curator and Librarian of the Museum of Practical Geology, London. 

J. A. M'Naught. 

Member of the Jury for Carriage Building, Paris Exposition, 1900. 

J. Bartlett. 

Lecturer on Construction, Architecture, Sanitation, Quantities, &c, at King's 
College, London. Member of Society of Architects. Member of Institute of 
Junior Engineers. 

James Clerk Maxwell, F.R.S. 

See biographical article: Maxwell, James Clerk. 

John Dvneley Prince, Ph.D. 

Professor of Semitic Languages, Columbia University, New York. Took part in . 
the Expedition to Southern Babylonia, 1 888-1 889. Author of A Critical Commentary 
on the Book of Daniel. 

Sir J. Frederick Dickson, K.C.M.G. 

Reorganized the North-West Province of Ceylon. 
Upasampada-Kammavaca and the Patimokha. 

James Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Litt.D., F.R.Hist.S. 

Gilmour Professor of Spanish Language and Literature, Liverpool University. 
Norman MacColl Lecturer, Cambridge University. Fellow of the British Academy. - 
Corresponding Member of the Royal Spanish Academy. Author of A History 
of Spanish Literature ; &c. 

John Henry Freese, M.A. 

Formerly Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. 

John Horace Round, M.A., LL.D. (Edin.). 

Author of Feudal England ; Studies in Peerage and Family History; Peerage and - 
Pedigree. 

John Holland Rose, M.A., Litt.D. 

Lecturer on Modern History to the Cambridge University Local Lectures Syndicate. _ 
Author of Life of Napoleon I. ; Napoleonic Studies ; The Development of the European " 
Nations; The Life of Pitt; chapters in the Cambridge Modern History. 

James Macdonald, M.A., LL.D. 

Vice-President of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland, 1895-1897. Rhind 
Lecturer on Archaeology, 1897. Author of Tituli Hunteriani: an Account of the ' 
Roman Stones in the Hunterian Museum. 



rCallovian; Cambrian System; 
J, Caradoc Series; 
L Carboniferous System; Chalk. 

-j Carriage. 



Carpentry. 



I 



-I Capillary Action (in part). 



Campoamor y Campoosorio; 
Castillo Solorzano; 
Celestina, La; 
Cervantes. 

Calpurnius, Titus. 

Castle (in part). 
Castle Guard. 



Cambaceres. 



Chalmers, George. 



Chair. 



James George Joseph Penderel-Brodhurst, 
Editor of the Guardian (London). 

Jean Paul Hippolyte Emmanuel Adhemar Esmein. r 

Professor of Law in the University of Paris. Officer of the Legion of Honour. J Chatelet 
Member of the Institute of France. Author of Cours elementaire d'histoire du droit 1 
francais ; &c. [ 

Joseph Rogerson Cotter, M.A. f 

Assistant to the Professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy, Trinity College, -j Calorescence. 
Dublin. Editor of 2nd edition of Preston's Theory of Heat. [ 

John Smith Flett, D.Sc, F.G.S. r 

Petrographer to the Geological Survey. Formerly Lecturer on Petrology in J Charnockite. 
Edinburgh University. Neill Medallist of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Bigsby 1 
Medallist of the Geological Society of London. [ 

John T. Bealby ,,„.,„ f Caspian Sea (in part); 

Joint author of Stanford s Europe. _ Formerly editor of the Scottish Geographical J Caucasia* 
Magazine. Translator of Sven Hedin's Through Asia, Central Asia and Tibet; &c. 1 - '/. .. 

Joseph Thomas Cunningham, M.A., F.Z.S. 

Lecturer on Zoology at the South-Western Polytechnic, London. Formerly 

Assistant Professor of Natural History in the University of Edinburgh. Naturalist -i Cephalopoda. 

to the Marine Biological Association, and Fellow of University College, Oxford. 

Author of numerous papers in scientific journals. 

Major-General James Waterhouse. 

Indian Staff Corps. Vice-President of the Royal Photographic Society. Assistant 
Surveyor-General in charge of Photographic Operations in the Surveyor-General's 
Office, Calcutta, 1866-1897. Took part in the observation of total eclipses, 
1 87 1 and 1875, and of transit of Venus, 1874. President of the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal, 1888-1890. Author of The Preparation of Drawings for Photographic 
Reproduction; &c. 

Captain J. Whitly Dixon, R.N. 

Nautical Assessor to the Court of Appeal. 

James Wycliefe Headlam, M.A. f 

Staff Inspector of Secondary Schools under the Board of Education. Formerly I 
Fellow of King's College, Cambridge, and Professor of Greek and Ancient History "j Caprlvi. 
at Queen's College, London. Author of Bismarck and thei Foundation of the German 
Empire; &c. (. 



Camera Obscura: History. 



Capstan. 



X 
L. D* 

L. J. B. 
L. J. S. 

L. S. 
L. V.* 

M.Br. 
M. G. 

M. H. S. 

M. J. de G. 
M. P. 
N. E. D. 

N. W. T. 

0. Ba. 

O.Br. 
0. M. D. 

P. A. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



p. 


A. K 


p. 


C. Y. 


p. 


La. 


p. 


Vb. 


p. 


A. M 



Joint author (with Henry J. Morgan) of 



Monseigneur Louis Marie Olivier Duchesne. 
See the biographical article: Duchesne, L. M. O. 

Lawrence J. Burpee. 

Author of The Search for the Western Sea. 
Canadian Life in Town and Country. 

Leonard James Spencer, M.A. 

Assistant in the Department of Mineralogy, British Museum. Formerly Scholar, 
of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, and Harkness Scholar. Editor of the Minera- 
logical Magazine. 

Sir Leslie Stephen, K.C.B., Litt.D. 

See the biographical article: Stephen, Sir Leslie. 

Luigi Villari. 

Italian Foreign Office (Emigration Dept.). Formerly Newspaper Correspondent in . 
east of Europe. Italian Vice-Consul in New Orleans, 1906, Philadelphia, 1907, 
and Boston, U.S.A., 1907-1910. Author of Italian Life in Town and Country; &c. 



jCalixtus I.; Celestine I. - : 

Canada: Literature, English- 
Canadian. 

Cerargyrite; 
Cerussite; 
Chabazite; 
Chalybite. 

Carlyle. 

Cantu; Cappello; Xi 

Capponi, G. and P.; 

Caracciolo; Carbonari; 

Carmagnola; 

Carrara; CaVour. ■ 



Margaret Bryant. 



Chapman, George {part); 
. Charlemagne: Legends. 
Moses G aster, Ph.D. (Leipzig). r 

Chief Rabbi of the Sephardic Communities of England. Vice-President, Zionist 
Congress, 1898, 1899, 1900. Ilchester Lecturer at Oxford on Slavonic and Byzantine J Cantacuzino; 
Literature, 1886 and 1891. President, Folklore Society of England. Vice-President] Cantemir. 
Anglo-Jewish Association. Author of History of Rumanian Popular Literature ; &c. (_ 

Marion H. Spielmann, F.S.A. 

Formerly Editor of the Magazine of Art. Member of Fine Art Committee of Inter- 
national Exhibitions of Brussels, Paris, Buenos Aires, Rome, and the Franco- 
British Exhibition, London. Authorof History of" Punch"; British Portrait Painting* 
to the Opening of the 19th Century; Works of G. F. Watts, R.A.; British Sculpture 
and Sculptors of To-day; Henriette Ronner; &c. 

Michael Jan de Goeje. 

See the biographical article: Goeje, Michael Jan de. 

Rev. Mark Pattison. 

See the biographical article: Pattison, Mark. 

Narcisse Etjtrope Dionne, M.D., LL.D., F.R.S. (Canada). 

Librarian of the Legislature of the Province of Quebec. Chief Editor of Le Courrier 
du Canada, 1880-1884. Chief Inspector of Federal Licences, 1884-1886. Chief 
Editor of Le Journal de Quebec, 1886. Author of Life of Samuel Champlain, Founder * 
of Quebec; Life of Jacques Cartier, discoverer of Canada; La Nouvelie France, 1540- 
1603 ; Quebec et Nouvelie France ; &c. 

Northcote Whitbridge Thomas, M.A. 

Government Anthropologist to Southern Nigeria. Corresponding Member of the , 

Soci6t6 d' Anthropologic de Paris. Author of Thought Transference; Kinship and] Cannibalism. 

Marriage in Australia; &c. I 

Oswald Barron, F.S.A. 

Editor of The Ancestor, 1902-1905. 



Caricature; 
Cartoon. 



Caliphate. 



Casaubon, Isaac. 



Champlain, Samuel de. 



Ceeil. 



Oscar Briliant. 

Ormonde Maddock Dalton, M.A., F.S.A. 



{ 

j Carpathian Mountains {in part) . 



Assistant Keeper, Department of British and Medieval Antiquities, British Museum. J 

Corresponding Member of the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. Author of) Catacomb {in part). 

Guide to the Early Christian and Byzantine Antiquities; &c. I 



Paul Daniel Alphandery. 

Professor of the History of Dogma, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Sorbonne, 
Paris. Author of Les Idees morales chez les httirodoxes latines au dtbut du XIII" ' 
siecle. 

Prince Peter Alexeivitch Kropotkin. 

See the biographical article : Kropotkin, P. A. 



Philip Chesney Yorke, M.A. 
Magdalen College, Oxford. 

Philip Lake, M.A., F.G.S. 

Lecturer on Physical and Regional Geography in Cambridge University. 

jf the Geological Survey of India. Author of Monograph of British Cambrian ~\ 

Trilobites. Translator and Editor of Kayser's Comparative Geology. I 



Capistrano. f 

f Caspian Sea {in part) ; 
I Caucasus {in part). 

/Catherine of Aragon; 
I Charles I.; Charles II. 



Formerly j Carpathian Mountains (in pari) ; 



Caucasus: Geology. 



Editor of the Poetical Works of Thomas Campion. { Campion, Thomas. 



Perctval Sylvanus Vivian. 
Author of Poems of Marriage. 

Percy Alexander Macmahon, F.R.S. , D.Sc r 

Late Major R.A. Deputy Warden of the Standards. Board of Trade. Joint- J fi av i ew 
General Secretary of the British Association. Formerly Professor of Physics, 1 KM *' 9 '' 
Ordnance College, and President of London Mathematical Society. [_ 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



XI 



R. 

R. A.* 
R. Ad. 
R. A. S. M. 
R. G. 
R. I. P. 
R. R. D. 

R. L.* 

R. L. H. 



{ 



The Rt. Hon. Lord Rayleigh. 

See the biographical article: Rayleigh, 3rd Baron. 

Robert Anchel. 

. Archivist to the Department de l'Eure. 

Robert Adamson. 

See the biographical article: Adamson, R. 

Robert Alexander Stewart Macalister, M.A., F.S.A. 
Director of Excavations for the Palestine Exploration Fund. 

Richard Garnett. 

See the biographical article: Garnett, Richard. 

R. I. Pocock, F.Z.S. 

Superintendent of the Zoological Gardens, London. 

Sir Robert Kennaway Douglas. 

Formerly Keeper of Oriental Printed Books and MSS. at the British Museum, and . 
Professor of Chinese, King's College, London. Author of The Language and Litera- 
ture of China; &c. I 

Richard Lydekker, F.R.S., F.G.S., F.Z.S. f Camel; Capuchin Monkey; 

Member of the Staff of the Geological Survey of India, 1874-1882. Author of J CarniVOra" Cat" Caw 
Catalogues of Fossil Mammals, Reptiles and Birds in British Museum; The Deer of\„, I. ' . ' 

all Lands; The Came Animals of Africa; &c. L Wtacea; Cftamois. 



Capillary Action (in pari). 

fCambon, Pierre Joseph; 
1 Cathelineau. 

I Category (in part). 

I Capernaum; 
I Carmel. 

1 Cardan. 



Centipede. 



Canton. 



R. N. B. 



Robert Lockhart Hobson. 

Assistant in the Department of British and Medieval Antiquities, British Museum. 
Author of Porcelain: Oriental, Continental and British; Marks on Pottery and- 
Porcelain (with W. Burton); and Catalogue and Guide of English Pottery and 
Porcelain in British Museum. 



Robert Nisbet Bain (d. ioco). 

Assistant Librarian, British Museum, 1 883-1909. Author of Scandinavia, the 
Political History of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, 1313-1900; The First Romanovs, 
1613-1725; Slavonic Europe, the Political History of Poland and Russia from 
1469 to 1796 ; &c. 



R. Po. 
R. P. S. 

R. S. C. 
R.W. 

R. We. 
STC. 
S. D. 

T. As. 

T A. H, 
T. Ba. 

T. F. C. 



Ceramics: Medieval and Later 
Italian; Persian, Syrian, 
Egyptian and Turkish. 

Canute; Canute VI.; 
Casimir III.; Casimir IV.; 
Catherine I.; 
Charles I. (Hungary); 
Charles IX., X., XL, XII. 

(Sweden). 
Charles XIII., XIV., XV. 

(Sweden and Norway). 

Charles the Bold. 



Rene Poupardin, D. is L. r 

Secretary of . the ficole des Chartes. Honorary Librarian at the Bibliotheque J 
Nationale, Paris. Author of Le Royaume de Provence sous les Carolingiens ; Recueil 1 
des chartes de Saint-Germain; &c. L 

R. Phene Spiers, F.S.A., F.R.I.B.A. r 

Master of the Architectural School and Surveyor, Royal Academy, London. Campanile; Capital; Arch.; 
Past President of Architectural Association. Associate and Fellow of King's J Cathedral: Arch.; 
College, London. Corresponding Member of the Institute of France. Edited Ceiling. 
Fergusson's History of Architecture. Author of Architecture East and West; &c. I 

Robert Seymour Conway, M.A., D.Lrrr. (Cantab.). r 

Professor of Latin in the University of Manchester. Formerly Professor of Latin J Campania (in part) 
in University College, Cardiff; and Fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. 1 
Author of The Italic Dialects. i_ 

Robert Wallace, F.R.S. (Edin.), F.L.S. 

Professor of Agriculture and Rural Economy at Edinburgh University, and Carton 
Lecturer on Colonial and Indian Agriculture. Professor of Agriculture, R.A.C., 
Cirencester, 1882-1885. Author of Farm Live Stock of Great Britain; Indian Agri-' 
culture; The Agriculture and Rural Economy of Australia and New Zealand; Farming 
Industries of Cape Colony; &c. 

Richard Webster, A.M. 

Editor of Elegies of Maximianus. 

Viscount St Cyres. 

See the biographical article: Iddesleigh, ist Earl of. 

Samuel Davidson, D.D. 

See the biographical article : Davidson, Samuel. 

Thomas Ashby, M.A., D.Litt., F.S.A. 

Director of the British School of Archaeology at Rome. Corresponding Member 
of the Imperial German Archaeological Institute. Formerly Scholar of Christ 
Church, Oxford. Craven Fellow, Oxford, 1897. Author of The Classical Topo- 
graphy, of the Roman Campagna ; &c. 

Captain Thomas A. Hull, R.N. 

Formerly Superintendent of Admiralty Charts. 

Sir Thomas Barclay, M.P. 

Member of the Institute of International Law. Member of the Supreme Council 
of the Congo Fres State. Officer of the Legion of Honour. Author of Problems 
of International Practice and Diplomacy; &c. M.P. for Blackburn, 1910. 

Theodore Freylinghuysen Collier, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor of History, Williams College, Williamstown, Mass., U.S.A. 



Cattle (in part). 



Channing, William E. 



J. Casuistry. 

J Canon: Scriptures. 

^ Camerino; Campania (in part) ; 

Canosa; Canusium; Capena; 

Capri; Capua; Carales; 

Carsioli; Casilinum; Casinum; 

Cassia, Via; Catania; 

Caudine Forks; Cefalu; 

Centuripe; Cesena. 
I Chart. 

} Capture. 

/Carthage, Synods of; 
\Chaleedon, Council of. 



11 




T. 


K. 


C. 


T. 


M. 


F. 


T. 


W. 


F. 


W. 


A 


B. C 


W. 


A 


P. 


W. 


B. 


* 


W. 


B. 


D. 


W. 


B. 


Du. 


W 


F. 

• 


C. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



W. F. W. 



w. 


Ft. 




w. 


G.* 




w. 


G. F. 


P 


w. 


G. M. 




w. 


Ha. 




w. 


J. G. 





W. L.* 

W. L. A. 

W. L. G. 

W. M. R. 
W. Ri. 



Canaan, Canaanites. 
Cathedral. 



Author of Mechanics of -l Carding. 



Rev. Thomas Kelly Cheyne. D.Litt., D.D. 
See the biographical article : Cheyne, T. K. 

Thomas Macall Fallow, M.A., F.S.A. f 

Formerly editor of The Antiquary, 1 895-1 899. Author of Memorials of Old Yorkshire ; < 
The Cathedral Churches of Ireland. I 

Thomas William Fox. 

Professor of Textiles in the University of Manchester. 
Weaving. 

Rev. William Augustus Brevoort Coolidge, M.A., F.R.G.S. 

Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. Professor of English History, St David's 
College, Lampeter, 1 880-1 881. Author of Guide to Switzerland; The Alps in Nature ' 
and in History; &c. Editor of The Alpine Journal, 1 880-1 889. 

Walter Alison Phillips, M.A. 

Formerly Exhibitioner of Merton College and Senior Scholar of St John's College, - 
Oxford. Author of Modern Europe ; &c. 

William Burton, Hon. M.A. (Vict.), F.C.S. 

Chairman, Joint-Committee of Pottery Manufacturers of Great Britain. Examiner 
for Board of Education in Pottery Design and for Technological Examinations in 
Pottery Manufacture. Author of English Stoneware and Earthenware ; Porcelain ; &c. 

William Boyd Dawkins, F.R.S., D.Sc. 

See the biographical article : Dawkins, William Boyd. 

William Bartlett Duitield, M.A. 

Barrister at Law, Inner Temple. Secretary to the Royal Commission on Canals, 
1906-1910. 

William Feilden Craies, M.A. [ 

Barrister-at-Law, Inner Temple. Lecturer on Criminal Law at King's College, -i Capital Punishment. 
London. Editor of Archbold's Criminal Pleading (23rd edition). (_ 

Walter Francis Willcox, LL.B., Ph.D. r 

Dean of, and Professor of Political Economy and Statistics at, Cornell University. 
Formerly Chief Statistician and now Special Agent of the U.S. Census Bureau. J Census: U.S.A. 
Author of The Divorce Problem — a Study in Statistics ; Social Statistics of the United 
States; &c. , L 

William Fream (d. 1907), LL.D., F.G.S., F.L.S., F.S.S. f 

Author of Handbook of Agriculture. Formerly Agricultural Correspondent of The -i Cattle (in part). 
Times. I 

Walcot Gibson, D.Sc, F.G.S. 

Geologist on H.M. Geological Survey. Author of The Gold-bearing Rocks of the 
S. Transvaal ; Mineral Wealth of Africa ; The Geology of Coal and Coal Mining ; &c. 

Sir Walter George Frank Phillimore, Bart., D.C.L., LL.D. 

Judge of the King's Bench Division. President of International Law Association, 
1905. Author of Book of Church Law. Editor of 2nd ed. of Phillimore' s Ecclesi- 
astical Law; 3rd ed. of vol. iv. of Phillimore' s International Law; &c. I 

Walter G. M'Millan, F.C.S., M.I.M.E. (d. 1004). f 

Formerly Secretary of the Institute of Electrical Engineers. Lecturer on Metallurgy, -> Carborundum. 
Mason College, Birmingham. Author of A Treatise on Electro-Metallurgy. [ 



Cannes; 

Chamonix; 

Chartreuse, La Grande. 

' Canon: Church Dignitary; 
Capo d'Istria; 
Carlsbad Decrees; Chasuble! 

Ceramics {in part). 
Cave. 



Cape Colony: Geology. 



Canon Law: Anglican. 



Chalmers, Thomas {in part). 



Literature, Welsh. 



Rev. William Hanna, LL.D., D.D. (1802-1882). 

Minister of St John's Free Church, Edinburgh, 1850-1866. Author of Life of Dr 
Chalmers ; Wycliffe and the Huguenots ; Martyrs of the Scottish Reformation. 

William John Gruffydd, M.A. 

Lecturer in Celtic, University College, Cardiff. Examiner in Welsh to the Central ) 
Welsh Board for Intermediate Education. Author of Caneuon a Cherddi: An~\ Celt: 
Anthology of Medieval Welsh Poetry. \_ 

Walter Lehmann, M.D. r 

Directorial Assistant of the Royal Ethnographical Museum, Munich. Conducted J r t , Am( , ri( , a . Arrhamlnvv 
Exploring Expedition in Mexico and Central America, 1907-1909. Author of many 1 central America. Arcnaeowgy. 
publications on Mexican and Central American Archaeology. [ 



Calvin (in part). 



Rev. William Lindsay Alexander, D.D., LL.D., F.R.S. (Edin.) (180S-1 

Classical Tutor, Lancashire Independent College. Pastor -of Independent Chapel, 
N. College Street, Edinburgh. One of the Old Testament Revisers. Author of 
A Moral Philosophy. 

William Lawson Grant, M.A. 

Professor at Queen's University, Kingston, Canada. Formerly Beit Lecturer in 
Colonial History at Oxford University. Editor of Acts of the Privy Council, Colonial 
series; Canadian Constitutional Development (in collaboration). 

William Michael Rossetti. 

See the biographical article : Rossetti, Dante Gabriel. 

William Ridgeway, M.A., D.Sc, LL.D. (Aberdeen), D.Litt. 

Fellow of the British Academy. Disney Professor of Archaeology at Cambridge 
University. Professor of Greek, Queen's College, Cork, 1883. Ex-President of 
Cambridge Philological, Antiquarian and Classical Societies. Author of The Oldest 
Irish Epic; Origin of Metallic Currency and Weight Standards; The Early Age of 
Greece; &c. 



Canada: Statistics; 

Cartier, Sir Georges Etiehne. 

Canova; Caracci; Cartoon; 
Cellini, Benvenuto (in part); 
Charlet. 



Celt. 



INITIALS AND HEADINGS OF ARTICLES 



xm 



W. R. B. 

W. R. S. 
W. Wo. 

W. W. R.* 
W. Y. S. 



Rt. Rev. William Robert Brownlow, M.A., D.D. (d. 1901). f 

Roman Catholic Bishop of Clifton. Provost and Domestic Frelate to Pope Leo 

XIII. Co-editor of English Roma Sotterranea. Author of Early Christian Symbol-\ Catacomb (in part). 
ism; Lectures on Sacerdotalism, on the Catacombs and other Archaeological Subjects. 
Translator of Cur Deus Homo and Vitis mystica. L 

William Robertson Smith. [ ., 

See the biographical article: Smith, William Robertson. • ^Canticles Km part). 

William Wood, D.C.L., F.R.S. (Canada). _ f 

Lieut. -Col., Canadian Militia. Formerly President of the English Section of the) Canada: Literature, French' 
Royal Society of Canada and of the Historic Landmarks Association. Author of] Canadian. 
The Fight for Canada ; The Logs of the Conquest of Canada, &c. 

William Walker Rockwell, Lie. Theol. 

Assistant Professor of Church History, Union Theological Seminary, New York. 

William Young Sellar. 

See the biographical article: Sellar, William Young. 



{celestine III. and V. 
| Catullus (in part). 



PRINCIPAL UNSIGNED ARTICLES 



California. 
Cambodia. 
Cambridge, Earls and Dukes 

of. 
Cambridge, England. 
Cambridgeshire. 
Campbell, Thomas. 
Canary Islands. 
Canning, George. 
Canterbury. 
Cape Town. 
Cape Verde Islands. 
Capital (Economics). 
Capitulations. 
Carbolic Acid. 
Carbon. 
Cardiganshire. 
Cards, Playing. 
Carducci, Giosue. 
Carinthia. 
Carlisle, Earls of. 



Carlisle. 

Carlos. 

Carlsbad. 

Carlstadt. 

Carmarthenshire. 

Carnarvonshire. 

Carnegie, Andrew. 

Carnot. 

Carol. 

Caroline Islands. 

Carrier. 

Cartagena. 

Cassel. 

Cassiodorus. 

Caste. 

Catherine, Saint. 

Catherine II. 

Catherine de' Medici 

Catiline. 

Cato. 

Causation. 



Cavaignac, Louis EugSne. 

Cavan. 

Cavendish, Henry. 

Caxton, William. 

Cedar. 

Celebes. 

Celsus. 

Cemetery. 

Chambers, Robert. 

Chancellor. 

Chancery. 

Channel* Islands. 

Chantrey, Sir Francis. 

Charles V., VI., VII. of 
France. 

Charles, Archduke of Austria. 

Charles Albert, king of Sar- 
dinia. 

Charles Augustus. 

Chartism. 

Chateaubriand. 



ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA 



ELEVENTH EDITION 



VOLUME V 



CALHOUN, JOHN CALDWELL (1782-1850), American states- 
man and parliamentarian, was born, of Scottish-Irish descent, 
in Abbeville District, South Carolina, on the 18th of March 1782. 
His father, Patrick Calhoun, is said to have been born in Donegal, 
in North Ireland, but to have left Ireland when a mere child. 
The family seems to have emigrated first to Pennsylvania, 
whence they removed, after Braddock's defeat, to Western 
Virginia. From Virginia they removed in 1756 to South Caro- 
lina and settled on Long Cane Creek, in Granville (now Abbeville) 
county. Patrick Calhoun attained some prominence in the 
colony, serving in the colonial legislature, and afterwards in the 
state legislature, and taking part in the War of Independence. 
In 1770 he had married Martha Caldwell, the daughter of 
another Scottish-Irish settler. 

The opportunities for obtaining a liberal education in the 
remote districts of South Carolina at that time were scanty. 
Fortunately, young Calhoun had the opportunity, although late, 
of studying under his brother-in-law, the Rev. Moses Waddell 
(1770-1840), a Presbyterian minister, who afterwards, from 
1819 to 1829, was president of the University of Georgia. In 
1802 Calhoun entered the junior class in Yale College, and 
graduated with distinction in 1804. He then studied first at 
the famous law school in Litchfield, Conn., and afterwards in a 
law office in Charleston, S.C., and in 1807 was admitted to the 
bar. He began practice in his native Abbeville District, and 
soon took a leading place in his profession. In 1808 and 1809 
he was a member of the South Carolina legislature, and from 
1811 to 1817 was a member of the national House of Repre- 
sentatives. 

When he entered the latter body the strained relations 
between Great Britain and the United States formed the most 
important question for the deliberation of Congress. Henry 
Clay, the Speaker of the House, being eager for war and knowing 
Calhoun's hostility to Great Britain, gave him the second place 
on the committee of foreign affairs, of which he soon became 
the actual head. In less than three weeks the committee 
reported resolutions, evidently written by Calhoun, recommend- 
ing preparations for a struggle with Great Britain; and in the 
following June Calhoun submitted a second report urging a 
formal declaration of war. Both sets of resolutions the House 
adopted. Clay and Calhoun did more, probably, than any other 
two men in Congress to force the reluctant president into 
beginning hostilities. 

In 1816 Calhoun delivered in favour of a protective tariff a 
speech that was ever after held up by his opponents as evidence 
of his inconsistency in the tariff controversy. The embargo and 
the war had crippled American commerce, but had stimulated 
manufactures. With the end of the Napoleonic wars in Europe 
v. 1 



the industries of the old world revived, and Americans began to 
feel their competition. In the consequent distress in the new 
industrial centres there arose a cry for protection. Calhoun, 
believing that there was a natural tendency in the United. States 
towards the development of manufactures, supported the Tariff 
Bill of 1816, which laid on certain foreign commodities duties' 
higher than were necessary for the purposes of revenue. He 
believed that the South would share in the general industrial 
development, not having perceived as yet that slavery was an 
insuperable obstacle. His opposition to protection in later years 
resulted from an honest change of convictions. He always 
denied that in supporting this bill he had been inconsistent, 
and insisted that it was one for revenue. 

From 1817 to 1825 Calhoun was secretary of war under* 
President Monroe. To him is due the fostering and the reforma- 
tion of the National Military Academy at West Point, which he 
found in disorder, but left in a most efficient state. Calhoun was 
vice-president of the United States from 1825 to 1832, during 
the administration of John Quincy Adams, and during most of 
the first administration of Andrew Jackson. This period was 
for Calhoun a time of reflection. His faith in a strong national- 
istic policy was gradually undermined, and he finally became 
the foremost champion of particularism and the recognized 
leader of what is generally known as the " States Rights "or 
" Strict Construction " party. 

In 1824 there was a very large increase in protective duties. 
In 1828 a still higher tariff act, the so-called " Bill of Abomina- 
tions," was passed, avowedly for the purpose of protection. 
The passage of these acts caused great discontent, especially 
among the Southern states, which were strictly agricultural. 
They felt that the great burden of this increased tariff fell on 
them, as they consumed, but did not produce, manufactured 
articles. Under such conditions the Southern states questioned 
the constitutionality of the imposition. Calhoun himself now"- 
perceived that the North and the South represented diverse 
tendencies. The North was outstripping the South in population 
and wealth, and already by the tariff acts was, as he believed, 
selfishly levying taxes for its sole benefit. The minority must, 
he insisted, be protected from " the tyranny of the majority." 
In his first important political essay, " The South Carolina 
Exposition," prepared by him in the summer of 1828, he showed 
how this should be done. To him it was clear that the Federal 
Constitution was a limited instrument, by which the sovereign 
states had delegated to the Federal government certain general 
powers. The states could not, without violating the constitu- 
tional compact, interfere with the activities of the Federal 
government so long as the government confined itself to its 
proper sphere; but the attempt of Congress, or any other 



CALHOUN 



department of the Federal government, to exercise any power 
which might alter the nature of the instrument would be an act 
of usurpation. The right of judging such an infraction belonged 
to the state, being an attribute of sovereignty of which the state 
could not be deprived without being reduced to a wholly sub- 
ordinate condition. As a remedy for such a breach of compact 
the state might resort to nullification (q.v.), or, as a last resort, 
to secession from the Union. Such doctrines were not original 
with Calhoun, but had been held in various parts of the Union 
from time to time. It remained for him, however, to submit 
them to a rigid analysis and reduce them to a logical form. 

Meantime the friendship between Calhoun and Jackson had 
come to an end. While a member of President Monroe's cabinet, 
Calhoun had favoured the reprimanding of General Jackson (q.v.) 
for his high-handed course in Florida in 1818, during the first 
Seminole War. In 1831 W. H. Crawford, who had been a member 
of this cabinet, desiring to ruin Calhoun politically by turning 
Jackson's hostility against him, revealed to Jackson what had 
taken place thirteen years before. Jackson could brook no 
criticism from one whom he had considered a friend; Calhoun, 
moreover, angered the president still further by his evident 
sanction of the social proscription of Mrs Eaton (q.v.) ; the political 
views of the two men, furthermore, were becoming more and more 
divergent, and the rupture between the two became complete. 

The failure of the Jackson administration to reduce the Tariff 
of 1828 drew from Calhoun his " Address to the People of South 
Carolina " in 183 1, in which he elaborated his views of the nature 
of the Union as given in the " Exposition." In 1832 a new tariff 
act was passed, which removed the " abominations " of 1828 but 
left the principle of protection intact. The people of South 
Carolina were not satisfied, and Calhoun in a third political tract, 
in the form of a letter to Governor James Hamilton (1786-1857) 
of South Carolina, gave his doctrines their final form, but without 
altering the fundamental principles that have already been stated. 

In 1832 South Carolina, acting in substantial accordance with 
Calhoun's theories, " nullified " the tariff acts passed by Congress 
in 1828 and 1832 (see Nullification; South Carolina; and 
United States). On the 28th of December 1832 Calhoun 
resigned as vice-president, and on the 4th of January 1833 took 
his seat in the Senate. President Jackson had, in a special 
message, taken strong ground against the action of South 
Carolina, and a bill was introduced to extend the jurisdiction of 
the courts of the United States and clothe the president with 
additional powers, with the avowed object of meeting the situ- 
ation in South Carolina. Calhoun, in turn, introduced resolu- 
tions upholding the doctrine held by South Carolina, and it was 
in the debate on the first-named measure, termed the " Force 
Bill," and on these resolutions, that the first intellectual duel 
took place between Daniel Webster and Calhoun. Webster 
declared that the Federal government through the Supreme 
Court was the ultimate expounder and interpreter of its own 
powers, while Calhoun championed the rights of the individual 
state under a written contract which reserved to each state its 
sovereignty. 

The practical result of the conflict over the tariff was a com- 
promise. Congress passed an act gradually reducing the duties 
to a revenue basis, and South Carolina repealed her nullification 
measures. As the result of the conflict, Calhoun was greatly 
strengthened in his position as the leader of his party in the South. 
Southern leaders generally were now beginning to perceive, as 
Calhoun had already seen, that there was a permanent conflict 
between the North and the South, not only a divergence of 
interests between manufacturing and agricultural sections, but an 
inevitable struggle between free and slave labour. Should enough 
free states be admitted into the Union to destroy the balance of 
power, the North would naturally gain a preponderance in the 
Senate, as it had in the House, and might, within constitutional 
limits, legislate as it pleased; The Southern minority recognized, 
therefore, that they must henceforth direct the policy of the 
government in all questions affecting their peculiar interests, or 
their section would undergo a social and economic revolution. 
The Constitution, if strictly interpreted according to Calhoun's 



views, would secure this control to the minority, and prevent an 
industrial upheaval. 

An element of bitterness was now injected into the struggle. 
The Northern Abolitionists, to whom no contract or agreement 
was sacred that involved the continuance of slavery, regarded the 
clauses in the Federal Constitution which maintained the property 
rights of the slave-owners as treaties with evil, binding on no one, 
and bitterly attacked the slave-holders and the South generally. 
Their attacks may be said to have destroyed the moderate party 
in that section. Any criticism of their peculiar institution now 
came to be highly offensive to Southern leaders, and Calhoun, who 
always took the most advanced stand in behalf of Southern rights, 
urged (but in vain) that the Senate refuse to receive abolitionist 
petitions. He also advocated the exclusion of abolitionist 
literature from the mails. 

Indeed from 1832 until his death Calhoun may be said to have 
devoted his life to the protection of Southern interests. He 
became the exponent, the very embodiment, of an idea. It is a 
mistake, however, to characterize him as an enemy to the Union. 
His contention was that its preservation depended on the recog- 
nition of the rights guaranteed to the states by the Constitution, 
and that aggression by one section could only end in disruption. 
Secession, he contended, was the only final remedy left to the 
weaker. Calhoun was re-elected to the Senate in i834andin 1840, 
serving until 1843. From 1832 to 1837 he was a man without 
a party. He attacked the " spoils system " inaugurated by 
President Jackson, opposed the removal of the government 
deposits from the Bank of the United States, and in general was 
a severe critic of Jackson's administration. In this period he 
usually voted with the Whigs, but in 1837 he went over to the 
Democrats and supported the " independent treasury " scheme 
of President Van Buren. He was spoken of for the presidency in 
1844, but declined to become a candidate, and was appointed as 
secretary of state in the cabinet of President Tyler, serving from 
the 1st of April 1844, throughout the remainder of the term, until 
the 10th of March 1845. While holding this office he devoted his 
energies chiefly to the acquisition of Texas, in order to preserve 
the equilibrium between the South and the constantly growing 
North. One of his last acts as secretary of state was to send a 
despatch, on the 3rd of March 1845, inviting Texas to accept the 
terms proposed by Congress. Calhoun was once more elected to 
the Senate in 1845. The period of his subsequent service covered 
the settlement of the Oregon dispute with Great Britain and the 
Mexican War. On the 19th of February 1847 he introduced in 
the Senate a series of resolutions concerning the territory about to 
be acquired from Mexico, which marked the most advanced stand 
as yet taken by the pro-slavery party. The purport of these 
resolutions was to deny to Congress the power to prohibit slavery 
in the territories and to declare all previous enactments to this 
effect unconstitutional. 

In 1850 the Union seemed in imminent danger of dissolution. 
California was applying for admission to the Union as a state 
under a constitution which did not permit slavery. Her ad- 
mission with two Senators would have placed the slave-holding 
states in the minority. In the midst of the debate on this applica- 
tion Calhoun died, on the 31st of March 1850, in Washington. 

Calhoun is most often compared with Webster and Clay. The 
three constitute the trio upon whom the attention of students at 
this period naturally rests. Calhoun possessed neither Webster's 
brilliant rhetoric nor his easy versatility, but he surpassed him in 
the ordered method and logical sequence of his mind. He never 
equalled Clay in the latter's magnetism of impulse and inspiration 
of affection, but he far surpassed him in clearness and directness 
and in tenacity of will. He surpassed them both in the distinct- 
ness with which he saw results, and in the boldness with which he 
formulated and followed his conclusions. 

Calhoun in person was tall and slender, and in his later years 
was emaciated. His features were angular and somewhat harsh, 
but with a striking face and very fine eyes of a brilliant dark blue. 
To his slaves he was just and kind. He lived the modest, 
unassuming life of a country planter when at his home, and at 
Washington lived as unostentatiously as possible, consistent with 



CALI— CALIBRATION 



his public duties and position. His character in other respects 
was always of stainless integrity. 

Bibliography. — A collected edition of Calhoun's Works (6 vols., 
New York, 1 853-1 855) has been edited by Richard K*. Cralle. The 
most important speeches and papers are: — The South Carolina 
Exposition (1828) ; Speech on the Force Bill (1833) ; Reply to Webster 
('833); Speech on the Reception of Abolitionist Petitions (1836), and 
on the Veto Power (1842) ; a Disquisition on Government, and a 
Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States 
(1849-1850) — the last two, written a short time before his death, 
defend with great ability the rights of a minority under a govern- 
ment such as that of the United States. Calhoun's Correspondence, 
edited by J. Franklin Jameson, has been published by the American 
Historical Association (see Report for 1-899, vo '- »•)• The biography 
of Calhoun by Dr Hermann von Hoist in the " American States- 
men Series " (Boston, 1882) is a condensed study of the political 
questions of Calhoun's time. Gustavus M. Pinckney's Life of John 
C. Calhoun (Charleston, 1903) gives a sympathetic Southern view. 
Gaillard Hunt's John C. Calhoun (Philadelphia, 1908) is a valuable 
work. (H. A. M. S.) 

CALI, an inland town of the department of Cauca, Colombia, 
South America, about 180 m. S.W. of Bogota and 50 m. S.E. of 
the port of Buenaventura, on the Rio Cali, a small branch of the 
Cauca. Pop. (1906 estimate) 16,000. Cali stands 3327 ft. 
above sea-level on the western side of the Cauca valley, one of 
the healthiest regions of Colombia. The land-locked character 
of this region greatly restricts the city's trade and development; 
but it is considered the most important town in the department. 
It has a bridge across the Cali, and a number of religious and 
public edifices. A railway from Buenaventura will give Cali and 
the valley behind it, with which it is connected by over 200 m, 
of river navigation, a good outlet on the Pacific coast. Coal 
deposits exist in the immediate vicinity of the town. 

CALIBRATION, a term primarily signifying the determination 
of the " calibre " or bore of a gun. The word calibre was intro- 
duced through the French from the Italian calibro, together with 
other terms of gunnery and warfare, about the 1 6th century. The 
origin of the Italian equivalent appears to be uncertain. It will 
readily be understood that the calibre of a gun requires accurate 
adjustment to the standard size, and further, that the bore must 
be straight and of uniform diameter throughout. The term was 
subsequently applied to the accurate measurement and testing of 
the bore of any kind of tube, especially those of thermometers. 

In modern scientific language, by a natural process of transi- 
tion, the term " calibration " has come to denote the accurate 
comparison of any measuring instrument with a standard, and 
more particularly the determination of the errors of its scale. 
It is seldom possible in the process of manufacture to make an 
instrument so perfect that no error can be discovered by the 
most delicate tests, and it would rarely be worth while to attempt 
to do so even if it were possible. The cost of manufacture would 
in many cases be greatly increased without adding materially 
to the utility of the apparatus. The scientific method, in all 
cases which admit of the subsequent determination and correc- 
tion of errors, is to economize time and labour in production by 
taking pains in the subsequent verification or calibration. 
This process of calibration is particularly important in laboratory 
research, where the observer has frequently to make his own 
apparatus, and cannot afford the time or outlay required to make 
special tools for fine work, but is already provided with apparatus 
and methods of accurate testing. For non-scientific purposes 
it is generally possible to construct instruments to measure with 
sufficient precision without further correction. The present 
article will therefore be restricted to the scientific use and 
application of methods of accurate testing. 

General Methods and Principles. — The process of calibration 
of any measuring instrument is frequently divisible into two 
parts, which differ greatly in importance in different cases, and 
of which one or the other may often be omitted. (1) The deter- 
mination of the value of the unit to which the measurements are 
referred by comparison with a standard unit of the same kind. 
This is often described as the Standardization of the instrument, 
or the determination of the Reduction factor. (2) The verification 
of the accuracy of the subdivision of the scale of the instrument. 
This may be termed calibration of the scale, and does not 



necessarily involve the comparison of the instrument with any 
independent standard, but merely the verification of the accuracy 
of the relative values of its indications. In many cases the 
process of calibration adopted consists in the comparison of the 
instrument to be -tested with a standard over the whole range of 
its indications, the relative values of the subdivisions of the 
standard itself having been previously tested. In this case the 
distinction' of two parts in the process is unnecessary, and the 
term calibration is for this reason frequently employed to include 
both. In some cases it is employed to denote the first part only, 
but for greater clearness and convenience of description we shall 
restrict the term as far as possible to the second meaning. 

The methods of standardization or calibration employed have 
much in common even in the cases that appear most diverse. They 
are all founded on the axiom that " things which are equal to the 
same thing are equal to one another." Whether it is a question of 
comparing a scale with a standard, or of testing the equality of two 
parts of the same scale, the process is essentially one of interchanging 
or substituting one for the other, the two things to be compared. In 
addition to the things to be tested there is usually required some 
form of balance, or comparator, or gauge, by which the equality 
may be tested. The simplest of such comparators is the instrument 
known as the callipers, from the same root as calibre, which is in 
constant use in the workshop for testing equality of linear dimensions, 
or uniformity of diameter of tubes or rods. The more complicated 
forms of optical comparators or measuring machines with scales and 
screw adjustments are essentially similar in principle, being finely 
adjustable gauges to which the things to be compared can be suc- 
cessively fitted. A still simpler and more accurate comparison is 
that of volume or capacity, using a given mass of liquid as the gauge 
or test of equality, which is the basis of many of the most accurate 
and most important methods of calibration. The common 
balance for testing equality of mass or weight is so delicate and so 
easily tested that the process of calibration may frequently with 
advantage be reduced to a series of weighings, as for instance in the 
calibration of a burette or measure-glass by weighing the quantities 
of mercury required to fill it to different marks. The balance may, 
however, be regarded more broadly as the type of a general method 
capable of the widest application in accurate testing. It is possible, 
for instance, to balance two electromotive forces or two electrical 
resistances against each other, or to measure the refractivity of a 
gas by balancing it against a column of air adjusted to produce the 
same retardation in a beam of light. These " equilibrium," or 
" null," or " balance " methods of comparison afford the most 
accurate measurements, and are generally selected if possible as 
the basis of any process of calibration. In spite of the great diversity 
in the nature of things to be compared, the fundamental principles 
of the methods employed are so essentially similar that it is possible, 
for instance, to describe the testing of a set of weights, or the cali- 
bration of an electrical resistance-box, in almost the same terms, and 
to represent the calibration correction of a mercury thermometer 
or of an ammeter by precisely similar curves. 

Method of Substitution. — In comparing two units of the same 
kind and of nearly equal magnitude, some variety of the general 
method of substitution is invariably adopted. The same method 
in a more elaborate form is employed in the calibration of a series 
of multiples or submultiples of any unit. The details of the method 
depend on the system of subdivision adopted, which is to some 
extent a matter of taste. The simplest method of subdivision is 
that on the binary scale, proceeding by multiples of 2. With a 
pair of submultiples of the smallest denomination and one of each 
of the rest, thus 1, I, 2, 4, 8, 16, &c, each weight or multiple is equal 
to the sum of all the smaller weights, which may be substituted for 
it, and the small difference, if any, observed. If we call the weights 
A, B, C, &c, where each is approximately double the following 
weight, and if we write a for observed excess of A over the rest of 
the weights, b for that of B over C+D+&C, and so on, the observa- 
tions by the method of substitution give the series of equations, 

A— rest=a, B — rest = &,C—rest = c, &c. . . (1) 
Subtracting the second from the first, the third from the second, 
and so on, we obtain at once the value of each weight in terms of 
the preceding, so that all may be expressed in terms of the largest, 
which is most conveniently taken as the standard 

B=A/2 + (b-a)l2, C = B/2 + (c-b)2,&c. . . (2) 

The advantages of this method of subdivision and comparison, in 
addition to its extreme simplicity, are (1) that there is only one 
possible combination to represent any given weight within the 
range of the series; (2) that the least possible number of weights 
is required to cover any given range; (3) that the smallest number 
of substitutions is required for the complete calibration. These 
advantages are important in cases where the accuracy of calibration 
is limited by the constancy of the conditions of observation, as in 
the case of an electrical resistance-box, but the reverse may be the 
case when it is a question of accuracy of estimation by an observer. 

In the majority of cases the ease of numeration afforded 
by familiarity with the decimal system is the most important 



CALIBRATION 



consideration. The most convenient arrangement on the decimal 
system for purposes of calibration is to have the units, tens, 
hundreds, &c, arranged in groups of four adjusted in the proportion 
of the numbers I, 2, 3, 4. The relative values of the weights in 
each group of four can then be determined by substitution inde- 
pendently of the others, and the total of each group of four, making 
ten times the unit of the group, can be compared with the smallest 
weight in the group above. This gives a sufficient number of 
equations to determine the errors of all the weights by the method 
of substitution in a very simple manner. A number of other equa- 
tions can be obtained by combining the different groups in other 
ways, and the whole system of equations may then be solved by the 
method of least squares; but the equations so obtained are not all 
of equal value, and it may be doubted whether any real advantage 
is gained in many cases by the multiplication of comparisons, since 
it is not possible in this manner to eliminate constant errors or 
personal equation, which are generally aggravated by prolonging 
the observations. A common arrangement of the weights in each 
group on the decimal system is 5, 2, I, I, or 5, 2., 2, I. These dp not 
admit of the independent calibration of each group by substitution. 
The arrangement 5, 2, I, I, I, or 5, 2, 2, 1, I, permits independent 
calibration, but involves a'larger number of weights and observations 
than the I, 2, 3, 4, grouping. The arrangement of ten equal weights 
in each group, which is adopted in " dial " resistance-boxes, and in 
some forms of chemical balances where the weights are mechanically 
applied by turning a handle, presents great advantages in point of 
quickness of manipulation and ease of numeration, but the complete 
calibration of such an arrangement is tedious, and in the case of a 
resistance-box it is difficult to make the necessary connexions. In 
all cases where the same total can be made up in a variety of ways, 
it is necessary in accurate work to make sure that the same weights 
are always used for a given combination, or else to record the actual 
weights used on each occasion. In many investigations where time 
enters as one of the factors, this is a serious drawback, and it is better 
to avoid the more complicated arrangements. The accurate adjust- 
ment of a set of weights is so simple a matter that it is often possible 
to neglect the errors of a well-made set, and no calibration is of 
any value without the most 

scrupulous attention to de- Table 

tails of manipulation, and 
particularly to the correction 
for the air displaced in com- 
paring weights of different 
materials. Electrical resist- 
ances are much more difficult 
to adjust owing to the change 
of resistance with tempera- 
ture, and the calibration of a 
resistance-box can seldom be 
neglected on account of the 
changes of resistance which 
are liable to occur after 
adjustment from imperfect annealing. It is also necessary to 
remember that the order of accuracy required, and the actual 
values of the smaller resistances, depend to some extent on the 
method of connexion, and that the box must be calibrated with 
due regard to the conditions under which it is to be used. Otherwise 
the method of procedure is much the same as in the case of a box 
of weights, but it is necessary to pay more attention to the constancy 
and uniformity of the temperature conditions of the observing-room. 

Method of Equal Steps.-. rln calibrating a continuous scale divided 
into a number of divisions of equal length, such as a metre scale 
divided in millimetres, or a thermometer tube divided in degree's 
of temperature, or an electrical slide-wire, it is usual to proceed by 
a method of equal steps. The simplest method is that known as the 
method of Gay Lussac in the calibration of mercurial thermometers 
or tubes of small bore. It is essentially a method of substitution 
employing a column of mercury of constant volume as the gauge 
for comparing the capacities of different parts of the tube. A pre- 
cisely similar method, employing a pair of microscopes at a fixed 
distance apart as a standard of length, is applicable to the calibration 
of a divided scale. The interval to be calibrated is divided into a 
whole number of equal steps or sections, the points of division at 
which the corrections are to be determined are called points of 
calibration. 

Calibration of a Mercury Thermometer. — To facilitate description, 
we will take the case of a fine-bore tube, such as that of a ther- 
mometer, to be calibrated with a thread of mercury. The bore of 
such a tube will generally vary considerably even in the best stan- 
dard instruments, the tubes of which have been specially drawn 
and selected. The correction for inequality of bore may amount 
to a quarter or half a degree, and is seldom less than a tenth. In 
ordinary chemical thermometers it is usual to make allowance for 
variations of bore in graduating the scale, but such instruments 
present discontinuities of division, and cannot be used for accurate 
work, in which a finely-divided scale of equal parts is essential. 
The calibration of a mercury thermometer intended for work of 
precision is best effected after it has been sealed. A-thread of mer- 
cury of the desired length is separated from the column. The exact 
adjustment of the length of the thread requires a little manipulation. 



The thermometer is inverted and tapped to make the mercury run 
down to the top of the tube, thus collecting a trace of residual gas 
at the end of the bulb. By quickly reversing the thermometer the 
bubble passes to the neck of the bulb. If the instrument is again 
inverted and tapped, the thread will probably break off at the neck 
of the bulb, which should be previously cooled or warmed so as to 
obtain in this manner, if possible, a thread of the desired length-. 
If the thread so obtained is too long or not accurate enough, it is 
removed to the other end of the tube, and the bulb further warmed 
till the mercury reaches some easily recognized division. At this 
point the broken thread is rejoined to the mercury column from the 
bulb, and a microscopic bubble of gas is condensed which generally 
suffices to determine the subsequent breaking of the mercury column 
at the same point of the tube. The bulb is then allowed to cool till 
the length of the thread above the point of separation is equal to the 
desired length, when a slight tap suffices to separate the thread. This 
method is difficult to work with short threads owing to deficient 
inertia, especially if the tube is very perfectly evacuated. A thread 
can always be separated by local heating with a small flame, but 
this is dangerous to the thermometer, it is difficult to adjust the 
thread exactly to the required length, and the mercury does not run 
easily past a point of the tube which has been locally heated in this 
manner. ' 

Having separated a thread of the required length, the thermo- 
meter is mounted in a horizontal position on a suitable support, 
preferably with a screw adjustment in the direction of its length. 
By _ tilting or tapping the instrument the thread is brought into 
position corresponding to the steps of the calibration successively, 
and its length in each position is carefully observed with a pair o r f 
reading microscopes fixed at a suitable distance apart. Assuming 
that the temperature remains constant, the variations of length 
of the thread are inversely as the variations of cross-section of the 
tube. If the length of the thread is very nearly equal to one step, 
and if the tube is nearly uniform, the average of the observed lengths 
of the thread, taking all the steps throughout the interval, is equal 
to the length which the thread should have occupied in each position 
had the bore been uniform throughout arid all the divisions equal. 

I. — Calibration by Method of Guy Lussac. 



No. of 
Step. 


I 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 ■ 


Ends of ( 
thread. \ 

Excess- 
length. 

Error of 
step. 

Correc- 
tion. 


I +-OIO 

\ +-038 
-•028 

-i 7 -6 
+ 17-6 


— •016 
+ •017 
-•033 

— 22-6 

+40-2 


— ■020 
-•003 

— •017 

— 6-6 

+46-8 


-•031 

— •022 

— •009 

+ i-4 
+45-4 


+ •016 
+ •010 
+ T006 

+ 16-4 

+2Q-0 


+ •008 
+ •005 
-•003 

+ 7-4 

+21-6 


+ •013 

+ •033 

— •020 

- 9-6 
+31-2 


+•017 
+•018 
— •001 

+ 9-4 

+21-8 


+ •004 
+ •013 
— •004 

+ 6-4 
+ 15-4 


-■088 
-•003 
+ •005 

+ 15-4 ! 




The error of each step is therefore found by subtracting the average 
length from the observed length in each position. Assuming that 
the ends of the interval itself are correct, the correction to be applied 
at any point of calibration to reduce the readings to a uniform tube 
and scale, is found by taking the sum of the errors of the steps up 
to the point considered with the sign reversed. 

In the preceding example of the method an interval of ten degrees 
is taken, divided into ten steps of I ° each. The distances of the ends 
of the thread from the nearest degree divisions are estimated by the 
aid of micrometers to the thousandth of a degree. The error of any 
one of these readings probably does not exceed half a thousandth, 
but they are given to the nearest thousandth only. The excess 
length of the thread in each position over the corresponding degree 
is obtained by subtracting the second reading from the first. Taking 
the average of the numbers in this line, the mean excess-length is 
— 10-4 thousandths. The error of each step is found by subtracting 
this mean from each of the numbers in the previous line. Finally, 
the corrections at each degree are obtained by adding up the errors 
of the steps and changing the sign. The errors and corrections 
are given in thousandths of i°. 

Complete Calibration. — The simple method of Gay Lussac does 
very well for short intervals when the number of steps is not ex- 
cessive, but it would not be satisfactory for a large range owing to 
the accumulation of small errors of estimation, and the variation 
of the personal equation. The observer might, for instance, con- 
sistently over-estimate the length of the thread in one half of the 
tube, and under-estirnate it in the other. The errors near the middle 
of the range would probably be large. It is evident that the correc- 
tion at the middle point of the interval could be much more accu- 
rately determined by using a thread equal to half the length of the 
interval. To minimize the effect of these errors of estimation, it 
is usual to employ threads of different lengths in calibrating the 
same interval, and to divide up the fundamental interval of the 
thermometer into a number of subsidiary sections for the purpose 
of calibration, each of these sections being treated as a step in the 
calibration of the fundamental interval. The most symmetrical 
method of calibrating a section, called by C. E. Guillaume a " Com- 
plete Calibration," is to use threads of all possible lengths which are 



CALIBRATION 



integral multiples of the calibration step. In the example already 
given nine different threads were used, and the length of each was 
observed in as many positions as possible. Proceeding in this 
manner the following numbers were obtained for the excess-length 
of each thread in thousandths of a degree in different positions, 
starting in each case with the beginning of the thread at 0°, and 
moving it on by steps of i°. The observations in the first column 
are the excess-lengths of the thread of l° already given in 
illustration of the method of Gay Lussac. The other columns 
give the corresponding observations with the longer threads. 
The simplest and most symmetrical method of solving these 
observations, so as to find the errors of each step in 
terms of the whole interval, is to obtain the differences of 
the steps in pairs by subtracting each observation from the one 

Table II. — Complete Calibration of Interval of 10° in 10 Steps. 



Lengths of Threads. 


i° 


2° 


3° 


4° 


5° 


6° 


7° 


8° 


9° 


Observed excess- o° 


-28 


,•7-32 


-67 


-62 


— 11 


-15 


-48 


— 2 


■'- 8 


lengths of threads, I ° 


-33 


'•i-21 


-47 


-28 


+ 14 


-'8 


— 22 


+21 


+24 


in various posi- 2° 


-17 


+ 2 


- 8 


+ 1 


+26 


+23 


+ 6 


+58 




tions, the begin- 3 


- 9 


+26 


+ 5 


~ 3 


+41 


+36 


+28 






ning of the thread 4 


+ 6 


+31 


- 7 


+ 4 


+45 


+49 








being set near the 5° 


- 3 


+ 5 


-15 


- 6 


+43 










points. 6° 


—20 


+ 7 


-16 


+ 2 












7° 


— 1 


+23 


+ 10 














8° 


- 4 


+29 
















9° 


+ 5 



















above it. This method eliminates the unknown lengths of the 
threads, and gives each observation approximately its due weight. 
Subtracting the observations in the second line from those in the 
first, we obtain a series of numbers, entered in column 1 of the next 
table, representing the excess of step (1) over each of the other steps. 
The sum of these differences is ten times the error of the first step, 
since by hypothesis the sum of the errors of all the steps is zero in 
terms of the whole interval. The numbers in the second column 
of Table III. are similarly obtained by subtracting the third line 
from the second in Table II., each difference being inserted in its. 
appropriate place in the table. Proceeding in this way we find the 
excess of each interval over those which follow it. The table is 
completed by a diagonal row of zeros representing the difference of 
each step from itself, and by repeating the numbers already found in 
symmetrical positions with their signs changed, since the excess of 
any step, say 6 over 3, is evidently equal to that of 3 over 6 with the 
sign changed. The errors of each step having been found by adding 
the columns, and dividing by 10, the corrections at each point of 
the calibration are deduced as before. 



Table III. — Solution of Complete Calibration. 



ampoules, were calibrated by Chappuis in five sections of 20° each, 
to determine the corrections at the points 20°, 40% 6o°, 8o°, which 
may be called the " principal points " of the calibration, in terms of 
the fundamental interval. Each section of 20° was subsequently 
calibrated in steps of 2°, the Corrections being at first referred, as in 
the example already given, to the mean degree of the section itself, 
and being afterwards expressed, by a simple transformation, in terms 
of the fundamental interval, by means of the corrections already 
found for the ends of the section. Supposing, for instance, that the 
corrections at the points 0° and 10° of Table III. are not zero, but 
C° and C respectively, the correction C„ at any intermediate point 
n will evidently be given by the formula, 

C n =>C°+c„ + (C'-C°)n/io . . . (3) 

where c„ is the correction already given in the table. 

If. the corrections are required to the thou- 
sandth of a degree, it is necessary to tabulate 
the results of the calibration at much more 
frequent intervals than 2°, since the correction, 
even of a good thermometer, may change by 
as much as 20 or 30 thousandths in 2°. To 
save the labour and difficulty of calibrating 
with shorter threads, the corrections at inter- 
mediate points are usually calculated by a 
formula of interpolation. 5 This leaves much to 
be desired, as the section of a tube often changes 
very suddenly and capriciously. It is probable 
that the graphic method gives equally good 
results with less labour. 

Slide-Wire. — The calibration of an electrical 
slide-wire into parts of equal resistance is precisely analogous to that 
of a capillary tube into parts of equal volume. The Carey Foster 
method, employing short steps of equal resistance, effected by trans- 
; ferring a suitable small resistance from one side of the slide-wire to 
the other, is exactly analogous to the Gay Lussac method, and suffers 
from the same defect of the accumulation of small errors unless steps 
of several different lengths are used. The calibration of a sliderwire, 
however, is much less troublesome than that of a thermometer tube 
for several reasons. It is easy to obtain a wire uniform to one part in 
500 or even less, and the section is not liable to capricious variations. 
In all work of precision the slide-wire is supplemented by auxiliary 
resistances by which the scale may be indefinitely extended. In 
accurate electrical thermometry, for example, the slide-wire itself 
would correspond to only 1°, or less, of the whole scale, which is less 
than a single step in the calibration of a mercury thermometer, 
so that an accuracy of a thousandth of a degree can generally be 
obtained without any calibration of the slide- wire. In the rare 
cases in which it is necessary to employ a long slide-wire, such as 
the cylinder potentiometer of Latimer Clark, the calibration is best 
effected by comparison with a standard, 



Step 

No. 


1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


6 


7 


8 


9 


10 


1 





- 5 


+ 11 


+20 


+34 


+25 


+ 7 


-I-26 


+23 


+32 


2 


+ 5 





+16 


+23 


+39 


+29 


+ 12 


+31 


-f-28 


+37 


3 


— 11 


-16 





+ 8 


+24 


+ 13 


- 4 


+ 15 


+13 


+22 


4 


— 20 


-23 


- 8 





+ 15 


+ 5 


— 12 


+ 7 


+ 4 


+ 13 


5 


-34 


-39 


-24 


-15 





- 9 


-26 


- 8 


— 10 


— 2 


6 


-25 


-29 


-13 


- 5 


+ 9 





-17 


+ 2 


— 1 


+ 8 


7 


- 7 


— 12 


+ 4 


+ 12 


+26 


+ 17 





+ 19 


+ 16 


+26 


8 


-26 


-3i 


-15 


- 7 


+ 8 


— 2 


-19 





- 3 


+ 6 


9 


-23 


-28 


-13 


- 4 


+ 10 


+ 1 


-16 


+ 3 





+ 9 


10 


-32 


-37 


— 22 


-13 


+ 2 


- 8 


-26 


- 6 


- 9 





Error of 
step. 


-17-3 


— 22-0 


- 6.4 


+ 1-9 


+ 16-7 


+ 7-i 


— 10- 1 


+ 8-9 


+ 6-1 


+ 15-1 


Correc- 






















tions. 


+ 17-3 


+39-3 


+45-7 


+43-8 


+27-1 


+20-0 


+30-1 


+2I-2 


+ 15-1 






such as a Thomson-Varley slide-box. 



The advantages of this method are the simplicity and symmetry 
of the work of reduction, and the accuracy of the result, which 
exceeds that of the Gay Lussac method in consequence of the much 
larger number of independent observations. It may be noticed, 
for instance, that the correction at point 5 is 27-1 thousandths by 
the complete calibration, which is 2 thousandths less than the value 
29 obtained by the Gay Lussac method, but agrees well with the 
value 27 thousandths obtained by taking only the first and last 
observations with the thread of 5 °, The disadvantage of the method 
lies in the great number of observations required, and in the labour 
of adjusting so many different threads to suitable lengths. It is 
probable that sufficiently good results may be obtained with much 
less trouble by using fewer threads, especially if more care is taken 
in the micrometric determination of their errors. 

The method adopted for dividing up the fundamental interval 
of any thermometer into sections and steps for calibration may be 
widely varied, and is necessarily modified in cases where auxiliary 
bulbs or " ampoules " are employed. The Paris mercury-standards, 
which read continuously from 0° to 100° C, without intermediate 



Graphic Representation of Results. — 
The results of a calibration are often 
best represented by means of a correc- 
tion curve, such as that illustrated in 
the diagram, which is plotted to repre- 
sent the corrections found in Table III. 
The. abscissa of such a curve is the read- 
ing of the instrument to be corrected. 
The ordinate is the correction to be 
added to the observed reading to reduce 
to a uniform scale. The corrections 
are plotted in the figure in terms of the 
whole section, taking the correction to 
be zero at the beginning and end. As 
a matter of fact the corrections at these 
points in terms of the fundamental in- 
terval were found to be -29 and -9 thousandths respectively. 
The correction curve is transformed to give corrections in terms 
of the fundamental interval by ruling a straight line joining the 
points +29 and +9 respectively, and reckoning the ordinates 
from this line instead of from the base-line. Or the curve may 
be replotted with the new ordinates thus obtained. In draw- 
ing the curve from the corrections obtained at the points of 
calibration, the exact form of the curve is to some extent a 
matter of taste, but the curve should generally be drawn as 
smoothly as possible on the assumption that the changes are 
gradual and continuous. 

The ruling of the straight line across the curve to express the 
corrections in terms of the fundamental interval, corresponds to 
the first part of the process of calibration mentioned above under 
the term " Standardization." It effects the reduction of the 



CALICO— GALICUT 



readings to a common standard, and may be neglected if relative 
values only are required. A precisely analogous correction occurs 
in the case of electrical instruments. A potentiometer, for 
instance, if correctly graduated or calibrated in parts of equal 

resistance, will give correct relative values of any differences of 




3 4 6 6.7 

Calibration Curve. 

potential within its range if connected to a constant cell to supply 
the steady current through the slide-wire. But to determine at 
any time the actual value of its readings in volts, it is necessary 
to standardize it, or determine its scale-value or reduction-factor, 
by comparison with a standard cell. 

A very neat use of the calibration curve has been made by 
Professor W. A. Rogers in the automatic correction of screws of divid- 
ing machines or lathes. It is possible by the process of grinding, as 
applied by Rowland, to make a screw which is practically perfect 
in point of uniformity, but even in this case errors may be introduced 
by the method of mounting. In the production of divided scales, 
and more particularly in the case of optical gratings, it is most im- 
portant that the errors should be as small as possible, and should be 
automatically corrected during the process of ruling. With this 
object a scale is ruled on the machine, and the errors of the un- 
corrected screw are determined by calibrating the scale. A metal 
template may then be cut out in the form of the calibration-correc- 
tion curve on a suitable scale. A lever projecting from the nut 
which feeds the carriage or the slide-rest is made to follow the contour 
of the template, and to apply the appropriate correction at each 
point of the travel, by turning the nut through a small angle on the 
screw. A small periodic error of the screw, recurring regularly at each 
revolution, may be similarly corrected by means of a suitable cam 
or eccentric revolving with the screw and actuating the template. 
This kind of error is important in optical gratings, but is difficult to 
determine and correct. 

Calibration by Comparison with a Standard. — The commonest 
and most generally useful process of calibration is the direct 
comparison of the instrument with a standard over the whole 
range of its scale. It is necessary that the standard itself should 
have been already calibrated, or else that the law of its indications 
should be known. A continuous current ammeter, for instance, 
can be calibrated, so far as the relative values of its readings are 
concerned, by comparison with a tangent galvanometer, since 
it is known that the current in this instrument is proportional 
to the tangent of the angle of deflection. Similarly an alternating 
current ammeter can be calibrated by comparison with an electro- 
dynamometer, the reading of which varies as the square of the 
current. But in either case it is neccessary, in order to obtain 
the readings in amperes, to standardize the instrument for some 
particular value of the current by comparison with a voltameter, 
or in some equivalent manner. Whenever possible, ammeters 
and voltmeters are calibrated by comparison of their readings 
with those of a potentiometer, the calibration of which can be 
reduced to the comparison and adjustment of resistances, which 
is the most accurate of electrical measurements. The commoner 
kinds of mercury thermometers are generally calibrated and 
graduated by comparison with a standard. In many cases this 
is the most convenient or even the only possible method. A 
mercury thermometer of limited scale reading between 250° and 
400 ° C, with gas under high pressure to prevent the separation 
of the mercury column, cannot be calibrated on itself, or by 
comparison with a mercury standard possessing a fundamental 
interval, on account of difficulties of stem exposure and scale. 
The only practical method is to compare its readings every few 
degrees with those of a platinum thermometer under the condi- 



tions for which it is to be used. This method has the advantage 
of combining all the corrections for fundamental interval, &c, 
with the calibration correction in a single curve, except the 
correction for variation of zero which must be tested occasionally 

at some point of the sca/e. 

Authorities. — Mercurial Thermometers: Guillaume, Thermo' 
metrie de Precision (Paris, 1889), gives several examples and refer- 
ences to original memoirs. The best examples of comparison and 
testing of standards are generally to be found in publications of 
Standards Offices, such as those of the Bureau International des 
Poids et Mesures at Paris. Dial Resistance- Box: Griffiths, Phil. 
Trans. A, 1893; Platinum Thermometry-Box : J. A. Harker and 
P. Chappuis, Phil. Trans. A, 1900; Thomson- Varley Potentiometer 
and Binary Scale Box: Callendar and Barnes, Phil. Trans. A, 
1901. (H. L. C.) 

CALICO, a general name given to plain cotton cloth. The 
word was spelt in various forms, including " calicut," which 
shows its derivation from the lindian city of Calicut or Kolikod, 
a seaport in the presidency of Madras, and one of the chief ports 
of intercourse with Europe in the 16th century, where cotton 
cloths were made. The name seems to have been applied to 
all kinds of cotton cloths imported from the East. In England 
it is now applied particularly to grey or bleached cotton cloth 
used for domestic purposes, and, generally, to any fairly heavy 
cotton cloth without a pattern. In the United States there is "a 
special application to printed cloth " of a coarser quality than 
muslin." In England " printed calico " is a comprehensive 
term. 

CALICUT, a city of British India, in the Malabar district of 
Madras; on the coast, 6 m. N. of Beypur. In 1901 the popula- 
tion was 76,981, showing an increase of 14% in the decade. 
The weaving of cotton, for which the place was at one time so 
famous that its name became identified with its calico, is no 
longer of any importance. Calicut is of considerable antiquity; 
and about the 7th century it had its population largely increased 
by the immigration of the Moplahs, a fanatical race of Mahom- 
medans from Arabia, who entered enthusiastically into com- 
mercial life. The Portuguese traveller Pero de Covilham 
(q.v.) visited Calicut in 1487 and described its possibilities for 
European trade; and in May 1498 Vasco da Gama, the first 
European navigator to reach India, arrived at Calicut. At 
that time it was a very flourishing city, and contained several 
stately buildings, among which was especially mentioned a 
Brahminical temple, not inferior to the largest monastery in 
Portugal. Vasco da Gama tried to establish a factory, but he 
met with persistent hostility from the local chief (zamorin), and a 
similar attempt made by Cabral two years later ended in the 
destruction of the factory by the Moplahs. In revenge the 
Portuguese bombarded the town, but no further attempt was 
made for some years to establish a trading settlement there. 
In 1509 the marshal Don Fernando Coutinho made an un- 
successful attack on the city; and in the following year it was 
again assailed by Albuquerque with 3000 troops. On this 
occasion the palace was plundered and the town burnt; but 
the Portuguese were finally repulsed, and fled to their ships after 
heavy loss. In the following year they concluded a peace with 
the zamorin and were allowed to build a fortified factory on the 
north bank of the Kallayi river, which was however again, and 
finally, abandoned in 1525. In 161 5 the town was visited by 
an English expedition under Captain Keeling, who concluded 
a treaty with the zamorin; but it was not until 1664 that an 
English trading settlement was established by th/3 East India 
Company. The French settlement, which still exists, was 
founded in 1698. The town was taken in 1765 by Hyder Ali, 
who expelled all the merchants and factors, and destroyed the 
cocoa-nut trees, sandal-wood and pepper vines, that the country 
reduced to ruin might present no temptation to the cupidity of 
Europeans. In 1782 the troops of Hyder were driven from 
Calicut by the British; but in 1788 it was taken and destroyed 
by his son Tippoo, who carried off the inhabitants to Beypur 
and treated them with great cruelty. In the latter part of 1790 
the country was occupied by the British; and under the treaty 
concluded in 1792, whereby Tippoo was deprived of half his 
dominions, Calicut fell to the British. After this event the 



CALIFORNIA 



inhabitants returned and rebuilt the town, which in 1800 con- 
sisted of 5000 houses. 

As the administrative headquarters of the district, Calicut 
maintains its historical importance. It is served by the Madras 
railway, and is the chief seaport on the Malabar coast, and the 
principal exports are coffee, timber and coco-nut products. 
There are factories for coffee-cleaning, employing several hundred 
hands; for coir-pressing and timber-cutting. The town has a 
cotton-mill, a saw-mill, and tile, coffee and oil works. A detach- 
ment of European troops is generally stationed here to overawe 
the fanatical Moplahs. 

CALIFORNIA, one of the Pacific Coast states of the United 
States of America, physically one of the most remarkable, 
economically one of the more independent, and in history and 
social life one of the most interesting of the Union* It is bounded 
N. by Oregon, E. by Nevada and Arizona, from which last it 
is separated by the Colorado river, and S. by the Mexican 
province of Lower California. The length of its medial line 
N. and S. is about 780 m., its breadth varies from 150 to 350 m., 
and its total area is 158,207 sq. m., of which 2205 are Water 
surface. In size it ranks second among the states of the 
Union. The coast is bold and rugged and with very few good 
harbours; San Diego and San Francisco bays being exceptions. 
The coast line is more than 1000 m. long. There are eight coast 
islands, all of inconsiderable size, and none of them as yet in 
any way important. 

Physiography.— The physiography of the state is simple; 
its main, features are few and bold: a mountain fringe along 
the ocean,, another mountain system along the east border, 
between them — closed in at both ends by their junction — a 
splendid valley of imperial extent, and outside all this a great 
area of barren, arid lands, belonging partly to the Great Basin 
and partly to the Open Basin region. 

Along the Pacific, and some 20-40 m. in width, runs the mass 
of the Coast Range, made up of numerous indistinct chains — 
most of which have localized individual names— that are broken 
down into innumerable ridges and spurs, and small valleys 
drained by short streams of rapid fall. The range is cut by 
numerous fault lines, some of which betray evidence of recent 
activity; it is probable that movements along these faults cause 
the earthquake tremors to which the region is subject, all of 
which seem to be tectonic. The altitudes of the Coast Range 
vary from about 2000 to 8000 ft. ; in the neighbourhood of San 
Francisco Bay the culminating peaks are about 4000 ft. in height 
(Mount Diablo, 3856 ft.; Mount St Helena, 4343 ft.), and to 
the north and south the elevation of the ranges increases. In 
the east part of the state is the magnificent Sierra Nevada, 
a great block of the earth's crust, faulted along its eastern side 
and tilted up so as to have a gentle back slope to the west and 
a steep fault escarpment facing east, the finest mountain system 
of the United States. The Sierra proper, from Lassen's Peak to 
Tehachapi Pass in Kern county, is about 430 m. long (from 
Mt. Shasta in Siskiyou county to Mt. San Jacinto in Riverside 
county, more than 600 m.). It narrows to the north and the 
altitude declines in the same direction. Far higher and grander 
than the Coast Range, the Sierra is much less complicated, 
being indeed essentially one chain of great simplicity of structure. 
It is only here and there that a double line of principal summits 
exists. The slope is everywhere long and gradual on the west, 
averaging about 200 ft. to the mile. Precipitous gorges or 
canyons often from 2000 to 5000 ft. in depth become a more 
and more marked feature of the range as one proceeds north- 
ward; over great portions of it they average probably not more 
than 20 m. apart. Where the volcanic formations were spread 
uniformly over the flanks of the mountains, the contrast between 
the canyons and the plain-like region of gentle slope in which 
they have been excavated is especially marked and characteristic. 
The eastern slope is very precipitous, due to a great fault which 
drops the rocks of the Great Basin region abruptly downward 
several thousand feet. Rare passes cross the chain, opening 
at the foot of the mountains on the east and the west high on their 
flanks, 7000-10,000 ft. above the sea. Between 36 20' and 38 



the lowest gap of any kind is above 0000 ft., and the average 
height of those actually used is probably not less than 11,000 ft. 
The Kearsarge, most used of all, is still higher. Very few in 
the entire Sierra are passable by vehicles. Some forty peaks 
are catalogued between 5000 and 8000 ft., and there are eleven 
above 14,000. The highest portion of the system is between 
the parallels of 36 30' and 37 30'; here the passes are about 
12,000 ft. in elevation, and the peaks range from 13,000 ft. 
upward, Mount Whitney, 14,502 ft., being the highest summit 
of the United States, excluding Alaska. From this peak north- 
ward there is a gradual decline, until at the point where the 
Central Pacific crosses in lat. 30° 20' the elevation is only 7000 ft. 

Of the mountain scenery the granite pinnacles and domes of 
the highest Sierra opposite Owen's Lake, where there is a drop 
eastward into the valley of about 10,000 ft. in 10 m.; the snowy 
volcanic cone of Mt Shasta, rising 10,000 ft. above the adjacent 
plains; and the lovely valleys of the Coast Range, and the 
south fork of the King river— all these have their charms; 
but most beautiful of all is the unique scenery of the Yosemite 
Valley (q.v.). Much of the ruggedness and beauty of the 
mountains is due to the erosive action of many alpine glaciers 
that once existed on the higher summits, and which have left 
behind their evidences in valleys and amphitheatres with 
towering walls, polished rock-expanses, glacial lakes and meadows 
and tumbling waterfalls. Remnants of these glaciers are still 
to be seen, — as notably on Mt. Shasta, — though shrunk to small 
dimensions. Glacial action may be studied well as far south as 
36 . The canyons are largely the work of rivers, modified by 
glaciers that ran through them after the rivers had formed them. 
All of the Sierra lakes and ponds are of glacial origin and there 
are some thousands of them. The lower lake line is about 8000 
ft. ; it is lower to the north than to the south, owing to the different 
climate, and the different period of glacial retrogression. Of 
these lakes some are fresh, and some — as those of the north-east 
counties— alkali. The finest of all is Tahoe, 6225 ft. above the 
sea, lying between the true Sierras and the Basin Ranges, with 
peaks on several sides rising 4000-5000 ft. above it. It is 1500 
ft. deep and its waters are of extraordinary purity (containing 
only three grains of solid matter to the gallon). Clear Lake, 
in the Coast Range, is another beautiful sheet of water. It is 
estimated by John Muir that on an average " perhaps more than 
a mile " of degradation took place in the last glacial period; 
but with regard to the whole subject of glacial action in California 
as in other fields, there is considerable difference of opinion. 
The same authority counted 65 small residual glaciers between 
36° 30' and 39 ; two-thirds of them lie between 37° and 38 , 
on some of the highest peaks in the district of the San Joaquin, 
Merced, Tuolumne and Owen's rivers. They do not descend, 
on an average, below 1 1,000 ft. ; the largest of all, on Mt. Shasta, 
descends to 9500 ft. above the sea. 

Volcanic action has likewise left abundant traces, especially 
in the northern half of the range, whereas the evidences of 
glacial action are most perfect (though not most abundant) 
in the south. Lava covers most of the northern half of the 
range, and there are many craters and ash-cones, some recent and 
of perfect form. Of these the most remarkable is Mt. Shasta. 
In Owen's Valley is a fine group of extinct or dormant volcanoes. 

Among the other indications of great geological disturbances 
on the Pacific Coast may also be mentioned the earthquakes 
to which California like the rest of the coast is liable. From 1850 
to 1887 almost 800 were catalogued by Professor E. H. Holden 
for California, Oregon and Washington. They occur in all 
seasons, scores of slight tremors being recorded every year by 
the Weather Bureau; but they are of no importance, and even 
of these the number affecting any particular locality is small. 
From 1769 to 1887 there were 10 " destructive " and 24 other 
" extremely severe " shocks according to the Rossi Forel nomen- 
clatural scale of intensity. In 1812 great destruction was 
wrought by an earthquake that affected all the southern part 
of the state; in 1865 the region about San Francisco was violently 
disturbed; in 1872 the whole Sierra and the state of Nevada 
were violently shaken; and in 1906 San Francisco fo.tO was in 



8 



CALIFORNIA 



large part destroyed by a shock that caused great damage else- 
where in the state. 

North of 40 N. lat. the Coast Range and Sierra systems unite, 
forming a country extremely rough. The eastern half of this 
area is covered chiefly with volcanic plains, very dry and barren, 
lying between precipitous, although not very lofty, ranges; 
the western half is magnificently timbered, and toward the coast 
excessively wet. Between 35 and 36 N. lat. the Sierra at its 
southern end turns westward toward the coast as the Tehachapi 
Range. The valley is thus closed to the north and south, and 
is surrounded by a mountain wall, which is broken down in but 
a single place, the gap behind the Golden Gate at San Francisco. 
Through this passes the entire drainage of the interior. The 
length of the valley is about 450 m., its breadth averages about 
40 m. if the lower foothills be included, so that the entire area 
is about 18,000 sq. m. The drainage basin measured from 
the water-partings of the enclosing mountains is some three 
times as great. From the mouth of the Sacramento to Redding, 
at the northern head of the valley, the rise is 552 ft. in 192 m., 
and from the mouth of the San Joaquin southward to Kern 
lake it is 282 ft. in 260 m. 

Two great rivers drain this central basin,— the San Joaquin, 
whose valley comprises more than three-fifths of the entire 
basin, and the Sacramento, whose valley comprises the remainder. 
The San Joaquin is a very crooked stream flowing through a low 
mud-plain, with tule banks; the Sacramento is much less 
meandering, and its immediate basin, which is of sandy loam, 
is higher and more attractive than that of the San Joaquin. 
The eastward flanks of the Coast Range are very scantily forested, 
and they furnish not a single stream permanent enough to reach 
either the Sacramento or San Joaquin throughout the dry season; 
On the eastern side of both rivers are various important tribu- 
taries, fed by the more abundant rains and melting snows of the 
western flank of the Sierra; but these streams also shrink 
greatly in the dry season. The Feather, emptying into the 
Sacramento river about 20 m. N. of the city of Sacramento, 
is the most important tributary of the Sacramento river. A 
striking feature of the Sacramento system is that for 200 m. 
north of the Feather it does not receive a single tributary of 
any importance, though walled in by high mountains. Another 
peculiar and very general feature of the drainage system of the 
state is the presence of numerous so-called river " sinks," where 
the waters disappear, either directly by evaporation or (as in 
Death Valley) after flowing for a time beneath the surface. 
These " sinks " are therefore not the true sinks of limestone 
regions. The popular name is applied to Owen's lake, at the 
end of Owen's river; to Mono lake, into which flow various 
streams rising in the Sierra between Mount Dana and Castle 
Peak; and to Death Valley, which contains the " sink " of the 
Amargosa river, and evidently was once an extensive lake, 
although now only a mud-flat in ordinary winters, and a dry, 
alkaline, desert plain in summer. All these lakes, and the other 
mountain lakes before referred to, show by the terraces about 
them that the water stood during the glacial period much higher 
than it does now. Tulare lake, which with Buena Vista lake 
and Kern lake receives the drainage of the southern Sierra, 
shows extreme local variations of shore-line, and is generally 
believed to have shrunk extremely since 1850, though of this 
no adequate proof yet exists. In 1900 it was about 200 sq. m. 
in area. In wet seasons it overflows its banks and becomes 
greatly extended in area, discharging its surplus waters into the 
San Joaquin; but in dry seasons the evaporation is so great 
that there is no such discharge. The drainage of Lassen, Siskiyou 
and Modoc counties has no outlet to the sea and is collected 
in a number of great alkaline lakes. 

Finally along the sea below Pt. Conception are fertile coastal 
plains of considerable extent, separated from the interior deserts 
by various mountain ranges from 5000 to 7000 ft. high, and 
with peaks much higher (San Bernardino, 11,600; San Jacinto, 
10,800; San Antonio, 10,140). Unlike the northern Sierra, 
the ranges of Southern California are broken down in a number 
of. places. It is over these passes — Soledad, 2822 ft., Cajon, 



San Gorgonio, 2560 ft.— that the railways cross to the coast; 
That part of California which lies to the south and east of the 
southern inosculation of the Coast Range and the Sierra c6m- 
prises an area of fully 50,000 sq. m., and belongs to the Basin" 
Range region. For the most part it is excessively dry and 
barren. The Mohave desert — embracing Kern, Los AhgeleS 
and San Bernardino, as also a large part of San Diego, Imperial 
and Riverside counties— belong to the " Great Basin," while a 
narrow strip along the Colorado river is in the "Open Basin 
Region." They have no drainage to the sea, save fitfully for 
slight areas through the Colorado river. The Mohave desert is 
about 2000 ft. above the sea in general altitude. The southern 
part of the Great Basin region is vaguely designated the Colorado 
desert. In San Diego, Imperial and Riverside counties a number 
of creeks or so-called rivers, with beds that are normally dryy 
flow centrally toward the desert of Salton Sink or " Sea "; 
this is the lowest part of a large area that is depressed below the 
level of the sea, — at Salton 263 ft., and 287 ft. at the lowest point.; 
In 1900 the Colorado river (q.v.) was tapped south of the Mexican- 
boundary for water wherewith to irrigate land in the Imperial 
Valley along the Southern Pacific railway, adjoining Salton Sea. 
The river enlarged the canal, and finding a steeper gradient than" 
that to its mouth, was'diverted into the Colorado desert, flooding: 
Salton Sea; 1 and when the break in this river was closed for 
the second time in February 1907, though much of its water 
i still escaped through minor channels and by seepage, a lake 
more than 400 sq. m. in area was left. A permanent 60 ft. 
masonry dam was completed in July 1907. The region to the 
east of the Sierra, likewise in the Great Basin province, between 
the crest of that range and the Nevada boundary, is very moun- 
tainous. Owen's river runs through it from north to south for 
some 180 m. Near Owen's lake the scenery is extremely grand. 
The valley here is very narrow, and on either side the mountains 
rise from 7000 to 10,000 ft. above the lake and river. The Inyo 
range, on the east, is quite bare of timber, and its summits are 
only occasionally whitened with snow for a few days during the 
winter, as almost all precipitation is cut off by the higher ranges 
to the westward. Still further to the east some 40 m. from the 
lake is Death Valley (including Lost or Mesquite Valley)— the 
name a reminder of the fate of a party of "forty-niners " who- 
perished here, by thirst or by starvation and exposure. Death 
Valley, some 50 m. long and on an average 20-25 m. broad from- 
the crests of the inclosing mountain ranges (or S^to' m. at their 
base), constitutes an independent drainage basin. It is below 
sea level (about 276 ft. according torecent surveys) , arid altogether 
is one of the most remarkable physical features of California. 
The mountains about it are high and bare and brilliant with 
varied colours. The Amargosa river, entering the valley from 
Nevada, disappears in the salty basin. Enormous quantities' 
of borax, already exploited, and of nitrate of soda, are known 
to be present in the surrounding country, the former as almost 
pure borate of lime in Tertiary lake sediments. 

The physiography of the state is the evident determinant of 
its climate, fauna and flora. California has the highest' land 
and the lowest land of the United States, the greatest variety 
of temperature and rainfall, and of products of the soil. 

Climate. — The climate is very different from that of the 
Atlantic coast; and indeed very different from that of any part 
of the country save that bordering California* Amid great 
variations of local weather there are some peculiar features that 
obtain all over the state. In the first place, the climate of the 
entire Pacific Coast is milder and more uniform in temperature 
than that of the states in corresponding latitude east of the 
mountains. Thus we have to go north as far as Sitka in 57 N. 
lat. to find the same mean yearly temperature as that of Halifax, 
Nova Scotia, in latitude 44 39'. And going south along the' 
coast, we find the mean temperature of San Diego 6" or 7? less 
than that of Vicksburg, Miss., or Charleston, S.C. The quantity 
of total annual heat supply "at Puget Sound exceeds that ; at 
Philadelphia, Pittsburg, Cleveland or Omaha, all more than 

1 In December 1904 Salton Sea was dry; in February 1906 if was 
occupied by a lake 60 m. long. 




Emery Walker sc. 



CALIFORNIA 



9 



500 m. farther south; Cape Flattery, exposed the year round 
to cold ocean fogs, receives more heat than Eastport, Maine, 
which is 3 farther south and has a warmer summer. In the 
second place, the means of winter and summer are much nearer 
the mean of the year in California than in the east. This condi- 
tion of things is not so marked as one goes inward from the 
coast; yet everywhere save in the high mountains the winters 
are comparatively mild. In the third place, the division of the 
year into two seasons — a wet one and a dry (and extremely 
dusty) one-^-marks this portion of the Pacific Coast in the most 
decided manner, and this natural climatic area coincides almost 
exactly in its extension with that of California; being truly 
characteristic neither of Lower California nor of the greater part 
of Oregon, though more so of Nevada and Arizona. And finally, 
in the fourth place, except on the coast the disagreeableness of 
the heat of summer is greatly lessened by the dryness of the air 
and the consequent rapidity of evaporation. Among the 
peculiarities of Calif ornian climate it is not one of the least 
striking that as one leaves the Sacramento or San Joaquin plains 
and travels into the mountains it becomes warmer, at least for 
the first 2O00 or 3000 ft. of ascent. 

Along both the Coast Range and the Sierra considerable 
rainfall is certain, although, owing to the slight snow accumula- 
tions of the former, its streams are decidedly variable. A heavy 
rain-belt, with a normal fall of more than 40 in., covers all the 
northern half of the Sierra and the north-west counties; shading 
off from this is the region of 10-20 in. fall, which covers all the 
rest of the state save Inyo, Kern and San Bernardino counties, 
Imperial county and the eastern portion of Riverside county; 
the precipitation of this belt is from o to 10 in. In excessively 
dry years the limits of this last division may include all of the 
state below Fresno and the entire Central Valley as well. In 
the mountains the precipitation increases with the altitude; 
above 6000 or 7000 ft. it is almost wholly in the form of snow; 
and this snow, melting in summer, is of immense importance to 
the state, supplying water once for placer mining and now for 
irrigation. 1 The north-west counties are extremely wet; many 
localities here have normal rainfalls of 60-70 in. and even higher 
annually, while in extreme seasons as much as 125 in. falls. 
Along the entire Pacific Coast, but particularly N. of San Fran- 
cisco, there is a night fog from May to September. It extends 
but a few miles inland, but within this belt is virtually a pro- 
longation of the rainy season and has a marked effect on 
vegetation. Below San Francisco the precipitation decreases 
along the coast, until at San Diego it is only about 10 in. The 
south-east counties are the driest portions of the United States. 
At Ogilby, Volcano, Indio and other stations on the Southern 
Pacific line the normal annual precipitation is from 1-5 to 2-5 in.; 
and there are localities near Owen's lake, even on its very edge, 
that are almost dry. For days iri succession when it storms 
along the Southern California coasts and dense rain clouds blow 
landwards to the mountains, leaving snow or rain on their 
summits, it has been observed that within a few miles beyond 
the ridge the contact of the desert air dissipates the remaining 
moisture of the clouds into light misty masses, like a steam 
escape in cold air. The extreme heat of the south-east is tempered 
fey the extremely low humidity characteristic of the Great Basin, 
which in the interior of the two southernmost counties is very 
low. The humidity of places such as Fresno, Sacramento and 
Red Bluff in the valley varies from 48 to 58. Many places in 
northern, southern, central, mountain and southern coastal 
California normally have more than 200 perfectly clear days in a 
year; and many in the mountains and in the south, even on the 
coast, have more than 250. The extreme variability in the 
amount of rainfall is remarkable. 1 The effects of a season of 
drought on the dry portions of the state need not be adverted 
fo;> and as there is no rain or snow of any consequence 
on the mountains during summer, a succession of dry 
seasons may almost bare the ranges of the accumulated stock 

1 During the interval from 1850 to 1872 the yearly rainfall at 
San Francisco ranged from 11-37 to 49-27 in.; from 1850 to 1904 the 
average was 22-74, and the probable annual variation 4 in. 



of previous winter snows, thus making worse what, is already 
bad. , 

The Colorado desert (together with the lower Gila Valley 
of Arizona) is the hottest part of the United States. Along the 
line of the Southern Pacific the yearly extreme is frequently 
from 124 to 129 F. (i.e. in the shade, which is almost if not 
quite the greatest heat ever actually recorded in any part of the 
world). At the other extreme, temperatures of — 20 to —36° 
are recorded yearly on the Central (Southern) Pacific line near 
Lake Tahoe. The normal annual means of the coldest localities 
of the state are from 37° to 44 F.; the monthly means from 
20 to 65° F. The normal annual means on Indio, Mammoth 
Tanks, Salton and Volcano Springs are from 73-9° to 78-4 F.; the 
monthly means from 52-8° to 101-3° (frequently 95° to 98°), 
The normal trend of the annual isotherms of the state is very 
simple: a low line of about 40° circles the angle in the Nevada 
boundary line; 50° normally follows the northern Sierra across 
the Oregon border; lines of higher temperature enclose the 
Great Valley; and lines of still higher tempera ture— usually 
6o° to 70°, in hotter years 6o° to 75 — run transversely across 
the southern quarter of the state. 

Another weather factor is the winds, which are extremely 
regular in their movements.. There are brisk diurnal sea-breezes, 
and seasonal trades and counter-trades. Along the coast an 
on-shore breeze blows every summer day; in the evening it is 
replaced by a night-fog, and the cooler air draws down the 
mountain sides in opposition to its movement during the day. 
In the upper air a dry off-shore wind from the Rocky Mountain 
plateau prevails throughout the summer; and in winter an on- 
shore rain wind; The last is the counter- trade, the all-year 
wind of Alaska and Oregon; it prevails in. winter even off 
Southern California. . 

There is the widest and most startling variety of local climates. 
At Truckee, for example, lying about 5800 ft. above the sea near 
Lake Tahoe, the lowest temperature of the year may be— 2,5° F. 
or colder, when 70 m. westward at Rocklin, which lies in the 
foothills about 250 ft. above the sea, the mercury. does not 
fall below 28°. Snow never falls at Rocklin, but falls in large 
quantity at Truckee; ice is the crop of the one, oranges of the 
other, at the same time. There are points in Southern California 
where one may actually look from sea to desert and from snow 
to orange groves. Distance from the ocean, situation with 
reference to the mountain ranges, and altitude are all important 
determinants of these climatic differences; but of these the 
last seems to be most important. At any rate it may be said 
that generally speaking the maximum, minimum and mean 
temperatures of points of approximately equal altitude are 
respectively but slightly different in northern or southern 
California, 2 

Death Valley surpasses for combined heat and aridity any 
meteorological stations on earth where regular observations 
are taken, although for extremes of heat it is exceeded by places 
in the Colorado desert. The minimum daily temperature in 
summer is rarely below 70 F. and often above 90° F. (in the 
shade), while the maximum may for days in succession be 
as high as 120 F. A record of 6 months (1891) showed an 
average daily relative humidity of 30-6 in the morning and 15-6 
in the evening, and the humidity sometimes falls to 5. Yet 
the surrounding country is not devoid of vegetation. The hills 
are very fertile when irrigated, and the wet season develops 
a variety of perennial herbs, shrubs and annuals. 

Fauna. — California embraces areas of every life-zone of 
North America: of the boreal, the Hudsonian and Canadian 
subzones; of the transition, the humid Pacific subzone; of 
the upper austral, the arid or upper Sonoran subzone; of the 
lower austral, the arid or lower Sonoran; of the tropical, the 
" dilute arid " subzone. As will be inferred from the above 

2 The means for Los Angeles and Red Bluff, of Redding and 
Fresno, of San Diego and Sacramento, of San Francisco or Monterey 
and Independence, are respectively about the same; and all of them 
lie between 56 and 63° F. The places mentioned are scattered over 
■3t* of longitude and 6|° of latitude. 



ro 



CALIFORNIA 



account of temperature, summer is longer in the north, and 
localities in the Valley have more hours of heat than do those 
of south California. Hence that climatic characteristic of 
the entire Pacific Coast — already referred to and which is of 
extreme importance in determining the life-zones of California — 
the great amount of total annual heat supply at comparatively 
high latitudes. A low summer temperature enables northern 
species to push far southward, while the high heat total of the 
year enables southern species to push far north. The resultant 
intermingling of forms is very marked and characteristic of 
the Pacific Coast states. The distribution of life-zones is 
primarily a matter of altitude and corresponds to that of the 
isotherms. The mountain goat and mountain sheep live in 
the Sierran upper-land, though long ago well-nigh exterminated. 
The Douglas red squirrel is ubiquitous in the Sierran forests 
and their most conspicuous inhabitant. White-tailed deer 
and especially black-tails are found on the high Sierra; the 
mule deer, too, although its habitat is now mainly east of the 
range, on the plateau, is also met with. Grizzly, black, cinnamon 
and brown bears are all Calif ornian- species once common and 
to-day rare. When Americans began to rule in California elk 
and antelope herded in great numbers in the Great Valley; 
the former may to-day sometimes- be seen, possibly, in the 
northern forests, and the latter occasionally cross into the state 
from Nevada. The sage-hen is abundant on the eastern flank 
of the Sierra. Grouse, quail, crows and woodpeckers (Melanerpes 
formicivorus) furnish species characteristic of the state. There 
are various species of ground-squirrels and gophers, which are 
very abundant. Noteworthy in the animal life of tie lower 
Sonoran and tropic region are a variety of snakes and lizards, 
desert rats and mice; and, among birds, the cactus wren, desert 
thrasher, desert sparrow, Texas night-hawk, mocking-bird 
and ground cuckoo or road runner (Geococcyx Calif ornianus). 
The California vulture, the largest flying bird in North America 
and fully as large as the Andean condor, is not limited to Cali- 
fornia but is fairly common there. In the zoology and botany 
of California as of the rest of the Pacific Coast, the distinctions 
between the upper austral and humid transition zones are largely 
obliterated; and as one passes southward into the arid lands, 
life forms of both these zones intermingle with those of the 
arid transition. 

Fish are abundant. The United States fish commission, and an 
active state commission established in 1869, have done much to 
preserve and increase this source of food. In 1904 the yield of 
the fisheries of the three Pacific Coast states was 168,600,000 
lbs., valued at $6,681,000, — nearly half that of the New England 
states, more than one-third that of the Middle Atlantic states and 
more than that of the South Atlantic and Gulf states combined. 
Of the total, California yielded between a quarter and a third. 
A third of her fish comes from the Sacramento river. Some 230 — 
more or less — marine food fishes are to be found in the market at 
San Francisco. The exports of fish from that port from 1892- 
1899 were valued at from $2,000,000 to $2,500,000 annually. 
Native oysters are small and of peculiar flavour; eastern 
varieties also are fattened, but not bred in California waters. 
Shrimp are abundant; the shrimp fishers are Chinese and four- 
fifths of the catch is exported to China. Sturgeon were once the 
cheapest fish after salmon; to-day, despite all efforts to increase 
the supply, they are the dearest. Salmon, once threatened with 
extinction, have been saved, maintained in good supply, and 
indeed have probably regained their pristine abundance. Shad 
and striped bass are both very abundant and cheap. Black bass, 
flounders, terrapin, sea -turtles, perch, turbot, sole and catfish are 
also common. Great herds of seals once lay like toll-gatherers off 
the Golden Gate and other bays of the coast, taking a large share 
of the salmon and other fish; but they are no longer common. 
The sea-lions sometimes raid the rivers for 100 m. inland. They 
have greatly increased since hunting them for their hides and oil 
ceased to be profitable, and thousands sometimes gather on the 
Farallones, off the Golden Gate. 

Flora. — Inclusiveness of range in the distribution of vegetable 
life is perhaps more suggestive than the distribution of animal 



species. The variation is from dwarf mountain pine to giant 
cactus and dates. The humid transition belt is the habitat of 
California's magnificent forests. Nut pine, juniper and true 
sage-brush (Artemisia tridentata) characterize the upper Sonoran, 
— although the latter grows equally in the transition zone. 
Cereals, orchard fruits and alfalfa are of primary importance in 
the upper and of secondary importance in the lower Sonoran. In 
the arid portions of thisand the tropic areas the indigenous plants 
are creosote, mesquite and alfileria bushes, desert acacias, 
paloverdes, alkali-heath, salt grass, agaves, yuccas (especially the 
Spanish-bayonet and Joshua tree) and cactuses. Among exotics 
the Australian saltbush spreads successfully over the worst alkali 
land. The introduction of other exotics into these zones, — made 
humid by irrigation, which converts them, the one into true 
austro-riparian the other into true humid tropical, — has revolur 
tionized the agricultural, and indeed the whole, economy of 
California. At the two ends of Cajon Pass, only four or five 
kilometres apart, are the two utterly distinct floras of the Mohave 
desert and the San Bernardino valley. Despite the presence of 
the pass, plants do not spread, so great is the difference of climatic 
conditions. On the desert the same plant will vary in different 
years from 4 in. to 10 ft. in height when equally mature, according 
to the rainfall and other conditions of growth. Many mature 
plants are not taller than 0-4 to o-8 in. The tree yucca often 
attains a height of 20 to 25 ft., and a diameter of 1-5 ft. About 
600 species of plants were catalogued in desert California in 189 1 
by a government botanical party. The flora of the coast islands 
of California is very interesting. On Santa Cruz Professor Joseph 
Le Conte found 248 species, nearly all of which are distinctively 
Californian, 48 being peculiar to the surrounding islands and 28 
peculiar to Southern California* Various other things indicate a 
separation of the islands from the mainland in quaternary times; 
since which, owing to the later southward movement on the 
continent of northern forms in glacial times, there has been a 
struggle for existence on the mainland from which the islands 
have largely escaped. 

Forests. — The forests and agricultural crops of the state de- 
mand particular notice. In 1906 the woodland was estimated 
by the United States census at 22% of the state's area, and the 
total stand at 200,000 million ft. of timber. The variety of forest 
trees is not great, but some of the California trees are unique, and 
the forests of the state are, with those of Oregon and Washington, 
perhaps the most magnificent of the world. At least the coni- 
ferous forests which make up nine-tenths of California's woodland 
surpass all others known in number of species and in the size and 
beauty of the trees. Forty-six species occur, namely, 32 species 
of pitch trees (18 pines), 12 species of the cypresses and their 
allies (2 sequoia), and 2 species of yews or their allies. Peculiar 
to California are the two species of sequoia (q.v.), — the redwood 
(S. sempervirens) , and the big-tree (S. gigantea), remnants of an 
earlier age when they were common in other parts of the world. 
The redwood grows only in a narrow strip on the Coast Range 
from Southern Oregon (where there are not more than 1000 acres) 
down nearly to the Golden Gate, in a habitat of heavy rains and 
heavy fogs. They cover an area of about 2000 sq. m. almost 
unmixed with other species. One fine grove stands S. of San 
Francisco near Santa Cruz. These noble trees attain very often 
a height of more than 300 ft., frequently of 350 and even more, 
and a butt diameter of more than 1 5 to 20 ft., with clean, straight 
fluted trunks rising 200 ft. below the lowest branches. They grow 
in a very dense timber stand; single acres have yielded 
1,500,000 ft. B.M. of lumber, and single trees have cut as high as 
100,000 ft. The total stand in 1900 was estimated by the United 
States census as 75,000,000,000 ft., and the ordinary stand per 
acre varies from 25,000 to 150,000 ft., averaging probably 60,000 
ft. The redwood is being rapidly used for lumber. There is 
nowhere any considerable young growth from seed, although this 
mode of reproduction is not (as often stated) unknown; the tree 
will reproduce itself more than once from the stump (hence its 
name) . In thirty years a tree has been known to grow to a height 
of 80 ft. and a diameter of 16 in. The wood contains no pitch and 
much water, and in a green condition will not bum. To this fact 



CALIFORNIA 



ii 



it owes its immunity from: the forest fires which wreak frightful 
havoc among the surrounding forests. ■ As the redwood is limited 
to the Coast Range, so the big tree is limited wholly to the Sierra 
Nevada. Unlike the redwood the big tree occurs in scattered 
groves (ten in all) among other species. Its habitat extends 
some 200 m., from latitude 36 to 39 , nowhere descending much 
below an altitude of 5000 ft., nor rising above 8000 ft. The most 
northerly grove and the nearest to San Francisco is the Calaveras 
Grove near Stockton; the Mariposa Grove just south of the Yose- 
mite National Park, is a state reservation and easily accessible 
to tourists. The noblest groves are near Visalia, and are held as 
a national park. The average height is about 275 ft., and the 
diameter near the ground 20 ft. ; various individuals stand over 
300 ft, and a diameter of 25 ft. is not rare. One tree measures 
35-7 ft. inside the bark 4 ft. above the ground, 10 fti at 200 ft. 
above the ground, and is 325 ft. tall. Specimens have been cut 
down that were estimated to be 1300 and even 2200 years old; 
many trees standing are presumably 250x2 years old. It is the 
opinion of John Muir that the big tree would normally live 5000 
years or more; that the California groves are still in their prime; 
that, contrary to general ideas, the big tree was never more widely 
distributed than now, at least not "within the past 8000 or 10,000 
years; that it is not a decaying species, but that on the contrary 
" no tree of all the forest is more enduringly established in con- 
cord with climate and soil," growing like the mountain pine even 
on granite, and in little danger save from the greed of the lumber- 
man; but other excellent authorities consider it as hardly hold- 
ing its own, especially in the north. Three main wood belts cover 
the flanks of the Sierra: the lower or main pine belt, the silver fir 
belt, and the upper pine belt. The sugar pine, the yellow or silver 
pine and the Douglas spruce (considerably smaller than in Oregon 
and Washington), are rivals in stature and nobility, all attaining 
200 ft. or more when full grown; and the incense cedar reaches a 
height of 150 ft. In this belt and the following one of firs the big 
tree also grows. The white silver fir (abies concolor) and the silver 
or red fir {ab. magnified), standing 200 to 250 ft., make up almost 
wholly the main forest belt from 5000 to 9000 ft. for some 450 m. 
Above the firs come the tamarack, constituting the bulk of the 
lower Alpine forest; the hardy long-lived mountain pine; the 
red cedar or juniper, growing even on the baldest rocks; the 
beautiful hemlock spruce; the still higher white pine, nut pine, 
needle pine; and finally, at 10,000 to 12,000 ft., the dwarf pine, 
which grows in a tangle on the earth over which one walks, and 
may not show for a century's growth more than a foot of height 
or an inch of girth. The Nevada slope of the mountains below 7 500 
ft. is covered with the nut pine down to the sage plains. Its nuts 
are gathered in enormous amounts by the Indians for food; and 
it is estimated that the yearly harvest of these nuts exceeds in 
bulk that of all the cereals of California (John Muir). On the 
Sierra the underbrush is characterized by the purtgent manzanita, 
the California buckeye and the chamiso; the last two growing 
equally abundantly on the Coast Range. The chamiso and the 
manzanita, with a variety of shrubby oaks and thorny plants, 
often grow together in a dense and sometimes quite impenetrable 
undergrowth, forming what is known as "chaparral"; if the 
chamiso occurs alone the thicket is a " chamisal." The elm, the 
hickory, the beech, the chestnut, and many others of the most 
characteristic and useful trees of the eastern states were originally 
entirely wanting in California. Oaks are abundant; they are 
especially characteristic of the Great Valley, where they grow in 
magnificent groves. Up to igionationalforestreservesamounted 
to 27,968,510 acres. In 1909 Congress created a national forest 
to include the big tree groves in Calaveras and Tuolumne counties. 
One of the noblest redwood areas (that of Santa Cruz county) is 
a state reservation (created in 1901). Even within reservations 
almost all the merchantable timber is owned by private in- 
dividuals. In addition to native trees many others — especially 
ornamental species — have been successfully introduced from 
various parts of the world. 

Soil. — Sand and loams in great variety, grading from mere 
sand to adobe, make up the soils of the state. The plains of 
the north-east counties are volcanic, and those of the south-east 



sandy. It is impossible to say with accuracy what part of the 
state may properly be classed as tillable. The total farm acreage 
in 1900 was 28,828,951 acres, of which 41-5 % were improved; 
since 1880 the absolute amount of improved land has remained 
practically constant, despite the extraordinary progress of the 
state in these years. Much land is too rough, too elevated 
or too arid ever to be made agriculturally available; but irriga- 
tion, and the work of the state and national agricultural bureaus 
in introducing new plants and promoting scientific farming, 
have accomplished much that once seemed impossible. The 
peculiarities of the climate, especially its division into two 
seasons, make Californian (and Southern Arizona) agriculture 
very different from that of the rest of the country. During the 
winter no shelter is necessary for live-stock, nor, during summer, 
for the grains that are harvested in June and July, and may lie 
for weeks or months in the field. The mild, wet winter is the 
season of planting and growth, and so throughout the year there 
is a succession of crops. The dangers of drought in the long dry 
seasons particularly increase the uncertainties of agriculture in 
regions naturally arid. Irrigation was introduced in Southern 
California before 1 780, but its use was desultory and its spread 
slow till after 1850. In 1900 almost 1,500,000 acres were irrigated 
— an increase of 46% since 1890. About half of this total was 
in San Joaquin Valley. California has the greatest area of 
irrigated land of any state in the Union, and offers the most 
complete utilization of resources. In the south artesian wells, 
and in the Great Valley the rivers of the Sierra slope, are the 
main source ©f water-supply. On nearly all lands irrigated 
some crops will grow in ordinary seasons without irrigation, but 
it is this that makes possible selection of crops; practically 
indispensable for all field and orchard culture in the south, 
save for a few moist coastal areas, it everywhere increases the 
yield of all crops and is practised generally all over the state. 
Of the acreage devoted to alfalfa in 1899, 76-2 % was irrigated; 
of that devoted to subtropical fruits, 71-7%. Small fruits, 
orchard fruits, hay, garden products and grains are decreasingly 
dependent on irrigation; wheat, which was once California's 
great staple, is (for good, but not for best results) comparatively 
independent of it, — hence its early predominance in Californian 
agriculture, due to this success on arid lands since taken over 
for more remunerative irrigated crops. 

Agriculture. — The spread of irrigation and of intensive cultiva- 
tion, and the increase of small farms during the last quarter of 
the 19th century, have made California what it is to-day. Agri- 
culture had its beginning in wheat-raising on great ranches, 
from 50,000 even to several hundred thousand acres in extent. 
A few of these, particularly in the Great Valley, are still worked, 
but only a few. The average size of farms in 1850 (when the 
large Mexican grants were almost the only farms, and these 
unbroken) was 4466 acres; in i860 it was 466-4, and in 1900 
only 397-4 acres. Stock ranches, tobacco plantations, and hay 
and grain farms, average from 800 to 530 acres, and counteract 
the tendency of dairy farms, beet plantations, orchards, vegetable 
gardens and nurseries to lower the size of the farm unit still 
further. The renting of large holdings prevails to a greater 
extent than in any other state except Texas. From 1880 to 
1900 the number of farms above 500 and below 1000 acres 
doubled; half of the total in 1900 were smaller than 100 acres. 
The most remunerative and most characteristic farming to-day 
is diversified and intensive and on small holdings. The essential 
character of California's economic life has been determined 
by the successive predominance of grass, gold, grain and fruits. 
Omitting the second it may be truly said that the order of 
agricultural development has been mainly one of blind experi- 
ment or fortuitous circumstances. Staple products have changed 
with increasing knowledge of climatic conditions, of life-zones 
and of the fitness of crops; first hides and tallow, then wool, 
wheat, grapes (which in the early eighteen-nineties were the 
leading fruit), deciduous orchard fruits, and semi-tropical citrus 
fruits successively. Prunes were introduced in 1854, but their 
possibilities were only slightly appreciated for some thirty years. 
Of various other crops much the same is true. Of late years 



12 



CALIFORNIA 



progress has been very intelligent; in earlier years it was gained 
through a multitude of experiments and failures, and great 
pecuniary loss, and progress was a testimonial chiefly to courage 
and perseverance. The possibilities of the lower Sonoran and 
tropical areas are still imperfectly known. Nature has been 
niggard of rain but lavish in soil and sun. Irrigation has shown 
that with water, arid and barren plains, veritable deserts may 
be made to bloom with immense wealth of semi-tropical fruits; 
and irrigation in the tropical area along the Colorado river, 
which is so arid that it naturally bears only desert vegetation, 
has made it a true humid-tropical region like Southern Florida, 
growing true tropical fruits. 

In 1900 California ranked eleventh among the states in total 
value of farm property ($796,527,955) and in 1899 fourteenth 
in the value of farm products ($131,690,606). The growth of 
the former from 1890 to 1900 was only 2-5%, one of the 
smallest increases among all the states. 

The pastoral period extended from 1769 to 1848. The live- 
stock industry was introduced by the Franciscans and flourished 
exceedingly. In 1834, when the missions had already passed 
their best days, there were some 486,000 cattle, horses, mules 
and asses on the ranges, and 325,000 small animals, principally 
sheep. Throughout the pre-American period stock-raising 
was the leading industry; it built up the prosperity of the 
missions, largely supported the government and almost ex- 
clusively sustained foreign commerce. Hides and tallow were 
the sum and substance of Californian economy. Horses were 
slaughtered wholesale at times to make way for cattle on the 
ranges. There was almost no dairying; olive oil took the place 
of butter, and wine of milk, at the missions; and in general 
indeed the Mexicans were content with water. In the develop- 
ment of the state under the American regime the live-stock 
industry has been subordinate. A fearful drought in 1862-1864 
greatly depressed it, and especially discouraged cattle ranching. 
Sheep then became of primary importance, until the increase 
of the flocks threatened ranges and forests with destruction. 
As late as 1876 there were some 7,000,000 sheep, in 1900 only 
2,581,000, and in 1906 only 1,750,000. In the total value of 
all live stock (5,402,297 head) in 1900 ($65,000,000) the rank of 
the state was 1 5th in the Union, and in value of dairy products 
in 1899 (12-84 million dollars) 12th. The live-stock industry 
showed a tendency to decline after 1890, and the dairy industry 
also, despite various things — notably irrigation and alfalfa 
culture — that have favoured them. 

Cereals replaced hides and tallow in importance after 1848. 
Wheat was long California's greatest crop. Its production 
steadily increased till about 1884, the production in 1880, the 
banner year, being more than 54 million bushels (32,537,360 
centals). Since 1884 its production has markedly fallen off; 
in 1905 the wheat crop was 17,542,013 bushels, and in 1906, 
26,883,662 bushels (valued at $20,162,746). There has been a 
general parallelism between the amount of rain and the amount 
of wheat produced; but as yet irrigation is little used for this 
crop. In the eighth decade of the 19th century, the value of the 
wheat product had come to exceed that of the annual output 
of gold. Barley has always been very important. The acreage 
given to it in 1899 was one-fourth the total cereal acreage, and 
San Francisco in 1902-1904 was the shipping point of the larger 
part of American exported barley, of (roughly) three-quarters 
in 1902, seven-eighths in 1903 and four-fifths in 1904. In 1906. 
California produced 38,760,000 bushels of barley, valued at 
$20,930,400. The great increase in the acreage of barley, which 
was 22'5% of the country's barley acreage in 1906, and 24-2% 
in 1905, is one reason for the decreased production of wheat. 
The level nature of the great grain farms of the valley led to the 
utilization of machinery of remarkable character. Combined 
harvesters (which enter a field of standing grain and leave this 
grain piled in sacks ready for shipment), steam gang-ploughs, 
and other farm machinery are of truly extraordinary size and 
efficiency. In 1899 cereals represented more than a third of the 
total crop acreage and crop product ($93,641,334) of the state. 
Wheat and other cereals are in part cut for hay, and the hay crop 



of 1906 was i,i33;465 tons, valued at $12,751^4.81. California 
is one of the leading hop-producing states of the Union, the 
average annual production since 1901 being more than 10,000,000 
lb. The product of sugar beets increased between 1888 and 
1902 from 1910 to 73,761 tons (according to the state board of 
trade), and in 1909 (according to the department of agriculture) 
it was 882,084 tons, from which 254,544,000 lb of sugar was 
manufactured. In this industry California in 1909 ranked 
second to Colorado. Truck gardening for export is an. 
assured industry, especially in the north. Great quantities of 
vegetables, fresh and canned, are shipped yearly, and the same ; 
is true on a far larger scale of fruit. Vegetable exports more 
than doubled between 1894 and 1903. In 1899 hay and grain 
represented slightly more than a third of the farm acreage 
and capital and also of the value of all farm products; 
live-stock and dairy farms represented slightly more than 
half the acreage, and slightly under 30% of the capital and- 
produce; fruit farms absorbed 6-2% of the acreage and 27% 
of the capital, and returned 22-5% of the value of farm 
produce. 

Fruit-growing. — Horticulture is now the principal industry, 
and in this field California has no rival in the United States, 
although ranking after Florida in the growth of some tropical, 
or semi-tropical fruits,— pineapples, guava, limes, pomeloes or 
grape-fruit and Japanese persimmons. In 1899 California's 
output of fruit was more than a fifth of that of the whole Union. 
The supremacy of the state is established in the growth of oranges, 
lemons, citrons, olives, figs, almonds, Persian (or English) 
walnuts, plums and prunes, grapes and raisins, nectarines,; 
apricots and pomegranates; it also leads in pears, and peaches, 
but here its primacy is not so assured. Southern California ■ 
by no means monopolizes the warm-zone fruits. Oranges, 
lemons and walnuts come chiefly from that section, but citrus 
fruits grow splendidly in the Sierra foothills of the Sacramento 
Valley, and indeed ripen earlier there than hi the southern 
district. Almonds, as well as peaches, pears, plums, cherries 
and apricots, come mainly from the north. Over half of the 
prune crop comes from Santa Clara county, and the bulk of the 
raisin output from Fresno county. Olives thrive as far north' 
as the head of the Great Valley, growing in all the valleys and 
foothills up to 1500 or 2000 ft. They were introduced by the 
Franciscans (as were various other subtropical fruits, pears and 
grapes), but their scientific betterment and commercial import- 
ance date from about 1885. They grow very abundantly and of 
the finest quality; for many years poor methods of preparation 
prejudiced the market against the Californian product, but this 
has ceased to be the case. The modern orange industry practic- 
ally began with the introduction into Southern California in 1873 
of two seedless orange trees from Brazil; from their stock have 
been developed by budding millions of trees bearing a seedless 
fruit known as the " Washington navel," which now holds first 
rank in American markets; other varieties, mainly seedlings, 
are of great but secondary importance. Shipments continue 
the year round. There has been more than one horticultural 
excitement in California, but especially in orange culture, which 
was for a time almost as epidemic a fever as gold seeking once 
was. By reason of the co-operative effort demanded for the 
large problems of irrigation, packing and marketing, the citrus 
industry has done much for the permanent development of the 
state, and its extraordinary growth made it, towards the close 
of the 19th century, the most striking and most potent single 
influence in the growth of agriculture. State legislation has 
advanced the fruit interest in all possible ways. Between 1872 
and 1903 exports of canned fruits increased from 91 to 94,205 
short tons; between 1880 and 1903 the increase of dried fruit ex- 
ports was from 295 to 149,531 tons; of fresh deciduous fruits, from 
2590 to 101,199; of raisins, from 400 to> 39,963; of citrus fruits, 
from 458 to 299,623; of wines and brandies between 1 891 and 
1903, from 47,651 to 97,332 tons. Of the shipments in 1903 
some 44 % were from Southern California, — i x. from the seven 
southernmost counties. 

Grape culture has a great future in California. Vines were 



CALIFORNIA 



r* 



first introduced by the Franciscans in 1771 from Spain, and 
until after i860" Mission " grapes were practically the only stock 
in California. Afterwards many hundred^ of European varieties 
were introduced with great success. " The state has such a 
variety of soil, slope, elevation, temperature and climatic 
conditions as to reproduce, somewhere within its borders, any 
wine now manufactured" (United States Census, 1900); but 
experience has not as yet divided the state into districts of 
specialized produce, nor determined just how far indigenous 
American vines may profitably be used, either as base or graftings, 
with European varieties. Grapes are grown very largely over 
the state. Raisins do well as far north as Yolo county, but do 
best in Madera, Fresno, Kings, Tulare and San Diego counties. 
The product ■ is more than sufficient for the markets of the 
United States. Dry wine grapes do best in the counties around 
San Francisco Bay, on unirrigated lands; while sweet wine 
stocks do best in Yolo, San Joaquin and the counties of the 
raisin grape, and on irrigated lands. In 1000 California produced 
about three-fifths in value ($3,937,871) and in 1905 the same 
proportion ($6,688,620) of the wine output of the United 
States. The value of: product more than sextupled from 1880 
to 1900. In quantity the product was more than four times the 
combined product of all other states. The better California 
wines are largely sold under French labels. Brandies are an 
important product. They are made chiefly from grapes, and 
are used to fortify wines. It was officially estimated that in the 
spring of 1904 there were some 227,000 acres of vineyards in 
the state, of which exactly five-tenths were in wine grapes and 
four-tenths in raisin grapes. 

Gold. — Between the pastoral period and the era of wheat was 
the golden epoch of Californian history. The existence of gold 
had long been suspected, and possibly known, in California before 
1848, and there had been desultory washings in parts where 
there was very little to reward prospectors. The first perfectly 
authenticated discovery was made near Los Angeles in 1842. 
The discovery of real historical importance was made in January 
1848 (the 24th is the correct date) at John A. Sutter's mill, on 
the south fork of the American river near Coloma, by a workman, 
James W. Marshall (1810-1885). His monument now marks 
the spot. From 1848 to the 1st of January 1903, according to 
the state mining bureau, California produced $1,379,275,408 
in goldi There were two periods of intense excitement. The 
first ended in 1854, at which time there was a decided reaction 
throughout the United States in regard to mining matters. 
The Californian discoveries had given rise to a general search 
for metalliferous deposits in the Atlantic states, and this had* 
been followed by wild speculations. At the time of their greatest 
productiveness, from 1850 to 1853, the highest yield of the 
washings was probably not less than $65,000,000 a year; accord- 
ing to the state mining bureau the average production from 
1851-1854 was $73,570,087 ($81,294,270 in 1852, the banner 
year), and from 1850-1861 $55,882,861, never falling below 
$50,000,000. The estimates of other competent authorities 
differ considerably, and generally are somewhat less generous 
than these figures. 

At first the diggings were chiefly along the rivers. These 
were " flumed," — that is, the water was diverted by wooden 
flumes from the natural channel and the sand and gravel 
in the bed were washed. All the "gulches" or ravines lead- 
ing down into the canyons were also worked over, with or 
without water. These were the richest " placers," but in them 
the gold was very unequally distributed. Those who first got 
possession of the rich bars on the American, Yuba, Feather, 
Stanislaus and the other smaller streams in the heart of the 
gold region, made sometimes from $1000 to $5000 a day; but 
after one rith spot was worked out it might be days or weeks 
before another was found. In 1848 $500^700 a day was not 
unusual luck; but, on the other hand, the income of the great 
majority of miners was certainly far less than that of men who 
seriously devoted themselves to trade or even to common 
labour.. Many extraordinary nuggets were found, varying 
from $1000 to $20,000 in value. The economic stimulus given by 



such times may be imagined. For several years gold-dust was 
a regular circulating medium in the cities as well as in the mining 
districts of the state. An ounce of dust in 1848 frequently went 
for $4 instead of $17; for a number of years traders in dust 
were sure of a margin of several dollars, as for example in private 
coinage, mints for which were common by 1851. From the 
record of actual exports and a comparison of the most authori- 
tative estimates of total production, it may be said that from 
1848 to 1856 the yield was almost certainly not less than 
$450,000,000, and that about 1870 the billion dollar mark had 
been passed. Just at this time came the highest point and the 
sudden fall of the second great mining fever of the state. This 
was a stock speculation based on the remarkable output 
($300,000,000 in 20 years) of the silver "bonanzas" of the 
Comstock lode at Virginia City, Nevada, which were opened 
and financed by San Francisco capitalists. The craze pervaded 
all classes. Shares that at first represented so many dollars 
per foot in a tangible mine were multiplied and remultiplied 
until they came to represent paper thicknesses or almost nothing, 
yet still their prices mounted upward. In April 1872 cam* the 
revulsion; there was a shrinkage of $60,000,000 in ten days; 
then in 1873 a tremendous advance, and in 1875 a final and 
disastrous collapse; in ten years thereafter the stock of the 
Comstock lode shrank from $3,000,000 to $2,000,000. This 
Comstock fever belongs to Californian rather than to Nevadan 
history, and is one of the most extraordinary in mining 
annals. 

First the "rocker," then the "torn," the "flume," and the 
hydraulic stream were the tools of the miner. Into the " rocker " 
and the " torn " the miner shovelled dirt, rocking it as he poured 
in water, catching the gold on riffles set across the bottom of his 
box; thus imitating in a wooden box the work of nature in the 
rivers. The " flume " enabled him to dry the bed of a stream 
while he worked over its gravels. The hydraulic stream came 
into use as early as 1852 (or 1853) when prospecting of the 
higher ground made it certain that the " deep " or " high " 
gravels — i.e. the detrital deposits of tertiary age — contained 
gold, though in too small quantities to be profitably worked in 
the ordinary way. The hydraulic process received an immense 
development through successive improvements of method and 
machinery. In this method tremendous blasts of powder, 
sometimes twenty-five or even fifty tons, were used to loosen the 
gravel, which was then acted on by the jet of water thrown from 
the " pipes." To give an idea of the force of the agent thus 
employed it may be stated that when an eight-inch nozzle is 
used under a heavy head, more than 3000 ft. may be discharged 
in a minute with a velocity of 150 ft. per second. The water as 
it thus issues from the nozzle feels to the touch like metal, and 
the strongest man cannot sensibly affect it with a crowbar. 
A gravel bank acted on by such tremendous force crumbled 
rapidly, and the disintegrated material could be run readily 
through sluices to the " dumps." Hydraulic mining is no longer 
practised on the scale of early days. The results were wonderful 
but disastrous, for the " dumps " were usually river-beds. 
From 1870-1879 the bed of Bear river was raised in places in its 
lower course 97 ft. by the detritus wash of the hydraulic mines, 
and that of Sleepy Hollow Creek 136 ft. The total filling up to 
that time on the streams in this vicinity had been from 100 to 
250 ft., and many thousand acres of fine farming land were 
buried under gravel, — some 16,000 on the lower Yuba alone. 
For many years the mining interests were supreme, and agri- 
culture, even after it had become of great importance, was 
invariably worsted when the two clashed; but in 1884 the long 
and bitter " anti-d6bris " or " anti-slickins " fight ended in favour 
of the farmers. In 1893 the United States government created 
a California Debris Commission, which has acted in unison with 
the state authorities. Permits for hydraulic mining are granted 
by the commission only when all gravel is satisfactorily 
impounded and no harm is done to the streams; and the 
improvement of these, which was impossible so long as limits 
were not set to hydraulic mining, can now be effectively advanced. 
Quartz mining began as early asi8si. Ini 908 about five-eighths 



14 



CALIFORNIA 



of the gold output was from such mines. Quartz veins are 
very often as £ood at a depth of 3000 ft. as at the surface. 
A remarkable feature of recent years (especially since 1900) is 
gold "dredging." Thousands of acres even of orchard, vine- 
yard and farming land have been thus treated in recent years. 
Gold was being produced in 1906 in more than thirty counties. 
The annual output since 1875 has been about $15,000,000 
to $17,000,000; in 1905, according to the Mines Report, it 
was $18,898,545. Colorado now excels California as a gold 
producer. 

Mineral Products. — California produces more than forty 
mineral substances that are of commercial significance. Gold, 
petroleum, copper, borax and its products, clays, quicksilver 
and silver lead, in order of importance, representing some four- 
fifths of the total. From 1894 to 1902 the aggregate production 
increased from 20-2 to 35-1 million dollars; in 1908 it was 
$65,137,636. Metallic products long represented three-fourths of 
the total, but the feature of recent years has been the rising im* 
portance of hydrocarbons and gases, and of structural materials, 
and indeed of non-metallic products generally. The production 
of crude petroleum has grown very rapidly since about 1895. 
Oil is found from north to south over some 600 m., but especially 
in Southern California. The high cost of coal, which has always 
been a hindrance to the development of manufactures, makes 
the petroleum deposits of peculiar value. Their total output 
increased from 4,250,000 to 44,854,737 barrels between i960 
and 1908, and the value of the product in 1908 was $23,433,502. 
The Kern river field is the most important in the state and one 
of the greatest in the world. Those of Coalinga, Santa Maria 
and Lompoc, and Los Angeles are next in importance. Both 
in 1900 and in 1905 California ranked fifth among the states of 
the United States in the petroleum refining industry. Copper 
has risen in importance in very recent years; it is mined mainly 
in Shasta county; the value of the state's total product in 1908 
was $5,232,986 Gold mining still centres in the mountainous 
counties north of Tuolumne. This is the region of quartz mining. 
In borax (of which California's output in 1904 was 45,647 tons) 
and structural materials San Bernardino has a long lead.' More 
than nine-tenths of the borax product of the country comes from 
about Death Valley. San Bernardino marbles have a very high 
repute. California was the fourth state of the Union in 1908 in 
the production of granite. It furnishes about two-fifths of the 
quicksilver of the world. This has been mined since 1824; the 
output was greatest from 1875-1883, when it averaged about 
43,000,000 pounds. The New Almaden mine (opened in 1824) in 
Santa Clara couhty produced from 1850 to 1896 some 73,000,000 
pounds. The centre of production is north and south of San 
Francisco Bay. Calif ornian coal is almost wholly inferior brown 
lignite, together with a small quantity of bituminous coals of 
poor quality; the state does not produce a tenth part of the 
coal it consumes. Of growing importance are the gems found 
in California: a few diamonds in Butte county; rock crystal 
in Calaveras county; and tourmalines, kunzite, the rare 
pink beryl and bright blue topazes in San Diego county. 
Chrysoprase, mined near Porterville and near Visalia (Tulare 
county), is used partly for gems, but more largely (like the 
vesuvianite found near Exeter, in the same county) for mosaic 
work; and there are ledges of fine rose quartz in the Coahuila 
mountains of Riverside county and near Lemon Cove, Tulare 
county. 

A vivid realization of the industrial revolution in the state 
is to be gained from the reflection that in 1875 California was 
pre-eminent only for gold and sheep; that the aggregate mineral 
output thirty years later was more than a third greater than then, 
and that nevertheless the value of farm produce at the opening 
of the 20th century exceeded by more than $100,000,000 the 
value of mineral produce, and exceeded by $50,000,000 the 
most generous estimate of the largest annual gold output in the 
annals of the state. 

Manufactures. — Previous to i860 almost every manufactured 
article used in the state was imported from the east or from 
Europe. Dairy products, for example, for whose production 



good facilities always existed, were long greatly neglected, and 
not for two decades at least after 1848 was the state independent 
in this respect. The high cost of coal, the speculative attractions 
of mining, and the high wages of labour, handicapped the 
development of manufactures in early years. The first continued 
to be a drag on such industries, until after 1895 the increasing 
use of crude petroleum obviated the difficulty. Several remark- 
able electric power and lighting plants utilize the water power 
of the mountains. 1 Geographic isolation has somewhat fostered 
state industries. The value of gross manufactured products 
increased4i-9%from 1890 to 1900. In the latter year California 
ranked 12th among the states in the gross value of all manufac- 
tures ($302,874,761); the per-capita value of manufactured and 
agricultural products being $293,— -$89 of the latter, $204 of the 
former. Of the wage-earners 6 1 % were engagedin manufacturing. 
Fourteen industries represented from 41% to 45% of the 
employees,, wages, capital and product of the aggregate manu- 
facturers of the state. The leading ones in order of importance 
and the rvalue of product in millions of dollars were: the manu- 
facture of railway, foundry, and machine shop products (19-6 
million dollars), lumber and timber industries (18-57), sugar and 
molasses refining (15-01), beef slaughtering (15-72), canning and 
preserving (13 >o8) , flour and grist milling (13- 10) , the manufacture 
of malt, vinousi and distilled liquors (9-26), leather industries 
(7-40), printing and publishing (6-86). In the second, third and 
fifth of these industries the state ranked respectively fifth, 
fourth and first in the Union. 2 The canning and preserving of 
fruits and vegetables is in the main an industry of the northern 
and central counties. In 1890 the state board of forestry 
estimated that the redwood forests were in danger of exhaustion 
by 1930. The redwood is a general utility lumber second only 
to the common white pine, and the drain on the woods has been 
continuous since 1850. The wood has a fine, straight and even 
grain; and though light and soft, is firm and extremely durable, 
lying, it is authoritatively asserted, for centuries in the forest 
without appreciable decay. It takes a beautiful polish. The 
colour varies from cedar colour to mahogany. A small southern 
belt in San Mateo, Santa Clara and Santa Cruz counties is not 
being commercially exploited. The annual lumber cut from 
1 898-1 903 averaged more than 663,348,000 ft.; of the 
852,638,000 ft. cut in 1903, 465,460,000 were of redwood, and 
264,890,000 of yellow pine; fir and sugar pines contributing 
another 104,600,000, and spruce and cedar 17,670,000 ft. In 
1 900 California ranked 16th among the states in value of product 
($13,764,647, out of a total of $566,852,984). The total cut was 
under £ of 1% of the estimated stand. In Humboldt county, 
in the redwood belt near Eureka, are probably the most modern 
and remarkable lumber mills of the world. In 1900 it was 
estimated that lumbermen controlled somewhat less than a fifth 
of the timber of the state, and the same part of the redwood. 
After 1800 important shipyards were established near San 
Francisco. The most important naval station of the United 

1 Small masses of water made to fall great distances and the use 
of turbines are important features of such plants. One on the 
North Yuba river at Colgate, where there is a 700 ft. fall, serves 
Oakland, San Jose and San Francisco, at high pressure yielding in 
San Francisco (220 m. away) 75 % of its power. Other plants are 
one at Electra (154 m. from San Francisco), and one on the San 
Joaquin, which delivers to Fresno 62 m. distant. 

2 The 1905 census of manufactures deals only with establishments 
under the factory system; its figures for 1905 and the figures for 
1900 reduced to the same limits are as follows : — total value of pro- 
ducts, 1905 $367,218,494; 1900, 5257,385,521, an increase of 
42-7 %; leading industries, with value of product in millions of 
dollars — canning and preserving, first in 1905 with 23-8 millions, 
third in 1900 with 13-4 millions; slaughtering and meat-packing, 
second in 1905 with 21-79 millions, first in 1900 with 15-71 millions- 
flour and grist mill products, third in 1905 with 20-2 millions, fourth 
in 1900 with 13-04 millions; lumber and timber, fourth in 1905 with 
18-27 millions, second in 1900 with 13-71 millions; printing and 
publishing, fifth in 1905 with 17-4 millions, sixth in 1900 with 
9-6 millions; foundry and machine shop products, sixth in 1905 
with 15-7 millions, fifth in 1900 with 12-04 millions; planing mill 
products, seventh in 1905 with 13-9 millions, twelfth in 1900 with 
4-8 millions; bread and other bakery products, eighth in IQOS with 
IO-6 millions, eleventh in 1900 with 4-87 millions. 



CALIFORNIA 



15 



States on the Pacific coast is at Mare Island at the northern end 
of San Francisco Bay, and the private Union Iron Works, on the 
peninsula near San Francisco, is one of the largest shipyards of 
the country. In 1905 more than one-half of the factory product 
was the output of four cities: San Francisco ($137,788,233), 
Los Angeles ($34,814,475), Sacramento ($10,310,416) and Fresno 
($9,849,001); next ranked Oakland, Stockton, and San Jose. 

The transportation facilities in California increased rapidly 
after 1870. The building of the Central Pacific and Union 
Pacific lines are among the romances of American railway 
history. They joined tracks near Ogden, Utah, in May 1869. 
The New Orleans line of the Southern Pacific was opened in 
January 1883; the Atchison, Topeka & Santa F6 completed its 
line to San Diego in 1885, and to San Francisco Bay in 1900. 
•The San Pedro, Los Angeles & Salt Lake, with trans-continental 
connexions at the eastern terminus, was chartered in 1901 and 
fully opened in March 1903. Railway mileage increased 137-3 % 
from 1870 to 1880, and 154-6% from 1880 to 1900. At the 
close of 1908 the total mileage was 7039-36 m., practically all 
of which is either owned or controlled by the two great trans- 
continental systems of the Southern Pacific and the Atchison, 
Topeka & Santa Fe. From 1869 to 1875 registered mail ex- 
changes were opened with China, Japan, Hawaii and Australia. 
There are now frequent mail connexions from San Francisco with 
Hawaii, Australasia, and eastern Asia, as well as with American 
ports north and south. The commerce of San Francisco amounts 
to some $80,000,000 or $90,000,000 yearly, about equally 
divided between imports and exports, until after 1905 — in 1907 
the imports were valued at $54,207,011, and the exports at 
$30,378,355 (less than any year since 1896). San Diego has a 
very good harbour, and the harbours of San Pedro (Los Angeles) 
and Eureka are fairly good and of growing importance. Grains, 
lumber, fish, fruits and fruit products, petroleum, vegetables and 
sugar are the leading items in the commerce of San Francisco. 
Other ports are of very secondary importance. Navigation on 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers was very important in 
early days, but is to-day of relatively slight importance in 
comparison with railway traffic. 

Population. — The population of California increased in 
successive decades from 1850 to 1910 respectively by 310-3, 47-3, 
54-3, 40-3, 22-4 and 60-1%. (The percentage of increase in 
1900-1910 was exceeded in Washington, Oklahoma, Idaho, Ne- 
vada, North Dakota and Oregon.) In 1 910 the total population 
was 2 ,3 7 7 , 549 , or 1 5 • 2 per sq.m. In 1 900 there were 116 incorporated 
towns and cities; and of the total population 43-3% was urban, — 
i.e. resident in cities (n in number) of 8000 or more inhabitants. 
These n cities were: San Francisco (pop. 342,782), Los Angeles 
(102,479), Oakland (66,960), Alameda (16,464), Berkeley 
(13,214), — the last three being suburbs of San Francisco, and the 
last the seat of the state university, — Sacramento, the state capital 
(29,282), San Jose (21,500), San Diego (17,700), Stockton 
(17,506), Fresno (12,470), and Pasadena (9117). Eight other 
cities had populations of more than 5000 — Riverside City 
(7973), Vallejo (7965), Eureka (7327), Santa Rosa (6673), Santa 
Barbara (6587), San Bernardino (6156), Santa Cruz (5659), 
and Pomona (5526). 

Of the entire population in 1900 persons of foreign birth or 
parentage (one or both parents being foreign) constituted 54-2 
and those of native birth were 75-3%. Of the latter six-tenths 
were born in California. The foreign element included 45,753 
i Chinese (a falling off of 25,313 since 1890), and 10,151 Japanese 
(an increase of 9004 in the same decade). Twenty-two foreign 
Countries contributed over 1000 residents each, the leading ones 
being the United Kingdom (91,638), Germany (72,449), Canada 
(29,618; 27,408 being English Canadians), Italy (22,777), Sweden 
(14,549), France (12,256), Portugal (12,068), Switzerland 
(10,974), Japan, Denmark, and Mexico, in the order named. 
Persons of negro descent numbered 1 1 ,045. Almost all the Indians 
of the state are taxed as citizens. In 1906 of 611,464 members 
of religious denominations 354,408 were Roman Catholics, 
64,528 Methodist Episcopalians, 37,682 Presbyterians, 26,390 
Congregationalists, 24,801 Baptists, 21,317 Protestant Episcopa- 



lians, 11,371 Lutherans, and 9,110 members of Eastern Orthodox 
churches. A peculiar feature in the population statistics of 
California is the predominance of males, which in 1900 was 
156,009; the Asiatic element accounts for a third of this number. 
Since 1885 the eight counties south of the Tehachapi Range, 
which are known collectively and specifically as Southern Califor- 
nia have greatly advanced in population. In 1 880 their population 
was 7-3, in 1890 17- 2, and in 1900 20-1% of the total population of 
the state. The initial impulse to this increase was the beginning 
of the " fruit epoch " in these counties, combined with a railway 
" rate-war " following the completion to the coast in 1885 of the 
Santa Fe, and an extraordinary land boom prevailing from 
1886 to 1888. The conjuncture of circumstances, and the 
immigration it induced, were unusual. The growth of the South, 
as of the rest of the state, has been continuous and steady. 

The Indians were prominent in early Californian history, but 
their progress toward their present insignificance began far back 
in the Spanish period. It proceeded much more rapidly after 
the restraining influence of the missions was removed, leaving 
them free to revert to savagery; and the downward progress 
of the race was fearfully accelerated during the mining period, 
when they were abused, depraved, and in large numbers killed. 
There have been no Indian wars in California's annals, but many 
butcheries. The natives have declined exceedingly in number 
since 1830, in 1900 numbering 15,377. They have always been 
mild-tempered, low, and unintelligent, and are to-day a poor 
and miserable race. They are all called " Digger Indians " 
indiscriminately, although divided by a multiplicity of tongues. 

Government and Institutions. — In the matter of constitution- 
making California has been conservative, having had only two 
between 1849 an< i 1910- The first was framed by a convention 
at Monterey in 1849, and ratified by the people and proclaimed 
by the United States military governor in the same year. The 
present constitution, framed by a convention in 1878-1879, came 
into full effect in 1880, and was subsequently amended. It was 
the work of the labour party, passed at a time of high discontent, 
and goes at great length into the details of government, as was 
demanded by the state of public opinion. The qualifications 
required for the suffrage are in no way different from those 
common throughout the Union, except that by a constitutional 
amendment of 1894 it is necessary for a voter to be able to read 
the state constitution and write his name. As compared with 
the earlier constitution it showed many radical advances toward 
popular control, the power of the legislature being everywhere 
curtailed. The power of legislation was taken from it by specific 
inhibition in thirty-one subjects before within its power; its 
control of the public domain, its powers in taxation, and its use 
of the state credit were carefully safe-guarded. " Lobbying " 
was made a felony; provisions were inserted against lotteries 
and stock-exchange gambling, to tax and control common 
carriers and great corporations, and to regulate telegraph, 
telephone, storage and wharfage charges. The powers of the 
executive department were also somewhat curtailed. For the 
judiciary, provisions were made for expediting trials and deci- 
sions. Notable was the innovation that agreement by three- 
fourths of a jury should be sufficient in civil cases and that a jury 
might be waived in minor criminal cases, a provision which of 
course was based on experience under the Mexican law. All 
these changes in the organic law reflect bitter experience after 
1850; and, read with the history of those years as a commentary, 
few American constitutions are more instructive. The con- 
stitution of 1879 corresponds very closely to the ordinary state 
constitution of to-day. The incorporation of banks issuing 
circulating notes is forbidden. Marriage is not only declared 
a civil contract, but the laws expressly recognize that the mere 
consent of the parties is adequate to constitute a binding 
marriage. The union of whites with persons of African descent 
is forbidden. Felons twice convicted may not be pardoned 
except on the recommendation of a majority of the judges of the 
supreme court. Judges and state executive officers are elected 
for terms longer than is usual in the different states (supreme 
judges 12 years, executive officers 4 years). These few provisions 



i6 



CALIFORNIA 



arc mentioned, not as of particular importance in themselves, 
but as exceptions of some moment to the usual type of state 
Constitutions (see United States). The Australian ballot was 
introduced in 1891. In local government there are no deviations 
from the usual types that demand notice. In the matter of 
liquor-laws there is local option, and a considerable proportion 
of the towns and smaller cities, particularly in the south, adopt 
prohibition. In most of the rest high licence is more or less 
strictly enforced. 

The total assessed valuation of property grew from 
$666,390,985 in 1880 to $1, 217, 648,683 in 1900 and 
$1,879,728,763 in 1907. In 1904, when the U.S. Census Report 
showed California to be the twenty- first state of the Union in 
population . but the sixth in wealth, the total estimated true 
value of all property was $4,115,491,106, of which $2,664,472,025 
was the value of real property and improvements thereon. 
The per capita wealth of the state was then reported as $2582.32, 
being exceeded only by the three sparsely settled states of 
Montana, Wyoming and Nevada. In 1898 California had the 
largest savings-bank deposit per depositor ($637.75) of anv 
state in the Union; the per caput deposit was $110 in 1902, and 
about one person in seven was a depositor. The state bonded debt 
in 1907 amounted to three and a half million dollars, of which all 
but $767,529.03 was represented by bonds purchased by the state 
and held for the school and university funds; for the common 
school fund on the 1st of July 1907 there were held bonds for 
$4,890,950, and $800,000 in cash available for investment; for 
the university fund there were held $751,000 in state bonds, 
and a large amount in other securities. The total bonded county 
indebtedness was $4,879,600 in 1906 (not including that of San 
Francisco, a consolidated city and county, which was $4,568,600). 
A homestead, entered upon record and limited to a value of 
$5000 if held by the head of a family and to a value of $1000 
if held by one not the head of a family, is exempt from liability for 
debts,except for a mortgage, a lien before it was claimed as a home- 
stead or a lien afterward for improvements. A homestead held by 
a married man cannot be mortgaged without consent of his wife. 

Under an act approved on the 25th of March 1903 a state 
board of charities and corrections, — consisting of six members, 
not more than three being of the same political party, appointed 
by the governor, with the advice and consent of the senate, 
and holding office for twelve years, two retiring at the end of each 
quadrennium, — investigates, examines, and makes " reports 
upon the charitable, correctional and penal institutions of the 
state," excepting the Veterans' Home at Yountville, Napa 
county, and the Woman's Relief Corps Home at Evergreen, 
Santa Clara county. There are state prisons with convicts 
working under the public account system, at San Quentin, 
Marin county, and Folsom, Sacramento county. The Preston 
(Sonoma county) School of Industry, for older boys, and the 
Whittier (Los Angeles county) State School, for girls and for 
boys under sixteen, are the state reformatories, each having 
good industrial and manual training departments. There are 
state hospitals for the insane at Agnew, Santa Clara county; 
at Stockton, San Joaquin county; at Napa, Napa county; at 
Patton, San Bernardino county; and, with a colony of tuber- 
cular patients, at Ukiah, Mendocino county. In 1906 the ratio of 
insane confined to institutions, to the total population, was 
1 to every 270. Also under state control are the home for care 
and training of feeble-minded children, at Eldridge, Sonoma 
county; the institution for the deaf and the blind at Berkeley, 
and the home of mechanical trades for the adult blind at Oakland. 
A Juvenile Court Law was enacted in 1903 and modified in 1905. 

The educational system of Califofnia is one of the best in the 
country. The state board of education is composed of the 
governor of the 6tate, who is its president; the superintendent of 
public instruction, who is its secretary; the presidents of the 
five normal schools and of the University of California, and the 
professor of pedagogy in the university. Sessions are long in 
primary schools, and attendance was made compulsory in 1874 
(and must not be less than two-thirds of all school days). The 
state controlled the actual preparation 'and sale of text-books 



for the common schools from 1885 to 1903, when the Perry 
amendment to the constitution '(ratified by popular vote in 1884) 
was declared to mean that such text-books must be manufactured 
within the state, but that the texts need not be prepared in 
California. The experiment of state-prepared text-books was 
expensive, and its effect was bad on the public school system, 
as such text-books were almost without exception poorly written 
and poorly printed. After 1903 copyrights were leased hy the 
state. Secondary schools are closely affiliated with, and closely 
inspected by, the state university. All schools are generously 
supported, salaries are unusually good, and pension funds in all 
cities are authorized by state laws. The value of school 
property in 1900 was $19,135,722, and the expenditure for 
the public schools $6,195,000; in 1906 the value of school 
property was $29,013,150, and the expenditure for public- 
schools $10,815,857. The average school attendance for all 
minors of school age (5-20 years) was 59-9%; of those native-born 
61-5, of those foreign-bom 34-6; of coloured children, including 
Asiatics and Indians, 35-8, and of white, 6o-8%. In 1900,6-2% 
of the males of voting age, and 2-4% of the native-bom males of 
voting age, were illiterate (could not write). Some 3% of the 
total population could not speak English; Chinese and Japanese 
constituting almost half of the number, foreign-born whites 
somewhat less, and Indians and native-born whites of foreign 
parentage together less than a tenth of the total. Of the higher 
educational institutions of the state the most important are the 
state university at Berkeley and Leland Stanford Jr. University 
at Palo Alto. The former is supported with very great liberality 
by the state; and the latter, the endowment of which is private 
(the state, however, exempting it from taxation), is one of the 
richest educational institutions of America. In 1906 there were 
also five state normal schools (at Chico, Los Angeles, San Diego, 
San Francisco, and San Jose), and a considerable number of 
denominational colleges. There is also a state polytechnic 
school at San Luis Obispo (1903). 

History. — The name " California " was taken from Ordonez de 
Montalvo's romance of chivalry Las Sergas de Esplandian 
(Madrid, 1 5 10) , in which is told of black Amazons ruling an island 
of this name " to the right of the Indies, very near the quarter 
of the terrestrial paradise." The name was given to the unknown 
north-west before 1 540. It does not show that the namers were 
prophets or wise judges, for the Spaniards really knew California 
not at all for more than two centuries, and then only as a genial 
but rather barren land; but it shows that the conquistador es 
mixed poetry with business and illustrates the glamour thrown 
about the " Northern Mystery." Necessarily the name had for 
a long time no definite geographical meaning. The lower 
Colorado river was discovered in 1540, but the explorers did not 
penetrate California; in 1 542-1 543 Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo 
explored at least the southern coast; in 1579 Sir Francis Drake 
repaired his ships in some Californian port (almost certainly not 
San Francisco Bay), and named the land New Albion; two 
Philippine ships visited the coast in 1584 and 1595, and in 1602 
and 1603 Sebastian Vizcaino discovered the sites of San Diego 
and Monterey. There was apparently no increase of knowledge 
thereafter for 150 years, Most of this time California was 
generally supposed to be an island or a group of islands. Jesuit 
missionaries entered Lower California as early as 1697, maintain- 
ing themselves there until Charles III.'s expulsion in 1767 of all 
Jesuits from his dominions; but not until Russian explorations 
in Alaska from 1 745-1 765 did the Spanish government show 
interest in Upper California. Because of these explorations, and 
also the long-felt need of a refitting point on the California coast 
for the galleons from Manila, San Diego was occupied in 1769 
and Monterey in 1770 as a result of urgent orders from Charles 
III. San Francisco Bay was discovered in the former year. Mean- 
while the Jesuit property in the Peninsula had been turned over 
to Franciscan monks, but in 1772 the Dominicans took over the 
missions, and the Franciscans not unwillingly withdrew to Upper 
California, where they were to thrive remarkably for some fifty 
years. 

This is the mission period — or from an economic standpoint. 



CALIFORNIA 



17 



the pastoral period — of Californian history. In all, twenty-one 
missions were established between 1 769 and 1823. The 
otthe 1 * leader in this movement was a really remarkable man, 
missions. Miguel Jose Serra (known as Junipero Serra, 1713- 
1784), a friar of very great ability, purest piety, and 
tireless zeal. He possessed great influence in Mexico and Madrid. 
" The theory of the mission system," says H. H. Bancroft, " was 
to make the savages work out their own salvation and that of 
the priests also." The last phrase scarcely does justice to the 
truly humane and devout intentions of the missionaries; but- in 
truth the mission system was a complete failure save in the 
accumulation of material wealth. Economically the missions 
were the blood and life of the province. At them the neophytes 
worked up wool, tanned hides, prepared tallow, cultivated hemp 
and wheat, raised a few oranges, made soap, some iron and 
leather articles, mission furniture, and a very little wine and olive 
oil. Such as it was, this was about the only manufacturing or 
handicraft in California. Besides, the hides and tallow yielded 
by the great herds of cattle at the missions were the support of 
foreign trade and did much toward paying the expenses of the 
government. The Franciscans had no sympathy for profane 
knowledge, even among the Mexicans, — sometimes publicly 
burning quantities of books of a scientific or miscellaneous 
nature; and the reading of Fenelon's Tilimaque brought ex- 
communication on a layman. As for the intellectual develop- 
ment of the neophytes the mission system accomplished nothing; 
save the care of their souls they received no instruction, they 
were virtually slaves, and were trained into a fatal dependence, 
so that once coercion was removed they relapsed at once into 
barbarism. It cannot be said, however, that Anglo-Americans 
have done much better for them. 

The political upheavals in Spain and Mexico following 1808 
made little stir in this far-off province. Joseph was never 
recognized, and allegiance was sworn to Ferdinand (1809). 
When revolution broke out in Mexico (1811), California remained 
loyal, suffering much by the cessation of supplies from Mexico, 
the resulting deficits falling as an added burden upon the missions. 
The occupation of Monterey for a few hours by a Buenos Aires 
privateer (1818) was the only incident of actual war that Cali- 
fornia saw in all these years; and it, in truth, was a ridiculous 
episode, fit introduction to the bloodless play-wars, soon to be 
inaugurated in Californian politics. In 1820 the Spanish coif- 
stitution was duly sworn to in California, and in 1822 allegiance 
was given to Mexico. Under the Mexican Federal constitution 
of 1824 Upper California, first alone (it was made a distinct 
province in 1804) and then with Lower California, received 
representation in the Mexican congress. 

The following years before American occupation may be divided 
into two periods of quite distinct interest. From about 1840 to 
1848 foreign relations are the centre of interest. From 1824 to 
1840 there is a complicated and not uninteresting movement of 
local politics and a preparation for the future, — the missions fall, 
republicanism grows, the sentiment of local patriotism becomes a 
political force, there is a succession of sectional controversies and 
personal struggles among provincial chiefs, an increase of foreign 
commerce, of foreign immigration and of foreign influence. 

The Franciscans were mostly Spaniards in blood and in 
sympathies. They viewed with displeasure and foreboding the 
fall of Iturbide's empire and the creation of the republic. They 
were not treasonable, but talked much, refusing allegiance to 
the new government; and as they controlled the resources of 
th? colony and the good will of the Indians, they felt their 
strength against the local authority; besides, they were its 
constant benefactors. But secularization was in harmony with 
the growth of republican ideas. There was talk in California of 
the rights of man and neophytes, and of the sins of friars. The 
missions were never intended to be permanent. The mission- 
aries were only the field workers sent out to convert and civilize 
the Indians, who were to be turned over then to the regular 
clergy, the monks pushing further onward into new fields. This 
was the well-established policy of Spain. In 1813 the Spanish 
Cortes ordered the secularization of all missions in America that 



were ten years old, but this decree was not published in California 
until 182 1. After that secularization was the burning question 
in Californian politics. In 1826 a beginning toward it was made 
in partially emancipating the neophytes, but active and thorough 
secularization of the missions did not begin until 1834; by 1835 
it was consummated at sixteen missions out of twenty-one, and 
by 1840 at all. At some of the missions the monks acted later 
as temporary curates for the civil authorities, until in 1845-1846 
all the missions were sold by the government. Unfortunately 
the manner of carrying it out discredited a policy neither unjust 
nor bad in itself, increasing its importance in the political 
struggles of the time. The friars were in no way mistreated: 
Californians did not share Mexican resentments against Spaniards, 
and the national laws directed against these were in the main 
quietly ignored in the province. In 1831 the mission question 
led to a rising against the reactionary clerical rule of Governor 
Manuel Victoria. He was driven out of the province. 

This was the first of the opera bouffe wars. The causes 
underlying them were serious enough. In the first place, there 
was a growing dissatisfaction with Mexican rule, which accom- 
plished nothing tangible for good in California, — although its 
plans were as excellent as could be asked had there only been 
peace and means to realize them; however, it made the mistake 
of sending convicts as soldiers. Californians were enthusiastic 
republicans, but found the benefits of republicanism slow in 
coming. The resentment of the Franciscans, the presence of 
these and other reactionaries and of Spaniards, the attitude of 
foreign residents, and the ambitions of leading Californian 
families united to foment and propagate discontent. The 
feeling against Mexicans — those " de la otra banda " as they 
were significantly termed— invaded political and even social 
life. In the second place, there was growing jealousy between 
northern towns and southern towns, northern families and 
southern families. These entered into disputes over the location 
of the capital and the custom-house, in the Franciscan question 
also (because the friars came some from a northern and some 
from a southern college) , and in the question of the distribution 
of commands in the army and offices in the civil government. 
Then there was the mission question; this became acuter about 
1833 when the friars began to destroy, or sell and realize on, the 
mission property. The next decade was one of plunder and ruin 
in mission history. Finally there was a real growth of republic- 
anism, and some rulers — notably Victoria — were wholly out of 
sympathy with anything but personal, military rule. From all 
these causes sprang much unrest and considerable agitation. 1 

In 1 8 28- 1 8 29 there was a revolution of unpaid soldiers aided 
by natives, against alleged but not serious abuses, that really 
aimed at the establishment of an independent native government. 
In 1 83 1 Governor Victoria was deposed; in 1836 Governor 
Mariano Chico was frightened out of the province; in 1836 
Governor Nicolas Gutierrez and in 1 844-1 845 Governor Manuel 
Micheltorena were driven out of office. The leading natives 
headed this last rising. There was talk of independence, 
but sectional and personal jealousies could not be over- 
come. In all these wars there was not enough blood shed to 
discolour a sword. The rising of 1836 against Gutierrez seems 
to-day most interesting, for it was in part a protest against the 
growth of federalism in Mexico. California was even deferred 
to as (declared to be seems much too strong a statement) an 
Estado Libre y Soberano; and from 1836 to 1838, when the 
revolutionary governor, Juan B. Alvarado, was recognized by 
the Mexican government, which had again inclined to federalism 
and, besides, did not take the matter very seriously, the local 
government rested simply on local sentiment. The satisfaction 
of this ended all difficulties. 

By this time foreign influence was showing itself of importance. 
Foreign commerce, which of course was contraband, being 
contrary to all Spanish laws, was active by the begin- ^^ 

ning of the 19th century. It was greatly stimulated ^ m ign- 
during the Spanish-American revolutions (the Lima tlon. 
and Panama trade dating from about 1813), for, as the 
Californian authorities practically ignored the law. smuggling 



1 8 



CALIFORNIA 



was unnecessary; this was, indeed, much greater after 1822 
under the high duties (in 1836-1840 generally about 100%) of 
the Mexican tariffs. In the early 'forties some three-fourths of 
the imports, even at Monterey itself, are said to have paid no 
duties, being landed by agreement with the officials. Wholesale 
and retail trade flourished all along the coast in defiance of pro- 
hibitory laws. American trade was by far most important. The 
Boston traders — whose direct trade began in 1822, but the in- 
direct ventures long before that — were men of decided influence 
in California. The trade supplied almost all the clothing, 
merchandise and manufactures used in. the province; hides and 
furs were given in exchange. If foreign trade was not to be 
received, still less were foreign travellers, under the Spanish laws. 
However, the Russians came in 1805, and in 181 2 founded on 
Bodega Bay a post they held till 1841, whence they traded and 
hunted (even in San Francisco Bay) for furs. From the day of 
the earliest foreign commerce sailors and traders of divers 
nationalities began to settle in the province. In 1826 American 
hunters first crossed to the coast; in 1830 the Hudson's Bay 
Company began queries in northern California. By this time
the foreign element was considerable in number, and it doubled 
• in the next six years, although the true overland immigration from 
the United States began only about 1840. Asa class foreigners 
were respected, and they were influential beyond proportion to 
their numbers. They controlled commerce, and were more 
energetic, generally, than were the natives; many were natural- 
ized, held generous grants of land, and had married into Cali- 
fornian families, not excluding the most select and influential. 
Most prominent of Americans in the interior was John A. Sutter 
(1803-1880), who held a grant of eleven square leagues around 
the present site of Sacramento, whereon he built a fort. His 
position as a Mexican official, and the location of his fortified 
post on the border, commanding the interior country and lying 
on the route of the overland immigrants, made him of great im- 
portance in -the years preceding and immediately following 
American occupation; although he was a man of slight abilities 
and wasted his great opportunities. Other settlers in the 
coast towns were also of high standing and importance. In 
short, Americans were hospitably received and very well treated 
by the government and the people; despite some formalities 
and ostensible surveillance there was no oppression whatever. 
There was, however, some jealousy of the ease with which 
Americans secured land grants, and an entirely just dislike of 
" bad " Americans. The sources from which all the immigrants 
were recruited made inevitable an element of lawlessness and 
truculence. The Americans happened to predominate. Along 
with a full share of border individuality and restlessness they 
had the usual boisterous boastfulness and a racial contempt, 
which was arrogantly proclaimed, for Mexicans, — often too for 
Mexican legal formalities. The early comers were a conservative 
American force in politics, but many of the later comers wanted 
and Euro- to make California a second, Texas. As early as 1805 
pean la- ( at j- ne ^j me { j ames Monroe's negotiations for 
Florida), there are traces of Spain's fear of American 
ambitions even in this far-away province. It was a fear she felt 
for all her American possessions. Spain's fears passed on to 
Mexico, the Russians being feared only less than Americans. An 
offer was made by President Jackson in 1835 to buy the northern 
part of California, including San Francisco Bay, but was refused. 
In 1836 and 1844 Americans were prominent in the incidents of 
revolution; divided in opinion in both years they were neutral 
in the actual " hostilities " of the latter, but some gave active 
support to the governor in 1836. From 1836 on, foreign inter- 
ference was much talked about. Americans supposed that 
Great Britain wished to exchange Mexican bonds for California; 
France also was thought to be watching for an opening for 
gratifying supposed ambitions; and all parties saw that even 
without overt act by the United States the progress of American 
settlement seemed likely to gain them the province, whose 
connexion with Mexico had long been a notoriously loose one. A 
considerable literature written by travellers of all the countries 
named had before this discussed all interests. In 1840 for too 



active interest in politics some Americans and Englishmen were 
temporarily expelled. 

In 1842 Commodore T. A. C. Jones (1789-1858) of the United 
States navy, believing that war had broken out between his 
country and Mexico and that a British force was about to seize 
California,raised the American flag over Monterey (October 21st), 
but finding that he had acted on misinformation he lowered the 
flag next day with due ceremony and warm apology. In Cali- 
fornia this incident served only to open up agreeable personal 
relations and social courtesies, but it did not tend to clarify the 
diplomatic atmosphere. It showed the ease of seizing the 
country, the indifference of the natives, and the resolution of the 
United States government. Mexico sought to prevent American 
immigration, but the local authorities would not enforce such 
orders, however positive. Between 1843 and 1845, Great 
Britain, the United States, and France opened consulates. By 
1845 there was certainly an agreement in opinion among all 
American residents (then not 700 in number) as regards the future 
of the country. The policy of France and Great Britain in these 
years is unknown. That of the United States is fully known. 
In 1845 the American consul at Monterey, Thomas O. Larkin 
(1802-1858), was instructed to work for the secession of California 
from Mexico, without overt aid from the United States, but with 
their good-will and sympathy. He very soon gained from leading 
officers assurances of such a movement before 1848. At the same 
time American naval officers were instructed to occupy the port* 
in case of war with Mexico, but first and last to work for the 
good-will of the natives. In 1845 Captain J. C. Fremont, — 
whose doings in California in the next two years were among the 
main assets in a life-long reputation and an unsuccessful presi- 
dential campaign, — while engaged in a government surveying 
expedition, aroused the apprehensions of the Californian 
authorities by suspicious and very possibly intentionally 
provocative movements, and there was a show of military force 
by both parties. Fremont had information beyond that of 
ordinary men that made him believe early hostilities between the 
United States and Mexico to be inevitable; he was also officially 
informed of Larkin's secret task and in no way authorized to 
hamper it. Resentment, however, incited him to personal 
revenge on the Californian government, and an ambition that 
clearly saw the gravity of the crisis prompted him to improve it 
unscrupulously for his own advancement, leaving his 
government to support or disavow him according as p/JL" *" 
war should come or not. In violation therefore of 
international amities, and practically in disobedience of orders, 
he broke the peace, caused a band of Mexican cavalry mounts 
to be seized, and prompted some American settlers to occupy 
Sonoma (14th June 1846). This episode is known as the " Bear 
Flag War," inasmuch as there was short-lived talk of making 
California an independent state, and a flag with a bear as an 
emblem (California is still popularly known as the Bear Flag 
State)flew for a few days at Sonoma. It was a very small, very 
disingenuous, inevitably an anomalous, and in the vanity of 
proclamations and other concomitant incidents rather a ridiculous 
affair; and fortunately for the dignity of history — and for 
Fremont— it was quickly merged in a larger question, when 
Commodore John Drake Sloat (1780-1867) on the 7th of July 
raised the flag of the United States over Monterey, proclaiming 
California a part of the United States. The opening hostilities 
of the Mexican War had occurred on the Rio Grande. The 
excuses and explanations later given by Fremont — military 
preparations by the Californian authorities , the imminence of their 
attack, ripening British schemes for the seizure of the province, 
etc. — made up the stock account of historians until the whole 
truth came out in 1886 (in Royce's California). Californians had 
been very friendly to Americans, but Larkin's intimates thought 
they had been tricked, and the people resented the stealthy and 
unprovoked breaking of peace, and unfortunately the Americans 
did not known how to treat them except inconsiderately and 
somewhat contemptuously. The result was a feeble rising in the 
south. The country was fully pacified by January 1847. The 
aftermath of Fremont's filibustering acts, followed as they were 



CALIFORNIA 



*9 



by wholly needless hostilities and by some injustice then and 
later in the attitude of Americans toward the natives, was a 
growing misunderstanding and estrangement, regrettable in 
Californian history. Thus there was an end to the " lotos-land 
society " of California. Another society, less hospitable, less 
happy, less contented, but also less mild, better tempered for 
building states, and more " progressive," took the place of 
the old. 

By the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848 Mexico ceded 
California to the United States. It was just at this time that 
California Sold was discovered, and the new territory took on 
ceded to great national importance. The discussion as to what 
the United snou id be done with it began in Congress in 1846, 
States. immediately involving the question of slavery. A 
furious conflict developed, so that nothing was accomplished in 
two successive sessions; even at the end of a third, in March 
1849, the only progress made toward creating a government for 
the territory was that the national revenue laws had been 
extended over it and San Francisco had been made a port of 
entry. Meanwhile conditions grew intolerable for the inhabit- 
ants. Before the end of the war Mexican laws not incompatible 
with United States laws were by international law supposed to 
be in force; but nobody knew what they were, and tie uncer- 
tainties of vague and variable alcalde jurisdictions were increased 
when Americans began to be alcaldes and grafted English 
common-law principles, like the jury, on Californian practice. 
Never was a population more in need of clear laws than the 
motley Californian people of 1848-1849, yet they had none when, 
with peace, military rule and Mexican law technically ended. 
There was a curious extra-legal fusion of laws, a half-breed legal 
system, and no definite basis for either law or government. Even 
the acts and theories of the officials were very inconsistent. 
Early in 1849 temporary local governments were set up in 
various towns, and in September a convention framed a free- 
state constitution and applied for admission to the Union. On 
the 7th of September 1850 a bill finally passed Congress admit- 
ting California as a free state. This was one of the bargains in 
the " Compromise • Measures of 1850" that were intended to 
dispose of the question of slavery in the Territories. Meanwhile 
the gold discoveries culminated and surpassed " three centuries 
of wild talk about gold in California." For three months there 
was little excitement, then a wild rush. Settlements were 
completely deserted; homes, farms and stores abandoned. 
Ships deserted by their sailors crowded the bay at San Francisco 
— there were 500 of them in July 1850; soldiers deserted whole- 
sale, churches were emptied, town councils ceased to sit, 
merchants, clerks, lawyers and judges and criminals, everybody, 
flocked to the foothills. Soon, from Hawaii, Oregon and Sonora, 
from the Eastern states, the South Seas, Australia, South America 

and China came an extraordinary flow of the hopeful 
Mr mid and adventurous. In the winter of '48 the rush began 

from the states to Panama, and in the spring across 
the plains. It is estimated that 80,000 men reached the coast 
in 1849, about half of them coming overland; three-fourths 
were Americans. Rapid settlement, excessive prices, reckless 
waste of money, and wild commercial ventures that glutted San 
Francisco with all objects usable and unusable made the following 
years astounding from an economic point of view; but not less 
bizarre was the social development, nor less extraordinary the 
'problems of state-building in a society " morally and socially 
tried as no other American community ever has been tried " 
(Royce). There was of course no home life in early California. 
In 1850 women numbered 8% of the population, but only 2% 
in the mining counties. The miners were an energetic, covetous, 
wandering, abnormally excitable body of men. Occasionally a 
kind of frenzy even would seem to seize on them, and lured by 
the. hope of new deposits of unheard-of richness thousands 
would flock on unfounded rumours to new and perhaps distant 
localities, where many might perish from disease and starvation, 
the rest returning in poverty and rags. Such were the Kern 
River fever of 1855 and the greater " Fraser River rush " of 
1858, the latter, which took perhaps 20,000 men out of the state, 



causing a terrible amount of suffering. Many interior towns 
lost half their population and some virtually all their population 
as a result of this emigration; and it precipitated a real estate 
crash in San Francisco that threatened temporary ruin. Mining 
times in California brought out some of the most ignoble and 
some of the best traits of American character. Professor Josiah 
Royce has pictured the social-moral process by which society 
finally impressed its " claims on wayward and blind individuals " 
who " sought wealth and not a social order," and so long as 
possible shirked all social obligations. Through varied instru- 
ments — lynch law, popular courts, vigilance committees— order 
was, however, enforced, better as times went on, until there was 
a stable condition of things. In the economic life and social 
character of California to-day the legacies of 1848 are plain. 

The slavery question was not settled for California in 1850. 
Until the Civil War the division between the Whig and Demo- 
cratic parties, whose organization in California preceded state- 
hood, was essentially based on slavery. The struggle fused with 
the personal contests of two men, rivals for the United States 
Senate, William McKendree Gwin (1805-85, U.S. senator, 
l8 5°-55 and 1857-61), the leader of the pro-slavery party, and 
David Colbreth Broderick (1819-1859), formerly a leader of 
Tammany in New York, and after 1857 a member from California 
of the United States Senate, the champion of free labour, who 
declared in i860 for the policy of the Republican party. 
Broderick's undoing was resolved upon by the slavery party, 
and he was killed in a duel. The Gwin party hoped to divide 
California into two states and hand the southern over to slavery; 
on the eve of the Civil War it considered the scheme of a Pacific 
coast republic. The decade 1850-1860 was also marked by the 
activity of filibusters against Sonora and Central America. Two 
of these — a French adventurer, one Gaston Raoux, comte de 
Raousset-Boulbon (1817-1854), and William Walker, had very 
picturesque careers. The state was thoroughly loyal when war 
came. The later 'fifties are characterized by H.H.Bancroft as 
a period of " moral, political and financial night." National 
politics were put first, to the complete ignoring of excessive 
taxation, financial extravagance, ignorant legislation and 
corruption in California. The public was exploited for many 
years with impunity for the benefit of private interests. One 
legacy that ought to be briefly noted here is that of 
disputed land grants. Under the Mexican regime such ^5"'' 
grants were generous and common, and the complicated grant*. 
'formalities theoretically essential to their validity 
were very often, if not usually, only in part attended to. Titles 
thus gained would never have been questioned under continued 
Mexican government, but Americans were unaccustomed to such 
riches in land and to such laxity. From the very first hundreds 
" squatted " on large claims, contesting the title. Instead of 
confirming all claims existing when the country passed to the 
United States, and so ensuring an immediate settlement of the 
matter, which was really the most important thing for the peace 
and purse of the community, the United States government 
undertook through a land commission and courts to sift the 
valid from the fraudulent. Claims of enormous aggregate value 
were thus considered and a large part of those dating from the 
last years of Mexican dominion (many probably artfully con- 
cocted and fraudulently antedated after the commission was at 
work) were finally rejected. This litigation filled the state and 
federal courts for many years. The high value of realty in 
San Francisco naturally offered extraordinary inducements to 
fraud, and the largest part of the city was for years involved in 
fraudulent claims, and its peace broken by " squatter "-troubles. 
Twenty or thirty years of the state's life were disturbed by these 
controversies. Land monopoly is an evil of large proportions 
in California to-day, but it is due to the laxness of the United 
States government in enabling speculators to accumulate holdings 
and not to the original extent of Mexican grants. 

In state gubernatorial elections after the Civil War the 
Democrats won in 1867, 1875,1882, 1886, 1894; the Republicans 
ini87i, 1879, 1890, 1898, 1902, 1906, 1910. Features of political 
life and of legislation after 1876 were a strong labour agitation, 



20 



CALIFORNIA 



the struggle for the exclusion of the Chinese, for the control of 
hydraulic mining, irrigation, and the advancement by state-aid 
of the fruit interests; the last three of which have already been 
referred to above. Labour conditions were peculiar in the 
decade following 1870. Mining, war times and the building of 
the Central Pacific had up to then inflated prices and prosperity. 
Then there came a slump; probably the truth was rather that 
money was becoming less unnaturally abundant than that there 
was any over-supply of labour. The turning off of some 1 5,000 
Chinese (principally in 1869-18 70) from the Central Pacific lines 
who flocked to San Francisco, augmented the discontent of 
incompetents, of disappointed late immigrants, and the reaction 
from flush times. Labour unions became strong and demon- 
strative. In 1877-1878 Denis Kearney (1847-1907), an Irish 
drayman and demagogue of considerable force and daring, 
headed the discontented. This is called the " sand-lots agita- 
tion " from the favourite meeting-place (in San Francisco) of 
the agitators. 

The outcome of these years was the Constitution of 1879, 
already described, and the exclusion of Chinese by national law. 
In 1879 California voted against further immigration of Chinese 
by 154,638 to 883. Congress re-enacted exclusion legislation in 
1-962. All authorities agree that the Chinese in early years were 
often abused in the mining country and their rights most un- 
justly neglected by the law and its officers. Men among the 
most respected in California (Joaquin Miller, H. H. Bancroft 
and others) have said most in praise and defence of the Chinaman. 
From railroad making to cooking he has proved his abilities 
and trustworthiness. He is found to-day in the mines and 
fisheries, in various lines of manufacture, in small farming, and 
in all branches of domestic service. The question of the economic 
development of the state, and of trade to the Orient, the views 
of the mercenary labour-contractor and of the philanthropist, 
the factor of " upper-race " repugnance, the " economic-leech" 
argument, the " rat-rice-filth-and-opium " argument, have all 
entered into the problem. Certain it is that though the unpre- 
judiced must admit that exclusion has not been at all an unmixed 
blessing, yet the consensus of opinion is that a large population, 
non-citizen and non-assimilable, sending — it is said— most of 
their earnings to China, living in the main meanly at best, and 
practically without wives, children or homes, is socially and 
economically a menace 'outweighing the undoubted convenience 
of cheaper (and frequently more trustworthy) menial labour 
than the other population affords. The exclusion had much to 
do with making the huge single crop ranches unprofitable and in 
leading to their replacement by small farms and varied crops. 
Many of the Chinese now in the state are wealthy. Race feeling 
against them has become much less marked. 
: One outcome of early mission history, the " Pious Fund of 
the Californias," claimed in 1902 the attention of the Hague 
Tribunal. (See Arbitration, International, Hague cases 
section.) In 1906- 1 907 ; there was throughout the state a re- 
markable anti-Japanese agitation, centring in San Francisco 
(q.v.) and affecting international relations and national politics. 

Governors of California (State) 1 
I. Spanish 

served 1767-1770 
1771-1774 



Gasper de Portola 

Filipe de Barri 

Felipe de Neve 

Pedro rages 

Jose Antonio Romeu 
'Jose Joaquin de Arillaga 

Diego de Borica . 
*J6se Joaquin de Arillaga 

Jose Joaquin de Arillaga 
*Jose Diario Arguello 

Pablo Vicente de Sola . 



1774-1782 
1782-1791 
1791-1792 

1 792-1 794 
1 794-1 800 
1800-1804 
1804-18 14 
1814-1815 
1815-1822 



1 As months and even years often elapsed between the date when 
early governors were appointed and the beginning of their actual 
service, the date of commission is disregarded, and the date of 
service given. Sometimes this is to be regarded as beginning at 
Monterey, sometimes elsewhere in California, sometimes at Loreto 
in LoWer California, All the Spanish and Mexican governors were 
appointed by the national government, except in the case of the 



Pablo Vicente de Sola 
*Luis Antonio Arguello 

Jos6 Maria Echeandia 

Manuel Victoria 

Jose Maria Echeandia 2 

Pio Pico 8 . 

Jose Figueroa 
*Jose Castro . 
*Nicolas Gutierrez 

Mariano Chico 

Nicolas Gutierrez 

Juan Bautista Alvarado * 

Carlos Antonio Carrillo 6 

Manuel Micheltorena . 

Pio Pico . 



II. Mexican 



John D. Sloat 
Richard F. Stockton 
Stephen W. Kearny 
R. B. Mason 
Bennett Riley 

Peter H. Burnett . 

*John H. McDpugall 
John Bigler 
John M. Johnson . 
John B. Weller 
Milton S. Latham 

*John G. Downey . 
Leland Stanford . 
Frederick F. Low 
Henry H. Haight . 
Newton Booth 

*Romualdo Pacheco 
William Irwin 
George G. Perkins 
George C. Stoneman 
Washington Bartlett 

*Robert W. Waterman 
Henry H. Markham 
James H. Budd 
Henry T. Gage 
George C. Pardee 
James N. Gillett . 
Hiram W. Johnson 



III. American 
(a) Military. 



served 1822 

1822-1825 

1825-1831 

1831 

1831-1832 

1832 

1832-1835 

1 835-1 836 

1836 

1836 

1836 

1 836-1 842 

1837-1838 

1842-1845 

1 845-1 846 



appointed 1846 

„ 1846-1847 



(b) State. 
1849-1851 
1851-1852 
1852-1856 
I 856-1 858 
1858-1860 
i860 (6 days) 

1860-1862 
I 862-1 863 
1 863-1 867 
1867-1871 
1871-1875 

1875 

1875-1880 

1 880-1 883 

1 883-1 887 

1887 

1887-1891 

1891-1895 

1 895-1 899 

1899-1903 

1903-1907 

1907-1911 



1847 

1 847-1 849 

1849 



Democrat 



Know Nothing 
Lecompton Democrat 



Republican 

Democrat 
Republican 

Democrat 

Republican 

Democrat 

>» 
Republican 

Democrat 
Republican 



1911- 

The mark * before the name of one of the Spanish governors 
indicates that he acted only ad interim, and, in the case of governors 
since 1849, that the officer named was elected as lieutenant-governor 
and succeeded to the office of governor. 

Bibliography. — For list of works on California, see University 
of California Library Bulletin, No. 9, 1887, " List of Printed Maps 
of California"; catalogue of state official publications by State 
Library (Sacramento, 1894). The following may be cited here on 
different aspects: — 

Topography. — J. Muir, Mountains of California (New York, 
1894) ; H. Gannett, " Dictionary of Elevations " (1898), and " River 
Profiles," publications of United States Geological Survey; G. W- 
James, The Wonders of the Colorado Desert (2 vols., Boston, 1966). 

Climate, &c.' — U.S. Department of Agriculture, California 
Climate and Crop Service, monthly reports; E. S. Holden, Recorded 
Earthquakes in California, Lower California, Oregon, and Washington 
Territory (California State University, 1887) ; United States Depart-, 
ment Agriculture, Weather Bureau, Bulletins, Alexander G. McAdie, 
"Climatology of California " (Washington, 1903). There is a 
great mass of general descriptive literature, especially on South- 
ern California, such as Charles Dudley Warner, Our Italy (New York, 
1891); Kate Sanborn, A Truthful Woman in Southern California 
(New York, 1893); W. Lindley and J. P. Widney, California of the 
South (New York, 1896) ; J. W. Hanson, American Italy (Chicago, 
1896) ; T. S. Van Dyke, Southern California (New York, 1886), &c. 

Fauna, Flora. — Muir, op. cit.\ United States Geological Survey, 
19th Annual Report, pt. v., H. Gannett, " Forests of the United 
States"; idem, 20th Annual Report, pt. v., " United States Forest 
Reserves"; United States Division of Forestry, Bulletin No. 28, 
" A Short Account of the Big Trees of California " (1900), No. 38, 
" The Redwood " (a volume, 1903), also Professional Papers, e.g. 
No. 8, J. B. Leiberg, " Forest Conditions in the Northern Sierra 
Nevada " (1902) ; California Board of Forestry, Reports (1885— ); 

semi-revolutionary rulers of 1831-1832 and 1836 (Alvarado), whose 
title rested on revolution, or on local choice under a national statute 
regarding gubernatorial vacancies. 

2 Acting political chief, revolutionary title. 

8 Briefly recognized in South. ' 

4 Revolutionary title, 1836-1838. 

6 Appointed 1837, never recognized in the North. 



CALIFORNIA, LOWER 



2, 1 



United States Censuses, reports on forests; United States Biological 
Survey, North American Fauna, No. 16, 1899, C. H. Merriam, 
" Biological Survey of Mt. Shasta "■; United States Department 
Agriculture, Contributions from United States National Herbarium, 
iv., 1893, F. V. Coville, Botany of Death Valley Expedition"; 
State Board of Fish Commissioners, Reports, from 1877; United 
States Fish Commissioners, Annual Reports, from 187 1, and Bulletins 
from 1882; J. le Conte, " Flora of the Coast Islands " (1887), being 
Bulletin No. 8 of California Academy of Sciences; consult also its 
Proceedings, Memoirs, and Occasional Papers; G. J. Peirce, Studies 
on the Coast Redwood (publication of Leland Stanford jr. University, 

Agriculture. — California Agricultural Experiment Station, 
Bulletins from 1884; Reports of the State Dairy Bureau, from 1898; 
State Board of Horticulture, Reports, 1 889-1 894; United States 
Censuses, 1890 and 1900, reports on irrigation. 

Industries.— J. S. Hittell, Resources of California (7th ed., 
San Francisco, 1879); J. S. Hittell, Commerce and Industries of the 
Pacific Coast (San Francisco, 1882) ; T. F. Cronise, Natural Wealth 
of California (San Francisco, 1868); E. W. Maslin, Resources of 
California, prepared by order of Governor H. H. Markham (Sacra- 
mento, 1893); United States Treasury, Bureau of Statistics, report 
by T. J. Vivian on " Commercial, Industrial, Agricultural, Trans- 
portation and Other Industries of California " (Washington 1890, 
valuable for whole period before 1890); United States Censuses, 
1890 and 1900, reports on agriculture, manufactures, mines and 
fisheries; California Stale Board of Trade (San Francisco), Annual 
Report from 1890. On Mineral Industries: — J. R. Browne, Report 
on " Mineral Resources of the States and Territories west of the 
Rocky Mountains" {United States Treasury, 2 vols., Washington, 
1867-1868); United States Geological Survey, Annual Reports, 
Mineral Resources; consult also the bibliographies of publications 
of the Survey, issued as Bulletins; California State Mining Bureau, 
Bulletins from 1888, note especially No. 30, 1904, by A. W. Vodges, 
" Bibliography relating to the Geology, Palaeontology and Mineral 
Resources of California" (2nd ed., the 1st being Bulletin No. 10, 
1896); California Debris Commission, Reports (in Annual Reports 
Chief of Engineers, United States Army, from 1893). 

Government. — E. F. Treadwell, The Constitution of the State of 
California . . . Annotated (San Francisco, 1902) ; Johns Hopkins 
University, Studies in History and Political Science, xiii., R. D. Hunt, 
"Genesis of California's First Constitution"; Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science, xii., R. D. Hunt, 
" Legal Status of California, 1846-1849 "; Reports of the various 
officers, departments and administrative boards of the state govern- 
ment (Sacramento), and also the Appendix to the Journals of the 
Senate and Assembly, which contains, especially in the earlier decades 
of the state's history, many of these state official reports along 
with valuable legislative reports of varied character. 

History. — Accounts of the valuable archives in Bancroft, and by 
Z. E. Eldridge in California Genealogical Society (1901); elaborate 
bibliographies in Bancroft with analyses and appreciations of many 
works. Of general scope and fundamental importance is the work 
of two men, Hubert H. Bancroft and Theodore H. Hittell. The 
former has published a History of California, 1542-1890 (7 vols., 
San Francisco, 1 884-1 890), also California Pastoral, 1769-1848 
(San Francisco, 1888), California Inter-Pocula, 1848-1856 (San 
Francisco, 1888), and Popular Tribunals (2 vols., San Francisco, 
1887). These volumes were largely written under Mr. Bancroft's 
direction and control by an office staff, and are of very unequal 
value; they are a vast storehouse of detailed material which is of 
great usefulness, although their judgments of men are often in- 
adequate and prejudiced. As regards events the histories are of 
substantial accuracy and adequacy. Written by one hand and 
more uniform in treatment and good judgment, is T. H. Hittell's 
History of California (4 vols., San Francisco, 1 885-1 897). The older 
historian of the state was Francisco Palou, a Franciscan, the friend 
and biographer of Serra; his " Noticias de la Nueva California " 
(Mexico, 1857, in the Doc. Hist. Mex., ser. iv., torn, vi.-viii. ; also 
San Francisco, 1874, 4 vols.) is no longer of importance save for its 
historical interest. Of the contemporary material on the period 
of Mexican domination the best is afforded by R. H. Dana's Two 
Years Before the Mast (New York, 1840, many later and foreign 
editions'}; also A. Robinson, Life in California (New York, 1846); 
and Alexander Forbes, California: A History of Upper and Lower 
California from their First Discovery to the Present Time (London, 
1839) ; see also F. W. Blackmar, " Spanish Institutions of the 
Southwest " {Johns Hopkins University Studies, 1891). A beautiful, 
vivid and reputedly very accurate picture of the old society is 
given in Helen Hunt Jackson's novel, Ramona (New York, 1884). 
There is no really scientific separate account of mission history ; 
there are books by Father Z. Engelhart, The Franciscans in California 
(Harbor Springs, Michigan, 1899), written entirely from a Franciscan 
standpoint ; C. F. Carter, Missions of Nueva California (San Fran- 
cisco, 1900); Bryan J. Clinch, California and its Missions: Their 
History to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (2 vols., San Francisco, 
1904) ; Francisco Palou, Relacion Historica de la Vida. . . . del Fray 
Junipero Serra (Mexico, 1787), the standard contemporary source; 
the Craftsman (Syracuse, N. Y., vol. v.), a series of articles on 
" Mission Buildings," by G. W. James. On the case of the Pious 



Fund of the missions see J. F. Doyle, History of the Pious Fund 
(San Francisco, 1887); United States Department of State," United 
States v. Mexico. Report of J. H. Ralston, agent of the United 
States and of counsel in the matter of the Pious Fund of the Cali- 
fornias " (Washington, 1902). On the " flush " mining years the 
best books of the time are J. Q. Thornton's Oregon and California 
(2 vols., New York, 1849); Edward Bryant's What I Saw in Cali- 
fornia (New York, 1848) ; W. Shaw's Golden Dreams (London, 1851) ; 
Bayard Taylor's Eldorado (2 vols., New York, 1850); W. Colton's 
Three Years in California (New York, 1850); E. G. Buffum's Six 
Months in the Gold Mines; from a Journal of Three Years' Residence 
in Upper and Lower California (London, 1850); J. T. Brooks' 
Four Months among the Gold Finders (London, 1849) ; G. G. Foster, 
Gold Regions of California (New York, 1884). On this same period 
consult Bancroft's Popular Tribunals; D. Y. Thomas, " A History 
of Military Government in Newly Acquired Territory of the United 
States," in vol. xx. No. 2 (New York, 1904) of Columbia University 
Studies in History, Economics, and Public Law; C. H. Shinn's 
Mining Camps: A Study in American Frontier Government {New 
York, 1885); J. Royce, California . . .A Study of American Char- 
acter, 1846-1856 (Boston, 1886) ; and, for varied pictures of mining 
and frontier life, the novels and sketches and poems of Bret Harte. 
See also P. H. Burnet, Recollections and Opinions of an Old Pioneer 
(New York, 1880); S. J. Field, Personal Reminiscences of Early 
Days in California (privately published, copyright 1893). , ; 

• CALIFORNIA, LOWER (Baja California), a long narrow 
peninsula between the Gulf of California and the Pacific Ocean, 
forming a territory of the republic of Mexico. Pop. (1895), 
42,245; (1900) 47,624. Lower California is a southward ex- 
tension of the State of California, United States, and is touched 
by only one of the Mexican states, that of Sonora on the E. The 
peninsula is about 760 m. long and from 30 to 150 m. wideband 
has an area of 58,328 sq m. It is traversed throughout its en,tire 
length by an irregular range of barren mountains, which slopes 
toward the Pacific in a succession of low hills, but breaks down 
abruptly toward the Gulf. The coast has two or three good 
sheltered bays, that of La Paz on the Gulf side and of Magda- 
lena on the Pacific side being best known. The coast is bordered 
by numerous islands, especially on the eastern side. The general 
appearance of the surface is arid and desolate, partly because of 
the volcanic remains, and partly because of the scanty rainfall, 
which is insufficient to support vegetation other than that of the 
desert except in the deeper mountain valleys. The northern 
part is hot and dry, like southern California, but the southern 
part receives more rain and has some fertile tracts, with a mild 
and pleasant climate. The principal natural product in this 
region is orchil, or Spanish, moss, but by means of irrigation the 
soil produces a considerable variety of products, including sugar 
cane, cotton, cassava, cereals, tobacco and grapes. Horses, 
sheep and cattle are raised in the fertile valleys, but only to a 
limited extent. The territory is rich in minerals, among which 
are gold, silver, copper, lead, gypsum, coal and salt. The silver 
mines near La Paz were worked by the Jesuits, as early as 1 700. 
There are also extensive pearl fisheries in the Gulf, La Paz being 
the headquarters of the industry, and whale fisheries on the W. 
coast in the vicinity of Magdalena Bay. The- development of 
mining and other industries in the territory has led to an exten- 
sion of the California railway system southwardinto thepeninsula, 
with the Mexican government's permission, the first section of 
37 m. from the northern frontier being completed and opened to 
traffic in 1907. The territory is divided into two districts, the 
northern having its capital at the insignificant little village of La 
Ensenada, on Todos Santos Bay, and the southern having its 
capital at La Paz, at the head of a deep bay opening into the Gulf. 
La Paz is a port of call for steamships running between Mazatlan 
and San Francisco, and had a population of 5056 in 1900. La 
Ensenada (pop. in 1906, about 1500), 65 m. by sea S. of San 
Diego, Cal., is the only port for the northern part of the territory, 
and supplies a district extending 2 50 m. along the coast and 60 m. 
inland, including the mining camps of the north; it manufactures 
and exports flour and leather. 

By orders of Cortes the coast of Lower California was explored 
in 1539 by Francisco de Ulloa, but no settlement resulted. It 
was called California, the name (according to E. E. Hale) being 
derived from a popular Spanish romance of that time, entitled 
Sergas de Esplandian, in which an island named California was 
mentioned and situated " on the right hand of the Indies, very 



22 



CALIFORNIA, UNIVERSITY OF 



near the terrestrial paradise." The name must have been given 
derisively, as the barren coasts of Lower California could not 
have suggested the proximity of a " terrestrial paradise." The 
exploration of the coast did not extend above the peninsula 
until 1842. The name California was at first applied exclusively 
to the peninsula; later, on the supposition that a strait con- 
nected the Pacific with the head of the Gulf of California, the 
name Islas Californias was frequently used. This erroneous 
theory was held as late as 1721. The first settlement was made 
in 1 597, but was abandoned. From 1633 to 1683 five unsuccessful 
attempts were made to establish a settlement at La Paz. Finally 
the Jesuits succeeded in founding a mission at Loreto on the 
Gulf coast, in about 26° "N. lat., in 1697, and at La Paz in 1720. 
At the time of their expulsion (1767) they had sixteen missions 
which were either self-supporting or were maintained by funds 
invested for that special purpose. The settlement of Upper 
California began in 1769, after which the two provinces were 
distinguished as California Baja or Antigua, and California Alta, 
the seat of government remaining in the former for a short time. 
The two provinces were separated in 1804, were united under one 
governor residing in California Alta in 1825, and were then re- 
united in a single department through the political changes of 
1836, which lasted no later than 1847. Lower California was 
only slightly disturbed by the struggle for independence among 
the Spanish-American colonies, but in 1822 Admiral Lord 
Cochrane, who was in the service of the Chilean revolutionists, 
appeared on the coast and plundered San Jose del Cabo, Todos 
Santos and Loreto. In the war between Mexico and the United 
States La Paz and other coast towns were occupied by small 
detachments from California. In 1853 a filibustering expedition 
against Sonora under William Walker took possession of La Paz 
and proclaimed a republic consisting of Sonora and the peninsula. 
Fearing an attack from the mainland, the filibusters first with- 
drew to La Ensenada, near the American frontier, and then in 
the following year broke up altogether during an attempt to 
invade Sonora by land. A revolution under the leadership of 
Marquez de Leon in 1879 met with some temporary success, but 
died for want of material support in 1880. The development 
of mining and other industries since that time, together with 
vigorous efforts to found colonies in the more favoured localities, 
have greatly improved the situation in the territory. 

See the two volumes of H. H. Bancroft's North Mexican States and 
Texas, lettered vols. 15 and 16 of his Works-, also Arthur Walbridge 
North, The Mother of California (San Francisco, 1908). 

CALIFORNIA, UNIVERSITY OF, one of the largest and most 
important of state universities in America, situated at Berkeley, 
California, on the E. shore of San Francisco Bay. It took the place 
of the College of California (founded in 1855), received Cali- 
fornia's portion of the Federal land grant of 1862, was chartered 
as a state institution by the legislature in 1868, and opened its 
doors in 1869 at Oakland. In 1873 it was removed to its present 
site. In the revised state constitution of 1879 provision is 
made for it as the head of the state's educational system. The 
grounds at Berkeley cover 270 acres on the lower slopes (299-900 
ft.) of the Berkeley Hills, which rise 1000 ft. or more above the 
university; the view over the bay to San Francisco and the 
Golden Gate is superb. In recent years new and better buildings 
have gradually been provided. In 1896 an international archi- 
tectural competition was opened at the expense of Mrs Phoebe R. 
Hearst (made a regent of the university in 1898) for plans for a 
group of buildings harmonizing with the university's beautiful 
site, and ignoring all buildings already existing. The first 
prize was awarded in 1899 to Emile Benard, of Paris. The 
first building begun under the new plans was that for the 
college of mines (the gift of Mrs Hearst), completed in 1907, 
providing worthily for the important school of mining, from 
1885 directed by Prof. S. B. Christy (b. 1853); California Hall, 
built by state appropriation, had been completed in 1906. The 
Greek theatre (1903), an open-air auditorium seating 7500 
spectators, on a hill-side in a grove of towering eucalypts, was 
the gift of William Randolph Hearst; this has been used 
regularly for concerts by the university's symphony orchestra, 



under tjie professor of music, John Frederick Wolle (b. 1S63), 
who originated the Bach. Festivals at Bethlehem, Pa.; free 
public concerts are given on Sunday afternoons; and there 
have been some remarkable dramatic performances here, notably 
Sudraka's Mricchakattika in English, and Aeschylus's Eumenides 
in Greek, in April 1907. There are no dormitories. Student 
self-government works through the " Undergraduate Students' 
Affairs Committee " of the Associated Students. The faculty of 
the university has its own social club, with a handsome building 
on the grounds. At Berkeley is carried on the work in the 
colleges of letters, social sciences, natural sciences, commerce, 
agriculture, mechanical, mining and civil engineering, and 
chemistry, and the first two years' course of the college of 
medicine — the Toland Medical College having been absorbed by 
the university in 1873; at Mount Hamilton, the work of the 
Lick astronomical department; and in San Francisco, that of 
dentistry (1888), pharmacy, law, art, and the concluding (post 
graduate or clinical) years of the medical course — the San 
Francisco Polyclinic having become a part of the university in 
1892. Three of the San Francisco departments occupy a group 
of three handsome buildings in the western part of the city, 
overlooking Golden Gate Park. The Lick astronomical depart- 
ment (Lick Observatory) on Mount Hamilton, near San Jose, 
occupies a site covering 2777 acres. It was founded in 1875 by 
James Lick of San Francisco, and was endowed by him with 
$700,000, $610,000 of this being used for the original buildings 
and equipments, which were formally transferred to the uni- 
versity in 1888. The art department (San Francisco Institute 
of art) was until 1 906 housed in the former home of Mark Hopkins, 
a San Francisco " railroad king "; it dated from 1893, under 
the name " Mark Hopkins Institute of Art." The building was 
destroyed in the San Francisco conflagration of 1906; but under 
its present name the department resumed work in 1907 on the 
old site. At the university farm, of nearly 750 acres, at Davis- 
ville, Yolo county, instruction is given in practical agriculture, 
horticulture, dairying, &c; courses in irrigation are given at 
Berkeley; a laboratory of plant pathology, established in 1907 
at Whittier, Riverside county, and an experiment station on 
20 acres of land near Riverside, are for the study of plant and 
tree diseases and pests and of their remedies. A marine biologi- 
cal laboratory is maintained at La Jolla, near San Diego, and 
another, the Hertzstein Research Laboratory, at New Monterey; 
the Rudolph Spreckels Physiological Laboratory is in Berkeley. 
The university has excellent anthropological and archaeological 
collections, mostly made by university expeditions, endowed by 
Mrs Hearst, to Peru and to Egypt. In 1907 the university 
library contained 160,000 volumes, ranking, after the destruction 
of most of the San Francisco libraries in 1906, as the largest 
collection in the vicinity. The building of the Doe library 
(given by the will of Charles Franklin Doe), for the housing of 
the university library, was begun in 1907. The university has 
also the valuable Bancroft collection of 50,000 volumes and 
countless pamphlets and manuscripts, dealing principally with 
the history of the Pacific Coast from Alaska through Central 
America, and of the Rocky Mountain region, including Montana, 
Utah, Wyoming, Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico and Western 
Texas. This collection (that of the historian Hubert Howe 
Bancroft) was acquired in 1905 for $250,000 (of which Mr 
Bancroft contributed $100,000), and was entrusted (1907) to the 
newly organized Academy of Pacific Coast History. The library 
of Karl Weinhold (1823-1901) of Berlin, which is especially rich 
in Germanic linguistics and " culture history," was presented to 
the university in 1903 by John D. Spreckels. The university 
publishes The University of California Chronicle, an official 
record; and there are important departmental publications, 
especially those in American archaeology and ethnology, edited 
by Frederic Ward Putnam (b. 1839), including the reports of 
various expeditions, maintained by Mrs Hearst; in physi- 
ology, edited by Jacques Loeb (b. 1859); in botany, edited 
by William Albert Setchell (b. 1864); in zoology, edited by 
William Emerson Ritter (b. 1859); and in astronomy, the 
publications of the Lick Observatory, edited by William Wallace 



CALIPASH— CALIPHATE 



23 



Campbell (b, 1862). In 1902, under the direction of Henry 
Morse Stephens (b. 1857), who then became professor of 
history, a department of university extension was organized; 
lecture courses, especially on history and literature, were de- 
livered in 1906-1907 at fifteen extension " centres," at most of 
which classes of study were formed. Annexes to the university, 
but having no corporate connexion with it, are the Berkeley 
Bible Seminary (Disciples of Christ), the Pacific Theological 
Seminary (Congregational), the Pacific Coast Baptist Seminary 
and a Unitarian school. 

The growth of the university has been extremely rapid. From 
1890 to 1900 the number of students increased fourfold. In 
the latter year the university of California was second to Harvard 
only in the number of academic graduate and undergraduate 
students, and fifth among the educational institutions of the 
country in total enrolment. In July 1907 there were 519 
officers in the faculties and 2987 students, of whom 226 were in 
the professional schools in San Francisco. In addition there 
were 707 students in the 1906 summer session, the total for 
1906-1907 thus being 3684; of this number 1506 were women. 
The university conferred 482 degrees in 1907, 546 in 1906, 470 in 
1905. The affairs of the university are administered by a board 
of twenty-three regents, seven state officials and heads of 
educational institutions, being members ex officio, and sixteen 
other members being appointed by the governor and senate of 
the state; its instruction is governed by the faculties of the 
different colleges, and an academic senate in which these are 
joined. The gross income from all sources for 1905-1906 was 
$1,564,190, of which about $800,000 was income from invest- 
ments, state and government grants, fees, &c, and the remainder 
was gifts and endowments. There is a permanent endowment of 
more than $3,000,000, partly from munificent private gifts, 
especially from Mrs Hearst and from Miss Cora Jean Flood. The 
financial support of the state has always been generous. No 
tuition fee is charged in the academic colleges to students 
resident in the state, and only $10.00 annually to students from 
without the state. The university maintains about 90 under- 
graduate scholarships, and 10 graduate scholarships and fellow- 
ships. All able-bodied male students are required to take the 
courses in military science, under instruction by an officer of the 
United States army detailed for the purpose. Physical culture 
and hygiene are prescribed for all men and women. A state law 
forbids the sale of liquor within one mile of the university 
grounds. To realize the ideal of the university as the head of the 
educational system of the state, a system of inspection of high 
schools has been developed, whereby schools reaching the pre- 
scribed standard are entitled to recommend their graduates for 
admission to the university without examination. It was 
anticipated at one time that the foundation of the Leland 
Stanford Junior University at Palo Alto would injure the state 
institution at Berkeley; but in practice this was not found to 
be the case; on the contrary, the competition resulted in giving 
new vigour and enterprise to the older university. Joseph Le 
Conte (professor from 1872 to 1901) and Daniel C. Gilman 
(president in 1872-1875) deserve mention among those formerly 
connected with the university. In 1899 Benjamin Ide Wheeler 
(b. 1854) became president. He had been a graduate (1875) 
of Brown University, and was professor first of comparative 
philology and then of Greek at Cornell University; his chief 
publications are Der griechische N ominalaccent (1885); Analogy, 
and the Scope of its Application in Language (1887) ; Principles of 
Language Growth (1891); The Organization of Higher Education 
in the United States (1897); Dionysos and Immortality (1899); 
and Life of Alexander the Great (1900). 

CALIPASH and CALIPEE (possibly connected with carapace, 
the upper shell of a turtle), the gelatinous substances in the upper 
and lower shells, respectively, of the turtle, the calipash being 
of a dull greenish and the calipee of a light yellow colour. 

CALIPH, Calif, or Khalif (Arab. khUlifa; the lengthening 
of the a is strictly incorrect), literally " successor," " repre- 
sentative," a title borne originally by Abu Bekr, who, on the 
death of Mahomet, became the civil and religious head of the 



Mahommedan state. In the same sense the term is used in the 
Koran of both Adam and David as the vicegerents of God. 
Abu Bekr and his three (or four) immediate successors are known 
as the " perfect " caliphs; after them the title was borne by the 
thirteen Omayyad caliphs of Damascus, and subsequently by 
the thirty-seven Abbasid caliphs of Bagdad whose dynasty fell 
before the Turks in 1258. By some rigid Moslems these rulers 
were regarded as only amirs, not caliphs. There were titular 
caliphs of Abbasid descent in Egypt from that date till 151 7 
when the last caliph was captured by Selim I. On the fall of the 
Omayyad dynasty at Damascus, the title was assumed by the 
Spanish branch of the family who ruled in Spain at Cordova 
(755-1031), and the Fatimite rulers of Egypt, who pretended 
to descent from Ali, and Fatima, Mahomet's daughter, also 
assumed the name (see Fatimites). 

According to the Shi'ite Moslems, who call the office the 
" imamate " or leadership, no caliph is legitimate unless he is 
a lineal descendant of the Prophet. The Sunnites insist that the 
office belongs to the tribe of Koreish (Quraish) to which Mahomet 
himself belonged, but this condition would vitiate the claim of 
the Turkish sultans, who have held the office since its trans- 
ference by the last caliph to Selim I. According to a tradition 
falsely ascribed to Mahomet, there can be but one caliph at a 
time; should a second be set up, he must be killed, for he "is 
a rebel." (See Mahommedan Institutions.) 

CALIPHATE. 1 The history of the Mahommedan rulers in the 
East who bore the title of caliph (q.v.) falls naturally into three 
main divisions: — (a) The first four caliphs, the immediate 
successors of Mahomet; (b) The Omayyad caliphs; (c) The 
Abbasid caliphs. To these three groups the present article is con- 
fined; for the Western caliphs, see Spain: History (and minor 
articles such as Almohades, Almoravides) ; for the Egyptian 
caliphs see Egypt: History (§ Mahommedan) and Fatimites. 
The history of Arabia proper will be found under Arabia : History, 

A.— The First Four Caliphs 

After the death of Mahomet the question arose who was to be 
his " representative." The choice lay with the community of 
Medina; so much was understood; but whom were they to 
choose? The natives of Medina believed themselves to be now 
once more masters in their own house, and wished to promote 
one of themselves. But the Emigrants (see Mahomet) asserted 
their opposing claims, and with success, having brought into 
the town a considerable number of outside Moslems, so as to 
terrorize the men of Medina, who besides were still divided into 
two parties. The Emigrants' leading spirit was Omar; he did 
not, however, cause homage to be paid to himself, but to Abu 
Bekr, the friend and father-in-law of the Prophet. 

The affair would not have gone on so smoothly, had not the 
opportune defection of the Arabians put a stop to the inward 
schism which threatened. Islam suddenly found itself once 
more limited to the community of Medina; only Mecca and 
Taif (Tayef) remained true. The Bedouins were willing enough 
to pray, indeed, but less willing to pay taxes; their defection, 
as might have been expected, was a political movement. 2 None 
the less was it a revolt from Islam, for here the political society 
and the religious are identical. A peculiar compliment to 
Mahomet was involved in the fact that the leaders of the rebellion 
in the various districts did not pose as princes and kings, but as 
prophets; in this appeared to He the secret of Islam's success. 

1. Reign of Abu Bekr.— Abu Bekr proved himself quite equal 
to the perilous situation. In the first place, he allowed the 
expedition against the Greeks, already arranged by Mahomet, 
quietly to set out, limiting himself for the time to the defence 
of Medina. On the return of the army he proceeded to attack 

' Throughout this article, well-known names of persons and 
places appear in their most familiar forms, generally without accents 
or other diacritical signs. For the sake of homogeneity the articles 
on these persons or places are also given under these forms, but in 
such cases, the exact forms, according to the system of transliteration 
adopted, are there given in addition. 

2 See Noldeke, Beitr&ge zur Kenntniss der Poesie der alien Araber 
(1864), pp. 89 seq. 



24 



CALIPHATE 



the rebels. The holy spirit of Islam kept the men of Medina 
together, and inspired in them an all-absorbing zeal for the 
faith; the Arabs as a whole had no other bond of union and no 
better source of inspiration than individual interest. As was 
to be expected, they were worsted; eleven small flying columns 
of the Moslems, sent out in various directions, sufficed to quell 
the revolt. Those who submitted were forthwith received back 
into favour; those who persevered in rebellion were punished 
with death. The majority accordingly converted, the obstinate 
were extirpated. In Yamama (Yemama) only was there a 
severe struggle; the Banii ganlfa under their prophet Mosailima 
fought bravely, but here also Islam triumphed. 

The internal consolidation of Islam in Arabia was, strange to 
say, brought about by its diffusion abroad. The holy war 
against the border countries which Mahomet had already 
inaugurated, was the best means for making the new religion 
popular among the Arabs, for opportunity was at the same 
time afforded for gaining rich booty. The movement was 
organized by Islam, but the masses were induced to join it by 
quite other than religious motives. Nor was this by any means 
the first occasion on which the Arabian cauldron had overflowed; 
once and again in former times emigrant swarms of Bedouins 
had settled on the borders of the wilderness. This had last 
happened in consequence of the events which destroyed the 
prosperity of the old Sabaean kingdom. At that time the small 
Arabian kingdoms of Ghassan and Hira had arisen in the western 
and eastern borderlands of cultivation; these now presented 
to Moslem conquest its nearest and natural goal. But inasmuch 
as Hira was subject to the Persians, and Eastern Palestine to 
the Greeks, the annexation of the Arabians involved the exten- 
sion of the war beyond the limits of Arabia to a struggle with 
the two great powers (see further Arabia: History). 

After the subjugation of middle and north-eastern Arabia, 
Khalid b. al-Walid proceeded by order of the caliph to the 
conquest of the districts on the lower Euphrates. Thence he 
was summoned to Syria, where hostilities had also broken out. 
Damascus fell late in the summer of 635, and on the 20th of 
August 636 was fought the great decisive battle on the Hieromax 
(Yarmuk), which caused the emperor Heraclius (q.v.) finally to 
abandon Syria. 1 Left to themselves, the Christians hence- 
forward defended themselves only in isolated cases in the fortified 
cities; for the most part they witnessed the disappearance -of 
the Byzantine power without regret. Meanwhile the war was 
also carried on against the Persians in Irak, unsuccessfully at 
first, until the tide turned at the battle of Kadisiya (Kadessia, 
Qadislya) (end of 637). In consequence of the defeat which 
they here sustained, the Persians were forced to abandon the 
western portion of their empire and limit themselves to Iran 
proper. The Moslems made themselves masters of Ctesiphon 
(Madain), the residence of the Sassanids on the Tigris, and 
conquered in the immediately following years the country of 
the two rivers. In 639 the armies of Syria and Irak were face 
to face in Mesopotamia. In a short time they had taken from 
the Aryans all the principal old Semitic lands — Palestine, Syria, 
Mesopotamia, Assyria and Babylonia. To these was soon added 
Egypt, which was overrun with little difficulty by 'Amr ibn-el- 
Ass (q.v.) in 640. (See Egypt: History, § Mahommedan.) 
This completed the circle of the lands bordering on the wilderness 
of Arabia; within these limits annexation was practicable and 
natural, a repetition indeed of what had often previously oc- 
curred. The kingdoms of Ghassan and Hira, advanced posts 
hitherto, now became the headquarters of the Arabs; the new 
empire had its centres on the one hand at Damascus, on the 
other hand at Kufa and Basra, the two newly-founded cities in 
the region of old Babylonia. The capital of Islam continued 
indeed for a while to be Medina, but soon the Hejaz (Hijaz) and 
the whole of Arabia proper lay quite on the outskirt of affairs. 

The ease with which the native populations of the con- 
quered districts, exclusively or prevailingly Christian, adapted 
themselves to the new rule is very striking. Their nationality had 

1 De Gpeje, Memoires d'hist. et de giog. orient. No. 2 (2nd ed., 
Leiden, 1864); Noldeke, D.M.Z., 1875, p. 76 sqq.; Baladhuri 137. 



been broken long ago, but intrinsically it was more closely allied 
to the Arabian than to the Greek or Persian. Their .religious 
sympathy with the West was seriously impaired by dogmatic 
controversies; from Islam they might at any rate hope for 
toleration, even though their views were not in accordance 
with the theology of the emperor of the day. The lapse of- the 
masses from Christianity to Islam, however, which took place 
during the first century after the conquest, is to be accounted 
for only by the fact that in reality they had no inward relation 
to the gospel at all. They changed their creed merely to acquire 
the rights and privileges of Moslem citizens. In no case were 
they compelled to do so; indeed the Omayyad caliphs saw 
with displeasure the diminishing proceeds of the poll-tax derived 
from their Christian subjects (see Mahommedan Institutions). 

It would have been a great advantage for the solidity oj> the 
Arabian empire if it had confined itself within the limits of those 
old Semitic lands, with perhaps the addition of Egypt.-, But the 
Persians were not so ready as the Greeks to give up the contest;, 
they did not rest until the Moslems had subjugated the whole 
of the Sassanid empire. The most important eVent in the 
protracted war which led to the conquest of Iran, was thebattle 
of Nehawend in 641 ; 2 the most obstinate resistance was offered 
by Persis proper, and especially by the capital; Istakhr -(Perse? 
polis). In the end, all the numerous and partly autonomous 
provinces of the Sassanid empire fell, one after the other, into 
the hands of the Moslems, and the young king, Yazdegerd III. 
(q.v.), was compelled to retire to the farthest corner of his^ realm, 
where he came to a miserable end. 3 But it was long before the 
Iranians learned to accept the situation. Unlike the Christians 
of western Asia, they had a vigorous feeling of national pride* 
based upon glorious memories and especially upon a church 
having a connexion of the closest kind with the state. Internal 
disturbances of a religious and political character and external 
disasters had long ago shattered the empire of the Sassanids 
indeed, but the Iranians had not yet lost their patriotism. They 
were fighting, in fact, against the despised and hated Arabs, 
in defence of their holiest possessions, their nationality and 
their faith. Their subjection was only external, nor did Islam 
ever succeed in assimilating them as the Syrian Christians were 
assimilated. Even when in process of time they did accept the 
religion of the prophet, they leavened it thoroughly with their 
own peculiar leaven, and, especially, deprived it of the practical 
political and national character which it had assumed after the 
flight to Medina. To the Arabian state they were always a 
thorn in the flesh; it was they who helped most to break up its 
internal order, and it was from them also that, it at last received 
its outward death-blow. The fallof the Omayyads was their 
work, and with the Omayyads fell the Arabian empire. 

2. Reign of Omar. — Abu Bekr died after a short reign on the 
22nd of August 634, and as a matter of course was succeeded by 
Omar. To Omar's ten years' Caliphate belong for the most part 
the great conquests. He himself did not take the field, but 
remained in Medina with the exception of his visit to Syria in 
638; he never, however, suffered the reins to slip from his 
grasp, so powerful was the influence of his personality and the 
Moslem community of feeling. His political insight is shown 
by the fact that he endeavoured to limit the indefinite extension 
of Moslem conquest, to maintain and strengthen the national 
Arabian character of the commonwealth of Islam, 4 and especially 
to promote law and order in its internal affairs. The saying 
with which he began his reign will never grow antiquated: 
" by Allah, he that is weakest among you shall be in my sight 
the strongest, until I have . vindicated for him his rights; but 
him that is strongest will I treat as the weakest, until he complies 

2 The accounts differ ; see Baladhuri 305. The chronology of the 
conquests is in many points uncertain. 

3 Baladhuri 315 sq.; Tabari i. 1068. 

4 He sought to make the whole nation a great host of God ; the 
Arabs were to be soldiers and nothing else. They were forbidden 
to acquire landed estates in the conquered countries; all land was 
either made state property or was restored to the old owners subject 
to a perpetual tribute which provided pay on a splendid scale for 
the army. 



CALIPHATE 



25 



with. the laws.". After the administration of justice he directed 
his organizing activity, as the circumstances demanded, chiefly 
towards financial questions — the incidence of taxation in the 
conquered territories, 1 and the application of the vast resources 
which poured into the treasury at Medina. It must not be 
brought against him as a personal reproach, that in dealing with 
these he acted on the principle that the Moslems were the char- 
tered plunderers of all the rest of the world. But he had to atone 
by his death for the fault of his system. In the mosque at Medina 
he was stabbed by a Kufan workman and died in November 644. 
3. Reign of Othman. — Before his death Omar had nominated 
six of the leading Mohajir (Emigrants) who should choose the 
caliph from among themselves — Othman, Ali, Zobair, Talha, 
Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, and Abdarrahman b. Auf. The last-named 
declined to be a candidate, and decided the election in favour 
of Othman. Under this weak sovereign the government of 
Islam fell entirely into the hands of the Koreish nobility. We 
have already seen that Mahomet himself prepared the way for 
this transference; Abu Bekr and Omar likewise helped it; the 
Emigrants were unanimous among themselves in thinking that 
the 1 precedence and leadership belonged to them as of right. 
Thanks to the energy of Omar, they were successful in appro- 
priating to themselves the succession to the Prophet. They 
indeed rested their claims on the undeniable priority of their 
services to the faith, but they also appealed to their blood 
relationship with the Prophet as a corroboration of their right 
to the inheritance ; and the ties of blood connected them with 
the Koreish in general. In point of fact they felt a closer con- 
nexion with these than, for example, with the natives of Medina; 
nature had not been expelled by faith. 2 The supremacy of the 
Emigrants naturally furnished the means of transition to the 
supremacy of' the Meccan aristocracy. Othman did all in his 
power to press forward this development of affairs. He belonged 
to the foremost family of Mecca, the Omayyads, and that he 
should favour his relations and the Koreish as a whole, in every 
possible way, seemed to him a matter of course. Every position 
of influence and emolument was assigned to them; they them- 
selves boastingly called the important province of Irak the garden 
of Koreish. In truth, the entire empire had become that garden. 
Nor was it unreasonable that from the secularization of Islam 
the chief advantage should be reaped by those who best knew 
the world. Such were beyond all doubt the patricians of Mecca, 
and after them those of Taif, people like Khalid b. al-Walid, 
Amr- ; ibn-el-Ass, 'Abdallah b. abi Sarh, Moghira b. Sho'ba, and, 
above all, old Abu Sofian with his son Moawiya. 

' Against the rising tide of worldliness an opposition, however, 
now began to appear. It was led by what may be called the 
spiritual noblesse of Islam, which, as distinguished from the 
hereditary nobility of Mecca, might also be designated as the 
nobility of merit, consisting of the " Defenders " (Ansar), and 
especially of the Emigrants who had lent themselves to the 
elevatiori of the Koreish, but by no means with the intention 
of allowing themselves thereby to be effaced. The opposition 
was headed by Ali, Zobair, Talha, both as leading men among 
the Emigrants and as 1 disappointed candidates for the Caliphate. 
Their motives were purely selfish; not God's cause but their 
own, not religion but power and preferment, were what they 
sought. 3 Their party Was a mixed one. To it belonged the men 
of real piety, who saw with displeasure the promotion to the 
first places in the commonwealth of the great lords who had 
actually done nothing for Islam, and had joined themselves to 
it only at the last moment. But the majority were merely a band 

■ l Noldeke, Tabari, 246. To Omar is due also the establishment 
of the Era of the Flight (Hegira), 

2 Even in the list of the slain at the battle of Honain the Emi- 

§ rants are enumerated along with the Meccans and Koreish, and 
istinguished from the men of Medina. _ 

: 3 It was the same opposition of the spiritual to the secular nobility 
that afterwards showed itself in the revolt of the sacred cities against 
the Omayyads. The movement triumphed with the elevation of the 
Abbasids to the throne. But, that the spiritual nobility was fighting 
not for principle but for personal advantage was as apparent in All's 
hostilities against Zobair and Talha as in that of the Abbasids against 
the followers of , Ali. ... 



of men without views, whose aim was a change not of system, 
but of persons in their own interest. Everywhere in the pro- 
vinces there was agitation against the caliph and his governors, 
except in Syria, where Othman's cousin, Moawiya, son of Abu 
Sofian (see below), carried on a wise and strong administration. 
The movement was most energetic in Irak and in Egypt. Its 
ultimate aim was the deposition of Othman in favour of Ali, 
whose own services as well as his close relationship to the Prophet 
seemed to give him the best claim to the Caliphate. Even then 
there were enthusiasts who held him to be a sort of Messiah. 

The malcontents sought to gain their end by force. In bands 
they came from the provinces to Medina to wring concessions 
from Othman, who, though his armies were spreading terror 
from the Indus and Oxus to the Atlantic, had no troops at hand 
in Medina. He propitiated the mutineers by concessions, but as 
soon as they had gone, he let matters resume their old course. 
Thus things went on from bad to worse. In the following year 
(656) the leaders of the rebels came once more from Egypt and 
Irak to Medina with a more numerous following; and the caliph 
again tried the plan of making promises which he did not intend 
to keep. But the rebels caught him in a flagrant breach of his 
word, 4 and now demanded his abdication, besieging him in his own 
house, where he was defended by a few faithful subjects. As he 
would not yield, they at last took the building by storm and put 
him to death, an old man of eighty. His death in the act of 
maintaining his rights was of the greatest service to his house and 
of corresponding disadvantage to the enemy. 

4. Reign of Ali. — Controversy as to the inheritance at once 
arose among the leaders of the opposition. The mass of the 
mutineers summoned Ali to the Caliphate, and compelled even 
Talha and Zobair to do him homage. But soon these two, 
along with Ayesha, the mother of the faithful, who had an old 
grudge against Ali, succeeded in making their escape to Irak, 
where at Basra they raised the standard of rebellion. Ali in 
point of fact had no real right to the succession, and moreover 
was apparently actuated not by piety but by ambition and the 
desire of power, so that men of penetration, even although they 
condemned Othman's method of government, yet refused to 
recognize his successor. The new caliph, however, found means 
of disposing of their opposition, and at the battle of the Camel, 
fought at Basra in November 656, Talha and Zobair were slain, 
and Ayesha was taken prisoner. 

But even so Ali had not secured peace. With the murder of 
Othman the dynastic principle gained the twofold advantage of a 
legitimate cry — that of vengeance for the blood of the grey-haired 
caliph and a distinguished champion, the governor Moawiya, 
whose position in Syria was impregnable. The kernel of his 
subjects consisted of genuine Arabs, not only recent immigrants 
along with Islam, but also old settlers who, through contact 
with the Roman empire and the Christian church, had become to 
some extent civilized. Through the Ghassanids these latter 
had become habituated to monarchical government and loyal 
obedience, and for a long time much better order had prevailed 
amongst them than elsewhere in Arabia. Syria was the proper 
soil for the rise of an Arabian kingdom, and Moawiya was just 
the man to make use of the situation. He exhibited Othman's 
blood-stained garment in the mosque at Damascus, and incited 
his Syrians to vengeance. 

Ali's position in Kufa was much less advantageous. The 
population of Irak was already mixed up with Persian elements; it 
fluctuated greatly, and was largely composed of fresh immigrants. 
Islam had its headquarters here; Kufa and Basra were the home 
of the pious and of the adventurer, the centres of religious and 
political movement. This movement it was that had raised Ali 
to the Caliphate, but yet it did not really take any personal 
interest in him. Religion proved for him a less trustworthy and 
more dangerous support than did the conservative and secular 
feeling of Syria for the Omayyads. Moawiya could either 
act or ■ refrain from acting as he chose, secure in either case 

4 Or, at least, so they thought. The history of the letter to 
'Abdallah b. abi Sarh seems to have been a trick played on the 
caliph, who suspected Ali of having ha^ - hand in it. 



26 



CALIPHATE 



of the obedience of his 'subjects. AH, on the other hand, was 
unable to convert enthusiasm for the principle inscribed on his 
banner into enthusiasm for his person. It was necessary that 
he should accommodate himself to the wishes of his supporters, 
which, however, were inconsistent. They compelled him 
suddenly to break off the battle of Siffin, which he was apparently 
on the point of gaining over Moawiya, because the Syrians 
fastened copies of the Koran to their lances to denote that not 
the sword, but the word of God should decide the contest (see 
further below, B. i ; also Axi). But in yielding to the will of the 
majority he excited the displeasure of the minority, the genuine 
zealots, who in Moawiya were opposing the enemy of Islam, 
and regarded Ali's entering into negotiations with him as a 
denial of the faith. When the negotiations failed and war was 
resumed, the Kharijites refused to follow Ali's army, and he had 
to turn his armies in the first instance against them. He 
succeeded in disposing of them without difficulty at the battle of 
Nahrawan, but in his success he lost the soul of his following. 
For they were the true champions of the theocratic principle; 
through their elimination it became clear that the struggle had in 
no sense anything to do with the cause of God. Ali's defeat was 
a foregone conclusion, once religious enthusiasm had failed him; 
the secular resources at the disposal of his adversaries were far 
superior. Fortunately for him he was murdered (end of January 
66 1), thereby posthumously attaining an importance in the eyes 
of a large part of the Mahommedan world (Shl'a) which he had 
never possessed during his life. l 

B. — The Omayyad Dynasty 

Summary of Preceding Movements. — The conquest of Mecca had 
been of the greatest importance to the Prophet, not only because 
Islam thus obtained possession of this important city with its 
famous sanctuary, but above all because his late adversaries 
were at last compelled to acknowledge him as the Envoy of God. 
Among these there were many men of great ability and influence, 
and he was so eager to conciliate them or, as the Arabic ex- 
pression has it, " to mellow their hearts " by concessions and 
gifts, that his loyal helpers ( Ansar) at Medina became dissatisfied 
and could only with difficulty be brought to acquiesce in it. 
Mahomet was a practical man; he realized that the growing 
state needed skilful administrators, and that such were found in 
much greater number among the antagonists of yesterday than 
among the honest citizens of Medina. The most important 
positions, such as the governorships of Mecca and Yemen, were 
entrusted to men of the Omayyad house, or that of the Makhzum 
and other Koreishite families. Abu Bekr followed the Prophet's 
example. In the great revolt of the Arabic tribes after the 
death of Mahomet, and in the invasion of Irak and Syria by the 
Moslems, the principal generals belonged to them. Omar did 
not deviate from that line of conduct. It was he who appointed 
Yazld, the son of Abu Sofian, and after his death, his brother 
Moawiya as governor of Syria L and assigned the province of Egypt 
to Amr-ibn-el-Ass ("Amr b. As). It is even surprising to find 
among the leading men so few-of the house of Hashim, the nearest 
family of the Prophet. The puzzled Moslem doctors explain 
this fact on the ground that the Hashimites were regarded as too 
noble to hold ordinary administrative offices, and that they 
could not be spared at Medina, where their counsel was required 
in all important affairs. There is, however, a tradition in which 
Ali himself calls the Omayyads born rulers. As long as Omar 
lived opposition was silent. But Othman had not the strong 
personality of his predecessor, and, although he practically 
adhered to the policy of Omar, he was accused of favouring the 
( members of his own family — the caliph belonged himself to the 
house of Omayya — at the expense of theHashimitesandthe Ansar. 
The jealousy of the latter two was prompted by the fact that the 
governorship and military commands had become not only much 
more important, but also much more lucrative, while power and 
money again procured many adherents. The truly devout 
Moslems on the other hand were scandalized by the growing 
luxury which relaxed the austere morals of the first Moslems, 
and this also was imputed to Othman. 



We thus see how the power of the house of Omayya developed 
itself, and how there arose against it an opposition, which led in 
the first place to the murder of Othman and the Caliphate of Ali, 
and furthermore; during the whole period of the Omayyad 
caliphs, repeatedly to dangerous outbreaks, culminating in the 
great catastrophe which placed the Abbasids on the throne. 
The elements of this opposition were of very various kinds: — 
(i) The old-fashioned Moslems, sons of the Ansar and Mohajir, 
who had been Mahomet's first companions and supporters, and 
could, not bear the thought that the sons of the old enemies of the 
Prophet in Mecca, whom they nicknamed tolaqa (freedmen), 
should be in control of the imamate, which carried with it the 
management of affairs both civil and religious. This party was 
in the foreground, chiefly in the first period. (2) The partisans 
of Ali, the Shi'a (Shi'ites), who in proportion as their influence 
with the Arabs declined, contrived to strengthen it by obtaining 
the support of the non-Arabic Moslems, aided thereto, especially 
in the latter period, by the Abbasids, who at the decisive 
moment succeeded in seizing the supreme power for themselves. 
(3) The Kharijites, who, in spite of the heavy losses they sus- 
tained at the hands of Ali, maintained their power by gaining 
new adherents from among those austere Moslems, who held both 
Omayyads and Alids as usurpers, and have often been called, not 
unjustly, the Puritans of Islam. (4) The non-Arabic Moslems, 
who on their conversion to Islam, had put themselves under the 
patronage of Arabic families, and were therefore called maula's 
(clients). These were not only the most numerous, but also, in 
virtue of the persistency of their hostility, the most dangerous. 
The largest and strongest group of these were the Persians, who, 
before the conquest of Irak by the Moslems, were the ruling class 
of that country, so that Persian was the dominant language. 
With them all malcontents, in particular the Shi'ites, found 
support; by them the dynasty of the Omayyads and the 
supremacy of the Arabs was finally overthrown. To these 
elements of discord we must add: — (1) That the Arabs, notwith- 
standing the bond of Islam that united them, maintained their 
old tribal institutions, and therewith their old feuds and factions; 
(2) that the old antagonism between Ma'adites 1 (original 
northern tribes) and Yemenites (original southern tribes), 
accentuated by the jealousy between the Meccans, who belonged 
to the former, and the Medinians, who belonged to the latter 
division, gave rise to perpetual conflicts; (3) that more than one 
dangerous pretender — some of them of the reigning family 
itself — contended with the caliph for the sovereignty, and must 
be crushed coute que co&te. It is only by the detailed enumera- 
tion of these opposing forces that we can form an idea of the 
heavy task that lay before the Prince of the Believers, and of the 
amount of tact and ability which his position demanded. 

The description of the reign of the Omayyads is extremely 
difficult. Never perhaps has the system of undermining 
authority by continual slandering been applied on such a scale as 
by the Alids and the Abbasids. The Omayyads were accused by 
their numerous missionaries of every imaginable vice; in their, 
hands Islam was not safe ; it would be a godly work to extirpate 
them from the earth. When the Abbasids had occupied the 
throne, they pursued this policy to its logical conclusion. But 
not content with having exterminated the hated rulers themselves, 
they carried their hostility to a further point. The official 
history of the Omayyads, as it has been handed down to us, is 
coloured by Abbasid feeling to such an extent that we can 
scarcely distinguish the true from the false. An example of this 
occurs at the outset in the assertion that Moawiya deliberately 
refrained from marching to the help of Othman, and indeed that 
it was with secret joy that he heard of the fatal result of the plot. 
The facts seem to contradict this view. When, ten weeks before 
the murder, some hundreds of men came to Medina from Egypt 
and Irak, pretending that they were on their pilgrimage to Mecca, 
but wanted to bring before the caliph their complaints against 
his vicegerents, nobody could have the slightest suspicion that 
the life of the caliph was in danger; indeed it was only during 

1 Ma'ad is in the genealogical system the father of the Modar and 
the Rab'ia tribes. Qais is the principal branch of the Motjar. 



CALIPHATE 



27 



the few days that Othman was besieged in his house that the 
danger became obvious. If the caliph then, as the chroniclers 
tell, sent a message to Moawiya for help, his messenger could not 
have accomplished half the journey to Damascus when the 
catastrophe took place. There is no real reason to doubt that 
the painful news fell on Moawiya unexpectedly, and that he, as 
mightiest representative of the Omayyad house, regarded as his 
own the duty of avenging the crime. He could not but view Ali 
in the light of an accomplice, because if, as he protested, he did 
not abet the murderers, yet he took them under his protection. An 
acknowledgment of Ali as caliph by Moawiya before he had 
cleared himself from suspicion was therefore quite impossible. 

1. The Reign of Moawiya. — Moawiya, son of the well-known 
Meccan chief Abu Sofian, embraced Islam together with his father 
and his brother Yazid, when the Prophet conquered Mecca, and 
was, like them, treated with the greatest distinction. He was even 
chosen to be one of the secretaries of Mahomet. When Abu Bekr 
sent his troops for the conquest of Syria, Yazid, the eldest son of 
Abu Sofian, held one of the chief commands, with Moawiya as 
his lieu tenant. In the year 639 Omar named him governor of 
Damascus and Palestine; Othman added to this province the 
north of Syria and Mesopotamia. To him was committed the 
conduct of the war against the Byzantine emperor, which he 
continued with energy, at first only on land, but later, when the 
caliph had at last given in to his urgent representations, at sea 
also. In the year 34 (a.d. 655) was fought off the coast of Lycia 
the great naval battle, which because of the great number of 
masts has been called "the mast fight," in which the Greek 1 
fleet, commanded by the emperor Constans II. in person, was 
utterly defeated. Moawiya himself was not present, as he was 
conducting an attack (the result of which we do not know) on 
Caesarea in Cappadocia. The Arabic historians are so entirely 
preoccupied with the internal events that they have no eye for 
the war at the frontier. The contention which Moawiya had 
with Ah checked his progress in the north. 

Moawiya was a born ruler, and Syria was, as we have seen, the 
best administered province of the whole empire. He was so 
loved and honoured by his Syrians that, when he invited them 
to avenge the blood of Othman, they replied unanimously, " It is 
your part to command, ours to obey." Ah was a valiant man, 
but had no great talent as a ruler. His army numbered a great 
many enthusiastic partisans, but among them not a few wise- 
acres; there were also others of doubtful loyalty. The battle at 
Siffin (657), near the Euphrates, which lasted two months and 
consisted principally in, sometimes bloody, skirmishes, with 
alternate success, ended by the well-known appeal to the decision 
of the Koran on the part of Moawiya. This appeal has been called 
by a European scholar " one of the unworthiest comedies of the 
whole world's history," accepting the report of very partial 
Arabic writers that it happened when the Syrians were on the 
point of losing the battle. He forgot that Ali himself, before the 
Battle of the Camel, appealed likewise to the decision of the 
Koran, and began the fight only when this had been rejected. 
There is in reality no room for suspecting Moawiya of not having 
been in earnest when making this appeal; he might well regret 
that internecine strife should drain the forces which were so 
much wanted for the spread of Islam. That the Book of God 
could give a solution, even of this arduous case, was doubtless the 
firm belief of both parties. But even if the appeal to the Koran 
had been a stratagem, as Ali himself thought, it would have been 
perfectly legitimate, according to the general views of that time, 
which had been also those of the Prophet. It is not unlikely 
that the chief leader of the Yemenites in Ali's army, Ash'ath b. 
Qais, knew beforehand that this appeal would be made. Cer- 
tainty is not to be obtained in the whole matter. 

On each side an umpire was appointed, Abu Mtisa al-Ash'ari, 
the candidate of Ash'ath, on that of Ah, Amr-ibn-el-Ass (q.v.) on 
that of Moawiya. The arbitrators met in the year 37 (a.d. 658) 
at Adhroh, in the south-east of Syria, where are the ruins of 
the Roman Castra described by Brtinnow and Domaszewsky 
(Die Provincia Arabia, i. 433-463). Instead of this place, the 
1 The Arabs always call them Rum, i.e. Romans. 



historians generally put Dumat-al-Jandal, the biblical Duma, 
now called Jauf , but this rests on feeble authority. The various 
accounts about what happened in this interview are without 
exception untrustworthy. J. Wellhausen, in his excellent book 
Das arabische Reich und sein Stiirz, has made it very probable that 
the decision of the umpires was that the choice of Ali as caliph 
should be cancelled, and that the task of nominating a successor 
to Othman should be referred to the council of notable men 
(shura), as representing the whole community. Ah refusing to 
submit to this decision, Moawiya became the champion of the 
law, and thereby gained at once considerable support for the 
conquest of Egypt, to which above all he directed his efforts. As 
soon as Amr returned from Adhroh, Moawiya sent him with an 
army of four or five thousand men against Egypt. About the 
same time the constitutional party rose against Ali's vicegerent 
Mahommed, son of Abu Bekr, who had been the leader of the 
murderous attack on Othman. Mahommed was beaten, taken 
in his flight, and, according to some reports, sewn in the skin of an 
ass and burned. 

Moawiya, realizing that Ali would take all possible means to 
crush him, took his measures accordingly. He concluded with 
the Greeks a treaty, by which he pledged himself to pay a large 
sum of money annually on condition that the emperor should give 
him hostages as a pledge for the maintenance of peace. Ali, 
however, had first to deal with the insurrection of the Kharijites, 
who condemned the arbitration which followed the battle of Siffin 
as a deed of infidelity, and demanded that Ali should break the 
compact (see above, A. 4) . Freed from this difficulty, Ali prepared 
to direct his march against Moawiya, but his soldiers declined to 
move. One of his men, Khirrit b. Rashid, renounced him 
altogether, because he had not submitted to the decision of the 
umpires, and persuaded many others to refuse the payment of the 
poor-rate. Ali was obliged to subdue him, a task which he 
effected not without difficulty. Not a few of his former partisans 
went over to Moawiya, as already had happened before the days 
of Siffin, amongst others Ali's own brother 'Aqil. Lastly, there 
were in Kufa, and still more in Basra, many Othmaniya or 
legitimists, on whose co-operation he could not rely. Moawiya 
from his side made incessant raids into Ali's dominion, and by his 
agents caused a very serious revolt in Basra. The statement that 
a treaty was concluded between Moawiya and Ali to maintain the 
status quo, in the beginning of the year 40 (a.d. 660), is not very 
probable, for it is pretty certain that just then Ali had raised an 
army of 40,000 men against the Syrians, and also that in the second 
or third month of that year Moawiya was proclaimed caliph at 
Jerusalem. At the same time Bosr b. Abi Artat made his 
expedition against Medina and Mecca, whose inhabitants were 
compelled to acknowledge the caliphate of Moawiya. On the 
murder of Ah in 661, his son Hasan was chosen caliph, but he 
recoiled before the prospect of a war with Moawiya, having 
neither the ambition nor the energy of Ali. Moawiya stood then 
with a large army in Maskin, a rich district lying to the north of 
the later West Bagdad, watered by the Dojail, or Little Tigris, a 
channel from the Euphrates to the Tigris. . The army of Trak was 
near Madain, the ancient Ctesiphon. The reports about what 
occurred are confused and contradictory; but it seems probable 
that Abdallah b. Abbas, the vicegerent of Ali at Basra and 
ancestor of the future Abbasid dynasty, was in command. No 
battle was fought. Hasan and Ibn Abbas opened, each for 
himself, negotiations with Moawiya. The latter made it a 
condition of surrender that he should have the free disposal of the 
funds in the treasury of Basra. Some say that he had already 
before the death of Ali rendered himself master of it. Notwith- 
standing the protest of the Basrians, he transported this booty 
safely to M ecca. When his descendants had ascended the throne 
and he had become a demi-saint, the historians did their best to 
excuse his conduct. Hasan demanded, in exchange for the power 
which he resigned, the contents of the treasury at Kufa, which 
amounted to five millions of dirhems, together with the revenues 
of the Persian province of Darabjird (Darab). When these nego- 
tiations became known, a mutiny broke out in Hasan's camp. 
Hasan himself was wounded and retired to Medina, where he 



2 8 



CALIPHATE 



died eight or nine years afterwards. The legend that he was 
poisoned by order of Moawiya is without the least foundation. 
It seems that he never received the revenues of Dar&bjird, the 
Basrians to whom they belonged refusing to cede them. 

Moawiya now made his entry into Kufa in the summer of a.h. 
41 (a.d. 661) and received the oath of allegiance as Prince of the 
Believers. This year is called the year of union (jamd'a). 
Moghlra b. Sho'ba was appointed governor of Kufa. IJomran b. 
Aban had previously assumed the government of Basra. This 
is represented commonly as a revolt, but as Homran was a client 
of Othman, and remained in favour with the Omayyads, it is 
almost certain that he took the management of affairs only to 
maintain order. 

One strong antagonist to Moawiya remained, in the person of 
Ziyad. This remarkable man was said to be a bastard of Abu 
Sofian, the father of Moawiya, and was, by his mother, the 
brother of Abu Bakra, a man of great wealth and position at 
Basra. He thus belonged to the tribe of Thaqif at Taif, which 
produced many very prominent men. At the age of fourteen 
years Ziyad was charged with the financial administration of the 
Basrian army. He had won the affection of Omar, by his know- 
ledge of the Koran and the Sunna of the Prophet, and by the fact 
that he had employed the first money he earned to purchase the 
freedom of his mother Somayya. He was a faithful servant of Ah 
and put down for him the revolt excited by Moawiya's partisans 
in Basra. Thence he marched into Fars and Kirman, where he 
maintained peace and kept the inhabitants in their allegiance to 
Ali. After Ali's death he fortified himself in his castle near 
Istakhr and refused to submit. Moawiya, therefore, sent Bosr 
b. Abi Artat to Basra, with orders to capture Ziyad's three sons, 
and to force Ziyad into submission by threatening to kill them. 
Ziyad was obdurate/ and it was due to his brother Abu Bakra, 
who persuaded Moawiya to cancel the order, that the threat was 
not executed. On his return to Damascus, Moawiya charged 
Moghlra b. Sho'ba to bring his countryman to reason. Abdallah 
b. 'Amir was made governor of Basra. 

As soon as Moawiya had his hands free, he directed all his 
forces against the Greeks. Immediately after the submission of 
Irak, he had denounced the existing treaty, and as early as 662 
had sent his troops against the Alans and the Greeks. Since then, 
no year passed without a campaign. Twice he made a serious 
effort to conquer Constantinople, in 669 when he besieged it for 
three months, and in 674. On the second occasion his fleet 
occupied Cyzicus, which it held till shortly after his death in 680, 
when a treaty was signed. In Africa also the extension of 
Mahommedan power was pursued energetically. In 670 took 
place the famous march of 'Okba ("Oqba) b. Nafi' and tke founda- 
tion of Kairawan, where the great mosque still bears his name. 
Our information about these events, though very full, is untrust- 
worthy, while of the events in Asia Minor the accounts are scarce 
and short. The Arabic historians are still absorbed by the events 
in Irak and Khorasan. 

The talented prefect of Kufa, Moghlra b. Sho'ba, eventually 
broke down the resistance of Ziyad, who came to Damascus to 
render an account of his administration, which the caliph 
ratified. Moawiya seems also to have acknowledged him as the 
son of Abu Sofian, and thus as his brother; in 664 this recogni- 
tion was openly declared. 1 In the next year Ziyad was appointed 
governor df Basra and the eastern provinces belonging to it. As 
the austere champion of the precepts of Islam, he soon restored 
order in the whole district. Outwardly, this was the case in 
Kufa also. A rising of Kharijites in the year 663 had ended in 
the death of their chief. But the Shi'ites were dissatisfied and 

1 A single genealogist, Abu Yaqazan, says that he was a legiti- 
mate son of Abu Scfian, and that his mother was Asma, daughter 
of A'war. But all others call his mother Somayya, who is said to 
have been a slave-girl of Hind, the wife of Abu Sofian, and who 
became later also the mother of Abu Bakra. We cannot make out 
whether Abu Sofian acknowledged him as his son or not. At a later 
period, the Abbasid caliph Mahdi had the names of Ziyad and his 
descendants struck off the rolls of the Koreish ; but, after his death, 
the persons concerned gained over the chief of the rolls office, and 
had their names replaced in the lists (see Tabari iii. 479). 



even dared to give public utterance to their hostility. Moghlra 
contented himself with a warning. He wasalready aged and had 
no mind to enter on a conflict. He died about the year 670, and 
his province also was entrusted to Ziyad, who appointed 'Amr b. 
Horaith as his vicegerent. At a Friday service in the great mosque 
'Amr was insulted and pelted with pebbles. Ziyad then came 
himself, arrested the leader of the Shi'ites, and sent fourteen rebels 
to Damascus, among them several men of consideration. Seven of 
them who refused to pledge themselves to obedience were put to 
death; the Shi'ites considered them as martyrs and accused 
Moawiya of committing a great crime. But in Kufa peace was 
restored, and this not by military force, but by the headmen of 
the tribes. We must not forget that Kufa and Basra were 
military colonies, and that each tribe had its own quarter of the 
city. A wholesome diversion was provided by the serious re- 
sumption of the policy of eastern expansion, which had been 
interrupted by the civil war. For this purpose Irak had to 
furnish the largest contingent. The first army sent by Ziyad 
into Khorasan recaptured Merv, Herat and Balkh, conquered 
Tokharistan and advanced as far as the Oxus. In 673 'Obai- 
dallah, the son of Ziyad, crossed the river, occupied Bokhara, and 
returned laden with booty taken from the wandering Turkish 
tribes of Transoxiana. He brought 2000 Turkish archers with 
him to Basra, the first Turkish slaves to enter the Moslem empire. 
Sa'id, son of the caliph Othman, whom Moawiya made governor 
of Khorasan, in 674 marched against Samarkand.: Other 
generals penetrated as far as the Indus and conquered Kabul, 
Sijistan, Makran and Kandahar. 1 ■• 

Ziyad governed Irak with the greatest vigour, but as long as 
discontent did not issue in action, he let men alone. At his death 
(672-673), order was so generally restored that " nobody had any 
more to fear for life or estate, and even the unprotected woman 
was safe in her house without having her door bolted." • 

Moawiya was a typical Arab sayyid (gentleman) . He governed, 
not by force, but by his superior intelligence, his self-control, 
his mildness and magnanimity. The following anecdote may 
illustrate this. One of Moawiya's estates bordered on that of 
Abdallah b. Zobair, who complained in a somewhat truculent 
letter that Moawiya's slaves had been guilty of trespassing. 
Moawiya, disregarding his son Yazid's advice that he should 
exact condign punishment for Zobair's disrespect, replied 1 in 
flattering terms, regretting the trespass and resigning both slaves 
and estate to Zobair. In reply Zobair protested his loyalty to 
Moawiya, who thereupon pointed a moral for the instruction of 
Yazid. ' ■ ; ; ) 

Moawiya has been accused of having poisoned more than one of 
his adversaries, among them Malik Ashtar, Abdarrahman the 
son of the great captain Khalid b. Walid, and Hasan b. Ali. As 
for the latter, European scholars have long been agreed that' the 
imputation is groundless. As to Abdarrahman the story is in the 
highest degree improbable. Madaini says that Moawiya was 
prompted to it, because when he consulted the Syrians about the 
choice of his son Yazid as his successor, they had proposed 
Abdarrahman. The absurdity of this is obvious, for Abdarrah- 
man died in the year 666. 1 Others say 2 that Moawiya. was afraid 
lest Abdarrahman should become too popular. Now, Abdarrah- 
man had not only been a faithful ally of Moawiya in the wars r with 
Ali, but after the peace devoted all his energy to the Greek war. 
It is almost incredible that Moawiya out of petty jealousy would 
have deprived himself of one of his best men. The probability is 
that Abdarrahman was ill when returning from the frontier, that 
Moawiya sent him his own medical man, the Christian doctor Ibn 
Othal, and that the rumour arose that the doctor had poisoned 
him. It is remarkable withal that this rumour circulated, not in 
Horns (Emesa), where Abdarrahman died, but in Medina-. There 
a young relation of Abdarrahman was so roused by the taunt 
that the death of his kinsman was unavenged, that he killed Ibn 
Othal near the mosque of Damascus. Moawiya imprisoned him 
and let him pay a high ransom, the law not permitting the talio 
against a Moslem for having killed a Christian. The story that 

1 Aghani xx. p, 13, Ibn abi Osaibia i.'p. 118. 

2 Tabari ii. p. 82. 



CALIPHATE 



29 



this relative was Khalid, the son of Abdarrahman, is absurd in- 
asmuch as Moawiya made this Khalid commander against the 
Greeks in succession to his father. In the third case — that of 
Malik Ashtar — the evidence is equally inadequate. In fact, since 
Moawiya did not turn the weapon of assassination against such 
men as Abdallah b. Zobair and Hosain b. Ali, it is unlikely that 
he used it against less dangerous persons. These two men were 
the chief obstacles to Moawiya's plan for securing the Caliphate 
for his son Yazid. The leadership with the Arabic tribes was as a 
rule hereditary, the son succeeding his father, but only if he was 
personally fit for the position, and was acknowledged as such by 
the principal men of the tribe. The hereditary principle had not 
been recognized by Islam in the cases of Abu Bekr, Omar and 
Othman; it had had some influence upon the choice of Ali, the 
husband of Fatima and the cousin of the Prophet. But it had 
been adopted entirely for the election of Hasan. The example of 
Abu Bekr proved that the caliph had the right to appoint his 
successor. But this appointment must be sanctioned by the 
principal men, as representing the community. Moawiya seems 
to have done his best to gain that approbation, but the details 
given ;by the historians are altogether unconvincing. This only 
seems to. be certain, that the succession of Yazid was' generally 
acknowledged before the death of his father, except in Medina. 
(See Mahommedan Institutions.) 

, Moawiya died in the month of Rajab 60 (a.d. 680) . His last 
words are said to have been: " Fear ye God, the Elevated and 
Mighty, for God, Praise be to Him, protects the man that fears 
Him; he who does not fear God, has no protection." Moawiya 
was, in fact, a religious man and a strict disciple of the precepts of 
Islam. We can scarcely, therefore, credit the charges made by 
the adversaries of his chosen successor Yazid, that he was a 
drinker of wine, fond of pleasure, careless about religion. All the 
evidence shows that, during the reign of the. Omayyads, life in 
Damascus and the rest of Syria was austere and in striking 
contrast to the dissolute manners which prevailed in Medina. 

2. Rule of Yazid. — When Moawiya died, the opposition had 
already been organized. On bis accession Yazid sent a circular 
to all lus prefects, officially announcing his father's death, and 
ordering them to administer the oath of allegiance to their 
subjects. In that sent to Walid b. 'Otba, the governor of 
Medina, he enclosed a private note charging him in particular to 
administer the oath, to Hosain, Abdallah b. Omar and Abdallah 
b. Zobair, if necessary, by force. Walid sent a messenger 
inviting them to a conference, thus giving them time to assemble 
their followers and %o escape to Mecca, where the prefect Omar 
b. Sa'id could do nothing against them. In the month Ramadan 
this Omar was made governor of Medina and sent an army against 
Ibn Zobair. This army was defeated, and from that time Ibn 
Zobair was supreme at Mecca. 

On the news of Yazid's accession, the numerous partisans of 
the family of Ali in Kufa sent addresses to Hosain, inviting him 
to take refuge with them, and promising to have him proclaimed 
caliph in Irak. Hosain, having learned that the majority of the 
inhabitants were apparently ready to support him strenuously, 
prepared to take action. Meanwhile Yazid, having been in- 
formed of the riotous behaviour of the Shi'ites in Kufa, sent 
Obaidallah, son of the famous Ziyad and governor of Basra, to 
restore order. Using the same tactics as his father had used 
before, Obaidallah summoned the chiefs of the tribes and made 
them responsible for the conduct of their men. On the 8th of 
Dhu'l-Hijja Hosain set out from Mecca with all his family, 
expecting to be received with enthusiasm by the citizens of Kufa, 
but on his arrival at Kerbela west of the Euphrates, he was 
confronted by an army sent by Obaidallah under the command of 
Omar, son of the famous Sa'd b. Abi Waqqas, the founder of 
Kufa. Hosain gave battle, vainly relying on the promised aid 
from Kufa, and fell with almost all his followers on the 10th of 
Muharram 61 (10th of October 680). 

No other issue of this rash expedition could have been expected. 
But, as it involved the grandson of the Prophet, the son of Ali, 
and so many members of his family, Hosain's devout partisans 
ajt Ku^a, who by their overtures had been the principal cause of 



the disaster, regarded it as a tragedy, and the facts gradually 
acquired a wholly romantic colouring. Omar b. Sa'd and his 
officers, Obaidallah and even Yazid came to be regarded as 
murderers, and their names have ever since been held accursed 
by all Shi'ites. They observe the 10th of Muharram, the day of 
' Ashura, as a day of public mourning. Among the Persians, stages 
are erected on that day in public places, and plays are acted, 
representing the misfortunes of the family of Ali. 1 " Revenge 
for Hosain " became the watchword of all Shi'ites, and the 
Meshed Hosain (Tomb of the martyr Hosain) at Kerbela is to 
them the holiest place in the world (see Kerbela). Obaidallah 
sent the head of Hosain to Damascus, together with the women 
and children and Ali b. Hosain, who, being ill, had not taken part 
in the fight. Yazid was very sorry for the issue, and sent the 
prisoners under safe-conduct to Medina. Ali remained faithful 
to the caliph, taking no share in the revolt of the Medinians, and 
openly condemning the risings of the Shi'ites. 

Ibn Zobair profited greatly by the distress caused by Hosain's 
death. Though he named himself publicly a refugee of the House 
of God, he had himself secretly addressed as caliph, and many of 
the citizens of Medina acknowledged him as such. Yazid, when 
informed of this, swore in his anger to have him imprisoned. But 
remembering the wisdom of his father, he sent messengers with a 
chain made of silver coins, and bearing honourable proposals. 
At the same time he received a number of the chief men of 
Medina, sent by the prefect, with great honour and loaded them 
with gifts and presents. But Ibn Zobair refused, and the 
Medinians, of whom the majority probably had never before 
seen a prince's court, however simple, were only confirmed in 
their rancour against Yazid, and told many horrible tales about 
his profligacy, that he hunted and held wild orgies with Bedouin 
sheikhs, and had no religion. A characteristically Arabic cere- 
mony took place in the mosque of Medina. " I cast off the oath 
of allegiance to Yazid, as I cast off my turban," exclaimed the 
first; and all others followed, casting off one of their garments, 
till a heap of turbans and sandals lay on the floor. Ibn Hanzala 
was made commander. The Omayyads, though they with their 
clients counted more than 1000 men, were not able to maintain 
themselves, and were allowed to depart only on condition of strict 
neutrality. 

At last the patience of Yazid was exhausted. An army — the 
accounts about the number vary from 4000 to 20,060— was 
equipped in all haste and put under the command of Moslim b. 
'Oqba, with orders first to exact submission from the Medinians, 
if necessary by force, and then to march against Ibn Zobair. 
Moslim, having met the expelled Omayyads at Wadi '1-Qora, 
encamped near the city (August 683) and gave the inhabitants 
three days in which to return to obedience, wishing to spare the 
ci ty of the Prophet and to prevent the shedding of blood. When, 
however, after the lapse of three days, a final earnest appeal had 
been answered insultingly, he began the battle. The Medinians 
fought valiantly, but could not hold out against the well-dis- 
ciplined Syrians. Moreover, they were betrayed by the Medinian 
family of the Banu. Haritha, who introduced Syrian soldiers into 
the town. Medina lies between two volcanic hills, called harra. 
After one of these the battle has been named " The Day of 
Harra." For three days the city was given up to plunder. It is 
said that a thousand bastards (the " children of the Harra ") 
were born in consequence of these days. The remaining citizens 
were compelled to take the oath of allegiance to Yazid in a 
humiliating form; the few who refused were killed. Ali b. 
Hosain, who had refused to have anything to do with the revolt, 
was treated with all honour. Mahommed b. al-Hanafiya, the 
son of Ali, and Abdallah b. Omar had likewise abstained, but 
they had left Medina for Mecca. 

Moslim then proceeded towards Mecca. He was already ill, and 
died about midway between the two cities, after having given the 
command, according to the orders of the caliph, to Hosain b. 
Nomair. It is quite natural that the man who delivered up the 
city of the Prophet to plunder, and at whose hands so many 
prominent Moslems fell, should have been an object of detestation 
1 See Chodzko, Theatre person (Paris, 1878). 



3o 



CALIPHATE 



to the devout. Even some European scholars have drawn a 
false picture of his personality, as has been clearly shown by 
Wellhausen. About Medina also false statements have been 
made. The city recovered very soon from the disaster, and 
remained the seat not only of holy tradition and jurisdiction, 
but also of the Arabic aristocracy. In no city of the empire, 
during the reign of the Omayyads, lived more singers and 
musicians than in Medina. 

Hosain b. Nomair arrived before Mecca in September 683 and 
found Ibn Zobair ready to defend it. A number of the citizens 
of Medina had come to the aid of the Holy City, as well as many 
Kharijites from Yamama under Najda b. "Amir. The siege had 
lasted 65 — others say 40— days, when the news came of the 
death of Yazid, which took place presumably on the 14th of 
Rabia I, 64 (12th November 683). Eleven days before a fire, 
caused by imprudence, had consumed all the woodwork of the 
Ka'ba and burst the black stone in three places. The evidence 
is quite conclusive; yet the fire has been imputed to the Syrians, 
and a tale was invented about ballistas which hurled against the 
House of God enormous stones and vessels full of bitumen. In 
fact, the siege had been confined to enclosure and skirmishes. It 
is said that on the news of the death of Yazid a conference took 
place between Hosain and Ibn Zobair, and that the former offered 
to proclaim the latter as caliph provided he would accompany 
him to Syria and proclaim a general amnesty. Ibn Zobair 
refused haughtily, and Hosain, with a contemptuous criticism of 
his folly, ordered his army to break up for Syria. 

Hitherto Ibn Zobair had confined himself to an appeal to the 
Moslems to renounce Yazid and to have a caliph elected by the 
council (shitrd) of the principal leading men. He now openly 
assumed the title of caliph and invited men to take the oath of 
allegiance. He was soon acknowledged throughout Arabia, in 
Egypt and in Irak. The Omayyads, who had returned to Medina, 
were again expelled. 

Yazid is described in theContinualio Isidori Byz.^2y , as"iucun- 
. dissimus et cunctis nationibus regni eius subditis vir gratissime 
habitus, qui nullam unquam, ut omnibus moris est, sibi regalis 
fastigii causa gloriam appetivit, sed communis 1 cum omnibus 
civiliter vixit." This is confirmed by the fact that Moawiya H. 
is said to have been a mild ruler, like his father, and goes far to 
outweigh the prejudiced account given by his opponents and 
coloured still further by tradition. Against the accusation of 
being a drinker of wine he himself protested in verses which he 
recited when he sent the army against Ibn Zobair. Decisive is 
also the testimony of Ibn al-Hanafiya, who declared that all the 
accusations brought by the Medinians were false. It may be 
true that he was fond of hunting, but he was a peace-loving, 
generous prince. It is uncertain at what age he died. Accounts 
vary between 33 and 39. The latter finds confirmation in the 
statement that he was born in a.h. 25, though another account 
places his birth in 22. As his son Moawiya who succeeded him 
was certainly adult (the accounts vary between 17 and 23), the 
latter date seems to be preferable. 

3. Moawiya II. had reigned a very short time — how long is 
again wholly uncertain — when he fell sick and died. Then 
commenced a period of the greatest confusion. The mother of 
Yazid, Maisun, belonged to the most powerful tribe in Syria, the 
Kalb, and it seems that this and the cognate tribes of Qoda'a 
(Yemenites) had enjoyed certain prerogatives, which had aroused 
the jealousy of the Qais and the cognate tribes of Modar. Im- 
mediately after the death of Yazid, Zofar b. Harith, who had 
already fought with Ibn Zobair against Yazid, had induced 
northern Syria and Mesopotamia to declare for Ibn Zobair. In 
Horns (Emesa) the governor No'man b. Bashlr had pledged 
himself to the same cause. The prefect of Damascus, Dahhak b. 
Qais, seemed to be wavering in his loyalty. Khalid, the brother 
of Moawiya II., was still a youth and appears to have had no 
strength of character. There was, however, a much more 
dangerous candidate, viz. Merwan b. Hakam, of another branch 
of the Omayyads, who had been Othman's right-hand man. He 
had pledged himself after some hesitation to Yazid, but now his 
1 Dozy took communis for a gloss to civiliter. 



turn had come. The amir of the Kalb, Ibn Bahdal, persuaded 
probably by Obaidallah b. Ziyad, conceived that only a man of 
distinction could win the contest, and proclaimed Merwan 
caliph, on condition that his successor should be Khalid b. 
Yazid, and after him 'Amr b. Sa'id al-Ashdaq, who belonged to 
the third branch of the Omayyads. Meanwhile Dahhak had 
declared himself openly for Ibn Zobair. A furious battle (a.d. 
684) ensued at Merj Rahit, near Damascus, in which Dahhak 
and Zofar, though they had the majority of troops, were utterly 
defeated. This battle became the subject of a great many 
poems and had pernicious consequences, especially as regards 
the antagonism between the Qais-Modar and Kalb- Yemenite 
tribes. 

4. Reign of Merwan I. — Merwan strengthened his position 
according to the old oriental fashion by marrying the widow of 
Yazid, and soon felt himself strong enough to substitute his own 
son Abdalmalik for Khalid b. Yazid as successor-designate. 
Khalid contented himself with protesting; he was neither a 
politician nor a soldier, but a student of alchemy and astronomy; 
translations of Greek books have been ascribed to him (Jahiz, 
Baydn, i. p. 126). In the year a.h. 435 there was still in Egypt 
a brazen \dobe attributed to Ptolemy which had belonged to 
Khalid (ibn Qifti, p. 440, 1.15). He was also consulted about 
future events. There were, however, not a few who deplored 
the fact that the throne had passed from the descendants of 
Abu Sofian. This feeling gave rise to the prophecy that there 
should appear later a Sofiani on the throne, who would reign 
with might and wisdom. 'Amr Ashdaq made no opposition till 
the death of Merwan. After the victory at Merj Rahit, Merwan 
conquered Egypt, and installed as governor his second son 
Abd/ilazlz. An army sent to the rescue by Ibn Zobair under the 
command of his brother Mus'ab was beaten in Palestine by 
"Amr Ashdaq. But a division sent by Merwan to the Hejaz was 
cut to pieces. Obaidallah b. Ziyad set out with the purpose of 
subduing Mesopotamia and marching thence against Irak. But 
he was detained a whole year in the former country, by a rising 
of the Shi'ites in Kufa, who were still in mourning for Hosain 
and had formed an army which called itself " the army of the 
penitent." They were routed at Ras 'Ain, but Obaidallah had 
still to fight Zofar. 

Meanwhile Mokhtar (son of that Abu 'Obaid the Thaqifite who 
had commanded the Arabs against the Persians in the un- 
fortunate battle of the Bridge), a man of great talents and still 
greater ambition, after having supported Ibn Zobair in the siege 
of Mecca, had gone to Kufa, where he joined the Shi'ites, mostly 
Persians, and acquired great power. He claimed that he was 
commissioned by Ali's son, Mahommed ibn al-Hanafiya, who 
after the death of Hosain was recognized by the Shi'ites as their 
Mahdi. A vague message from Mahommed, that it was the duty 
of every good Moslem to take part with the family of the Prophet, 
was interpreted in favour of Mokhtar, and thenceforward all the 
Shi'ites, among them the powerful Ibrahim, son of Ali's right 
hand Malik Ashtar, followed him blindly as their chief. After- 
wards Ibn al-Hanafiya seems to have acknowledged him dis- 
tinctly as his vicegerent. . Ibn Zobair's representative in Kufa 
was compelled to flee, and all those who had participated in the 
battle of Kerbela were put to death. An army despatched 
against Obaidallah under Ibrahim routed the Syrians near 
Mosul (battle of Khazir); Obaidallah and Hosain b. Nomair 
were slain. Mokhtar was now at the zenith of power, but Ibn 
Zobair, determined to get rid at all costs of so dangerous an 
enemy, named his brother Mus'ab governor of Basra and ordered 
him to march against Kufa. Basra was at that time full of 
fugitives from Kufa, Arabian chiefs who resented the arrogance of 
Mokhtar's adherents, and desired eagerly to regain their former 
position in Kufa. The troops of Basra had been, since the death 
of Yazid, at war with the Kharijites, who had supported Ibn 
Zobair during the siege of Mecca, but had deserted him later. 
Their caliph, Nafi' b. Azraq, after whom they were called also 
Azraqites, threatened even the city itself, when Mohallab b. Abi 
Sofra, a very able general, compelled them to retire. Mohallab 
then marched with Mus'ab against Kufa. Mokhtar fell, and with 



CALIPHATE 



3* 



him the ephemeral dominion of the Persian Shi'ites. This had 
been their first attempt to dispute the authority of their Arabian 
conquerors, but it was not to be the last. Ibrahim b. Ashtar, 
Mokhtar's governor of Mesopotamia, submitted and acknow- 
ledged the Caliphate of Ibn Zobair. 

5. Reign of Abdalmalik. — Merwan died on the 27th of Ramadan 
65 (7th May 685); according to tradition, he was suffocated by 
his wife, because he had insulted her son Khalid and herself. 
The accession of Abdalmalik was attended with no difficulty, 
but the first years of his reign were occupied by troubles in 
northern Syria, where, instigated by the Greeks, the Mardaites 
of the Amanus, called Jarajima by the Arabs, penetrated into 
the Lebanon. He was obliged to conclude an unfavourable 
treaty first with them, later with the emperor of Constantinople. 
Moreover, in the year 68 (a.d. 687-688) Syria was afflicted by a 
serious famine. Ibn Zobair, however, was occupied at Mecca 
with the rebuilding of the Ka'ba, and Mus'ab was harassed not 
only by the Kharijites, but also by a noble freebooter, Obaidallah 
b. Horr, who had created for himself a principality in the vicinity 
of Madain (Ctesiphon). 

The period of the pilgrimage caused a momentary truce to all 
these struggles, and in Dhu '1-hijja, a.h. 68 (January 688), was 
seen the curious spectacle of four different standards planted 
near Mecca, belonging respectively to four chiefs, each of whom 
was a pretender to the empire; the standard of Abdallah b. 
Zobair, caliph of Mecca; that of the caliph of Damascus, 
Abdalmalik; that of Ali's son Mahommed b. al-Hanafiya, Mahdi 
of the Shi'ites; and that of the Kharijites, who were at that time 
under the command of Najda b. "Amir. Such, however, was the 
respect inspired by the holy places, that no disorders resulted. 

When, in the year (69 a.h.) 689 Abdalmalik had at last en- 
camped at Bo^nan IJablb in the vicinity of Kinnesrin (Qinnasrin) , l 
with the purpose of marching against Mu§'ab, his cousin 'Amr 
Ashdaq, to whom by the treaty of Jabia, before the battle of 
Merj Rahit, the succession to Merwan had been promised, took 
advantage of his absence to lay claim to the supreme power, and 
to have himself proclaimed caliph by his partisans. Abdalmalik 
was obliged to retrace his steps and to lay siege to his own capital. 
The garrison of Damascus took fright, and deserted their posts, 
so that 'Amr Ashdaq was compelled to surrender. The caliph 
Abdalmalik summoned him to his palace and slew him with his 
own hand. Abdalmalik has every claim to our esteem as one of 
the ablest monarchs that ever reigned, but this murder remains 
a lasting blot on his career. 

Abdalmalik could now give his whole attention to the pro- 
jected expedition against Irak. Mus'ab was encamped at 
Bajomaira in the neighbourhood of Takrit. But Abdalmalik's 
first task was to subdue Zofar and his Qaisites at Kerkesia 
(Qarqisia), and the rest of the partisans of Mokhtar at Nisibis. 
Meanwhile, Mu§'ab had to curb a violent revolt in Basra, brought 
about by agents of Abdalmalik, and called after a place in the 
city the revolt of the Jof rites. About the middle of a.d. 691 
Abdalmalik at last encamped at Dair al-Jathallq (the monastery 
of the Catholicus) between Maskin, not far from the site of 
Bagdad, and Bajomaira. Mus'ab's best troops were fighting 
under Mohallab against the Kharijites; many Basrians were 
secretly favourable to the Omayyads, nor were the Kufian 
soldiers to be trusted. The people of Irak had never been 
accustomed to discipline, and no improvement had taken place 
during the troubles of the last years. Abdalmalik, therefore, 
wrote secretly to the chiefs of Mus'ab's army, and persuaded them 
to desert to him, with the exception of Ibrahim b. Ashtar, the 
brave son of a brave father, who, after the fall of Mokhtar, had 
become a faithful supporter of Ibn Zobair. His death, in the 
beginning of the battle, decided the fate of Mu§'ab, who was 
slain sword in hand by a Shi'ite of Kufa. 

This victory opened the gates of Kufa to Abdalmalik, and all 
Irak received him with acclamation. Thence, a few days later, 
he sent Hajjaj b. Yusuf at the head of 2000 Syrians against Ibn 
Zobair in Mecca, and despatched a messenger toTariq b.' Amr, who 

1 Formerly the capital of the homonymous province of Syria ; 
it lies a day's march west from Haleb (Aleppo). 



was encamped at Wadi '1-Qora with 5000 men, to make himself 
master of Medina and thence to rejoin Hajjaj. Before the 
arrival of this reinforcement, Hajjaj confined himself to skir- 
mishes, in which his soldiers always had the advantage. Then, 
in Dhu 1 Qa'da 72 (March 25th, 692) Mecca was invested. The 
blockade lasted more than six months, during which the city was 
a prey to all the horrors of siege and famine. Hajjaj had set up a 
balista on the hill of Abu Qobais, whence he poured on the city a 
hail of stones, which was suspended only in the days of the 
pilgrimage. Ibn Zobair employed against him Abyssinians 
armed with Greek-fire-tubes, who, however, quitted him soon 
under the pressure of famine. This at length triumphed over his 
last adherents. Ten thousand fighting men, and even two of the 
sons of the pretender (it is said, on his own advice), left the city 
and surrendered. Mecca being thus left without defenders, Ibn 
Zobair saw that ruin was inevitable. Hajjaj having promised 
him amnesty if he would surrender, he went to his mother Asma, 
the daughter of Abu Bekr, who had reached the age of a hundred 
years, and asked her counsel. She answered that, if he was 
confident in the justice of his cause, he must die sword in hand. 
In embracing him for the last time, she felt the cuirass he wore 
and exclaimed that such a precaution was unworthy of a man 
resolved to die. He, therefore, took off the cuirass, and, when 
the Omayyad troops made their way into the city, attacked them 
furiously, notwithstanding his advanced age, and was slain. • His 
head was cut off, and sent by Hajjaj to Damascus. 

With Ibn Zobair perished the influence which the early 
companions of Mahomet had exercised over Islam. Medina and 
Mecca, though they continued to be the holy cities, had no longer 
their old political importance, which had already been shaken to 
its foundations by the murder of Othman and the subsequent 
troubles. Henceforward we shall find temporal interests, 
represented by Damascus, predominating over those of religion, 
and the centre of Islam, now permanently removed beyond the 
limits of Arabia, more susceptible to foreign influence, and 
assimilating more readily their civilizing elements. Damascus, 
Kufa and Basra will attract the flower of all the Moslem pro- 
vinces, and thus that great intellectual, literary and scientific 
movement, which reached its apogee under the first Abbasid 
Caliphs at Bagdad, steadily becomes more marked. 

After the burning of the Ka'ba during the siege of Mecca by 
Hosain b. Nomair, Ibn Zobair had rebuilt and enlarged the house 
of God. It is said that he thus carried out a design of the 
Prophet, which he had not ventured to undertake for fear of 
offending the newly converted Koreishites. Hajjaj pulled down 
the enlargements and restored the Ka'ba to its old state. Mean- 
while, the caliph committed to him the government of the Hejaz. 
The Medinians, whose loyalty was suspected, were treated by 
him with severity; not a few maulas (clients) were obliged to 
wear a leaden badge on their neck (Tabari, ii. p. 854 seq.). 

Thus the protracted war against Ibn Zobair was brought to an 
end; hence this year (71) also is called the " year of union " 
(jama' a). But the storms in Irak and Mesopotamia had not yet 
altogether subsided. The Qais could not leave unavenged the 
blood shed at Merj Rahit. For about ten years the Syrian and 
Mesopotamian deserts were the scene of a series of raids, often 
marked by great cruelty, and which have been the subject of a 
great many poems. Abdalmalik had need of all his tact and 
energy to pacify ultimately the zealous sectaries, but the 
antagonism between Yemenites (Kalb and Azd) and Modarites 
(Qais and Tamim) had been increased by these struggles, and 
even in the far east and the far west had fatal consequences. 

When Abdalmalik, after a stay of forty days, returned from Irak 
to Syria, he left two Omayyad princes as his vicegerents in Kufa 
and Basra. Mohallab, who at the time of the battle of Bajomaira 
was in the field against the Azraqites (Kharijites), and had put 
himself at the disposal of the caliph, had orders to carry on the 
war. But the two princes proved unequal to their task and did 
not support Mohallab sufficiently, so that the Kharijites gained 
more than one victory. Abdalmalik in alarm made Hajjaj 
governor of Irak with the most extensive powers. The troops of 
Kufa, who accompanied Mohallab in an expedition against the 



3 2 



CALIPHATE 



Kharijites, had abandoned their general and dispersed to their 
homes, and nothing could induce them to return to their duty. 
Then, in the year 75 (a.d. 694),' at the moment when the people 
were assembled in the mosque for morning prayers, an unknown 
young man of insignificant appearance, with a veil over his face, 
ascended the pulpit. It seemed at first that he could not find his 
words. One of the audience, with a contemptuous remark, took 
a handful of pebbles to pelt him with. But he let them fall when 
Hajjaj lifted his veil and began to speak. 

" Men of Kufa," he said, " I see before me heads ripe for the 
sickle, and the reaper- — I am he. It seems to me, as if I saw 
already the blood between your turbans and your shoulders. I 
am not one of those who can be frightened by inflated bags of skin, 
nor need any one think to squeeze me like a fig. The Prince of 
the Believers has spread before him the arrows of his quiver, and 
has tried every one of them by biting its wood. It is my wood 
that he has found the hardest and strongest, and I am the arrow 
which he shoots against you." 

At the end of this address he ordered his clerk to read the 
letter of the caliph. He began: " From the servant of God, 
Abdalmalik, Prince of the Believers, to the "Moslems that are in 
Kufa, peace be with you." As nobody uttered a word in reply, 
Hajjaj said: " Stop, boy," and exclaimed: " The Prince of the 
Believers salutes you, and you do not answer his greeting ! You 
have been but poorly taught. I will teach you afresh, unless 
you behave better. Read again the letter of the Prince of the 
Believers." Then, as soon as he had read: " peace upon ye," 
there remained not a single man in the mosque who did not 
respond, "and upon the Prince of the Believers be peace." 
Thereupon Hajjaj ordered that every man capable of bearing 
arms should immediately join Mohallab in Khuzistari (Susiana), 
and swore that all who should be found in the town after the third 
day should be beheaded. This threat had its effect, and Hajjaj 
proceeded to Basra, where his presence was followed by the same 
results. Mohallab, reinforced by the army of Irak, at last 
succeeded, after a struggle of eighteen months, in subjugating 
the Kharijites and their caliph Qatara b. Foja'a, and was able at 
the beginning of the year 78 (a.d. 697) to return to Hajjaj at 
Basra. The latter loaded him with honours and made him 
governor of Khorasan, whence he directed several expeditions 
into Transoxiana. In the meantime Hajjaj himself had, in 695 
and 696, with great difficulty suppressed Shablb b. Yazid at the 
head of the powerful tribe of Shaiban, who, himself a Kharijite, 
had assumed the title of Prince of the Believers, and had even 
succeeded in occupying Kufa. In the east the realm of Islam 
had been very much extended under the reign of Moawiya, 
when Ziyad was governor of Irak and Khorasan. Balkh and 
Tokharistan, Bokhara, Samarkand and Khwarizm (modern 
Khiva), even Kabul and Kandahar had been subdued; but in 
the time of the civil war a great deal had been lost again. Now 
at last the task of recovering the lost districts could be resumed. 
When, in 697, Hajjaj gave the government of Khorasan to 
Mohallab, he committed that of Sijistan (Seistan) to Obaidallah 
b. Abi Bakra, a cousin of Ziyad. This prefect allowed himself to 
be enticed by Zanbll, prince of Zabulistan, to penetrate into the 
country far from his base, and escaped narrowly, not without 
severe losses. The command over Sijistan was now given to 
Abdarrahman b. Ash'ath, a descendant of the old royal family of 
Kinda, and a numerous army was entrusted to him, so magnifi- 
cently equipped that it was called " the peacock army." Not 
long after his arrival in Sijistan, Ibn Ash'ath, exasperated by the 
masterful tone of Hajjaj, the plebeian, towards himself, the 
high-born, decided to revolt. The soldiers of Irak, who did not 
love: the governor, and disliked the prospect of a long and 
difficult war far from home, eagerly accepted the proposition of 
returning to Irak, and even proclaimed the dethronement of 
Abdalmalik, in favour of Ibn Ash'ath. The new pretender 
entered Fars and Ahwaz (Susiana) , and it was in this last province 
near Tostar (Shuster) that Hajjaj came up with him, after 
receiving from Syria the reinforcements which he had demanded 
in all haste from the caliph. Ibn Ash'ath drove him back to 
Basra, entered the city, and then turned his arms against Kufa. 



of which be took possession with aid from within. Hajjaj, 
afraid lest his communications with Syria should be cut off, 
pitched his camp at Dair Qorra, eighteen miles west from Kufa 
towards the desert, where Mahommed, the brother of the caliph, 
and Abdallah, his son, brought him fresh troops. Ibn Ash'ath 
encamped not far from him at Dair al-Jamajim with a far more 
numerous army. In great alarm Abdalmalik endeavoured to 
stifle the revolt by offering to dismiss Hajjaj from his post. 
The insurgents rejected this offer, and hostilities recommenced. 
At the end of three months and a half, in July 702, a decisive 
action took place. Victory declared for Hajjaj. Ibn Ash'ath 
fled to Basra, where he managed to collect fresh troops; but 
having been again beaten in a furious battle that took place at 
Maskin near the Dojail, he took refuge at Ahwaz, from which he 
was soon driven by the troops of Hajjaj under 'Omara b. Tamlm. 
The rebel then retired to Sijistan, and afterwards sought • an 
asylum with the king of Kabul. His partisans fled before 
'Omara's army and penetrated into Khorasan, where they were 
disarmed by the governor Yazid, son of the celebrated Mohallab, 
who had died in the year 701. The pretender was betrayed by 
the king of Kabul and killed himself. His head was sent to 
Hajjaj and then to Damascus. This happened in the year 703 
or 704. Yazid b. Mohallab was soon after deprived of the 
government of Khorasan, Majjaj accusing him of partiality 
towards the rebels of Yemenite extraction. He appointed in his 
stead first his brother Mofaddal b. Mohallab, and nine months 
after Qotaiba b. Moslim, who was destined in a later period to 
extend the sway of Islam in the east as far as China. 

The struggle of Ibn Ash'ath was primarily a contest for 
hegemony between Irak and Syria. The proud Arabic lords 
could not acquiesce in paying to a plebeian like Hajjaj, invested 
with absolute power by the caliph, the strict obedience he re- 
quired. They considered it further as an injustice that the 
Syrian soldiers received higher pay than those of Irak. This is 
apparent from the fact that one of the conditions of peace 
proposed by Abdalmalik before the battle of Dair al-Jamajim 
had been that henceforth the Irakian troops should be paid 
equally with the Syrian. Moreover, Hajjaj, in order to maintian 
the regular revenue from taxation, had been obliged to introduce 
stringent regulations, and had compelled a great many villagers 
who had migrated to the cities to return to their villages. 
Several of these -werefaqihs, students of Koranic science and law, 
and all these seconded Ibn Ash'ath with all their might. But, as 
Wellhausen has shown, it is not correct to consider the contest as 
a reaction of the maula's (Persian Moslems) against the Arabic 
supremacy. 

Immediately after the victories of Dair al-Jamajim and 
Maskin, in 702, Hajjaj, built a new residence on the Tigris, 
between Basra and Kufa, which he called Wasit (" Middle "). 
There his Syrian soldiers were not in contact with the turbulent 
citizens of the two capitals, and were at any moment ready to 
suppress any fresh outburst. 

At the beginning of his reign Abdalmalik had replaced the 
humble mosque built by Omar on the site of the temple at 
Jerusalem by a magnificent dome, which was completed in the 
year 691. Eutychius and others pretend that he desired to 
substitute Jerusalem for Mecca, because Ibn Zobair had occupied 
the latter place, and thus the pilgrimage to the Ka'ba had become 
difficult for the Syrians. This is quite improbable. Abdalmalik 
was born and educated in Islam, and distinguished himself in his 
youth by piety and continence. He regarded himself as the 
champion of Islam and of the communion of the believers, and 
had among his intimates men of acknowledged devoutness such 
as Raja b. Haywa. The idea of interfering with the pilgrimage 
to the House of God at Mecca, which would have alienated from 
him all religious men, and thus from a political point of view 
would have been suicidal, cannot have entered his mind for a 
moment. But the glorification of Jerusalem, holy alike for 
Moslems, Christians and Jews, could not but exalt the glory of 
Islam and its rulers within and without. 

As soon as the expedition to Irak against Mus'ab had termin- 
ated, the holy war against the Greeks was renewed. The 



CALIPHATE 



33 



queries in Asia Minor and Armenia were entrusted to
Mahommed b. Merwan, the caliph's brother, who was appointed 
governor of Mesopotamia and Armenia, and in 692 beat the 
army of Justinian II. near Sebaste in Cilicia. From this time 
forth the Moslems made yearly raids, the chief advantage of 
which was that they kept the Syrian and Mesopotamian Arabs 
in continual military exercise. After the victorious march of 
Okba (Oqba) b. Nan' through north Africa and the foundation of 
Kairawan, his successor Qais b. Zohair had been obliged to 
retreat to Barca (Cyrenaica). In the year 696 Abdalmalik sent 
Hassan b. No'man into Africa at the head of a numerous army. 
He retook Kairawan, swept the coast as far as Carthage, which he 
sacked, expelling the Greek garrisons from all the fortified places; 
he then turned his arms against the Berbers, who, commanded by 
the Kahina (Diviner), as the Arabs called their queen, beat him 
so completely that he was compelled to retreat to Barca. Five 
years later he renewed the war, defeated and killed the Kahina, 
and subdued the Berbers, who henceforward remained faithful to 
the Arabs. Hassan continued to be governor of Kairawan till 
after the death of Abdalmalik. 

In the meantime Abdalmalik reconstituted the administration 
of the empire on Arabic principles. Up to the year 693 the 
Moslems had no special coinage of their own, and chiefly used 
Byzantine and Persian money, either imported or struck by 
themselves. Moawiya, indeed, had struck dinars and dirhems 
with a Moslem inscription, but his subjects would not accept 
them as there was no cross upon them. Abdalmalik instituted 
a purely Islamitic coinage. If we may believe Theophanes, who 
says that Justinian II. refused to receive these coins in payment 
of the tribute and therefore declared the treaty at an end, we 
must put the beginning of the coinage at least two years earlier. 
Hajjaj coined silver dirhems at Kufa in 694. A still greater 
innovation was that Arabic became the official language of the 
state. In the conquered countries till then, not only had the 
Greek and Persian administration been preserved, but Greek 
remained the official language in the western, Persian in the 
eastern provinces. All officials were now compelled to know 
Arabic and to conduct their administration in that language. 
To this change was due in great measure the predominance of 
Arabic throughout the empire. Lastly, a regular post service 
was instituted from Damascus to the provincial capitals, especi- 
ally destined for governmental despatches. The postmasters 
.were charged with the task of informing the caliph of all important 
news in their respective countries. 

All the great rivals of Abdalmalik having now disappeared, 
he was no longer like his predecessors primus inter pares, but 
dominus. Under his rule the members of the Omayyad house 
enjoyed a greater amount of administrative control than had 
formerly been the case, but high office was given only to com- 
petent men. He succeeded in reconciling the sons of 'Amr 
Ashdaq, and also Khalid b. Yazid, to whom he gave bis own 
daughter in marriage. He himself had married 'Atika, a daughter 
of Yazid, a union which was in all respects a happy one. He 
took great care in the education of his sons, whom he destined 
as his successors. His brother Abdalazlz, governor of Egypt, 
whom Merwan had marked out as his successor, died in the year 
703 or 704, and Abdalmalik chose as heirs to the empire first 
his son Walid, and after him his second son Suleiman. He 
himself died on the 14th Shawwal 86 (9th October 705) at the age 
of about sixty. His reign was one of the most stormy in the 
annals of Islam, but also one of the most glorious. Abdalmalik 
not only brought triumph to the cause of the Omayyads, but 
also extended and strengthened the Moslem power as a whole. 
He was well versed in old Arabic tradition and in the doctrine 
of Islam, and was passionately fond of poetry. His court was 
crowded with poets, whom he loaded with favours, even if they 
were Christians like Akhtal. In his reign flourished also the two 
celebrated rivals of Akhtal, Jarir and Farazdaq. 

6. Reign of Walid I. — This is the most glorious epoch in the 
history of Islam. In Asia Minor and Armenia, Maslama, brother 
of the caliph, and his generals obtained numerous successes 
against the Greeks. Tyana was conquered after a long siege, 

v. 2 



and a great expedition against Constantinople was in preparation. 
In Armenia Maslama advanced even as far as! the Caucasus. In 
Africa, Musa b. Nosair, who succeeded Hassan b. No'man as 
governor, in a short time carried his conquests as far as Fez, 
Tangier and Ceuta, and one of his captains even made -a descent 
on Sicily and plundered Syracuse. When he returned from the 
west to Kairawan, he made his client Tariq (or Tarik) governor 
of Tangier and of the whole western part of Africa. Under him 
the chiefs who had submitted to the Moslem arms retained 
their authority. One of them was the Greek exarch of Tangier, 
Julian, who, supported by the powerful Berber tribe of Ghomera, 
had long resisted and even asked for aid from Spain, but had 
been compelled to surrender and was left governor of Cedta. 
Meanwhile in Spain, after the death of the Gothic king Witiza 
in the year 90 (708-709), anarchy arose, which was terminated 
by the council of noblemen at Toledo electing Roderic, the power- 
ful duke of Baetica, to be his successor in the fifth year of Walid. 
The eldest son of Witiza then applied to Julian, and asked the aid 
of the Arabs for the recovery of his father's throne. Tariq 
forwarded the embassy to Kairawan, and Musa asked the 
caliph's permission to send an expedition into Spain. Authorized 
by Musa, Tariq now sent, in Ramadan 91 (July 710), 500 Berbers 
under the command of Tarif to reconnoitre the country. This 
expedition, seconded by partisans of Witiza, was successful. Ill 
the beginning of a.d. 711 Roderic had been summoned to the 
north on account' of an invasion of Navarra by the Franks', 
caused, it is said, by the conspirators. Tariq s thus certain of 
meeting no serious opposition to his landing; passed into Spain 
himself with an army composed mainly of Berbers of the Ghomera 
tribe under the guidance of Julian. The spot where he landed 
thence acquired the name of Jebel Tariq, " Mountain of Tariq," 
afterwards corrupted into Gibraltar. Having made himself 
master of Algeciras and thereby secured his communication with 
Africa, Tariq set out at once in the direction of Cordova. At the 
news of the invasion Roderic hastened back and led a numerous 
army against the combined forces of Tariq and the partisans of 
Witiza. A fierce battle took place in the plain of Barbata on the 
little river of Guadaleta (north of Medina Sidonia), in which 
Roderic was completely routed. The spoils of the victors were 
immense, especially in horses, but the king himself had dis- 
appeared. Fearing lest he should have escaped to Toledo and 
should there fit out another army, the partisans of Witiza 
insisted that Tariq should march immediately against the capital. 
Tariq complied with their wishes, notwithstanding the express 
command of Musa b. Nosair that he should not venture too far 
into the country, and the protests of Julian. Having made 
himself master of Ecija and having despatched a detachment 
under Moghlth against Cordova, Tariq took Mentesa (Villanueva 
de la Fuente) and marched upon Toledo, which he soon con- 
quered. At the same time Moghlth took Cordova. But, 
notwithstanding these successes, Tariq knew that his situation 
was most critical. King Roderic, who had escaped to Lusitania, 
and the noble Goths, who had fled from Toledo, would certainly 
not be slow in making efforts to regain what they had lost. He 
therefore sent a message in all haste to Musa, entreating him to 
come speedily. Musa, though angered by the disobedience of 
Tariq, hastened to the rescue and embarked in April 712 with 
18,000 men, among them many noble Arabs, and began, advised 
by Julian, a methodical campaign, with the purpose of estab- 
lishing and securing a line of communication between the sea 
and Toledo. After having taken Seville, Carmona and Merida, 
he marched from the latter place by the Via Romana to Sala- 
manca, after having ordered Tariq to rejoin him in order to 
encounter king Roderic. Not far from Tamames the king was 
defeated and killed. King Alphonso the Great found his tomb- 
stone at Viseo with the inscription, " Hie requiescit Rodericus rex 
Gothorum." After this battle Must reconquered Toledo, which, 
after the departure of Tariq, had recovered its independence, 
and entered the capital in tfiumph . Already, before the expedi- 
tion to Salamanca, he had perceived that the sons of Witiza had 
neither military nor political ability. He therefore proclaimed 
the caliph of Damascus as sole ruler of the whole peninsula. 



34 



CALIPHATE 



The Gothic princes must content themselves with honours and 
apanages, in which they readily acquiesced. In the same year 
93 (a.d. 712) Musa struck Moslem coins with Latin inscriptions. 
Musa then continued the subjugation of Spain, till Walid recalled 
him to Damascus. He obeyed after having appointed his son 
Abdalazlz governor of Andalos (Andalusia), as the Arabs named 
the peninsula, and assigned Seville as his residence. AbdalazTz 
consolidated his power by marrying the widow of the late king 
Roderic. Musa left Spain about August 714, and reached 
Damascus shortly before the death of Walid. Notwithstanding 
the immense booty he brought, he did not receive his due reward. 
Accused of peculation, he was threatened with imprisonment 
unless he paid a fine of 100,000 pieces of gold. The old man — 
he was born in the year 640 — was released by Yazid b. Mohallab, 
the then mighty favourite of the caliph Suleiman, but died in 
the same year 716 on his way to Mecca. His son Abdalazlz was 
an excellent ruler, who did much for the consolidation of the 
new conquests, but he reigned only one year and eleven months, 
when he was murdered. His death has been falsely imputed by 
some historians to the caliph Suleiman. 1 

In the East the Moslem armies gained the most astonishing 
successes. In the course of a few years Qotaiba b. Moslim 
conquered Paikend, Bokhara, Samarkand, Khwarizm (mod. 
Khiva), Ferghana and Shash (Tashkent), and even Kashgar on 
the frontiers of China. Meanwhile Mahommed b. Qasim invaded 
Makran, took Daibol, passed the Indus, and marched, after 
having beaten the Indian king Daher, through Sind upon Multan, 
which he conquered and whence he carried off an immense booty. 

Walid was the first caliph, born and trained as prince, who 
felt the majesty of the imamate and wished it to be felt by his 
subjects. He desired to augment the splendours of Islam and 
its sovereign, as Abdalmalik had already done by building the 
dome of Jerusalem. In the time of the conquest of Damascus, 
one half of the great church had been made a mosque, while the 
remaining half had been left to the Christians. Walid annexed 
this part, indemnifying the Christians elsewhere, and restored 
the whole building sumptuously and magnificently. In his time 
many fine palaces and beautiful villas were built in Syria, and 
Becker's conjecture seems not altogether improbable, that from 
this period dates the palace of Mashetta, the facade of which is 
now in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum at Berlin, as perhaps also 
the country houses discovered by Musil in the land of Moab. 
Walid also caused the mosque of Medina to be enlarged. For 
this purpose, the apartments of the Prophet and his wives were 
demolished, which at first caused much discontent in Medina, 
some crying out that thereby a verse of the Book of God (S. 49, 
v. 4) was cancelled. With this exception, the citizens of Medina 
had nothing to complain of. The vicegerent of Abdalmalik 
had treated them harshly. Walid immediately on his accession 
appointed as governor of Hejaz his cousin Omar b. Abdalazlz, 
who was received there with joy, his devoutness and gentle 
character being well known. But the reputation of Omar 
attracted to the two holy cities a great number of the inhabitants 
of Irak, who had been deeply involved in the rebellion of Ibn 
Ash'ath. Hajjaj, however, was not the man to allow the forma- 
tion of a fresh nucleus of sedition, and persuaded the caliph to 
dismiss Omar in the year 712, and appoint Othman b. H a yyan 
at Medina and Khalid al-Qasri at Mecca. These two prefects 
compelled the refugees to return to Irak, where many of them 
were severely treated and even put to death by Hajjaj. 

Few people have been so slandered as this great viceroy of the 
Orient. In reality he was a man of extraordinary ability, and 
accomplished the task committed to him with vigour and energy. 
To his unflagging constancy was due the suppression of the 
dangerous rebellion of Ibn Ash'ath. After the restoration of 
peace his capacity for organization was displayed in all directions. 

1 This account of the conquest is based partly on the researches 
of Dozy, but mainly on those of Saavedra in his Estudio sobre la 
Invasion de los Arabes en Espana (Madrid, 1892). Some of the 
details, however, e.g. the battle near Tamames and the part played 
by the sons of Witiza, are based, not on documentary evidence, but 
on probable inferences. For other accounts of the deaths of Musa 
and Abdalaziz see Sir Wm. Muir, Caliphate (London, 1891), pp.368-9. 



The draining and tilling of submerged or uncultivated land on a 
large scale, the promotion of agriculture in every way, in par- 
ticular by the digging of channels, and the regulation of the 
system of taxation, were carried out on his initiative. He 
showed the utmost wisdom in the selection of his lieutenants. 
The fear of his name was so great that even in the desert there 
was security for life and property, and his brilliant military 
successes were unquestionably due in a great measure to the 
care which he bestowed on equipment and commissariat. The 
heavy expenses entailed thereby were largely met by the booty 
which he won. Hajjaj was a sincere Moslem; this, however, 
did not prevent him from attacking Ibn Zobair in the Holy 
City, nor again from punishing rebels, though they bore the 
name of holy men. He enjoyed the entire confidence of Abdal- 
malik with Walid, but Suleiman, the appointed successor, 
regarded him with disfavour. Yazid b. Mohallab, whom he had 
recalled from Khorasan, and imprisoned, had escaped and put 
himself under the protection of Suleiman, who made himself 
surety for the fine to which Yazid had been condemned. Hajjaj 
foreboded evil, and prayed eagerly that he might die before 
Walid. His death took place about the end of Ramadan 95 
(June or July 714). 

7. Reign of Suleiman (Solaiman). — Suleiman had early missed 
the throne. Walid wished to have his son Abdalazlz chosen as 
his successor, and had offered Suleiman a large sum of money to 
induce him to surrender bis rights. Walid went still further 
and sent letters to the governors of all the provinces, calling on 
them to take the oath of allegiance to his son. None, except 
Hajjaj and his two generals Qotaiba b. Moslim and Mahommed b. 
Qasim, consented thus to set at naught the order of succession 
established by Abdalmalik; and Suleiman succeeded without 
difficulty on the death of his brother Jornada II. 96 (February 
715). We can easily conceive the hatred felt by Suleiman for 
Hajjaj and for all that belonged to him. Hajjaj himself was 
dead; but Suleiman poured out his wrath on his family and his 
officers. The governors of Medina and Mecca were dismissed; 
Mahommed b. Qasim, the conqueror of India, cousin of Hajjaj, 
was dismissed from his post and outlawed. Qotaiba b. Moslim, 
the powerful governor of Khorasan, tried to anticipate the caliph 
by a revolt, but a conspiracy was formed against him, which 
ended in his murder. Some historians say that he was falsely 
accused of rebellion. 

Yazid b. Mohallab, the enemy of Maj jaj, was made governor • 
of Irak. His arrival was hailed with joy, especially by the 
Azd, to whom his family belonged, and the other Yemenite 
tribes. Yazid discovered soon that the system of taxation as 
regulated by Hajjaj could not be altered without serious danger 
to the finances of the empire, and that he could not afford the 
expenses which his prodigal manner of life involved. He there- 
fore asked the caliph to give him the governorship of Khorasan 
also, and took his residence in Merv, where he was free from 
control. On his return to Khorasan he set on foot a series of 
new expeditions against Jorjan and Tabaristan, with only partial 
success. He sent, however, to the caliph an exaggerated account 
of his victories and the booty he had made. He had cause to 
repent this later. 

Walid had, in the last years of his reign, made preparations 
for a great expedition against Constantinople. Suleiman carried 
them on with energy, and as early as the autumn of a.d. 715 
Maslama invaded Asia Minor at the head of a numerous army, 
whilst a well-equipped fleet under Omar b. Hobaira sailed out 
to second him. It is said that Suleiman was firmly persuaded 
that Constantinople would be conquered during his reign, in 
accordance with a Sibylline prophecy which said that the city 
would be subdued by a caliph bearing the name of a prophet, 
he himself being the first to fulfil this condition. 2 Moreover, the 
Byzantine empire was in these years disturbed by internal 
troubles. The first year of the expedition was not unsuccessful. 
The siege of Amorium in Phrygia was broken up, but Pergamum 
and Sardis were taken. On the 25th of August 716 the blockade 

2 Solaiman is the Arabic form of Solomon. The prophecy is to 
be found in the Kitab al-Oyun, p. 24; cf. Tabari ii. p. 1138. 



CALIPHATE 



35 



of Constantinople began from the land side, and two weeks later 
from the sea side. A few months before, Leo the Isaurian had 
ascended the throne and prepared the city for the siege. This 
lasted about a year. The besieged were hard pressed, but the 
besiegers suffered by the severe winter, and were at last obliged 
to raise the siege. Maslama brought back the rest of his army 
in a pitiful state, while the fleet, on its return, was partly de- 
stroyed by a violent tempest. The Moslems regard this failure 
as one of the great evils that have befallen the human race, and 
one which retarded the progress of the world for ages, 1 the other 
calamity being the defeat in the battle of Tours by Charles Martel. 

Maslama was still on his way back when Suleiman died at 
Dabiq in northern Syria, which was the base of the expeditions 
into Asia Minor. He seems not to have had the firmness of 
character nor the frugality of Walid; but he was very severe 
against the looseness of manners that reigned at Medina, and was 
highly religious. Raja. b. Haywa, renowned for his piety, whose 
influence began under Abdalmalik and increased under Walid, 
was his constant adviser and even determined him to designate 
as his successor his devout cousin Omar b. Abdalazlz. Suleiman 
was kind towards the Alids and was visited by several of them, 
amongst others by Abu Hashim, the son of Mahommed b. al 
Hanaflya, who after his father's death had become the secret 
Imam (head) of the Shi'ites. On his way back to Hejaz this man 
visited the family of Abdallah b. 'Abbas, which resided at 
Homaima, a place situated in the vicinity of 'Amman, and died 
there, after having imparted to Mahommed b. Ali b. Abdallah b. 
Abbas the names of the chiefs of the Shi'a in Irak and Khorasan, 
and disclosed his way of corresponding with them. From that 
time the Abbasids began their machinations against the 
Omayyads in the name of the family of the Prophet, avoiding all 
that could cause suspicion to the Shi'ites, but holding the strings 
firmly in their own hands. 

8. Reign of Omar II. — Omar b. Abdalazlz did his best to 
imitate his grandfather Omar in all things, and especially in 
maintaining the simple manner of life of the early Moslems. He 
was, however, born in the midst of wealth; thus frugality 
became asceticism, and in so far as he demanded the same rigour 
from his relatives, he grew unjust and caused uneasiness and 
discontent. By paying the highest regard to integrity in the 
choice of his officers, and not to ability, he did not advance the 
interests of his subjects, as he earnestly wished to do. In the 
matter of taxes, though actuated by the most noble designs, he 
did harm to the public revenues.. The principle of Islam was, 
that no Moslem, whatever might be his nationality, should pay 
any tax other than the zakdt or poor-rate (see Mahommedan 
Institutions). In practice, this privilege was confined to the 
Arabic Moslems. Omar wished to maintain the principle. The 
original inhabitants had been left on the conquered lands as 
agriculturists, on condition of paying a fixed sum yearly for 
each district. If one of these adopted Islam, Omar permitted 
him to leave his place,' which had been strictly forbidden by 
Hajjaj in Irak and the eastern provinces, because by it many 
hands were withdrawn from the tilling of the ground, and those 
who remained were unable to pay the allotted amount. Omar's 
system not only diminished the actual revenue, but largely 
increased in the cities the numbers of the mania's (clients), 
mainly Persians, who were weary of their dependency on their 
Arabic lords, and demanded equal rights for themselves. Their 
short dominion in Kufa under Mokhtar had been suppressed, but 
the discontent continued. In North Africa particularly, and in 
Khorasan the effect of Omar's proclamation was that a great 
multitude embraced Islam. When it became necessary to impose 
a tribute upon the new converts, great discontent arose, which 
largely increased the number of those who followed the Shi'ite 
preachers of revolt. Conversion to Islam was promoted by the 
severe regulations which Omar introduced for the non-believers, 
such as Christians and Jews. 1 1 was he who issued those humiliat- 
ing rescripts, which are commonly but unjustly attributed to 
Omar I. But he forbade extortion and suppressed more than 

1 Seyid Ameer Ali, A Critical Examination of the Life and Teach- 
ings of Mahomet, pp. 341-343. 



one illegal impost. He endeavoured above all to procure justice 
for all his subjects. Complaints against oppression found in him 
a ready listener, and many unlawfully acquired possessions were 
restored to the legal owners, for instance, to the descendants of 
Ali and Talha. Even to the Kharijites he contrived to give 
satisfaction, as far as possible. In all these matters he followed 
the guidance of divines and devotees, in whose congenial company 
he delighted. It is, therefore, not to be wondered at that these 
men saw in Omar the ideal of a prince, and that in Moslem 
history he has acquired the reputation of a saint. 

After the failure of the siege of Constantinople, the advanced 
posts in Asia Minor were withdrawn, but the raids were continued 
regularly. It has been said that it was Omar's intention to give 
up his Spanish conquests, but the facts argue the contrary. The 
governor, named by Omar, Samh b. Abdallah, even crossed the 
Pyrenees and took possession of Narbonne; but he was beaten 
and killed at Toulouse in July 720. But Omar did all he could to 
prevent the degradation of the Holy War, which, instead of being 
the ultimate expedient for the propagation of Islam, if all 6ther 
means had failed, had often degenerated into mere pillaging 
expeditions against peaceful nations. 

9. Reign of Yazid II. — Omar's reign was as short as that of 
his predecessor. He died on the 24th of Rajab 101 (a.d. 9th 
February 720). Yazid II., son of Abdalmalik and, by his mother 
'Atika, grandson of Yazid I., ascended the throne without opposi- 
tion. He had at once, however, to put down a dangerous 
rebellion. Yazid b. Mohallab had returned to Irak, after the 
conquest of Jorjan, when Suleiman was still alive. Shortly after, 
AdI b. Artat, whom Omar II. had appointed governor, arrived, 
arrested Yazid, and sent him to Omar, who called him to account 
for the money he had mentioned in his letter to Suleiman, and 
imprisoned him when he pretended not to be able to pay the 
amount. Yazid II. had personal grounds for ill-will to Yazid b. 
Mohallab. One of the wives of the new caliph, the same who 
gave birth to that son of Yazid II. who afterwards reigned as 
Walid II., was niece to the celebrated Hajjaj, whose family had 
been ill-treated by the son of Mohallab, when he was governor of 
Irak under Suleiman. Aware that Yazid b. Abdalmalik, on 
ascending the throne, would spare neither him nor his family, 
Yazid b. Mohallab had succeeded in escaping to Basra, the home 
of his family, where his own tribe the Azd was predominant. 
Meanwhile 'AdI b. Artat had all the brothers of Yazid and other 
members of the family of Mohallab arrested, and tried to prevent 
Yazid from entering the city. But 'Adi was too scrupulous to 
employ the public money for raising the pay of his soldiers, 
whilst Yazid promised mountains of gold. Yazid stormed the 
castle and took 'AdI prisoner, the public treasury fell into his 
hands, and he employed the money to pay his troops largely and 
to raise fresh ones. A pardon obtained for him from the caliph 
came too late; he had already gone too far. He now proclaimed 
a Holy War against the Syrians, whom he declared to be worse 
enemies of Islam than even the Turks and the Dailam. Notwith- 
standing the warnings of the aged Hasan al-Basri, the friend of 
Omar II., the religious people, took the part of Yazid, and were 
followed by the manias. Though the number of his adherents 
thus increased enormously, their military value was small. 
Ahwaz (Khuzistan), Fars and Kirman were easily subdued, but 
in Khorasan the Azd could not prevail over the Tamlm, who were 
loyal to the caliph. As the rebellion threatened to spread far and 
wide, Yazid II. was obliged to appeal to his brother, the celebrated 
Maslama. With the approach of the Syrians, Yazid b. Mohallab 
tried to forestall them at Kufa. He took his way over Wasit, 
which he mastered — the Syrian garrison seems to have been 
withdrawn in the days of Omar II. — but, before he could get hold 
of Kufa, the Syrian troops arrived. The meeting took place at 
'Aqr in the vicinity of Babel, and Yazid was completely defeated 
and fell in the battle. His brothers and sons fled to Basra; 
thence they went by sea to Kirman and then to Kandabil in 
India; but they were pursued relentlessly and slain with only 
two exceptions by the officers of Maslama. The possessions of 
the Mohallabites were confiscated. 

Maslama was rewarded with the governorship of Irak and 



36 



CALIPHATE 



Khorasan, but was soon replaced by Omar b. Hobaira, who under 
Omar II. had been governor of Mesopotamia. He belonged to 
the tribe of Qais, and was very severe against the Azd and other 
Yemenite tribes, who had more or less favoured the part of Yazid 
b. Mohallab. In these years the antagonism between Qais 
(Modar) and Yemenites became more and more acute, especially 
in Khorasan. The real cause of the dismissal of Maslama was, 
that he did not send the revenue-quota to Damascus. Omar b. 
Hobaira, to supply the deficiency, ordered the prefect of 
Khorasan, Sa'id-al-Harashl, to take tribute from the Sogdians in 
Transoxiana, who had embraced Islam on the promise of Omar II. 
The Sogdians raised a revolt in Ferghana, but were subdued by 
Sa'id and obliged to pay. A still more questionable measure of 
Ibn Hobaira was his ordering the successor of Sa'id Harashi to 
extort large sums of money from several of the most respectable 
Khorasanians. The discontent roused thereby became one of the 
principal causes of the fall of the Omayyads. 

In Africa serious troubles arose from the same cause. Yazid b. 
Abi Moslim, who had been at the head of the financial department 
in Irak under Hajjaj, and had been made governor of Africa by 
Yazid II., issued orders that the villagers who, having adopted 
Islam, were freed from tribute according to the promise of Omar 
II., and had left their villages for the towns, should return to 
their domiciles and pay the same tribute as before their conver- 
sion. The Berbers rose in revolt, slaughtered the unfortunate 
governor, and put in his place the former governor Mahommed b. 
Yazid. The caliph at first ratified this choice, but soon after 
dismissed Mahommed from his post, and replaced him by Bishr b. 
§a£wan, who under Hisham made an expedition against Sicily. 

Yaiid II. was by natural disposition the opposite of his prede- 
cessor. He did not feel that anxiety for the spiritual welfare of 
his subjects which had animated Omar II. Poetry and music, 
not beloved by Suleiman and condemned by Omar, were held 
by him in great honour. Two court-singers, Sallama and Hababa, 
exercised great influence, tempered only by the austerity of 
manners that prevailed in Syria. He was so deeply affected by 
the death of Hababa, that Maslama entreated him not to exhibit 
his sorrow to the eyes of the public. He died a few days later, on 
the 26th of January 724, according to the chroniclers from grief 
for her loss. As his successor he had appointed in the first place 
his brother Hisham, and after him his own son Walid. 

10. Reign of Hisham. — Hisham was a wise and able prince 
and an enemy of luxury, not an idealist like Omar II., nor a 
worldling like Yazid II., but more like his father Abdalmalik, 
devoting all his energy to the pacification of the interior, and to 
extending and consolidating the empire of Islam. But the dis- 
content, which had been sown under his predecessors, had now 
developed to such an extent that he could not suppress it in 
detail. His first care was to put an end to the tyrannical rule 
of, the Qaisites (Modarites) in Irak and Khorasan by dismissing 
Omar b. Hobaira and appointing in his place Khalid al-Qasri. 
This very able man, who under Hajjaj had been prefect of 
Mecca, belonged properly neither to the Qaisites nor to the 
Yemenites, but as he took the place of Ibn Hobaira and dis- 
missed his partisans from their posts, the former considered him 
as. their adversary, the latter as their benefactor. After his 
death, in' particular, the Yemenites celebrated him as their chief, 
and assigned as the reason for their revolt the injuries which he 
suffered, Khalid himself assuredly did not intend it. He was a 
loyal servant of the dynasty, and remained such even after 
receiving very harsh treatment from them. For fifteen years 
Khalid governed the eastern half of the empire, and continued 
to maintain peace with only few exceptions throughout. He 
did much for the reclaiming and improving of lands in Irak, in 
which the caliph himself and several princes took an active part. 
The great revenues obtained thereby naturally caused much 
jealousy. Khalid lived on a very rich scale and was extra- 
ordinarily liberal, and he was charged with having carried out all 
his improvements for his own interests, and upbraided for 
Selling -the corn of his estates only when the prices were high. 
To these charges were added the accusation that he was too 
tolerant ; to Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians. As his mother 



professed the Christian religion, he was accused of infidelity. 
At last a conspiracy, into which the principal engineer of Khalid, 
Hassan the Nabataean, had been drawn, succeeded in inciting 
Hisham against Khalid. They told him that Khalid had used 
disrespectful terms in speaking of the caliph, and that he had 
appropriated revenues belonging to the state. The latter 
imputation especially influenced Hisham, who was very parsi- 
monious. When the dismissal of Khalid had been resolved upon, 
Yusuf b. Omar, his appointed successor, was sent secretly to 
Kuf a, where he seized on Khalid unawares. For eighteen months 
Khalid remained in prison. But when he declined even under 
torture to confess that he had been guilty of extensive peculation, 
he was finally released. He settled at Damascus and made a 
noble return for his injuries by taking an active part in the war 
against the Greeks. In the summer of a.d. 740, while he was in 
Asia Minor, a great fire broke out in Damascus, the guilt of which 
was attributed to Khalid. Though it soon appeared that the 
imputation was false, Khalid, on his return, was furious, and 
uttered very offensive words against the caliph. Hisham, how- 
ever, would not again punish his old servant; on the contrary, 
he seems to have regarded his indignation as a proof of innocence. 

The successor of Khalid in Irak had not long been in office 
when Zaid b. Ali, grandson of Hosain b. Ali, who had come to 
Kufa for a lawsuit, was persuaded by the chiefs of the Shi'a to 
organize a revolt. He succeeded in so far that 15,000 Kufians 
swore to fight with him for the maintenance of the command- 
ments of the Book of God and the Sunna (orthodox tradition) of 
his Prophet, the discomfiture of the tyrants, the redress of 
injury, and last, not least, the vindication of the family of the 
Prophet as the rightful caliphs. The revolt broke out on the 
6th of January 740. Unfortunately for Zaid he had to do with 
the same Kufians whose fickleness had already been fatal to his 
family. He was deserted by his troops and slain. His body was 
crucified in Kufa, his head sent to Damascus and thence to 
Medina. His son Yahya, still a youth, fled to Balkh in Khorasan, 
but was discovered at last and hunted down, till he fell sword in 
hand under Walid II. Abu Moslim, the founder of the Abbasid 
dynasty, proclaimed himself his avenger, and on that occasion 
adopted the black garments, which remained the distinctive 
colour of the dynasty. 

In Khorasan also there were very serious disturbances. The 
Sogdians, though subdued by Sa'id al Harashi, were not 
appeased, but implored the assistance of the Turks, who had 
long been contending earnestly against the Arabs for the 
dominion of Transoxiana. They found besides a most valuable 
ally in Harith b. Soraij, a distinguished captain of the Arabic 
tribe of Tamlm, who, with many pious Moslems, was scandalized 
by the government's perfidy in regard to the new converts. 
Harith put himself at the head of all the malcontents, and raised ■ 
the black flag, in compliance with a Sibylline prophecy, holding 
that the man with the black flag (the Prophet's flag) would put 
an end to the tyranny, and be the precursor of the Mahdi. 1 The 
government troops suffered more than one defeat, but in the 
last month of the year 118 (a.d. 736) the governor Asad al- 
Qasrl, the brother of Khalid, after having defeated* Harith, 
gained a brilliant victory over the Turks, which finally caused 
them to retreat. Asad died almost simultaneously with the 
dismissal of Khalid. Hisham then separated Khorasan from 
Irak and chose as governor of the former Nasr b. Sayyar, a 
valiant soldier who had grown grey in war, and who, besides all 
his other capacities, was an excellent poet. Nasr instituted a 
system of taxation, which, if it had been introduced earlier, 
would perhaps have saved the Arabic domination. It was that 
which later on was generally adopted, viz. that all possessors 
of conquered lands (i.e. nearly the whole empire except Arabia), 
whether Moslems or not, should pay a fixed tax, the latter in 
addition to pay a poll-tax, from which they were relieved on 
conversion to Islam. During thd reign of Hisham, Nasr made 
a successful expedition against Harith and the Turks. The 

1 Cf. Van Vloten, Recherches stir la domination arabe, le Chiitisme 
et les croyances messianiques sous le Khalifat des Omayades (Amster- 
dam, 1894), p. 63 seq. 



CALIPHATE 



37 



propaganda of the Shi'a by the Abbasids was continued in these 
years with great zeal. • 

In India several provinces which had been converted to Islam 
under the Caliphate of Omar II. declared themselves independent, 
because the promise of equal rights for all Moslems was not kept 
under the reign of his successors. This led to the evacuation of 
the eastern part of India (called Hind by the Arabs, Sind being the 
name of the western part) , and to the founding of the strong cities 
of Mahfuza and Mansura for the purpose of controlling the land. 

In the north and north-west of the empire there were no 
internal disorders, but the Moslems had hard work to maintain 
themselves against the Alans and the Khazars. In the year 112 
(a.d. 730) they suffered a severe defeat, in which the general 
Jarrah perished. But the illustrious Maslama b. Abdalmalik, 
and Merwan b. Mahommed (afterwards caliph), governor of 
Armenia' and Azerbaijan (Adherbaijan), succeeded in repelling 
the Khazars, imposing peace on the petty princes of the eastern 
Caucasus, and consolidating the Arab power in that quarter. 
The war against the Byzantines was continued with energy 
during the whole of Hisham's reign. Moawiya, the son of 
Hisham, whose descendants reigned later in Spain, was in com- 
mand till 118 (a.d. 736), when he met his death accidentally in 
Asia Minor by a fall from his horse. After his death, Suleiman, 
another son of the caliph, had the supreme command. Both 
were eager and valiant warriors. But the hero of all the battles 
was Abdallah b. Hosain, surnamed al-Battal (the brave). He 
has been the subject of many romantic tales. Tabarl tells how 
he took the emperor Constantine prisoner in the year 114 (a.d. 
732; but Constantine V. Copronymus only began to reign in. 
740 or 741 a.d.); another Arabic author places this event in 
the year 122, adding that al-Battal, having defeated the Greeks, 
was attacked and slain in returning with his captives. The 
Greek historians say nothing about Constantine having been 
made prisoner. It is probable that the Arabs took another 
Greek soldier for the prince. 1 The victories of the Moslems had 
no lasting results. During the troubles that began in the reign 
of Walid II., the Greeks reconquered Marash (Germanicia), 
Malatia (Malatiyeh) and Erzerum (Theodosiopolis) . 

In Spain the attention of the Moslems was principally turned 
to avenge the defeat of Samh beyond the Pyrenees. As early as 
the second year of the reign of Hisham, 'Anbasa, the governor of 
Spain, crossed the Pyrenees, and pushed on military queries
vigorously. Carcassonne and Nimes were taken, Autun sacked. 
The death of 'Anbasa in a.d. 725 and internal troubles put a stop 
to further hostilities. The Berbers were the chief contingent of 
the Moslem troops, but were treated by their Arab masters as 
inferior people. They began to resent this, and one of their 
chiefs, Munisa (Munuza) , made himself independent in the north 
and allied himself with Odo, king of Aquitaine, who gave him his 
daughter in marriage. In the year 113 Abdarrahman b. Abdallah 
subdued Munisa, crossed the mountains and penetrated into 
Gascony by the valley of Roncesvalles. The Moslems beat Odo, 
gained possession of Bordeaux, and overran the whole of southern 
Gaul nearly as far as the Loire. But in October 732 their march 
was checked between Tours and Poitiers by Charles Martel and 
after some days of skirmishing a fierce but indecisive battle was 
fought. Abdarrahman was among the slain and the Moslems 
retreated hastily in the night, leaving their camp to the Franks. 
They were, however, not yet discouraged. In 739 the new governor 
of Spain, Oqba (Aucupa) b. Hajjaj, a man of high qualities, 
re-entered Gaul and pushed forward his raids as far as Lyons, 
but the Franks again drove back the Arabs as far as Narbonne. 
Thenceforth the continual revolts of the Berbers in Africa, and 
the internal troubles which disturbed Spain until the reign of 
Abdarrahman I., effectually checked the ambition of the Moslems. 

In Africa the hand of government pressed heavily. The 
Berbers, though they had pledged themselves to Islam and had 
furnished the latest contingents for the Holy War, were treated 
as tributary serfs, notwithstanding the promises given by 
Omar II. The Kharijites, of whom a great many had emigrated 

1 Cf. Wellhausen, Die Kdmpfe der Araber mit den Rom. in der 
Zeit der Umaijiden (Gottingen, 1901), p. 31. 



to Africa, found them eager listeners. Still, they could: not 
believe that it was according to the will of the caliph that they 
here thus treated, until a certain number of their chiefs went as a 
deputation to Hisham, but failed to obtain an audience. There- 
upon a fierce insurrection broke out, against which the governor 
of Africa was powerless. Hisham at once sent an army of more 
than 30,000 men, under the command of Kolthum al-Qoshairl, 
and Balj b. Bishr. Not far from the river Sabu in Algeria, 2 the 
meeting with the army of the insurgents took place (a.d. 740). 
Kolthum was beaten and killed; Balj b. Bishr led the rest of the 
Syrian army to Ceuta, and thence, near the end of 741, to Spain, 
where they aided in the suppression of the dangerous revolt of the 
peninsular Berbers. Balj died in 742. A year later the governor, 
Abu'l-Khattar, assigned to bis troops for settlement divers 
countries belonging to the public domain. 3 An effort of the 
African Berbers to make themselves masters of Kairawan failed, 
their army being utterly defeated by the governor Hanzala. 

Hisham died in February 743, after a reign of twenty years. 
He had not been wanting in energy and ability, and kept the reins 
of the government in his own hands. He was a correct Moslem 
and tolerant towards Christians and Jews. His financial ad- 
ministration was sound and he guarded against any misuse of the 
revenues of the state. But he was not popular. His residence 
was at Rosafa on the border of the desert, and he rarely admitted 
visitors into his presence; as a rule they were received by his 
chamberlain Abrash. Hisham tried to keep himself free from 
and above the rival parties, but as his vicegerents were inexorable 
in the exaction of tribute, the Qaisites against the Yemenites, 
the Yemenites against the Qaisites, both parties alternately had 
reason to complain, whilst the non-Arabic Moslems suffered 
under the pressure and were dissatisfied. He caused a large 
extent of land to be brought into cultivation, and many public 
works to be executed, and he was accused of overburdening his 
subjects for these purposes. Therefore, Yazid III. (as also the 
Abbasids) on taking office undertook to abstain from spending 
money on building and digging. The principle that a well-filled 
treasury is the basis of a prosperous government was pushed by 
him too far. Notwithstanding his activity and his devotion to 
the management of affairs, the Moslem power declined rather 
than advanced, and signs of the decay of the Omayyad dynasty- 
began to show themselves. The history of his four successors, 
Walid II., Yazid III., Ibrahim and Merwan II., is but the history 
of the fall of the Omayyads. 

ir. Reign of Walid II. — Walid II. was a handsome man, 
possessed of extraordinary physical strength, and a distinguished 
poet. But Hisham, to whom he was successor-designate, 
foolishly kept him in the background, and even made earnest 
efforts to get his own son Maslama acknowledged as his successor. 
Walid therefore retired to the country, and passed his time there 
in hunting, cultivating poetry, music and the like, waiting with 
impatience for the death of Hisham and planning vengeance on 
all those whom he suspected of having opposed him. His first 
public action was to increase the pay of all soldiers by 10 
dirhems, that of the Syrians by 20. The Omayyads who came to 
pay their respects to him received large donations. Many 
philanthropic institutions were founded. As to the family of his 
predecessor, he contented himself with confiscating their posses- 
sions, with the single exception of Suleiman b. Hisham, whom he 
had whipped and put in prison. But the Makhzumites, who were 
related to Hisham by his mother, he deprived of all their power 
and had them tortured to death. The vicegerents of Hisham 
were replaced by Qaisites; Yusuf b. Omar, the governor of Irak, 
being a Qaisite, was not only confirmed in his office, but received 
with it the supreme command of Khorasan. He made use of it 
immediately by ordering Nasr b. Sayyar to collect a rich present 
of horses, falcons, musical instruments, golden and silver vessels 
and to offer it to the caliph in person, but before the present was 
ready the news came that Walid had been murdered. 

2 Bayan i. p. 42 ; Dozy, Histoire des musulmans d'Espagne, i. 
p. 246, names the place Bacdoura or Nafdoura, the Spanish chronist 
Nauam. 

3 Dozy i. p. 268, 



3« 



CALIPHATE 



It is not certain that Walid also suspected Khalid al-Qasrl of 
having intrigued against him. But Yusuf b. Omar did not rest 
until he had his old enemy in his power. It is said that he 
guaranteed Walid a large sum of money, which he hoped to 
extort from Khalid. This unfortunate man died under torture, 
which he bore with fortitude, in Muharram 126 (November 

743)- 

Walid designated his two sons as heirs to the Caliphate. 
These were still under age and were not the children of a free- 
born, noble mother. Both circumstances, according to the then 
prevailing notions, made them unfit for the imamate. Moreover, 
it was an affront, in particular, for the sons of Walid I., who 
already had considered the nomination of Yazid II. as a slight to 
themselves. A conspiracy arose, headed by Yazid b. Walid I., 
and joined by the majority of the Merwanid princes and many 
Kalbites and other Yemenites who regarded the ill-treatment of 
Khalid al-Qasrl as an insult to themselves. Various stories were 
circulated about the looseness of Walid's manner of life; Yazid 
accused him of irreligion, and, by representing himself as a 
devout and God-fearing man, won over the pious Moslems. The 
conspirators met with slight opposition. A great many troops 
had been detached by Hisham to Africa and other provinces, the 
caliph himself was in one of his country places; the prefect of 
Damascus also was absent. Without difficulty, Yazid made 
himself master of Damascus, and immediately sent his cousin 
Abdalazlz with 2000 men against Walid, who had not more than 
200 fighting men about him. A few men hastened to the rescue, 
among others 'Abbas b. Walid with his sons and followers. 
Abdalazlz interrupted his march, took him prisoner and compelled 
him to take the oath of allegiance to his brother Yazid. Walid's 
small body of soldiers was soon overpowered. After a valiant 
combat, the caliph retired to one of his apartments and sat 
with the Koran on his knee, in order to die just as Othman 
had died. He was killed on the 17th of April 744. His head 
was taken to Damascus and carried about the city at the end of 
a spear. 

On the news of the murder of the caliph, the citizens of Horns 
(Emesa) put at their head Abu Mahommed as-Sofianl, a grandson 
of Yazid I., and marched against Damascus. They were beaten 
by Suleiman b. Hisham at a place called Solaimanla, 12 m. from 
the capital. Abu Mahommed was taken prisoner and shut up 
with several of his brethren and cousins in the Khadra, the old 
palace of Moawiya, together with the two sons of Walid II. One 
or two risings in Palestine were easily suppressed. But the 
reigning family had committed suicide. Their unity was broken. 
The holiness of their Caliphate, their legitimate authority, had 
been trifled with; the hatred of the days of Merj Rahit had been 
revived. The orthodox faith also, whose strong representative 
and defender had hitherto been the caliph, was shaken by the 
fact that Yazid III. belonged to the sect of the Qadaris who 
rejected the doctrine of predestination. The disorganization of 
the empire was at hand. 

12. Reign of Yazid III. — Yazid III., on his accession, made a 
fine speech, in which he promised to do all that could be expected 
from a good and wise ruler, even offering to make place im- 
mediately for the man whom his subjects should find better 
qualified for the Caliphate than himself. He cancelled, however, 
the increase of the pay granted by Walid and thus earned the 
nickname of the Ndqis (diminisher). As he owed his position to 
the aid of the Kalbites, he chose his officers from among them. 
The governorship of Irak was confided to a Kalbite, Mansur b. 
Jomhur, a hot-headed and unscrupulous man. Yusuf b. Omar 
was unable to offer resistance, and was ultimately taken and 
confined in the Khadra. Mansur had hardly been three months 
in office when Yazid replaced him by Abdallah, son of Omar II. 
The distant provinces, with the exception of Sind and Sijistan, 
renounced the authority of the new caliph. In Africa Abdarrah- 
man b. Hablb, a descendant of the famous 'Oqba b. Nafi", was 
almost independent. In Spain every amir tried to free himself 
from a suzerainty which appeared to him only nominal. Nasr b. 
Sayyar, the governor of Khorasan, had not yet decided whether 
he ought to take the oath of allegiance when Yazid died; after a 



reign of only five months and a half, on the 12th of Dhu'l-Hijja 
•a.h. 126 (25th September a.d. 744). 

13. Yazid III. left his brother Ibrahim as his successor. He 
was acknowledged as caliph only in a part of Syria, and reigned 
no longer than two months, when he was obliged to abdicate and 
to submit to the authority of Merwan II. 

14. Merwan II., the son of Mahommed b. Merwan and cousin 
of Maslama, was a man of energy, and might have revived the 
strength of the Omayyad dynasty, but for the general disorder 
which pervaded the whole empire. In 73 2 Hisham had entrusted 
to him the government of Armenia and Azerbaijan, which he 
held with great success till the death of Walid II. He had great 
military capacity and introduced important reforms. On the 
murder of Walid he prepared to dispute the supreme power with 
the new caliph, and invaded Mesopotamia. Yazid III., in 
alarm, offered him as the price of peace the government of this 
province together with Armenia and Azerbaijan. Merwan 
resolved to accept those conditions, and sent a deputation to 
Damascus, which, however, had just reached Manbij (Hiera- 
polis) when Yazid died. Leaving his son Abdalmalik with 40,000 
men in Rakka, Merwan entered Syria with 80,000 men. Sulei- 
man b. Hisham, at the head of 120,000 men, was defeated at 'Ain 
al-Jarr, between Baalbek and Damascus. Merwan made many 
prisoners, whom he treated with the greatest mildness, granting 
them freedom on condition that they should take the oath of 
allegiance to the sons of Walid II. He then marched upon 
Damascus. But Suleiman b. Hisham, Yazid, the son of Khalid 
al-Qasri, and other chiefs, hastened to the Khadra and killed the 
two princes, together with Yusuf b. Omar. Suleiman then made 
himself master of the treasury and fled with the caliph Ibrahim 
to Tadmor (Palmyra). Only Abu Mahommed as-Sofianl escaped 
the murderers. When Merwan entered Damascus this man 
testified that the sons of Walid II., who had just become adult, 
had named Merwan successor to the Caliphate, and was the first 
to greet him as Prince of the Believers. All the generals and 
officers followed his example and took the oath of allegiance 
(7th December a.d. 744). Merwan did all he could to pacify 
Syria, permitting the Arabs of the four provinces to choose 
their own prefects, and even acquiescing in the selection as 
prefect of Palestine of Thabit b. No'aim, who had behaved very 
treacherously towards him before, but whom he had forgiven. 
He did not, however, wish to reside in Damascus, but trans- 
planted the seat of government to his own town, Harran in 
Mesopotamia. Suleiman b. Hisham and Ibrahim tendered 
their submission and were pardoned. 

But the pacification was only on the surface. Many Omayyad 
princes considered Merwan as an upstart, his mother being a 
slave-girl; the Damascenes were angry because he had chosen 
Harran for his residence; the Kalbites felt themselves slighted, 
as the Qaisites predominated. Thabit b. No'aim revolted in 
Palestine, Emesa (Homs) and Tadmor were turbulent, Damascus 
was besieged by Yazid b. Khalid al QasrI. Merwan, who wanted 
to march against Irak, was obliged to return to Syria, where he 
put an end to the troubles. This time Thabit b. No'aim had to 
pay for his perfidy with his life. After this new pacification, 
Merwan caused the Syrians to acknowledge his two sons as heirs 
to the Caliphate, and married them to two daughters of Hisham. 
All the Omayyad princes were invited to the wedding, Merwan 
hoping still to conciliate them. He then equipped 10,000 
Syrians, and ordered them to rejoin the army of 20,000 men 
from Kinnesrin (Qinnasrin) and Mesopotamia, who, under Yazid 
b. Omar b. Hobaira, were already on the march towards Irak. 
When these Syrians came to Rosafa (Rusafa), Suleiman b. 
Hisham persuaded them to proclaim himself caliph, and made 
himself master of Kinnesrin. From all sides Syrians flocked to 
his aid till he had 70,000 men under his orders. Merwan im- 
mediately ordered Ibn Hobaira to stop his march and to wait for 
him at Durln, and marched with the main force against Suleiman, 
whom he Utterly defeated at Khosaf in the district of Kinnesrin. 
Suleiman fled to Horns and thence to Tadmor and on to Kufa, 
leaving his brother ^a'id in Homs. The siege of this place by 
Merwan lasted rfearly five nfdnths. After the victoty the walls 



CALIPHATE 



39 



were demolished, and likewise those of Baalbek, Damascus, 
Jerusalem and other towns. Syria was utterly crushed, and 
therewith the bulwark of the dynasty was destroyed. Not until 
the summer of 128 (a.d. 746) could Merwan resume his campaign 
against Irak. 

The governor of this province, Abdallah, the son of Omar II., 
was a man of small energy, whose principal care was his personal 
ease and comfort. An ambitious man, Abdallah b. Moawiya, a 
great-grandson of Ali's brother Ja'far, put himself at the head of 
a band of Shi'ites and manias, made himself master of Kufa and 
marched upon Hira, where, since Yusuf b. Omar, the governor 
and the Syrian troops had resided. The rebels were defeated, 
and Kufa surrendered (October 744) under condition of amnesty 
for the insurgents and freedom for Abdallah b. Moawiya. This 
adventurer now went into Media (Jabal), where a great number 
of manias and Shi'ites, even members of the reigning dynasty 
and of the Abbasid family, such as the future caliph Mansur, 
rejoined him. With their help he became master of a vast 
empire, which, however, lasted scarcely three years. 

Ibn Omar did not acknowledge Merwan as caliph. For the 
moment Merwan coald do no more than send a new governor, 
Ibn Sa'id al IJarashi. This officer was supported only by the 
Qaisite troops, the Kalbites, who were numerically superior, 
maintaining Ibn Omar in his residence at Hira. There were 
many skirmishes between them, but a common danger soon 
forced them to suspend their hostilities. The general disorder 
after the death of Hisham had given to the Khawarij an oppor- 
tunity of asserting their claims such as they had never had 
before. They belonged for the greater part to the Rabl'a, who 
always stood more or less aloof from the other Arabs, and had a 
particular grudge against the Modar. Their leading tribe, the 
Shaiban, possessed the lands on the Tigris in the province of 
Mosul, and here, after the murder of Walid II., their chief 
proclaimed himself caliph. Reinforced by many Kharijites out 
of the northern provinces, he marched against Kufa. Ibn Omar 
and Ibn Sa'id al Harash! tried to defend their province, but 
were completely defeated. Harashi fled to Merwan, Ibn Omar 
to Hira, which, after a siege of two months, he was obliged to 
surrender in Shawwal 127 (August a.d. 745). Mansur b. Jomhflr 
was the first to pass over to the Khawarij; then Ibn Omar 
himself took the oath of allegiance. That a noble Koreishite, 
a prince of the reigning house, should pledge himself to follow 
Dahhak the Shaibanite as his Imam, was an event of which 
the Khawarij were very proud. Ibn Omar was rewarded with 
the government of eastern Irak, KhQzistan and Fars. 

Whilst Merwan besieged Horns, Dahhak returned to Meso- 
potamia and took Mosul, whence he threatened Nisibis, where 
Abdallah, the son of Merwan, maintained himself with difficulty. 
Suleiman b. Hisham also had gone over to the Khawarij, who 
now numbered 1 20,000 men. Mesopotamia itself was in danger, 
when Merwan at last was able to march against the enemy. In a 
furious battle at Kafartutha (September a.d. 746) the Khawarij 
were defeated; Dahhak and his successor Khaibari perished; 
the survivors were obliged to retire to Mosul, where they crossed 
the Tigris. Merwan followed them and encamped on the 
western bank. Immediately after the battle of Kafartutha, 
Yazid b. Omar b. Hobaira directed his troops towards Irak. He 
beat the Kharijites repeatedly and entered Kufa in May or June 
747. Ibn Omar was taken prisoner; Mansur b. Jomhur fled to 
Ibn Moawiya. Ibn Hobaira was at last free to send Ibn Dobara 
with an army to Mesopotamia. At his approach the Kharijites 
left their camp and fled to Abdallah b. Moawiya, who was now at 
the height of his power. But it was not destined to last. The 
two generals of Ibn Hobaira, Ibn Dobara and Nobata b. Hanzala 
defeated his army; Ibn Moawiya fled to Khorasan, where he met 
his death; the chief of the Kharijites, Shaiban Yashkori went to 
eastern Arabia; Suleiman b. Hisham and Mansur b. Johmur 
escaped to India. Thus, at last, the western and south-eastern 
parts of the empire lay at the feet of Merwan. But in the north- 
east, in Khorasan, meanwhile a storm had arisen, against which 
bis resources and his wisdom were alike of no avail. 

When the news of the murder of Walid II. reached Khorasan, 



Nasr b. Sayyar did not at once acknowledge the Caliphate of 
Yazid III., but induced the Arab chiefs to accept himself as amir 
of Khorasan, until a caliph should be universally acknowledged. 
Not many months later (Shawwal 126) he was confirmed in his 
post by Yusuf b. Orriar, the governor of Irak. But Nasr had a 
personal enemy, the chief of the Azd (Yemenites) Jodai' al- 
Kirmanl, a very ambitious man. A quarrel arose, and in a short 
time the Azd under Kirma.nl, supported by the Rabl'a, who 
always were ready to join the opposition, were in insurrection, 
which Nasr tried in vain to put down by concessions. 

So stood matters when Harith b. Soraij, seconded by Yazid III;, 
reappeared on the scene, crossed the Oxus and came to Merv. 
Nasr received him with the greatest honour, hoping to get his aid 
against Kirmani, but Harith, to whom 3000 men of his tribe, the 
Tamim, had gone over, demanded Nasr's abdication and tried to 
make himself master of Merv. Having failed in this, he allied 
himself with Kirmani. Nasr could hold Merv no longer, and 
retired to Nishapur. But the Tamim of Harith could not endure 
the supremacy of the Azd. In a moment the allies were divided 
into two camps; a battle ensued, in which Harith was defeated 
and killed. Originally, Harith seems to have had the highest 
aims, but in reality he did more than any one else to weaken the 
Arabic dominion. He brought the Turks into the field against 
them; he incited the native population of Transoxiana against 
their Arab lords, and stirred up discord between the Arabs 
themselves. . Being a Tamimite, he belonged to the Modar, on 
whom the government in Khorasan depended; but he aided the 
Yemenites to gain the upper hand of them. Thus he paved the 
way for Abu Moslim. 

Since the days of Ali there had been two tendencies among the 
Shi'ites. The moderate party distinguished itself from the other 
Moslems only by their doctrine that the imamate belonged 
legally to a man of the house of the Prophet. The other party, 
that of the ultra-Shi'ites, named Hashimiya after Abu Hashim 
the son of Mahommed b. al-Hanafiya, preached the equality of all 
Moslems, Arabs or non-Arabs, and taught that the same divine 
spirit that had animated the Prophet, incorporated itself again 
in his heirs (see Shi'ites). After the death of Hosain, they chose 
for their Imam Mahommed b. al-Hanafiya, and at his decease his 
son Abu Hashim, from whom Mahommed b. Ali, the grandson of 
Abdallah b. Abbas, who resided at Homaima in the south-east of 
Syria, obtained the secrets of the party and took the lead (a.h. 
98, see above). This Mahommed, the father of the two first 
Abbasid caliphs, was a man of unusual ability and great ambition. 
He directed his energies primarily to Khorasan. The missionaries 
were charged with the task of undermining the authority of the 
Omayyads, by drawing attention to all the injustices that took 
place under their reign, and to all the luxury and wantonness of 
the court, as contrasted with the misery of many of their subjects. 
God would not suffer it any longer. As soon as the time was ripe 
— and that time could not be far off — He would send a saviour 
out of the house of the Prophet, the Mahdi, who would restore 
Islam to its original purity. All who desired to co-operate in 
this holy purpose must pledge themselves to unlimited obedience 
to the Imam, and place their lives and property at his disposal. As 
a proof of their sincerity they were required at once to pay a fixed 
sum for the Imam. The missionaries had great success, especially 
among the non- Arabic inhabitants of Khorasan and Transoxiana. 

Mahommed b. Ali died a.h. 126 (a.d. 743-744), and his son 
Ibrahim, the Imam, took his place. Ibrahim had a confidant 
about whose antecedents one fact alone seems certain, that he 
was a mania (client) of Persian origin. This man, Abu Moslim by 
name, was a man of real ability and devoted to his master's 
cause. To him,in 745-746, the management of affairs in Khorasan 
was entrusted, with instructions to consult in all weighty matters 
the head of the mission, the Arab Suleiman b. Kathir. At first 
the chiefs of the mission were by no means prepared to recognize 
Abu Moslim as the plenipotentiary of the heir of the Prophet. 
In the year 129 he judged that the time for open manifestation 
had arrived. His partisans were ordered to assemble from all sides 
on a fixed day at Siqadenj in the province of Merv. Then, on the 
1st Shawwal (15th June 747), the first solemn meeting took 



40 



CALIPHATE 



place and the black flags were unfolded. On that occasion 
Suleiman b. Kathlr was still leader, but by the end of the year 
. Abu Moslim, whom the majority believed to belong himself to 
the family of the Prophet, was the acknowledged head of a strong 
. army. Meantime, Nasr had moved from Nishapur to Merv, and 
here the two Arabic armies confronted each other. Then, at last, 
the true significance of Abu Moslim's work was recognized. Nasr 
warned the Arabs against their common enemy, " who preaches 
a religion that does not come from the Envoy of God, and whose 
chief aim is the extirpation of the Arabs." In< vain he had 
entreated Merwan and Ibn Hobaira to send him troops before it 
should be too late. When at last it was possible to them to fulfil 
his wish, it was in fact too late. For a moment it seemed as 
though the rival Arab factions, realizing their common peril, 
would turn their combined forces against the Shi'ites. But Abu 
Moslim contrived to re-awaken their mutual distrust and jealousy, 
and, taking advantage of the opportunity, made himself master 
of Merv, in Rabia II. a^h. i3o(December747). Nasr escaped only 
by a headlong flight to Nishapur. This was the end of the Arabic 
dominion in the East. Many Arab chiefs were killed, partly by 
order of Abu Moslim, partly by their clients. The latter, however, 
was strictly forbidden by Abu Moslim. So severe indeed was the 
discipline he exercised, that one of the chief missionaries, who by 
a secret warning had rendered possible the escape of Nasr from 
Merv, paid for it with his life. 

As soon as Abu Moslim had consolidated his authority, he sent 
his chief general Qahtaba against Nishapur. Nasr's son Tamlm 
was vanquished and killed, and Nasr retreated to Kumis (Qumis) 
on the boundary of Jorjan, whither also advanced from the other 
side Nobata at the head of an army sent by Merwan. Qahtaba 
detached his son Hasan against Nasr and went himself to meet 
Nobata, whom he beat on the ist of Dhu'l-hijja 130 (6th August 
748). Nasr could not further resist. He reached Sawa. in the 
vicinity of Hamadan, where he died quite exhausted, at the age of 
eighty-five years. Rei and Hamadan were taken without serious 
difficulty. Near Nehawend, Ibn Dobara, at the head of a large 
army, encountered Qahtaba, but was defeated and killed. In 
themonthof Dhu'l-qa'da 131 (June 749) Nehawend (Nehavend) 
surrendered, and thereby the way to Irak lay open to Qahtaba. 
Ibn Hobaira was overtaken and compelled to retire to Wasit. 
Qahtaba himself perished in the combat, but his son Hasan 
entered Kufa without any resistance on the 2nd of September 740. 

Merwan had at last discovered who was the real chief of the 
movement in Khorasan, and had seized upon Ibrahim the Imam 
■ and imprisoned him at Harran. There he died, probably from 
the plague, though Merwan was accused of having killed him. 
When the other Abbasids left Homaima is not certain. But they 
arrived at Kufa in the latter half of September 749, where in the 
meantime the head of the propaganda, Abu Salama, called the 
wazir of the family of Mahomet, had previously undertaken the 
government. This Abu Salama seems to have had scruples 
against recognizing Abu'l-Abbas as the successor of his brother 
Ibrahim, and to have expected that the Mahdi, whom he looked 
for from Medina, would not be slow in making his appearance, 
little thinking that an Abbasid would present himself as such. 
But Abu Jahm, on the instructions of Abu Moslim, declared to 
the chief officers of the Khorasanian army that the Mahdi was in 
their midst, and brought them to Abu'l-Abbas, to whom they 
swore allegiance. Abu Salama also was constrained to take the 
oath. On Friday, the 12th Rabia II. a.h. 132 (28th November 
749) Abu'l-Abbas was solemnly proclaimed caliph in the principal 
mosque of Kufa. The trick had been carried out admirably. On 
the point of gathering the ripe fruit, the Alids were suddenly 
pushed aside,' and the fruit was snatched away by the Abbasids. 
The latter gained the throne and they took good care never to be 
deprived of it. 

After the conquest of Nehawend, Qahtaba had detached one 
of his captains, Abu 'Aun, to Shahrazur, where he defeated the 
Syrian army which was stationed there. Thereupon Abu 'Aun 
occupied the land of Mosul, where he obtained reinforcements 
from Kufa, headed by Abdallah b. AH, an uncle of Abu'l-Abbas, 
who was to have the supreme command. Merwan advanced 



to meet him, and was completely defeated near the Greater Zab, 
an affluent of the Tigris, in a battle which lasted eleven days. 
Merwan retreated to Harran, thence to Damascus, and finally to 
Egypt, where he fell in a last struggle towards the end of 132 
(August 750). His head was cut off and sent to Kufa. 1 Abu 
Aun, who had been the real leader of the campaign against 
Merwan, remained in Egypt as its governor. Ibn Hobaira, 
who had been besieged in Wasit for eleven months, then con- 
sented to a capitulation, which was sanctioned by Abu'l-Abbas. 
Immediately after the surrender, Ibn Hobaira and his principal 
officers were treacherously murdered. In Syria, the Omayyads 
were persecuted with the utmost rigour. Even their graves were 
violated, and the bodies crucified and destroyed. In order that 
no members of the family should escape, Abdallah b. Ali pre- 
tended to grant an amnesty to all Omayyads who should come 
in to him at Abu Fotros (Antipatris) and acknowledge the new 
caliph, and even promised them the restitutionof alltheirproperty. 
Ninety men allowed themselves to be entrapped, and Abdallah 
invited them to a banquet. When they were all collected, a 
body of executioners rushed into the hall and slew them with 
clubs. He then ordered leathern covers to be thrown upon the 
dying men, and had the banquet served upon them. In Medina 
and Mecca Da'ud b. Ali, another uricle of Abu'l-Abbas, con- 
ducted the persecution; in Basra, Suleiman b. Ali. Abu'l-Abbas 
himself killed those he could lay his hands on in Hira and Kufa, 
amongst them Suleiman b. Hisham, who had been the bitterest 
enemy of Merwan. Only a few Omayyads escaped the massacre, 
several of whom were murdered later. A grandson of Hisham, 
Abdarrahman, son of his most beloved son Moawiya, reached 
Africa and founded in Spain the Omayyad dynasty of Cordova. 

With the dynasty of the Omayyads the hegemony passes 
finally from Syria to Irak. At the same time the supremacy of 
the Arabs came to an end. Thenceforth it is not the contingents 
of the Arabic tribes which compose the army, and on whom the 
government depends; the new dynasty relies on a standing 
army, consisting for the greater part of non-Arabic soldiers. 
The barrier that separated the Arabs from the conquered nations 
begins to crumble away. Only the Arabic religion, the Arabic 
language and the Arabic civilization maintain themselves, and 
spread more and more over the whole empire. 

C. — The Abbasids 

We now enter upon the history of the new dynasty, under 
which the power of Islam reached its highest point. 

1. Abu'l-Abbas inaugurated his Caliphate by a harangue 
in Which he announced the era of concord and happiness which 
was to begin now that the House of the Prophet had been 
restored to its right. He asserted that the Abbasids were the 
real heirs of the Prophet, as the descendants of his oldest uncle 
Abbas. Addressing the Kufians, he said, " Inhabitants of Kufa, 
ye are those whose affection towards us has ever been constant 
and true; ye have never changed your mind, nor swerved from 
it, notwithstanding all the pressure of the unjust upon you. At 
last our time has come, and God has brought you the new era. 
Ye are the happiest of men through us, and the dearest to us. 
I increase your pensions with 100 dirhems; make now your 
preparations, for I am the lavish shedder of blood 2 and the 
avenger of blood." 

Notwithstanding these fine words, Abu'l-Abbas did not trust 

1 Merwan has been nicknamed al-Ja'di and al-Himar (the Ass). 
As more than one false interpretation of these names has been 
given, it is not superfluous to cite here Qaisarani (ed. de Jong, p. 
31), who says on good authority that a certain al-Ja'd b. Durham, 
killed under the reign of Hisham for heretical opinions, had followers 
in Mesopotamia, and that, when Merwan became caliph, the Khora- 
sanians called him a Ja'd, pretending that all'Ja'd had been 
his teacher. As to al-Himar this was substituted also by the 
Khorasanians for his usual title, al-Faras, " the race-horse." 

2 The Arabic word for " shedder of blood," as-Saffah, which by 
that speech became a name of the caliph, designates the liberal host 
who slaughters his camels for his guests. European scholars have 
taken it unjustly in the sense of the bloodthirsty, and found in it 
an allusion to the slaughter of the Omayyads and many others. 
At the same time, it was not without much bloodshed that Abu'l- 
Abbas finally established his power. 



CALIPHATE 



+? 



the Kufians. He resided outside the town with the Khorasanian 
troops, and with them went first to Hira, then to Hashimiya, 
which he caused to be built in the neighbourhood of Anbar. 
For their real sympathies, he knew, were with the house of Ali, 
and Abu Salama their leader, who had reluctantly taken the oath 
of allegiance, did not conceal his disappointment. Abu Jahm, 
the vizier {q.v.; also Mahommedan Institutions), or " helper," 
of Abu Moslim, advised that Abu Ja'far, the caliph's brother, 
should be sent to Khorasan to consult Abu Moslim. . The result 
was that Abu Salama was assassinated, and at the same time 
Suleiman b. Kathlr, who had been the head of the propaganda 
in Khorasan, and bad also expected that the Mahdi would belong 
to the house of Ali. It is said that Abu Ja'far, whilst in Khorasan, 
was so impressed by the unlimited power of Abu Moslim, and 
saw so clearly that, though he called his brother and himself 
his masters, he considered them as his creatures, that he vowed 
his death at the first opportunity. , 

The ruin of the Omayyad empire and the rise of the new 
dynasty did not take place without mighty convulsions. In 
Bathanlya and the Hauran, in the north of Syria, in Mesopo- 
tamia and Irak Khorasan insurrections had to be put down 
with fire and sword. The new caliph then distributed the 
provinces among the principal members of his family and his 
generals. To his brother Abu Ja'far he gave Mesopotamia, 
Azerbaijan and Armenia; to his uncle Abdallah b. AH, Syria; 
to his uncle Da'ud, Hejaz, Yemen and Yamama (Yemama); 
to his cousin 'Isa b. Musa, the province of Kufa. Another uncle, 
Suleiman b. Ali, received the government of Basra with Bahrein 
and Oman; Isma 'il b. Ali that of Ahwaz; Abu Moslim, Khora- 
san and Transoxiana; Mahommed b. Ash'atb, Fars; Abu 'Aun, 
Egypt. In Sind the Omayyad governor, Mansur b. Jomhur, 
had succeeded in maintaining himself, but was defeated by an 
army sent against him under Musa b. Ka'b, and the black 
standard of the Abbasids was raised over the city of Mansura. 
Africa and Spain are omitted from this catalogue, because the 
Abbasids never gained any real footing in Spain, while Africa 
remained, at least in the first years, in only nominal subjection 
to the new dynasty. In 754 Abu Moslim came to Irak to visit 
Abu'l- Abbas and to ask his permission to make the pilgrimage 
to Mecca. He was received with great honour, but the caliph 
said that he was sorry not to be able to give him the leadership 
of the pilgrimage, which he had already purposely entrusted to 
his brother, Abu Ja'far. 

Abu'l-Abbas died on the 13th of Dhu'l-hijja 136 (5th June 
754). He seems to have been a man of limited capacity, and 
had very little share in the achievements accomplished in his 
name. He initiated practically nothing without the consent of 
Abu Jahm, who was thus the real ruler. In the few cases where 
he had to decide, he acted under the influence of his brother 
Abu Ja'far. 

2. Reign of Mansur. — Abu'l-Abbas had designated as his 
successors first Abu Ja'far, surnamed al-Mansur (the victorious), 
and after him his cousin 'Isa b. Musa. Abu Ja'far was, according 
to the historians, older than Abu'l-Abbas, but while the mother 
of the latter belonged to the powerful Yemenite tribe of al- 
Harith b. Ka'b, the mother of Abu Ja'far was a Berber slave-girl. 
But he was a son of Mahommed b. Ali, and was therefore pre- 
ferred by Abu Moslim to his uncles and cousins. Abu'l-Abbas, 
however, had promised the succession to his uncle Abdallah b. 
Ali, when he marched against Merwan. When the news of the 
death of Abu'l-Abbas reached Abdallah, who at the head of a 
numerous army was on the point of renewing the Byzantine war, 
he came to Harran, furious at his exclusion, and proclaimed 
himself caliph. Abu Moslim marched against him, and the two 
armies met at Nisibis, where, after a number of skirmishes, a 
decisive engagement took place ( 2 8th November 754). Abdallah 
was defeated and escaped to Basra, where he found a refuge with 
his brother Suleiman. A year later he asked for pardon, and 
took the oath of allegiance to Mansur. The caliph spared his 
life for a time, but he did no.t forget. In 764 Abdallah met his 
death by the collapse of his house, which had been deliberately 
undermined. 



The first care of Mansur was now to get rid of the' powerful Abu 
Moslim, who had thus by another brilliant service strengthened 
his great reputation. On pretence of conferring with him on 
important business of state, Mansur induced him, in spite of 
the warnings of his best general, Abu Nasr, to come to Madain 
(Ctesiphon), and in the most perfidious manner caused him to be 
murdered by his guards. Thus miserably perished the real, 
founder of the Abbasid dynasty, the Sahib addaula, as he is 
commonly called, the Amin (trustee) of the House of the Prophet. 
A witty man, being asked his opinion about Abu Ja'far (Mansur) 
and Abu Moslim, said, alluding to the Koran 21, verse 22, "if 
there were two Gods, the universe would be ruined." The 
Khorasanian chiefs were bribed into submission, and order was at 
last re-established by Mansur's general Khazim b. Khozaima in 
Mesopotamia, and by Abu Da'ud, the governor of Khorasan in 
the east. 

About the same time Africa 1 and Spain escaped from the 
dominion of the eastern Caliphate; the former for a season, 
the latter permanently. The cause of the revolt of Africa was 
as follows. Mansur had written to Abdarrahman, announcing 
the death of Abu'l-Abbas, and requiring him to take the oath of 
allegiance. Abdarrahman sent in his adhesion, together with a 
few presents of little value. The caliph replied by a threatening 
letter which angered Abdarrahman. He called the people to- 
gether at the hour of. prayer, publicly cursed Mansur from the 
pulpit and declared him deposed. He next caused a circular 
letter, commanding all Maghribins to refuse obedience to the 
caliph, to be read from the pulpit throughout the whole extent 
of the Maghrib (western North Africa) . A brother of Abdarrah- 
man, Ilyas, saw in this revolt an opportunity of obtaining the 
government of Africa for himself. Seconded by many of the 
inhabitants of Kairawan, who had remained faithful to the cause 
of the Abbasids, he attacked his brother, slew him, and pro- 
claimed himself governor in his stead. This revolution in favour 
of the Abbasids was, however, not of long duration. Hablb, 
the eldest son of Abdarrahman, who had fled in the night of his 
father's murder, was captured, but the vessel which was to convey 
him to Spain having been detained by stress of weather, his 
partisans took arms and rescued him. Ilyas was marching 
against them, when the idea occurred to Habib of challenging 
him to single combat. Ilyas hesitated, but his own soldiers 
compelled him to accept the challenge. He measured arms 
with Habib, and was slain. The party of independence thus 
triumphed, but in the year 144 (761) Mahommed b. Ash'ath^ 
the Abbasid general, entered Kairawan and regained posses- 
sion of Africa in the name of the eastern caliph. From the 
year 800, it must be added, Africa only nominally belonged 
to the Abbasids; for, under the reign of Harun al-Rashid, 
Ibrahim b. al-Aghlab, who was invested with the government 
of Africa, founded in that province a distinct dynasty, that of 
the Aghlabites. 

At the same time as the revolt in Africa, the independent 
Caliphate of the western Omayyads was founded in Spain. The 
long dissensions which had preceded the fall of that dynasty 
in the East had already prepared the way fcr the independence 
of a province so distant from the centre of the empire. Every: 
petty amir then tried to seize sovereign power for himself, and the 
people groaned under the consequent anarchy. Weary of these 
commotions, the Arabs of Spain atjast came to an understanding 
among themselves for the election of a caliph, and their choice 
fell upon one of the last survivors of the Omayyads, Abdarrah- 
man b. Moawiya, grandson of the caliph Hisham. This prince 
was wandering in the deserts' of Africa, pursued by his implacable 
enemies, but everywhere protected and concealed by the desert 
tribes, who pitied his misfortunes and respected his illustrious 
origin. A deputation from Spain sought him out in Africa and 
offered him the Caliphate, which he accepted with joy. On the 
1st Rabia I. 138 (14th August 755) Abdarrahman landed in the 
Iberian peninsula, where he was universally welcomed, and 

1 The rule of the caliphs in Morocco, which had never been firmly 
established, had already, 1 in 740, given place to that of independent 
princes (see Morocco, History). 



4 2 



CALIPHATE 



speedily founded at Cordova the Western Omayyad Caliphate 
(see Spain: History). 

While Mansur was thus losing Africa and Spain, be was trying 
to redeem the losses the empire had sustained on the northern 
frontier by the Byzantines. In 750-751 the emperor Constantine 
V. (Copronymus) had unsuccessfully blockaded Malatia; but 
five years later he took it by force and razed its wall to the ground. 
Mansur now sent in 757 an army of 70,000 men under the com- 
mand of his cousin Abdalwahhab, the son of Ibrahim the Imam, 
whom he had made governor of Mesopotamia, the real chief 
being Hasan b. Qahtaba. They rebuilt all that the emperor 
had destroyed, and made this key of Asia Minor stronger than 
ever before. The Moslems then made a raid by the pass of 
Hadath (Adata) and invaded the land of the Byzantines. Two 
aunts of the caliph took part in this expedition, having made a 
vow that if the dominion of the Omayyads were ended they 
would wage war in the path of God. Constantine advanced 
with a numerous army, but was afraid of attacking the invaders. 
The Moslems also rebuilt Mopsuestia. But from 758 till 763 
Mansur was so occupied with his own affairs that he could not 
think of further raids. 

In 758 (others say in 753 or 754) a body of 600 sectaries, called 
Rawendls (?.».), went to Hashimiya, the residence of the caliph, 
not far from Kufa. They believed that the caliph was their 
lord, to whom they owed their daily bread, and came to pay him 
divine honours. They began by marching in solemn procession 
round the palace, as if it had been the Ka'ba. Mansur being told 
of it said: " I would rather they went to hell in obedience to 
us, than to heaven in disobedience." But as they grew tumul- 
tuous, and he saw that this impious homage gave offence to his 
men, he caused the principal leaders to be seized and thrown 
into prison. The Rawendls immediately rose in revolt, broke 
the prison doors, rescued their chiefs, and returned to the palace. 
The unfortunate fanatics were hunted down and massacred to 
the last man, and thereby the ties that bound the Abbasids to 
the ultra-Shi'ites were severed. From that time forward the 
Abbasid caliphs became the maintainers of orthodox Islam, 
just as the Omayyads had been. The name of Hashimiya, which 
the reigning family still retained, was henceforward derived 
not from Abu Hashim, but from Hashim, the grandfather of 
Abbas, the great-grandfather of the Prophet. 

A much greater danger now threatened Mansur. In the last 
days of the Omayyads, the Shi'ites had chosen as caliph, 
Mahommed b. Abdallah b. Hasan, whom they called the Mahdi 
and the " pure soul," and Mansur had been among those who 
pledged themselves to him by oath. Not unnaturally, the Alids 
in Medina were indignant at being supplanted by the Abbasids, 
and Mansur's chief concern was to get Mahommed into his 
power. Immediately after his occupying the throne, he named 
Ziyad b. Obaidallah governor of Medina, with orders to lay 
hands on Mahommed and his brother Ibrahim, who, warned 
betimes, took refuge in flight. In 758 Mansur, informed that a 
revolt was in preparation, came himself to Medina and ordered 
Abdallah to tell him where his sons were. As he could not or 
would not tell, he together with all his brothers and some other 
relatives were seized and transported to Irak, where Abdallah 
and bis brother AH were beheaded and the others imprisoned. 
Notwithstanding all these precautions, a vast conspiracy was 
formed. On the same day Mahommed was to raise the standard 
of revolt in Medina, Ibrahim in Basra. But the Alids, though 
not devoid of personal courage, never excelled in politics or in 
tactics. In a.d. 762 Mahommed took Medina and had himself 
proclaimed caliph. The governor of Kufa, 'Isa b. Musa, received 
orders to march against him, entered Arabia, and captured 
Medina, which, fortified by Mahommed by the same means as the 
Prophet had employed against the besieging Meccans, could not 
hold out against the well-trained Khorasanians. Mahommed 
was defeated and slain. His head was cut off and sent to Mansur. 
When on the point of death, Mahommed gave the famous sword 
of the Prophet called Dhu'l-Fiqar to a merchant to whom he 
owed 400 dinars. It came later, into the possession of Harun 
al-Rashid. In the meanwhile Ibrahim had not only gained 



possession of Ba$ra, Ahwaz and Fars, but had even occupied 
Wasit. The empire of the Abbasids was in great jeopardy. For 
fifty days Mansur stayed in his room, neither changing his 
clothes nor allowing himself a moment's repose. The greater 
part of his troops were in Rei with his son al-Mahdi, who had 
conquered Tabaristan, in Africa, with Mahommed b. Ash'ath, 
and in Arabia with 'Isa b. Musa. Had Ibrahim marched at once 
against Kufa he might have crushed Mansur, but he let slip the 
opportunity. A terrible conflict took place at Ba-Khamra, 
48 m. from Kufa. Homaid b. Qahtaba, the eommander 
of Mansur's army, was defeated, only a small division under 
'Isa b. Musa holding its ground. At that moment Salm, 
the son of the famous Qotaiba b. Moslim, came to the rescue by 
attacking the rear of Ibrahim. Homaid rallied his troops, and 
Ibrahim was overpowered. At last he fell, pierced by an arrow, 
and, in spite of the desperate efforts of his followers, his body 
remained in the hands of the enemy. His head was cut off and 
brought to Mansur. 

Mansur could now give his mind to the founding of the new 
capital. When the tumult of the Rawendls took place he saw 
clearly that his personal safety was not assured in Hashimiya, 1 
where a riot of the populace could be very dangerous, and his 
troops were continually exposed to the perverting influence of the 
fickle and disloyal citizens of Kufa. He had just made choice of 
the admirable site of the old market-town of Bagdad when the 
tidings came of the rising of Mahommed in Medina. In those 
days he saw that he had been very imprudent to denude himself 
of troops, and decided to keep henceforth always with him a body 
of 30,000 soldiers. So Bagdad, or properly " the round city " of 
Mansur, on the western bank of the Tigris, was built as the 
capital. Strictly it was a huge citadel, in the centre of which 
was the palace of the caliph and the great mosque. But around 
this nucleus there soon grew up the great metropolis which was 
to be the centre of the civilized world as long as the Caliphate 
lasted. 2 The building lasted three years and was completed in 
the year 149 (a.d. 766). That year is really the beginning of the 
new era. " The Omayyads," says the Spanish writer Ibn Hazm, 
" were an Arabic dynasty; they had no fortified residence, nor 
citadel; each of them dwelt in his villa, where he lived before 
becoming caliph; they did not desire that the Moslems should 
speak to them as slaves to their master, nor kiss the ground 
before them or their feet; they only gave their care to the 
appointment of able governors in the provinces of the empire. 
The Abbasids, on the contrary, were a Persian dynasty, under 
which the Arab tribal system, as regulated by Omar, fell to 
pieces; the Persians of Khorasan were the real rulers, and the 
government became despotic as in the days of Chrosroes." The 
reign of Abu'l- Abbas and the first part of that of Mansur had been 
almost a continuation of the former period. But now his equals 
in birth and rank, the Omayyads and the Alids, had been crushed; 
the principal actors in the great struggle, the leaders of the 
propaganda and Abu Moslim were out of the way; the caliph 
stood far above all his subjects; and his only possible an- 
tagonists were the members of his own family. 

'Isa b. Musa had been designated, as we have seen, by Abu'l- 
Abbas as successor to Mansur. The latter having vainly tried 
to compel 'Isa to renounce his right of succession, in favour of 
Mansur's son Mahommed al-Mahdi, produced false witnesses who 
swore that he had done so. However unwillingly, 'Isa was 
obliged at last to yield, but it was understood that, in case of 
Mahommed's death, the succession should return to 'Isa. One of 
the false witnesses was, it is asserted, Khalid b. Barmak, the 
head of that celebrated family the Barmecides (q.v.), which 
played so important a part in the reign of Harun al-Rashid. 
This Khalid, who was descended from an old sacerdotal family 
in Balkh, and had been one of the trusty supporters of Abu 
Moslim, Mansur appointed as minister of finance. 

A son of Mahommed the Alid had escaped lo India, where, 

1 This Hashimiya near Kufa is not to be confused with that 
founded by Abu'l-Abbas near Anbar. 

2 Cf. G. le Strange, Baghdad during the Abbasid Caliphate (Oxford, 
1900). 



CALIPHATE 



43 



with the connivance of the governor Omar b. IJaf s Hazarmerd, 
he had found refuge with an Indian king. Mansur discovered 
his abode, and caused him to be killed. His infant son was sent 
to Medina and delivered to his family. Omar Hazarmerd lost 
his government and received a command in Africa, where he 
died in 770. 

In a.h. 158 (a.d. 775) Mansur undertook a pilgrimage to 
Mecca, but succumbed to dysentery at the last station on the 
route. He was about sixty-five years of age, and had reigned 
for twenty-two years. He was buried at Mecca. He was a man 
of rare energy and strength of mind. His ambition was boundless 
and no means, however perfidious, were despised by him. But 
he was a great statesman and knew how to choose able officers 
for all places. He was thrifty and anxious to leave to his son a 
full treasury. He seems, to have cherished the ideal that this son, 
called Mahommed b. Abdallah, after the Prophet, should fulfil 
the promises of peace and happiness that had been tendered to 
the believers, and therefore to have called him al-Mahdi. For 
that purpose it was necessary that he should have the means not 
only to meet all state expenses, but also to be bounteous. But 
from the report of the historian Haitham b. 'AdI x about the last 
discourse which father and son had together, we gather that the 
. former had misgivings in regard to the fulfilment of his wishes. 

Khalid b. Barmak took the greatest care of the revenues, but 
contrived at the same time to consult his own interests. Mansur 
discovered this in the same year in which he died, and threatened 
him with death unless he should pay to the treasury three millions 
of dirhems within three days. Khalid already had so many 
friends that the sum was brought together with the exception of 
30,000 dirhems. At that moment tidings came about a rising in 
the province of Mosul, and a friend of Khalid said to the caliph 
that Khalid was the only man capable of putting it down. 
Thereupon Mansur overlooked the deficiency and gave Khalid 
the government of Mosul. " And," said a citizen of that town, 
" we had such an awe and reverence for Khalid, that he appeased 
the disorders, almost without punishing anybody." 

3. Reign of Mahdi. — As soon as Mansur was dead, Rabl", his 
client and chamberlain, induced all the princes and generals who 
accompanied the caliph, to take the oath of allegiance to his son 
Mahommed al-Mahdi, who was then at Bagdad. Isa b. Musa 
hesitated, but was compelled to give in. In 776 Mahdi constrained 
him for a large bribe to renounce his right of succession in favour 
of his sons, Musa. and Harun. Mansur wrote in his testament to 
his son that he had brought together so much money that, even 
if no revenue should come in for ten years, it would suffice for all 
the wants of the state. Mahdi, therefore, could afford to be 
munificent, and in order to make his accession doubly welcome to 
his subjects, he began by granting a general amnesty to political 
prisoners. Among these was a certain Ya'qiib b. Da'ud, who, 
having insinuated himself into the Confidence of the caliph, 
especially by discovering the hiding places of certain Alids, was 
afterwards (in 778) made prime minister. The provincial 
governors in whom his father had placed confidence, Mahdi 
superseded by creatures of his own. 

In Khorasan many people were discontented. The promises 
made to them during the war against the Omayyads had not been 
fulfilled, and the new Mahdi did not answer at all to their ideal. 
A revolt in 160 under the leadership of a certain Yusuf b. Ibrahim, 
surnamed al-Barm, was suppressed by Yazid b. Mazyad, who, 
after a desperate struggle, defeated Yusuf , took him prisoner and 
brought him in triumph to Bagdad, where he with several of his 
officers was killed and crucified. In the following year, Mahdi was 
menaced by a far more dangerous revolt, led by a sectary, known 
generally as Mokanna (q.v.), or " the veiled one," because he 
always appeared in public wearing a mask. He took up his abode 
in the Transoxianian province of Kish and Nakhshab, where he 
gathered around him a great number of adherents. After some 
successes, the pretender was ultimately cornered at the castle of 
Sanam near Kish, and took poison together with all the members 
of his family. His head was cut off and sent to Mahdi in the year 
163. 

1 Tabari iii. p. 443 seq. 



Mahdi had been scarcely a year on the throne when he resolved 
to accomplish the pilgrimage to Mecca. The chroniclers relate 
that on this occasion for the first time camels loaded with ice for 
the use of the caliph came to Mecca. Immediately on his arrival 
in the Holy City he applied himself, at the request of the inhabi- 
tants, to the renewal of the curtains which covered the exterior 
walls of the Ka'ba. For a very long time no care had been taken 
to remove the old covering when a new one was put on; and the 
accumulated weight caused uneasiness respecting the stability of 
the walls. Mahdi caused the house to be entirely stripped and 
anointed with perfumes, and covered the walls again with a single 
cloth of great richness. The temple itself was enlarged and 
restored. On this occasion he distributed considerable largesses 
among the Meccans. From Mecca Mahdi went to Medina, where 
he caused the mosque to be enlarged, and where a similar distribu- 
tion of gifts took place. During his stay in that city he formed for 
himself a guard of honour, composed of 500 descendants of the 
Ansar, 2 to whom he assigned a quarter in Bagdad, named after 
them the Qatfa (Fief) of the Ansar. Struck by the difficulties 
of every kind which had to be encountered by poor pilgrims to 
Mecca from Bagdad and its neighbourhood, he ordered Yaqtin, 
his freedman, to renew the milestones, to repair the old reservoirs, 
and to dig wells and construct cisterns at every station of the 
road where they were missing. He also had new inns built and 
decayed ones repaired. Yaqtin remained inspector of the road 
till 767. 

During the reign of Mansur the annual raids against the 
Byzantines had taken place almost without intermission, but 
the only feat of importance had been the conquest of Laodicea, 
called "the burnt" (17 KaraKeKavnivrj), by Ma'yuf b. Yahya in 
the year 770. At first the armies of Mahdi were not successful. 
The Greeks even conquered Marash (Germanicia) and annihilated 
the Moslem army sent from Dabiq. In 778, however, Hasan b. 
Qahtaba made a victorious raid as far as Adhruliya (Dorylaeum) ; 
it was on his proposition that Mahdi resolved on building the 
frontier town called Hadath (Adata), which became an outpost. 
In 779 the caliph decided on leading his army in person. He 
assembled his army in the plains of Baradan north of Bagdad 
and began his march in the early spring of 780, taking with him 
his second son Harun, and leaving his elder son Musa as his 
lieutenant in Bagdad. Traversing Mesopotamia and Syria, he 
entered Cilicia, and established himself on the banks of the Jihan 
(Pyramus). Thence he despatched an expeditionary force, nomi- 
nally under the command of Harun,. but in reality under that 
of his tutor, the Barmecide Yahya b.' Khalid. Harun captured 
the fortress Samalu after a siege of thirty-eight days, the inhabi- 
tants surrendering on condition that they should not be killed or 
separated from one another. The caliph kept faith with them, 
and settled them in Bagdad, where they built a monastery called 
after their native place. In consequence of this feat, Mahdi made 
Harun governor of the whole western part of the empire, including 
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Two years later war broke out afresh 
between the Moslems and the Greeks. Leo IV., the East 
Roman emperor, had recently died, leaving the crown to Constan- 
tine VI. This prince being only ten years old, his mother Irene 
acted as regent and assumed the title Augusta. By her orders 
an army of 90,000 men, under the command of Michael Lachano- 
drakon, entered Asia Minor. The Moslems, on their side, invaded 
Cilicia under the orders of Abdalkabir who, being afraid of 
encountering the enemy, retired with his troops. Irritated by 
this failure, the caliph in 781 sent Harun, accompanied by his 
chamberlain Rabf, with an army of nearly 100,000 men, with 
orders to carry the war to the very gates of Constantinople. The 
patrician Nicetas, count of Opsikion, who sought to oppose his 
march, was defeated by Harun's general, Yazid b. Mazyad, and 
put to flight. Harun then marched against Nicomedia, where he 
vanquished the domesticus, the chief commander of the Greek 
forces, and pitched his camp on the shores of the Bosporus. 
Irene took alarm, sued for peace, and obtained a truce for three 
years, but only on the humiliating terms of paying an annual 

2 The first citizens of Medina who embraced Islam were called 
Ansar ("helpers "). 



44 



CALIPHATE 



tribute of 90,000 denarii, and supplying the Moslems with guides 
and markets on their way home. This brilliant success so 
increased Mahdi's affection for Harun that he appointed him 
successor-designate after Musa and named him al-Rashld (" the 
follower of the right cause "). Three years later, he resolved 
even to give to him the precedence in the succession instead of 
Musa, yielding to the importunity of Khaizoran, the mother of 
the two princes, and to his own predilection. It was necessary 
first to obtain from Musa a renunciation of his rights; and for 
that purpose he was recalled from Jorjan, where he was engaged 
on an, expedition against the rebels of Tabaristan. Musa, 
informed of his father's intentions, refused to obey this order, 
and Mahdi determined to march in person against him. But, 
after his arrival at Masabadhan, a place in Jabal (Media, the later 
Persian Irak), he died suddenly, at the age of only forty-three. 
Some attribute his death to an accident met with in hunting; 
others believe him to have been poisoned. Some European 
scholars have suspected Musa of having been concerned in it, but 
of this we have no proof whatever. 

The reign of Mahdi was a time of great prosperity. Much was 
done for the organization of the huge empire; agriculture and 
commerce flourished; the revenues were increasing, whilst the 
people fared well. The power of the state was acknowledged even 
in the far east: the emperor of China, the king of Tibet, and 
many Indian princes concluded treaties with the caliph. He was 
an ardent champion of the orthodox faith, repudiating all the 
extravagant doctrine preached by the Abbasid missionaries and 
formerly professed by his father. In particular he persecuted 
mercilessly the Manichaeans and all kinds of freethinkers. 

4. Reign of Modi. — On the death of Mahdi, Harun, following 
the advice of Yahya b. Khalid, sent the insignia of the Caliphate, 
with letters of condolence and congratulation, to Musa in Jorjan, 
and brought the army which had accompanied Mahdi peacefully 
back from Media to Bagdad. Musa returned in all haste to the 
capital, and assumed the title of ahHadi (" he who directs"). 
The accession of a new caliph doubtless appeared to the partisans 
of the house of Ali a favourable opportunity for a rising. Hosain 
,b. AIT b. Hasan III. raised an insurrection at Medina with the 
support of numerous adherents, and proclaimed himself caliph. 
.Thence he went to Mecca, where on the promise of freedom many 
slaves flocked to him, and many pilgrims also acknowledged him. 
Suleiman b. Mansur, the caliph's representative in the pilgrimage 
of that year, was entrusted with the command against him. 
Hosain was attacked at Fakh, 3 m. from Mecca, and perished in 
the combat with many other Alids. His maternal uncle, Idris b. 
Abdallah, a brother of Mahommed and Ibrahim, the rivals of 
Mansur, succeeded in escaping, and fled to Egypt, whence by the 
help of the postmaster, himself a secret partisan of the Shi'ites, 
he passed into West Africa, where at a later period his son founded 
the Idrisite dynasty in Fez (see Morocco) . 

: Hadi, who had never been able to forget that he had narrowly 
escaped being supplanted by his brother, formed a plan for 
excluding him from the Caliphate and transmitting the succes- 
sion to his own son Ja'far. To this he obtained the assent 
of his ministers and the principal chiefs of his army, with the 
exception of Yahya b. Khalid, Harun's former tutor, who showed 
such firmness and boldness that Hadi cast him into prison and 
resolved on his death. Some historians say that he had already 
given orders for his execution, when he himself was killed 
(September 14th, 786) by bis mother Khaizoran, who had 
systematically and successfully intrigued against him with the 
object of gaining the real power for herself. Hadi, indignant at 
the fact that she was generally regarded as the real source of 
authority, had attempted to poison her, and Khaizoran, hoping 
to find a more submissive instrument of her will in her second 
and favourite son, caused Hadi to be smothered with cushions by 
two young slaves whom she had presented to him. She herself 
died three years later. 

5. Reign of Harun al-Rashld. — We have now reached the most 
celebrated name among the Arabian caliphs, celebrated not only 
in the East, but in the West as well, where the stories of the 
Thousand and One Nights have made us familiar with that world 



which the narrators represent in such brilliant colours. Harun 
ascended the throne without opposition. His first act was to 
choose as prime minister his former tutor, the faithful Yahya, b. 
Khalid, and to confide important posts to the two sons of Yahya. 
Fadl and Ja'far, of whom the former was bis own foster-brother, 
the latter his intimate friend. The Barmecide family were 
endowed in the highest degree with those qualities of gsnerosity 
and liberality which the Arabs prized so highly, and the chronicles 
never weary in their praises. Loaded with all the burdens of 
government, Yahya brought the most distinguished abilities' to 
the exercise of his office. He put the frontiers in a good state Of 
defence; he filled the public treasury, and carried the splendour 
of the throne to the highest point. His sons, especially Fadl, 
were worthy of their father. 

Although the administration of Harun's states was committed 
to skilful hands, yet the first years of his long reign were not free 
from troubles. Towards the year 176 (a.d. 792-793) a man of the 
house of Ali, named Yahya b. Abdallah, another brother' of 
Mahommed and Ibrahim, who had taken refuge in the land of 
Dailam on the south-western shores of the Caspian Sea, succeeded 
in forming a powerful party, and publicly claimed the Caliphate. 
Harun immediately sent against him an army of 50,000 men, 
under the command of Fadl, whom he made governor of all the 
Caspian provinces. Reluctant, however, to fight against a 
descendant of the Prophet, Fadl first attempted to induce him 
to submit by promising him safety and a brilliant position at the 
court of Bagdad. Yahya accepted the proposal, but required 
that the caliph should send him letters of pardon countersigned 
by the highest legal authorities and the principal personages of 
the empire. Harun consented and Yahya went to Bagdad, 
where he met with a splendid reception. At the end of some 
months, however, he Was calumniously accused of conspiracy, 
and the caliph, seizing the opportunity of ridding himself of a 
possible rival, threw him into prison, where he died, according to 
the majority of the historians, of starvation. Others say that 
Ja'far b. Yahya b. Khalid, to whose care he had been entrusted; 
suffered him to escape, and that this was the real cause of Harun's 
anger against the Barmecides (q.v.). Dreading fresh insurrections 
of the Alids, Harun secured the person of another descendant of 
Ali, Musa b. Ja'far, surnamed al-Kazim, who enjoyed great 
consideration at Medina, and had already been arrested and 
released again by Mahdi. The unfortunate man was brought by 
the caliph himself to Bagdad, and there died, apparently by 
poison. 

Meanwhile Harun did not forget the hereditary enemy of 
Islam. In the first year of his reign all the strong places of 
Kinnesrin and Mesopotamia were formed into a special pro- 
vince, which received the name of al-'Awasim (" the defending for- 
tresses ") , with Manbij (Hierapolis) as its capital. The building 
of the fortress of Hadath having been completed, Harun com- 
mitted to Faraj the Turk the task of rebuilding and fortifying the 
city of Tarsus. Thanks to these and similar measures, the Mos- 
lem armies were able to advance boldly into Asia Minor. Almost 
every year successful raids were made, in the year 797 under the 
command of the caliph himself, so that Irene was compelled to 
sue for peace. An attack by the Khazars called the caliph's 
attention from his successes in Asia Minor. This people had 
made an irruption into Armenia, and their attack had been so 
sudden that the Moslems and Christians were unable to defend 
themselves, and 100,000 had been reduced to captivity. Two 
valiant generals, Khozaima b. Khazim and Yazld b. Mazyad, 
marched against the Khazars and drove them out of Armenia. 

In the midst of the cares of war, Harun was assiduous in his 
religious duties, and few years passed without his making the 
pilgrimage. Having determined to fix the order of succession in 
so formal a manner as to take away all pretext for future con- 
tentions, he executed a deed by which he appointed his eldest son 
Mahommed his immediate heir, and after him the second, 
Abdallah, and after Abdallah the third, Qasim. Mahommed 
received the surname of al-Amtn (" the Sure "), Abdallah that 
of al-Ma'mun ("he in whom men trust "), and Qasim that of 
al-Mo'tamin billah (" he who trusts in God "). Harun further 



CALIPHATE 



45 



stipulated that Mamun should have as his share during the life- 
time of his brother the government of the eastern part of the 
empire. Each of the parties concerned swore to observe faithfully 
every part of this deed, which the caliph caused to be hung up in 
the Ka'ba, imagining that it would be thus guaranteed against all 
violation on the part of men, a precaution which was to be rendered 
vain by the perfidy of Amin. 

• It was in the beginning of the following year, at the very 
moment when the Barmecides thought their position most secure, 
that Harun brought sudden ruin upon them. The causes of 
their disgrace have been differently stated by the annalists (see 
Barmecides). The principal cause appears to have been that 
they abused the sovereign power which they exercised. Not a 
few were jealous of their greatness and sought for opportunities 
of instilling distrust against them into the mind of Hartin, and of 
making him feel that he was caliph only in name. The secret 
dissatisfaction thus aroused was increased, according to some 
apparently well-informed authorities, by the releasing of the 
Ahd Yahya b. Abdallah, already mentioned. Finally Harun 
resolved on their destruction, and Ja'far b. Yahya, who had just 
taken leave of him after a day's hunting, was arrested, taken to 
the castle of Harun, and beheaded. The following day, his father 
Yahya, his brother "Fadl, and all the other Barmecides were 
arrested and imprisoned; all their property was confiscated. 
The only Barmecide who remained unmolested with his family 
was Mahommed the brother of Yahya, who had been the cham- 
berlain of the caliph till 795, when Fadl b. Rabi' got his place. 
This latter had henceforward the greatest influence at court. 

In the same year a revolution at Constantinople overthrew the 
empress Irene. The new emperor Nicephorus, thinking himself 
strong enough to refuse the payment of tribute, wrote an insulting 
letter to Harun, who contented himself with replying: " Thou 
shall not hear, but see, my answer." He entered Asia Minor and 
took Heraclea, plundering and burning along his whole line of 
march, till Nicephorus, in alarm, sued for peace. Scarcely had 
the caliph returned into winter quarters when Nicephorus broke 
the treaty. When the news came to Rakka, where Harun was 
residing, not one of the ministers ventured to tell him, until at 
last a poet introduced it in a poem which pleased the monarch. 
Notwithstanding the rigour of the season, Harun retraced his 
steps, and Nicephorus was compelled to observe his engagements. 
In' 805 the first great ransoming of Moslem prisoners took place 
on the banks of the little river Lamus in Cilicia. But Nicephorus:, 
profiting by serious disturbances in Khorasan, broke the treaty 
again, and overran the country as far as Anazarha and Kanisat 
as-sauda (" the black church ") on the frontier,. where he took 
many prisoners, who were, however, recovered by the garrison of 
Mopsuestia. Thus Harun was obliged to take the field again. 
He entered Asia Minor with an army of 135,000 regulars, beside 
volunteers and camp followers. Heraclea was taken, together 
with many other places, and Tyana was made a military station. 
At the same time his admiral, Homaid b. Ma'yuf, conquered 
Cyprus, which had broken the treaty, and took 16,000 of its 
people captive. Nicephorus was now so completely beaten that 
he was compelled to submit to very harsh conditions. In the 
year 808 the second ransoming between the Moslems and the 
Greeks took place near the river Lamus. 

The disturbances in Khorasan were caused by the malversa- 
tions of the governor of that province, Ali b. 'Isa. b. Mahan. 
The caliph went in person to Merv, in order to judge of the 
reality of the complaints which had reached him. Ali b. 'Isa 
hastened to meet the caliph on his arrival at Rai (Rhagae), 
near the modern Teheran, with a great quantity of costly 
presents, which he distributed with such profusion among the 
princes and courtiers that no one was anxious to accuse him. 
Harun confirmed him in his post, and, after having received the 
chiefs of Tabaristan who came to tender their submission, 
returned through Bagdad to Rakka on the Euphrates, which 
city was his habitual residence. In the following year Rafi' b. 
Laith, a grandson of Nasr b. Sayyar, raised the standard of revolt 
in Samarkand, and, at the head, of a numerous army, defeated 
the son of Ali b. 'Isa. Thereupon Ali fled from Balkh, leaving 



the treasury, which was plundered by the populace after his 
departure. The caliph on learning that the revolt was due to 
Ali's tyranny, sent Harthama b. A'yan with stringent orders 
to seize Ali and confiscate his possessions. This order was carried 
out, and it is recorded that 1 500 camels were required to transport 
the confiscated treasures. The caliph's hope that Rafi' would 
submit on condition of receiving a free pardon was not fulfilled, 
and he resolved to set out himself to Khorasan, taking with him 
his second son Mamun. On the journey he was attacked by an 
internal malady, which carried him off, ten months after his 
departure from Bagdad, a.h. 193 (March 809), just on his arrival 
at the city of Tus. Hartin was only forty-five years of age. He 
was far from having the high qualifications of his grandfather 
Mansur; indeed he did not even possess the qualities of his 
father and his brother. When the latter asked him to renounce 
his right of succession, he was willing to consent; saying that 
a quiet life with his beloved wife, the princess Zobaida, was 
his highest wish, but he obeyed his mother and Yahya b. Khalid. 
As long as the Barmecides were in office, he acted only on 
their direction. After their disgrace he was led into many 
impolitic actions by his violent and often cruel propensities. 
But the empire was, especially in the earlier part of his reign, 
in a very: prosperous state, and was respected widely by foreign 
powers. Embassies passed between Charlemagne and Hartin 
in the years 180 (a.d. 797) and 184 (a.d. 801), by which the 
former obtained facilities for the pilgrims to the Holy Land, the- 
latter probably concessions for the trade on the Mediterranean 
ports. The ambassadors brought presents with them; on one 
of these occasions the first elephant reached the land of the 
Franks. . ; . 

Under the reign of Hartin, Ibrahim b. al-Aghlab, the governor 
of Africa, succeeded in making himself independent of the central 
government, on condition of paying a fixed annual tribute -to his 
suzerain the caliph. This was, if we do not take Spain into the 
account, the first instance of dismemberment, later to be followed 
by many others. 

In the days of this caliph the first paper factories were founded 
in Bagdad. 

6. Reign of Amin.- — On the death of Hartin his minister, 
Fadl b. Rabi", with the view of gaining the new caliph's con- 
fidence, hastened to call together all the troops of the late caliph 
and to lead them back to Bagdad, in order to place them in the 
hands of the new sovereign, Amin. He even, in direct violation 
of Harun's will, led back the corps which was intended to occupy 
Khorasan under the authority of Mamun. Aware, however, 
that in thus acting he was making Mamun his irreconcilable 
enemy, he persuaded Amin to exclude Mamun from the succes- 
sion. Mamun, on receiving his brother's invitation to go to 
Bagdad, was greatly perplexed; but his tutor and later vizier, 
Fadl b. Sahl, a Zoroastrian of great influence, who in 806 had 
adopted Islam, reanimated his courage, and pointed out to him 
that certain death awaited him at Bagdad. Mamun resolved 
to hold out, and found pretexts for remaining in Khorasan. 
Amin, in anger, caused the will of his father, which, as we have 
seen, was preserved in the Ka'ba, to be destroyed, declared on 
his own authority that Mamun's rights of succession were 
forfeited, and caused the army to swear allegiance to his own son 
Mtisa, a child of five, on whom he bestowed the title of an^Natiq 
bil-Haqq (" he who speaks according to truth "), a.h. 194 (a.d. 
809-810). On hearing the news, Mamun, strong in the rightful- 
ness of his claim, retaliated by suppressing the caliph's name in 
all public acts. Amin immediately despatched to Khorasan an 
army of 40,000 under the command of Ali b. 'Isa, who had re- 
gained his former influence, and told the caliph that, at his 
coming to Khorasan, all the leading men would come over to his 
side. Zobaida, the mother of the caliph, entreated Ali to treat 
Mamun kindly when he should have made him captive. It is 
said that Fadl b. Sahl had, through a secret agent, induced 
Fadl b. Rabi' to select Ali, knowing that the dislike felt towards 
him by the Khorasanians would double their strength in fighting 
against him. Mamun; on his side, sent in all haste an army of 
less than 4000 men of his faithful Khorasanians, and entrusted 



4-6 



CALIPHATE 



their command to Tahir b. Hosain, who displayed remarkable 
abilities in the war that ensued. The two armies met under the 
walls of Rai (Shaaban 195, May 811). By a bold attack, in the 
manner of the Kharijites of yore, Tahir penetrated into the centre 
of the hostile army and killed Ah. The frightened army fled, 
leaving the camp with all its treasures to Tahir, who from that 
day was named " the man with the two right hands." A 
courier was despatched immediately to Merv, who performed the 
journey, a distance of about 750 miles, in three days. On 
the very day of his arrival, Harthama b. A'yan had left Merv 
with reinforcements. Mamun now no longer hesitated to take 
the title of caliph. 

When the news of Ali's defeat came to Bagdad, Amln sent 
Abdarrahman b. Jabala to Hamadan with 20,000 men. Tahir 
defeated him, forced Hamadan to surrender, and occupied all 
the strong places in Jabal (Media). The year after, Amln placed 
in the field two new armies commanded respectively by Ahmad 
b. Mazyad and Abdallah b. Homaid b. Qah^aba. The skilful 
Tahir succeeded in creating divisions among the troops of his 
adversaries, and obtained possession, without striking a blow, 
of the city of Holwan, an advantage which opened the way to 
the very gates of Bagdad. He was here reinforced by troops 
sent from Khorasan under the command of Harthama b. A'yan, 
who was appointed leader of the war against Amln, with orders 
to send Tahir to Ahwaz. Tahir continued his victorious march, 
conquered Ahwaz, took Wasit and Madain, and pitched his camp 
near one of the gates of the capital, where he was rejoined by 
Harthama. One after the other the provinces fell away from 
Amln, and he soon found himself in possession of Bagdad alone. 
The city, though blockaded on every side, made a desperate 
defence for nearly two years. Ultimately the eastern part of 
the city fell into the hands of Tahir, and Amln, deserted by his 
followers, was compelled to surrender. He resolved to treat with 
Harthama, as he was averse to Tahir; but this step caused his 
ruin. Tahir succeeded in intercepting him on his way to Har- 
thama, and immediately ordered him to be put to death. His 
head was sent to Mamun (September 813). It was presented to 
him by his vizier, Fadl, b. Sahl, surnamed Dhu'l-Riyasatain, or 
" the man with two governments," because his master had 
committed to him both the ministry of war and the general 
administration. Mamun hid his joy beneath a feigned display of 
sorrow. 

■ Amln was only twenty-eight years old. As a ruler he was 
wholly incompetent. He hardly comprehended the importance 
of the affairs with which he was called upon to deal. He acted 
invariably on the advice of those who for the time had his 
confidence, and occupied himself mainly with the affairs of his 
harem, with polo, fishing, wine and music. The five years of his 
reign were disastrous to the empire, and in particular to Bagdad 
which never entirely recovered its old splendour. 

7. Reign of Mamun. — On the day following the death of 
Amln Tahir caused Mamun to be proclaimed at Bagdad, and 
promised in his name a general amnesty. The accession of this 
prince appeared likely to restore to the empire the order necessary 
for it3 prosperity. It was not so, however. The reign of Mamun — 
that reign in which art, science and letters, under the patronage 
of the caliph, threw so brilliant a lustre — had a very stormy 
beginning. Mamun was in no haste to remove to Bagdad, but 
continued to reside at Merv.. In his gratitude to Fadl b. Sahl, 
to whose service he owed his success, he not only chose him as 
prime minister of the empire, but also named his brother, Hasan 
b. Sahl, governor of Media, Fars, Ahwaz, Arabia and Irak. The 
two generals to whom he owed still more were not treated as 
they deserved. Harthama was ordered to return to Khorasan; 
Tahir was made governor of Mesopotamia and Syria, with the 
task of subduing Nasr b. Shabath, who with numerous adherents 
refused submission to the caliph. The Alids seized on the eleva- 
tion of Mamun as a pretext for fresh revolts. At Kufa a certain 
Ibn Tabataba placed an army in the field under Abu'l-Saraya, 
who had been a captain in the army of Harthama. An army 
sent by Hasan b. Sahl was defeated, and Abu'l-Saraya, no longer 
content to play a second part, poisoned his chief, Ibn Tabataba, 



and put in his place another of the family of Ali, Mahoriuned 
b. Mahommed, whom, on account of his extreme youth, he 
hoped to govern at his will. Abu'l-Saraya's success continued, 
and several cities of Irak — Basra, Wasit and Madain — fell into 
his hands. Mecca, Medina and Yemen also were mastered by 
the Alids, who committed all kinds of atrocities and sacrilege. 
Abu'l-Saraya, who even struck money in Kufa, began to menace 
the capital, when Hasan b. Sahl hastily sent a messenger to 
Harthama b. A'yan, who was already at Holwan on his way back 
to Merv, entreating him to come to his aid. Harthama, who 
was deeply offended by his dismissal, refused at first, but at last 
consented, and at once checked the tide of disaster. The troops 
of the Alids were everywhere driven back, and the whole of Irak 
fell again into the hands of the Abbasids. Kufa opened its 
gates; Basra was taken by assault. Abu'l-Saraya and 
Mahommed b. Mahommed fled to Mesopotamia, but were made 
prisoners. The former was decapitated, the, latter was sent to 
Khorasan, the revolt in Arabia was quickly suppressed, and 
peace seemed within reach. This, however, was by no means 
the case. The disorder of civil war had caused a multitude of 
robbers and vagabonds to emerge from the purlieus of Bagdad. 
These ruffians proceeded to treat the capital as a conquered city, 
and it became necessary for all good citizens to organize them- 
selves into a regular militia. Harthama, having vanquished 
Abu'l-Saraya, did not go to Hasan b. Sahl, but proceeded 
towards Merv with the purpose of telling Mamun that the state 
of affairs was not as Fadl b. Sahl represented it to him, and 
urging him to come to Bagdad, where his presence was necessary. 
Fadl, informed of his intentions, filled the caliph's mind with 
distrust against the old general, so that when Harthama arrived 
Mamun had him cast into prison, where he died shortly after- 
wards. When the tidings of his disgrace came to Bagdad, the 
people expelled the lieutenant of Hasan b. Sahl, called by them 
the Majuzl (" the Zoroastrian "), who had chosen Madain for his 
residence, and put at their head Mansur, a son of Mahdi, who 
refused to assume the title of caliph, but consented to be Mamun's 
vicegerent instead of Hasan b. Sahl. 

Meanwhile, at Merv, Mamun was adopting a decision which 
fell like a thunderbolt on the Abbasids. In a.h. 201 (a.d. 817), 
under pretence of putting an end to the continual revolts of the 
partisans of Ali, and acting on the advice of his prime minister 
Fadl, he publicly designated as his successor in the Caliphate Ali 
ar-Rida, a son of that Musa al-Kazim who perished in the prison 
of Mahdi, a direct descendant of Hosain, the son of Ali, and 
proscribed black, the colour of the Abbasids, in favour of that of 
the house of Ali, green. This step was well calculated to delight 
the followers of Ali, but it could not fail to exasperate the 
Abbasids and their partisans. The people of Bagdad refused to 
take the oath to Ali b. Musa, declared Mamun deposed, and 
elected his uncle, Ibrahim, son of Mahdi, to the Caliphate. 1 It 
was only indirectly that the news reached the caliph, who then 
saw that Fadl had been treating him as a puppet. His anger 
was great, but he kept it carefully to himself. Fadl was one day 
found murdered, and Ah b. Musa died suddenly. The historians 
bring no open accusation against Mamun, but it seems clear 
that the opportune removal of these men was not due to chance. 
Mamun affected the profoundest grief, and, in order to disarm 
suspicion, appointed as bis prime minister the brother of Fadl, 
Hasan b. Sahl, whose daughter Buran he afterwards married. 
Soon after the news came to him that Hasan b. Sahl had become 
insane. Mamun appointed an officer to act as his lieutenant, 
and wrote that he was coming to Bagdad in a short time. From 
that moment the pseudo-caliph Ibrahim found himself deserted, 
and was obliged to seek safety in concealment. His precarious 
reign had, however, lasted nearly two years. Mamun had found 
out also that the general uneasiness was largely due to bis treat- 
ment of Harthama and Tahir, the latter having been put in a 
rebellious country without the men and the money to maintain 
his authority. The caliph therefore wrote to Tahir to meet him 
at Nahrawan, where he was received with the greatest honour. 

1 On this event, see a remarkable essay by Barbier de Meynard 
in the Journal Asiatique for March-April, 1869. 



CALIPHATE 



4? 



Having taken all precautions, Mamun now made his solemn 
entry into Bagdad, but, to show that he came as a master, he 
still displayed for several days the green colours, though at last, 
at the request of Tahir, he consented to resume the black. From 
this time, a.h. 204 (August 819), the real reign of Mamun began, 
freed as he now was from the tutelage of Fadl. 

When welcoming Tahir, Mamun bade him ask for any reward 
he might desire. Tahir, fearing lest the caliph, not being able to 
endure the sight of the murderer of his brother, should change 
his mind towards him, contrived to get himself appointed 
governor of Khorasan. Like most of the great Moslem generals, 
Tahir, it is said, had conceived the project of creating an inde- 
pendent kingdom for himself. His death, a.h. 207 (a.d. 822), 
prevented its realization; but as his descendants succeeded him 
one after the other in the post of governor, he may be said in 
reality to have founded a dynasty in Khorasan. His son Abdallah 
b. Tahir was a special favourite of Mamun, He brought Nas,r b. 
Shabath to subjection in Mesopotamia, and overcame by great 
ability a very dangerous rebellion in Egypt. When he returned 
thence, the caliph gave him the choice between the government 
of Khorasan and that of the northern provinces, where he would 
have to combat Babak the Khorramite. Abdallah chose the 
former (see below, § 8). 

The pseudo-caliph, Ibrahim, who, since Mamun's entry into 
Bagdad, had led a wandering life, was eventually arrested. But 
Mamun generously pardoned him, as well as Fadl b. Rabf, the 
chief promoter of the terrible civil war which had so lately 
shaken the empire. After that time, Ibrahim lived- peacefully 
at the court, cultivating the arts of singing and music. 

Tranquillity being now everywhere re-established, Mamun 
gave himself up to science and literature. He caused works on 
mathematics, astronomy, medicine and philosophy to be trans- 
lated from the Greek, and founded in Bagdad a kind of academy, 
called the " House of Science," with a library and an observatory. 
It was also by his orders that two learned mathematicians 
undertook the measurement of a degree of the earth's circum- 
ference. Mamun interested himself too in questions of religious 
dogma. He had embraced the Motazilite doctrine about free will 
and predestination, and was in particular shocked at the opinion 
which had spread among the Moslem doctors that the Koran 
was the uncreated word of God. In the year 212 (a.d. 827) he 
published an edict by which the Motazilite (Mu'tazilite) doctrine 
was declared to be the religion of the state, the orthodox faith 
condemned as heretical. At the same time he ordered all his 
subjects to honour Ali as the best creature of God after the 
Prophet, and forbade the praise of Moawiya. In a.h. 218 (a.d. 
833) a new edict appeared by which all judges and doctors 
were summoned to renounce the error of the uncreated word of 
God. Several distinguished doctors, and, among others, the 
celebrated Ahmad b. Hanbal (q.v.), founder of one of the four 
orthodox Moslem schools, were obliged to appear before an 
inquisitorial tribunal; and as they persisted in their belief 
respecting the Koran, they were thrown into prison. Mamun, 
being at Tarsus, received from the governor of Bagdad the report 
of the tribunal, and ordered that the culprits should be sent off 
to him. Happily for these unfortunate doctors, they had 
scarcely reached Adana, when news of the caliph's death 
arrived and they were brought back to Bagdad. The two 
successors of Mamun maintained the edicts — Ahmad b. Hanbal, 
who obstinately refused to yield, was flogged in the year 834 — 
but it seems that Motasim did not himself take much interest in 
the question, which perhaps he hardly understood, and that the 
prosecution of the inquisition by him was due in great part to 
the charge which was left him in Mamun's will. In the reign of 
Motawakkil the orthodox faith was restored, never to be assailed 
again. 1 

In spite of these manifold activities Mamun did not forget the 
hereditary enemy of Islam. In the years 830, 831 and 832 he 
made expeditions into Asia Minor with such success that Theo- 
philus, the Greek emperor, sued for peace, which Mamun 

1 Cf. W. M. Patton, Ahmed ibn Hanbal and the Mihna (Leiden, 
1897) ; and article Mahommedan Religion. « 



haughtily refused to grant. Accordingly, he decided on marching 
in the following year against Amorium, and thence to Constanti- 
nople itself. Having sent before him his son Abbas to make 
Tyana a strong fortress, he set out for Asia Minor to put himself 
at the head of the army, but died of a fever brought on by 
bathing in the chill river, Pedendon, 40 m. from Tarsus, in Rajab 
218 (a.d. August 833), at the age of forty-eight. 

Mamun was a man of rare qualities, and one of the best rulers 
of the whole dynasty after Mansur. By him the ascendancy of 
the Persian element over the Arabian was completed. Moreover, 
he began to attract young Turkish noblemen to his court, an 
example which was followed on a much larger scale by his 
successor and led to the supremacy of the Turks at a later period. 

8. Reign of Motasim. — Abu Ishak al-Mo'tasnn had for a long 
time been preparing himself for the succession. • Every year he 
had bought Turkish slaves, and had with him in the last expedi- 
tion of Mamun a bodyguard of 3000. Backed by this force he 
seems to have persuaded the ailing caliph to designate him as his 
successor. The chroniclers content themselves with recording 
that he himself wrote in the name of the caliph to the chief 
authorities in Bagdad and elsewhere that he was to be the 
successor. His accession, however, met at first with active 
opposition in the army, where a powerful party demanded, 
that Abbas should take the place of his father. Abbas, however, 
publicly renounced all pretension to the Caliphate, and the whole 
army accepted Motasim, who immediately had the fortifications 
of Tyana demolished and hastened back to Bagdad, where he 
made his public entry on the 20th of September 833. 

Motasim wanted officers for his bodyguard. Immediately 
after his coming to Bagdad, he bought all the Turkish slaves 
living there who had distinguished themselves. Among them 
were Ashnas, Itakh, Wasif, Slma, all of whom later became men 
of great influence. The guard was composed of an undisciplined 
body of soldiers, who, moreover, held in open contempt the 
religious precepts of Islam. Tired of the excesses committed 
by these Turks, the people of Bagdad beat or killed as many of 
them as they could lay hands on, and Motasim, not daring to 
act with severity against either his guard or the citizens, took the 
course of quitting the city. Having bought in 834 territories at 
Samarra, a small place situated a few leagues above Bagdad, 
he caused a new residence to be built there, whose name, which 
could be interpreted " Unhappy is he who sees it," was changed 
by him into Sorra-man-ra'a, " Rejoiced is he who sees it." 
Leaving the government of the capital in the hands of his son 
Harun al-Wathiq, he established himself at Samarra in 836. 
This resolution of Motasim was destined to prove fatal to his 
dynasty; for it placed the caliphs at the mercy of their prae- 
torians. In fact, from the time of Wathiq, the Caliphate became 
the plaything of the Turkish guard, and its decline was continuous. 

In the time of the civil war the marshlands in Irak between 
Basra and Wasit had been occupied by a large population of 
Indians, called yat, or, according to the Arabic pronunciation, 
Zott, who infested the roads and levied a heavy tribute from the 
ships ascending and descending the Tigris. From the year 821 
onwards Mamun had tried in vain to bring them to submission. 
When Motasim came back to Bagdad, after the death of his 
brother, he found the people in great distress, their supply of 
dates from Basra having been cut off by the Zott, and resolved 
to put them down with all means. After seven months of 
vigorous resistance, they at last yielded on condition of safety 
of life and property. In January 835 the Zott in their national 
costume and with their own music were conducted on a great 
number of boats through Bagdad. Thence they were transported 
to Ainzarba (Anazarba) on the frontier of the Greek empire. 
Twenty years later they entered Asia Minor, whence in a later 
period they came into Europe, under the name of Athinganoi 
(Ziganes) and Egyptians (gipsies). 2 

A far more difficult task lay before Motasim, the subjection of 
Babak al-Khorraml in Azerbaijan. Though the name Khorrami 
is often employed by the Moslem writers to designate such 

2 See M. J. de Goeje, Memoire sur les migrations des Ziganes a 
travers VAsie (Leiden, 1903) ; also Gipsies. 



4* 



CALIPHATE 



extravagant Moslem sectaries as the Hashimlya,the real Khorrami 
were not Moslems, but Persian Mazdaqites, or communists. 
The name Khorrami, or Khorramdlni, " adherent of the pleasant 
religion," seems to be a nickname. As they bore red colours, 
they were also called Mohammira, or Redmakers. Their object 
was to abolish Islam and to restore " the white religion." We 
find the first mention of them in the year 808, when Harun 
al-Rashid sent an army against them. During the civil war 
their power was steadily increasing, and spread not only over 
Azerbaijan, but also over Media (Jabal) and Khorasan. The 
numerous efforts of Mamun to put them down had been all in 
vain, and they were now in alliance with the Byzantine emperor. 
Therefore, in the year 835, Motasim made Afshln, a Turkish 
prince who had distinguished himself already in the days of 
Mamun, governor of Media, with orders to take the lead of the 
war against Babak. After three years' fighting, Babak was 
taken prisoner. He was carried to Samarra, led through the city 
on the back of an elephant, and then delivered to the execu- 
tioners, who cut off his arms and legs. His head was sent to 
Khorasan, his body was crucified. For long afterwards the place 
where this happened bore the name of " Babak's Cross." 

In the hope of creating a diversion in Babak's favour, Theo- 
philus in 837 fell upon and laid waste the frontier town of 
Zibatra. There and in several other places he took a great 
number of prisoners, whom he mutilated. The news arrived just 
after that of the capture of Babak, and Motasim swore to take 
exemplary vengeance. He assembled a formidable army, 
penetrated into Asia Minor, and took the city of Amorium, 
where he gained rich plunder. During his return the caliph 
was informed of a conspiracy in the army in favour of 'Abbas 
the son of Mamun, of which 'Ojaif b. 'Anbasa was the ringleader. 
The unfortunate prince was arrested and died soon after in prison. 
.The conspirators were killed, many of them with great cruelty. 
(For the campaign see Bury in J.H.S., 1909, xxix. pt. i.) 

Motasim had just returned to Samarra when a serious revolt 
broke out in Tabaristan, Maziyar, one of the hereditary chiefs 
of that country, refusing to acknowledge the authority of Abdallah 
Ibn Tahir, the governor of Khorasan, of which Tabaristan was 
a province. The revolt was suppressed with great difficulty, 
and it came out that it was due to the secret instigation of 
Afshln, who hoped thereby to cause the fall of the Tahirids, 
and to take their place, with the ulterior object of founding an 
independent kingdom in the East. Afshln, who stood at that 
moment in the highest favour of the caliph, was condemned 
and died in prison. Motasim died a year later, January 842. 

9. Reign of Wathiq. — His son Wathiq, who succeeded, though 
not in the least to be compared with Mamun, had yet in common 
with him a thirst for knowledge — perhaps curiosity would be a 
more appropriate term — which prompted him, as soon as he 
became caliph, to send tbe famous astronomer Mahommed b. 
Musa into Asia Minor to find out all about the Seven Sleepers 
which he discovered in the neighbourhood of Arabissus, 1 and 
Sallam the Interpreter to explore the situation of the famous 
wall of Gog and Magog, which he reached at the north-west 
frontier of China. 2 For these and other personal pursuits he 
raised money by forcing a number of high functionaries to dis- 
gorge their gains. In so vast an empire the governors and 
administrators had necessarily enjoyed an almost unrestricted 
power,. and this had enabled them to accumulate wealth. Omar 
had already compelled them to furnish an account of their riches, 
and, when he found that they had abused their trust, to relin- 
quish half to the state. As time went on, nomination to an office 
was more and more generally considered a step to wealth. 
During the reign of the Omayyads a few large fortunes were 
made thus. But with the increasing luxury after Mansur, the 
thirst for money became universal, and the number of honest 
officials lessened fast. Confiscation of property had been 

1 See M. J. de Goeje, " De legende der Zevenslapers van Efeze," 
Versl. en Meded. der K. Akad. v. Wetensch. Afd. Letterk. 4 e Reeks, iii., 
1900. 

2 See M. J. de Goeje, " De muur van Gog en Magog," Versl. en 
Meded. 3° Reeks, v., 1888. 



employed with success by Harun al-Rashid after the disgrace of 
the Barmecides, and occasionally by his successors, but Wathiq 
was the first to imprison high officials and fine them heavily on 
the specific charge of peculation. 

The caliph also shared Mamun's intolerance on the doctrinal 
question of the uncreated Koran. He carried his zeal to such a 
point that, on the occasion of an exchange of Greek against 
Moslem prisoners in 845, he refused to receive those Moslem 
captives who would not declare their belief that the Koran was 
created. The orthodox in Bagdad prepared to revolt, but were 
discovered in time by the governor of the city. The ringleader 
Ahmad b. Nasr al-Khoza'I was seized and brought to Samarra, 
where Wathiq beheaded him in person. The only other event 
of importance in the reign of Wathiq was a rising of the Arabian 
tribes in the environs of Medina, which the Turkish general 
Bogha with difficulty repressed. When he reached Samarra with 
his prisoners, Wathiq had just died (August 846). That the 
predominance of the praetorians was already established is clear 
from the fact that Wathiq gave to two Turkish generals, Ash n as 
and Itakh respectively, the titular but lucrative supreme govern- 
ment of all the western and all the eastern provinces. In his days 
the soldiery at Samarra was increased by a large division of 
Africans (Maghribls). 

10. Reign of Motawakkil. — As Wathiq had appointed no 
successor the vizier Mahommed Zayyat had cast his eye on 
his son Mahommed, who was still a child, but the generals Wasif 
and Itakh, seconded by the upper cadi Ibn abi Da'ud, refused 
their consent, and offered the supreme power to Wathiq's 
brother Ja'far, who at his installation adopted the name of 
al-Motawakkil 'aid 'llah (" he who trusts in God "). The new 
caliph hated the vizier Zayyat, who had opposed his election, and 
had him seized and killed with the same atrocious cruelty which 
the vizier himself had inflicted on others. His possessions, and 
those of others who had opposed the caliph's election, were 
confiscated. But the arrogance of Itakh, to whom he owed his 
Caliphate, became insufferable. So, with the perfidy of his race, 
the caliph took him off his guard, and had him imprisoned and 
killed at Bagdad. He was succeeded by Wasif. 

About this time an impostor named Mahmud b. Faraj had set 
himself up as a prophet, claiming to be Dhu'l-Qarnain (Alexander 
the Great) risen from the dead. Asserting that Gabriel brought 
him revelations, he had contrived to attract twenty -seven 
followers. The caliph had him flogged, and compelled each of 
the twenty-seven to give him ten blows on the head with his 
fist. The " prophet " expired under the blows (850). 

One of the first acts of Motawakkil was the release of all those 
who had been imprisoned for refusing to admit the dogma of the 
created Koran, and the strict order to abstain from any litigation 
about the Book of God. The upper cadi Ibn abi Da'ud, the 
leader of the movement against orthodoxy, who had stood in 
great esteem with Mamun and had fulfilled his high office under 
the reigns of Motasim and Wathiq, had a stroke of paralysis in 
the year 848. His son Mahommed was put in his place till 851, 
when all the members of the family were arrested. They released 
themselves by paying the enormous sum of 240,000 dinars and 
16,000,000 dirhems, which constituted nearly their whole 
fortune, and were then sent to Bagdad, where father and son 
died three years later. An orthodox upper cadi was named 
instead, and the dogma of the created Koran was declared 
heresy; therewith began a persecution of all the adherents of 
that doctrine and other Motazilite tenets. Orthodoxy triumphed, 
never again to lose its place as the state religion. Hand in hand 
with these reactionary measures came two others, one against 
Jews and Christians, one against the Shi'ites. The first caliph 
who imposed humiliating conditions on the Dhimmls, or Cove- 
nanters, who, on condition of paying a certain not over-heavy 
tribute, enjoyed the protection of the state and the free exercise 
of their cult, was Omar II., but this policy was not continued. 
A proposition by the cadi Abu Yiisuf to Harun al-Rashid to 
renew it had not been adopted. Motawakkil, in 850, formulated 
an edict by which these sectaries were compelled to wear a 
distinctive dress and to distinguish their houses by a figure of 



CALIPHATE 



the devil nailed to the door, excluding them at the same time 
from all public employments, and forbidding them to send their 
children to Moslem schools. Nevertheless, he kept his Christian 
medical men, some of whom were high in favour. He showed 
his hatred for the Shi'ites by causing the mausoleum erected over 
the tomb of Hosain at Kerbela, together with all the buildings 
surrounding it, to be levelled to the ground and the site to be 
ploughed up, and by forbidding any one to visit the spot. A year 
before, a descendant of Hosain, Yahya b. Omar, had been arrested 
and flogged on his orders. He escaped afterwards, rose in 
rebellion at Kufa in 864, and was killed in battle. It is reported 
that the caliph even permitted one of his buffoons to turn the 
person of Ali into mockery. 

In the year 848-849 Ibn Ba'ith, who had rendered good service 
in the war against Babak, but had for some cause been arrested, 
fled from Samarra to Marand in Azerbaijan and revolted. Not 
without great difficulty Bogha, the Turkish general, succeeded 
in taking the town and making Ibn Ba'ith prisoner. He was 
brought before Motawakkil and died in prison. In the year 237 
(a.d. 851-852) a revolt broke out in Armenia. Notwithstanding 
a vigorous resistance, Bogha subdued and pacified the province 
in the following year. In that same year, 852-853, the Byzan- 
tines made a descent on Egypt with 300 vessels. 'Anbasa the 
governor had ordered the garrison of Damietta to parade at the 
capital Fostat. The denuded town was taken, plundered and 
burned. The Greeks then destroyed all the fortifications at the 
mouth of the Nile near Tinnis, and returned with prisoners and 
booty. The annual raids of Moslems and Greeks in the border 
districts of Asia Minor were attended with alternate successes, 
though on the whole the Greeks had the upper hand. In 856 
they penetrated as far as Amid (Diarbekr), and returned with 
10,000 prisoners. But in the year 859 the Greeks suffered a 
heavy defeat with losses of men and cattle, the emperor Michael 
himself was in danger, whilst the fleet of the Moslems captured 
and sacked Antalia. This was followed by a truce and an 
exchange of prisoners in the following year. 

In 855 a revolt broke out in Horns (Emesa), where the harsh 
conditions imposed by the caliph on the Christians and Jews 
had caused great discontent. It was repressed after a vigorous 
resistance. A great many leading men were flogged to death, 
all churches and synagogues were destroyed and all the Christians 
banished. 

In the year 851 the Boja (or Beja), a wild people living between 
the Red Sea and the Nile of Upper Egypt, the Blemmyes of the 
ancients, refused to pay the annual tribute, and invaded the 
land of the gold and emerald mines, so that the working of the 
mines was stopped. The caliph sent against them Mahommed 
al-Qomml, who subdued them in 856 and brought their king 
Ali Baba to Samarra before Motawakkil, on condition that he 
should be restored to his kingdom. 

About this time Sijistan liberated itself from the supremacy 
of the Tahirids. Ya'qub b. Laith al-Saffar proclaimed himself 
amir of that province in the year 860, and was soon after con- 
firmed in this dignity by the caliph. 

In 858 Motawakkil, hoping to escape from the arrogant 
patronage of Wasif, who had taken the place of Itakh as head 
of the Turkish guard, transferred his residence to Damascus. 
But the place did not agree with him, and he returned to Samarra, 
where he caused a magnificent quarter to be built 3 m. from the 
city, which he called after his own name Ja'fariya, and on which 
he spent more than two millions of dinars (about £900,000). 
He found the means by following the example of his predecessor 
in depriving many officials of their ill-gotten gains. He contrived 
to enrol in his service nearly 12,000 men, for the greater part 
Arabs, in order to crush the Turks. In the year of his elevation 
to the Caliphate, he had regulated the succession to the empire 
in his own family by designating as future caliphs his three sons, 
al-Montasir billah (" he who seeks help in God "), al-Mo'tazz 
billah (" he whose strength is of God "), and al-Mowayyad billah 
(" he who is assisted by God "). By and by he conceived an 
aversion to his eldest son, and wished to supplant him by Motazz, 
the son of bis favourite wife Qablha. The day had been fixed on 1 



which Montasir, Wasif and several other Turkish generals were 
to be assassinated. But Wasif and Montasir had been informed, 
and resolved to anticipate him. In the night before, Shawwal 
a.h. 247 (December 861), Motawakkil, after one of his wonted 
orgies, was murdered, together with his confidant, Fath b. Khaqan. 
The official report, promulgated by his successor, was that Fath 
b. Khaqan had murdered his master and had been punished for 
it by death. For the administrative system in this reign see 
Mahommed an Institutions. 

11. Reign of Montasir. — On the very night of his father's 
assassination Montasir had himself proclaimed caliph. He was 
a man of very feeble character, and a mere puppet in the hands 
of his vizier Ahmad b. Khaslb and the Turkish generals/ He 
was compelled to send Wasif, the personal enemy of Ibn Khaslb, 
to the frontier for a term of four years, and then to deprive his 
two brothers Motazz and Mowayyad, who were not agreeable to 
them, of their right of succession. He died six months after, by 
poison, it is said. 

12. Reign of Mosta'in. — The Turkish soldiery, now the chief 
power in the state, chose, by the advice of Ibn Khaslb, in suc- 
cession to Montasir, his cousin Ahmad, who took the title of 
al-Mosta'in billah (" he who looks for help to God ")• In the 
reign of this feeble prince the Greeks inflicted serious losses on 
the Moslems in Asia Minor. A great many volunteers from all 
parts, who offered their services, were hunted down as rioters 
by the Turkish generals, who were wholly absorbed by their 
own interests. The party which had placed Mosta'in on the 
throne, led by Ibn Khaslb and Otamish, were soon overpowered 
by Wasif and Bogha. Ibn Khaslb was banished to Crete, 
Otamish murdered. The superior party, however, maintained 
Mosta'in on the throne, because they feared lest Motaizz should 
take vengeance upon them for the murder of his father Mota- 
wakkil. But in the year 865 Wasif and Bogha fled with Mosta'in 
to Bagdad, and Motazz was proclaimed caliph at Samarra. A 
terrible war ensued; Mosta'in was obliged to abdicate, and was 
killed in the following year. 

In 864 a descendant of Ali, named Hasan b. Zaid, gained 
possession of Tabaristan and occupied the great city of Rai 
(Rey) near Teheran. A year later the province was reconquered 
by the Tahirid governor of Khorasan, so that Hasan was obliged 
to retreatfor refuge to the land of the Dailam. But he returned 
soon, and after many reverses ruled over Tabaristan and Jorjan 
for many years. 

13. Reign of Motazz. — Motazz, proclaimed caliph at Bagdad 
in the first month of 252 (January 866), devoted himself to the 
object of freeing himself from the omnipotent Turkish generals, 
especially Wasif and Bogha, who had opposed his election. But 
such a task demanded an ability and energy which he did not 
possess. He was obliged to grant them amnesty and to recall 
them to Samarra. He mistrusted also his brothers Mowayyad 
and Mowaffaq, who had interceded for them. He put the former 
to death and drove the latter into exile to Bagdad. Some time 
after he had the satisfaction of seeing Wasif killed by his own 
troops, and succeeded, a year later, in having Bogha assassinated. 
But a more difficult problem was the payment of the Turkish, 
Persian and African guards, which was said to have amounted 
in a.h. 252 to 200,000,000 dirhems 1 (about £6,500,000), 01 
apparently twice the revenue derived from the land tax. As the 
provincial revenues annually decreased, it became impossible 
to pay this sum, and Salih the son of Wasif, in spite of the 
remonstrances of the caliph, confiscated the property of state 
officials. Upon a further demand, Motazz, having failed to 
procure money from his mother Qablha, who was enormously 
rich, was seized upon and tortured, and died of starvation in 
prison (Shaaban 255, July 868). 

The dismemberment of the empire continued fast in these 
years, and the caliph was compelled to recognize the virtual 
independence of the governors Ya'qub the Saffarid (see Saf- 
farids and Persia, History, § B) in Seistan, and Ahmad 
b. Tulun in Egypt. 

1 " Dinars " in the text of Tabari iii. 1685, must be an error 
for " dirhems." 



5° 



CALIPHATE 



14. Reign of Mohtadi, — Immediately after the seizure of 
Motazz, the Turks, led by Salih b. Waslfy proclaimed as caliph 
one of the sons of Wathiq with the title of al-Mohtadi billah 
(" the guided by God "), who, however, refused to occupy the 
throne until his predecessor had solemnly abdicated. Mohtadi, 
who was a man of noble and generous spirit and had no lack of 
energy, began by applying the precarious measure of power 
which was left him to the reform of the court. He banished the 
musicians and singers, and forbade all kinds of games; he 
devoted himself to the administration of justice, and gave 
public audiences to the people for the redress of their grievances. 
At the same time he contrived to elevate the power of the Abna, 
the descendants of those Persian soldiers who had established 
the dynasty of the Abbasids, in order to break the supremacy 
of the Turks and other mercenaries. But Mohtadi came too 
late, and the Turks did not leave him time to finish his work. 

On the news of the conspiracy against Motazz, Musa, the son 
of the famous general Bogha, 1 then governor of Media (Jabal), 
ordered his deputy-general Moflih to return at once from a pro- 
posed invasion of Dailam, and moved with his army towards 
Samarra, notwithstanding the peremptory orders of the caliph. 
At his approach Salih, who was afraid of Musa, hid himself, 
but was soon discovered and killed. At that moment a Kharijite, 
named Mosawir, who in 867 had risen in Mesopotamia and 
beaten more than one general of the government, took Balad 
and menaced Mosul. Musa could not refuse to comply with the 
formal command of the caliph to march against him. During 
the absence of these troops, Mohtadi seems to have tried to get 
rid of the principal Turkish leaders. A brother of Musa and one 
of his best generals, Bayikbeg (Baiekbak), were killed, but the 
soldiery he had gained over for himself were not strong enough. 
Mohtadi was overwhelmed and killed, Rajab 256 (June 870). 

15. Reign of Motamid. — Whether from weariness or from 
repentance, the Turkish soldiery discontinued for a time their 
hateful excesses, and their new leader, Musa b. Bogha, was 
without the greed and ambition of his predecessors. A son of 
Motawakkil was brought out of prison to succeed his cousin, and 
reigned for twenty-three years under the name of al-Mo'tatnid 
'ala'lldh ("he whose support is God ") . He was a feeble, pleasure- 
loving monarch, but Mohtadi had regained for the Caliphate 
some authority, which was exercised by Obaidallah b. Khaqan, 
the able vizier of Mohtadi, and by Motamid's talented brother 
Abu Ahmad al-Mowaffaq; Miisa b. Bogha himself remained till 
his death a staunch servant of the government. During the 
reign of Motamid great events took place. The great power long 
wielded by the Tahirids, not only in the eastern provinces, but 
also at Bagdad itself, had been gradually diminishing, and came 
to an end in the year 873, when Ya'qub the Saffarid occupied 
Nishapur and imprisoned Mahommed b. Tahir with his whole 
family. The power of Ya'qub then increased to such an extent 
that he was not content with the caliph's offer to recognize him 
as supreme in the provinces he had conquered, and military 
governor of Bagdad, but marched against Irak. The caliph 
himself, wearing the mantle and the staff of the Prophet, then 
went out against him, and after a vigorous resistance he 'was 
beaten by Mowaffaq, who had the command of the troops, and 
fled to Jondisapur in Khuzistan, where he died three years later, 
leaving his empire to his brother 'Amr. This prince maintained 
himself in power till the year 900, when he was beaten and taken 
prisoner by Isma'Il b. Ahmed the Samanid. The Samanids had 
been governors of Transoxiana from the time of Mamun, and 
after the fall of the Tahirids, had been confirmed in this office 
by the caliph. After 287 (900) they were independent princes, 
and under their dominion these districts attained to high 
prosperity. 

Motamid had also to deal with a rising of the negro slaves in 
the province of Basra, led by one Ali b. Mahommed, who called 
himself a descendant of Ali. It lasted from 869 to 883, and tasked 
the government to its utmost. 2 

'This Bogha was called al-Kabir, or major; the ally of Wasif, 
a man of much inferior consideration, al-Saghir, or minor. 
8 See Noldeke, Orientalische Skizzen, pp. 155 seq. 



In the west, Ahmad b. Ttilun became a mighty prince, whose 
sway extended over Syria and a part of Mesopotamia. Motamid, 
who wished to free himself from the guardianship of his brothel 
Mowaffaq, concerted with him a plan to emigrate to Egypt, 
Ahmad being himself angered against Mowaffaq on personal 
grounds. Motamid's flight was stopped by his vizier Ibn 
Makhlad, and the caliph himself was reconducted to Samarra 
as a prisoner in the year 882. From that time there was war 
between the Abbasids and the Tfllunids. Ahmad died in 270 
(884). His son Khomaruya succeeded him, and maintained 
himself in power till his death in 896, in which year his daughter 
was married to the caliph Motadid. Ten years later Egypt was 
conquered by a general of the caliph Moktafl. 

During the reign of Motamid the emperor Basil I. conducted 
the war against the Moslems with great success, till in the year 
270 (a.d. 884) his army suffered a terrible defeat near Tarsus, 
in which the greater part of the army, the commander Andreas, 
and many other patricians perished. 

Motamid had appointed his son al-Mofawwid as successor to 
the Caliphate, and after him his brother Mowaffaq. When the 
latter died in the year 891, his son Abu '1-' Abbas, al-Mo'tadid 
("he who seeks his support in God"), was put in his place. 
Next year Mofawwid was compelled to abdicate in favour of his 
cousin. Shortly after Motamid died, Rajab 279 (October 892). 
Not long before these events, the seat of the Caliphate bad been 
restored to Bagdad. 

16. Reign of Motadid.— Motadid may be called, after Mansur, 
the most able and energetic of all the Abbasid rulers. He took 
good care of the finances, reformed the administration, was an 
excellent commander in war, and maintained order as far as 
possible. The Kharijites in Mesopotamia, who for many years 
had molested the government, were finally crushed with the aid 
of their former ally Hamdan, who became the founder of the 
well-known dynasty of the Hamdanites. The mighty house 
of Abu Dolaf in the south-west of Media, which had never 
ceased to encroach on the Caliphate, was put down. The 
governor of Azerbaijan and Armenia, belonging to the powerful 
Turkish house of the Sajids or Sajites, whose loyalty was always 
doubtful, planned an invasion of Syria and Egypt. Motadid 
frustrated it by a quick movement. The citizens of Tarsus who 
were involved in the plot were severely punished. The chief 
punishment, however, the burning of the fleet, wa/ a very 
impolitic measure, as it strengthened the hands of the Byzantines. 

Almost simultaneously with the rising of the negro slaves 
in Basra there arose in the province of Kufa the celebrated 
sect of the Carmathians (q.v.) , Fatimites 3 or Isma'ilites. This 
powerful sect, which save for a difference of opinion would have 
joined the negro rising, remained outwardly quiet during 
Motamid's reign, but under Motadid the government began to 
have misgivings about them. Abu Sa'Id al-Jannabl, who had 
founded a Carmathian state in Bahrein, the north-eastern 
province of Arabia (actually called Lahsa), which could become 
dangerous for the pilgrim road as well as for the commerce of 
Basra, in the year 900 routed an army sent against him by 
Motadid, and warned the caliph that it would be safer to let the 
Carmathians alone. In the same year the real chief of the sect, 
whose abode had been discovered by the caliph, fled from 
Salamia in Syria, where he lived, to Africa, and hid himself at 
Sijilmasa (in Tafilalt) in the far west, whence he reappeared 
ten years later at Kairawan as the Mahdi, the first caliph of the 
Fatimites. 4 

Motadid died in Rabia II. a.h. 289 (March 902), leaving the 
Caliphate to his son al-Mokt&fl billah (" he who sufficeth himself 
in God "). 

17. Reign of'Moktafi. — Moktafi inherited his father's intre- 
pidity, and seems to have had high personal qualities, but his 
reign of six years was a constant struggle against the Carmathians 
in Syria, who defeated the Syrian and Egyptian troops, and 

s For the connexion between Carmathians and Fatimites see under 
Fatimites. 

1 M. J. de Goeje, Memoire sur les Carmathes du Bahrain el les 
Fatimides (Leiden, 1886). 



CALIPHATE 



5i 



conquered Damascus and other cities. Moktafi led his troops 
in person, and his general, Mahommed b. Suleiman, gained a 
signal victory. Three of their chiefs were taken and put to death. 
But, to avenge their defeat, they lay in wait for the great pilgrim 
caravan on its return from Mecca in the first days of 294 (906), 
and massacred 20,000 pilgrims, making an immense booty. 
This horrible crime raised the whele Moslem world against 
them. Zikriiya their chief was defeated at last and perished. 

After the defeat of the Syrian Carmathians, Mahommed b. 
Suleiman was sent by the caliph to Egypt, where he overthrew 
the dominion of the TulQnids. 'Isa b. Mahommed al-Naushari 
was made governor in their stead (905). 

The war with the Byzantines was conducted with great energy 
during the reign of Moktafi. In the year 905 the Greek general 
Andronicus took Marash, and penetrated as far as Haleb 
(Aleppo), but the Moslems were successful at sea, and in 907 
captured Iconium, whilst Andronicus went over to the caliph's 
side, so that the Byzantine emperor sent an embassy to Bagdad 
to ask for a truce and an exchange of prisoners. 

18. Reign of Moqtadir. — The sudden death of Moktafi, Dhu'l- 
qa'da 295 (August 908), was a fatal blow to the prestige of the 
Caliphate, which had revived under the successive governments of 
Mowaffaq, Motadid and himself. The new caliph, al-Moqtadir 
billah (" the powerful through God "), a brother of Moktafi, was 
only thirteen years of age when he ascended the throne. Owing 
to his extreme youth many of the leading men at Bagdad rebelled 
and swore allegiance to Abdallah, son of the former caliph 
Motazz, a man of excellent character and of great poetical gifts; 
but the party of the house of Motadid prevailed, and the rival 
caliph was put to death. Moqtadir, though not devoid of noble 
qualities, allowed himself to be governed by his mother and her 
ladies and eunuchs. He began by squandering the 15,000,000 
dinars which were in the treasury when his brother died in 
largesses to his courtiers, who, however, merely increased their 
demands. His very able vizier, the noble and disinterested 
Ali b. 'Isa, tried to check this foolish expenditure, but his efforts 
were more than counterbalanced by the vizier Ibn abi'l-Forat 
and the court. The most shameless bribery and the robbery 
of the well-to-do went together with the most extravagant 
luxury. The twenty-four years of Moqtadir's reign are a period 
of rapid decay. The most important event in the reign was the 
foundation of the Fatimite dynasty, which reigned first in the 
Maghrib and then in Egypt for nearly three centuries (see 
Fatimites and Egypt: History, " Mahommedan "). 

Far more dangerous, however, for the Caliphate of Bagdad 
at the time were the Carmathians of Bahrein, then guided by 
Abu Tahir, the son of Abu Sa'Id Jannabl. In 311 (a.d. 923) 
they took and ransacked Basra; in the first month of the 
following year the great pilgrim caravan on its return from 
Mecca was overpowered; 2500 men perished, while an even larger 
number were made prisoners and brought to Lahsa, the residence 
of the Carmathian princes, together with an immense booty. 
The caravan which left Bagdad towards the end of this year 
returned in all haste before it had covered a third of the way. 
Then Kufa underwent the fate that had befallen Basra. In 313 
(a.d. 926) the caravan was allowed to pass on payment of a large 
sum of money. The government of Bagdad resolved to crush 
the Carmathians, but a large army was utterly defeated by Abu 
Tahir in 315 (927), and Bagdad was seriously threatened. Next 
year Mecca was taken and plundered; even the sacred Black 
Stone was transported to Lahsa, where it remained till 339 (950), 
when by the express order of the Imam, the Fatimite caliph, it 
was restored to the Ka'ba. 

In 317 (929) a conspiracy was formed to dethrone Moqtadir, 
to which Munis, the chief commander of the army, at first 
assented, irritated by false reports. Very soon he withdrew, 
and though he could not prevent the plundering of the palace, 
and the proclamation as caliph of another son of Motadid with 
the title al-Qahir billah (" the victorious through God "), he 
rescued Moqtadir and his mother, and at the same time his 
imprisoned friend Ali b. 'Isa, and brought them to his own house. 
A few days later, a counter-revolution took place; the leaders 



of the revolt were killed, and Moqtadir, against his wish, was 
replaced on the throne. In 320 (a.d. 932) Munis, discovering 
a court intrigue against him, set out for Mosul, expecting that 
the Hamdanids, who owed to him their power, would join him. 
Instead of doing this, they opposed him with a numerous army, 
but were defeated. Munis took Mosul, and having received 
reinforcements from all parts, marched against Bagdad. The 
caliph, who wished nothing more than to be reconciled to his old 
faithful servant, was forced to take arms against him, and fell in 
battle Shawwal 320 (October 932), at the age of 38 years. His 
reign, which lasted almost twenty-five years, was in all respects 
injurious to the empire. 

19. Reign of Qahir. — After the victory Munis acted with 
great moderation and proclaimed a general amnesty. His own 
wish was to call Abu Ahmad, a son of Moktafi, or a son of Moq- 
tadir, to the Caliphate, but the majority of generals preferring 
Qahir because he was an adult man and had no mother at his 
side, he acquiesced, although he had a personal dislike for him, 
knowing his selfish and cruel character. Qahir was a drunkard, 
and derived the money for his excesses from promiscuous con- 
fiscation. He ill-treatetl the sons of Moqtadir and Abu Ahmad, 
and ultimately assassinated his patrons Munis and Yalbak, 
whose guardianship he resented. In Jornada I. 322 (April 
934) he was dethroned and blinded, and died in poverty seven 
years later. 

During the last years of Moqtadir and the reign of Qahir a 
new dynasty rose. Buya, the chief of a clan of the Dailam, a 
warlike people who inhabit the mountainous country south-west 
of the Caspian Sea, had served under the Samanids, and found a 
footing in the south of Media (Jabal), whence his three sons — 
well known under the titles they assumed at a later period: 
Tmad addaula (" prop of the dynasty "), Rokn addaula (" pillar 
of the dynasty "), and Mo'izz addaula (" strengthener of the 
dynasty ") — succeeded in subduing the province of Fars, at the 
time of Qahir's dethronement (see Persia: History). 

20. Reign of Radi. — Moqtadir's son, who was then proclaimed 
caliph under the name of ar-Rddi billah (" the content through 
God"), was pious and well-meaning, but inherited only the 
shadow of power. The vizier Ibn Moqla tried to maintain his 
authority at least in Irak and Mesopotamia, but without success. 
The treasury was exhausted, the troops asked for pay, the people 
in Bagdad were riotous. In this extremity the caliph bade 
Ibn Raiq, who had made himself master of Basra and Wasit, 
and had command of money and men, to come to his help. He 
created for him the office of Amir al-Omara, " Amir of the 
Amirs," which nearly corresponds to that of Mayor of the Palace 
among the Franks. 1 Thenceforth the worldly power of the 
Caliphate was a mere shadow. The empire was by this time 
practically reduced to the province of Bagdad; Khorasan and 
Transoxiana were in the hands of the Samanids, Fars in those 
of the Buyids; Kirman and Media were under independent 
sovereigns; the Hamdanids possessed Mesopotamia; the Sajids 
Armenia and Azerbaijan; the Ikshldites Egypt; as we have 
seen, the Fatimites Africa, the Carmathians Arabia. The Amir 
al-Omara was obliged to purchase from the latter the freedom 
of the pilgrimage to Mecca, at the price of a disgraceful treaty. 

During the troubles of the Caliphate the Byzantines had made 
great advances; they had even taken Malatia and Samosata 
(Samsat). But the great valour of the Hamdanid prince Saif- 
addaula checked their march. The Greek army suffered two 
severe defeats and sued for peace. 

21. Reign of Mottaqi. — Radi diedinRabial. A.H.329 (December 
940). Another son of Moqtadir was then proclaimed caliph 
under the name of al-Mottaqi billah (" he who guards himself by 
God ") . At the time of his accession the Amir al-Omara was the 
Turkish general Bajkam, in whose favour Ibn Raiq had been 
obliged to retire. Unfortunately Bajkam died soon after, and 
his death was followed by general anarchy. A certain Barldl, 
who had carved out for himself a principality in the province of 
Basra, marched against Bagdad and made himself master of 
the capital, but was soon driven out by the Dailamite general 

1 See Defremery, Memoire sur les Emirs al-Omara (Paris, 1848). 



52 



CALIPHATE 



Kurtakln. Ibn Raiq came back and reinstated himself as Amir 
al-Omara. But Barldl again laid siege to Bagdad, and Mottaqi 
fled to Nasir addaula the Hamdanid prince of Mosul, who then 
marched against Bagdad, and succeeded in repelling Barldl. 
In return he obtained the office of Amir al-Omara. But the 
Dailamite and Turkish soldiery did not suffer him to keep this 
office longer than several months. Tuzun, a former captain of 
Bajkam, compelled him to return to Mosul and took his place. 
Mottaqi fled again to Mosul and thence to Rakka. The Ikshid, 
sovereign of Egypt and Syria, offered him a refuge, but Tuzun, 
fearing to see the caliph obtain such powerful support, found 
means to entice him to his tent, and had his eyes put out, Saphar 
333 (October 944). 

22. Reign of Mostakfi. — As successor Tuzun chose al-Mostakfi 
billdh ("he who finds full sufficiency with God"), a son of 
Moktafi. This prince, still more than his predecessors, was 
a mere puppet in the hands of Tuzun, who died a few months 
later, and his successor Ibn Shirzad. Such was the weakness 
of the caliph that a notorious robber, named Hamdl, obtained 
immunity for his depredations by a monthly payment of 25,000 
dinars. One of the Buyid princes, wtiose power had been 
steadily increasing, marched about this time against Bagdad, 
which he entered in Jornada I. a.h. 334 (December 945), and was 
acknowledged by the caliph as legal sovereign, under the title 
of Sultan. He assumed at this time the name of Mo'izz addaula. 
Mostakfi was soon weary of this new master, and plotted against 
him. At least Mo'izz addaula suspected him and deprived him 
of his eyesight, Jornada II. a.h. 334 (January 946). There were 
thus in Bagdad three caliphs who had been dethroned and 
blinded, Qahir, Mottaqi and Mostakfi. 

23. Reign of Moti. — Mo'izz addaula soon abandoned his 
original idea of restoring the title of caliph to one of the descend- 
ants of Ali, fearing a strong opposition of the people, and also 
dreading lest this should lead to the recovery by the caliphs of 
their former supremacy. His choice fell on a son of Moqtadir, 
who took the title of al-Motl' billdh ("he who obeys God"). 
The sultan, reserving to himself all the powers and revenues of 
the Caliphate, allowed the caliph merely a secretary and a pension 
of 5000 dirhems a day. Though in public prayers and on the 
coins the name of the caliph remained as that of the supreme 
authority, he had in reality no authority out of the palace, so 
that the saying became proverbial, " he contents himself with 
sermon and coin." 

The Hamdanid prince of Mosul, who began to think his 
possessions threatened by Mo'izz addaula, tried without success 
to wrest Bagdad from him, and was obliged to submit to the 
payment of tribute. He died in 358 (a.d. 969), and ten years 
later the power of this branch of the Hamdanids came to an end. 
The representative of the other branch, Saif addaula, the prince 
of Haleb (Aleppo), conducted the war against the Byzantines 
with great valour till his death in 356 (a.d. 967), but could not 
stop the progress of the enemy. His descendants maintained 
themselves, but with very limited power, till a.h. 413 (a.d. 1022). 

Mo'izz addaula died in the same year as Saif addaula, leaving 
his power to his son Bakhtiyar Tzz addaula, who lacked his 
father's energy and loved pleasure more than business. 

While the Abbasid dynasty was thus dying out in shame and 
degradation, the Fatimites, in the person of Mo'izz li-din-allah 
(or Mo'izz Abu Tamin Ma'add) (" he who makes God's religion 
victorious "), were reaching the highest degree of power and 
glory in spite of the opposition of the Carmathians, who left 
their old allegiance and entered into negotiations with the court 
of Bagdad, offering to drive back the Fatimites, on condition of 
being assisted with money and troops, and of being rewarded 
with the government of Syria and Egypt. The former condition 
was granted, but the caliph emphatically refused the latter 
demand, saying: " Both parties are Carmathians, they profess 
the same religion and are enemies of Islam." The Carmathians 
drove the Fatimites out of Syria, and threatened Egypt, but, 
notwithstanding their intrepidity, they were not able to cope 
with their powerful rival, who, however, in his turn could not 
bring them to submission. In 978-979 peace was made on 



condition that the Carmathians should evacuate Syria: for an 
annual payment of. 70,000 dinars. But the losses sustained by 
the Carmathians during that struggle had been enormous. 
Their power henceforward declined, and came to an end in a.h. 
474 (a.d. 1081). 

Mo'izz addaula, as we have seen, professed a great veneration 
for the house of Ali. He not only caused the mourning for the 
death of Hosain and other Shi'ite festivals to be celebrated at 
Bagdad, but also allowed imprecations against Moawiya and 
even against Mahomet's wife Ayesha and the caliphs Abu 
Bekr, Omar and Othman, to be posted up at the doors of the 
mosques. These steps annoyed the people and the Turkish 
soldiery, who were Sunnites, and led at last to an insurrection. 
Moti was compelled to abdicate, and Bakhtiyar was driven out 
of Bagdad Dhu'l-qa'da 363 (August 974). 

24. Reign of Tai. — Moti left the empty title of caliph to his son 
al-Td'i li-amri'lldh (" the obedient to the command of God "). 
The Turks who had placed him on the throne could not maintain 
themselves, but so insignificant was the person of the caliph 
that 'Adod addaula, who succeeded his cousin Bakhtiyar in 
Bagdad, did not think of replacing him by another. Under this 
prince, or king, as he was called, the power of the Buyids reached 
its zenith. His empire stretched from the Caspian to the Persian 
Sea, and in the west to the eastern frontier of Syria. He did 
his best to remedy the misery caused by the intestine wars, 
repaired the ruined mosques and other public edifices, founded 
hospitals and libraries — his library in Shiraz was one of the 
wonders of the world — and improved irrigation. It was also he 
who built the mausoleum of Hosain at Kerbela, and that of Ali 
at Kufa. But after his death in the year 372 (a.d. 983), his 
sons, instead of following the example of their predecessors, 
the three sons of Buya, fought one against the other. In 380 
(a.d. 990) the youngest of them, Baha addaula, had the upper 
hand. This prince, who was as avaricious as he was ambitious, 
wishing to deprive the caliph Ta'i of his possessions, compelled 
him to abdicate a.h. 381 (a.d. 991). 

25. Reign of Qddir. — A grandson of Moqtadir was then made 
caliph under the name of al-Qddir billdh (" the powerful through 
God "). The only deed of power, however, that is recorded of 
him, is that he opposed himself to the substitution of a Shi'ite 
head cadi for the Sunnite, so that Baha addaula had to content 
himself with giving to the Shi'ites a special judge, to whom he 
gave the title of naqib (superintendent). During this caliphate 
the Buyid princes were in continual war with one another. 
Meanwhile events were preparing the fall of their dynasty. In 
350 (a.d. 961) a Turkish general of the Samanids had founded for 
himself a principality in Ghazni, arid at his death in 366 (a.d. 
976) his successor Sabuktagin had conquered Bost in Sijistan 
and Qosdar in Baluchistan, beaten the Indian prince Diaya 
Pala, and been acknowledged as master of the lands west of the 
Indus. At his death in 387 his son Mahmud conquered the 
whole of Khorasan and Sijistan, with a great part of India. He 
then attacked the Buyids, and would have destroyed their 
dynasty but for his death in the year 421 (a.d. 1030). 

In 389 (a.d. 999) Uek-khan, the prince of Turkistan, took 
Bokhara and made an end to the glorious state of the Samanids, 
the last prince of which was murdered in 395 (a.d. 1005). The 
Samanids had long been a rampart of the Caliphate against the 
Turks, whom they held under firm control. From their fall 
dates the invasion of the empire by that people. The greatest 
gainer for the moment was Mahmud of Ghazni. In Mesopotamia 
and Irak several petty states arose on the ruins of the dominions 
of the Hamdanids and of the Abbasids. 

Qadir died in the last month of a.h. 422 (November 1031). 
He is the author of some theological treatises. 

26. Reign of QditH.—He was succeeded by his son, who at his 
accession took the title of al-Qdim bi-amri'lldh (" he who main- 
tains the cause of God "). During the first half of his long reign 
took place the development of the power of the Ghtizz, a great 
Turkish tribe, who took the name Seljuk from Seljuk their chief in 
Transoxiana. Already during the reign of Mahmud large bodies 
had passed the Oxus and spread over Khorasan and the adjacent 



CALIPHATE 



53 



countries. In the time of his successor the bulk of the tribe 
followed, and in the year 429 (a.d. 1038) Toghrul Beg, their 
chief, beat the army of the Ghaznevids and made his entry into 
Nishapur. Thenceforth this progress was rapid (see Seljuks). 
The situation in Bagdad had become so desperate that the caliph 
called Toghrul to his aid. This prince entered Bagdad in the 
month of Ramadan a.h. 447 (December 1055), and overthrew 
finally the dynasty of the Buyids. 1 In 449 (a.d. 1058) the caliph 
gave him the title of " King of the East and West." But in the 
following year, 450, during his absence, the Shi'ites made them- 
selves masters of the metropolis, and proclaimed the Caliphate 
of the Fatimite prince Mostansir. They were soon overthrown 
by Toghrul, who was now supreme, and compelled the caliph 
to give him his daughter in marriage. Before the marriage, 
however, he died, and was succeeded by his nephew Alp Arslan, 
who died in 465 (25th December) (a.d. 1072). Qaim died two 
years later, Shaaban a.h. 467 (April 1075). 

In the year 440 Mo'izz b. Badls, the Zeirid ruler of the Maghrib, 
made himself independent, and substituted in prayer the name 
of the Abbasid caliph for that of Mostansir. In order to punish 
him, the latter gave permission to the Arab tribes in Egypt to 
cross the Nile, and granted them possession of all the lands they 
should conquer. This happened in 442 (a.d. 1050) and was of 
the greatest significance for the subsequent fate of Africa. 

27. Reign of Moqtadi.- — In the first year of the Caliphate of 
al-Moqladi bi-amri'lldh (■" he who follows the orders of God "), a 
grandson of Qaim, the power of the Seljuk empire reached its 
zenith. All the eastern provinces, a great part of Asia Minor, 
Syria, with the exception of a few towns on the shore, the main 
part of West Africa acknowledged the caliph of Bagdad as the 
Imam. Yemen had been subjected, and at Mecca and Medina 
his name was substituted in the public prayers for that of the 
Fatimite caliph. But after the death of Malik-Shah a contest 
for the sultanate took place. The caliph, who had in 1087 
married the daughter of Malik-Shah, had been compelled two 
years after to send her back to her father, as she complained of 
being neglected by her husband. Just before his death, the 
Sultan had ordered him to transfer his residence from Bagdad to 
Basra. After his death he stayed and supported the princess 
Turkan Khatiin. This lost him his life. The day after Barki- 
yaroq's triumphant entry into Bagdad, Muharram 487 (February 
1094), he died suddenly, apparently by poison. 

28. Reign of Mostazhir. — Al-Mostazhir billdh (" he who seeks 
to triumph through God "), son of Moqtadi, was only sixteen 
years old when he was proclaimed caliph. His reign is memorable 
chiefly for the growing power of the Assassins (q.v.) and for the 
first Crusade (see Crusades) . The Seljuk princes were too much 
absorbed by internal strife to concentrate against the new 
assailants. After the death of Barkiyaroq in November 1104, 
his brother Mahommed reigned till April n 18. His death was 
followed about four months later by that of Mostazhir. 

29. Reign of Mostarshid. — Al-Mostarshid billdh (" he who asks 
guidance from God ."), who succeeded his father inRabia II. 512 
(August 1118), distinguished himself by a vain attempt to re- 
establish the power of the caliph. Towards the end of the year 
529 (October 1134) he was compelled to promise that he would 
confine himself to his palace and never again take the field. Not 
long after he was assassinated. About the same time Dobais 
was killed, a prince of the family of the Banu Mazyad, who had 
founded the Arabian state of Hillah in the vicinity of the ruins 
of Babel in 1102. 

30. Reign of Rdshid. — Al-Rdshid billdh ("the just through 
God") tried to follow the steps of his father, with the aid of 
Zengi, the prince of Mosul. But the sultan Mas'ud beat the army 
of the allies, took Bagdad and had Rashid deposed (August 1 136) . 
Rashid escaped, but was murdered two years later. 

31. Reign of Moqtafi. — His successor Al-Moqtafi li-amri'lldh 
(" he who follows the orders of God "), son of Mostazhir, had 
better success. He was real ruler not only of the district of 
Bagdad, but also of the rest of Irak, which he subdued by force. 

1 Henceforward the history of thp Caliphate is largely that of the 
Seljuk princes (see Seljuks). 



He died in the month of Rabia II. 555 (March 1 160). Under his 
reign the central power of the Seljuks was rapidly sinking. In 
the West of Atabeg (prince's guardian) Zengi, the prince of 
Mosul, had extended his dominion over Mesopotamia and the 
north of Syria, where he had been the greatest defender of Islam 
against the P'ranks. At his death in the year 541 (a.d. 1146), 
his noble son, the well-known Nureddm, who was called " the 
just king," continued his father's glorious career. Transoxiana 
was conquered by the heathen hordes of Khata, who towards the 
end of 535 (a.d. 1141) under the king Ghurkhan defeated the 
great army of the Seljuk prince and compelled the Turkish 
tribes of the Ghuzz to cross the Oxus and to occupy Khorasan. 

32. Reign of Mostanjid. — Al-Mostanjid billdh ("he who 
invokes help from God"), the son of Moqtafi, enlarged the 
dominion of the Caliphate by making an end to the state of the 
Mazyadites in Hillah. His allies were the Arabic tribe of the 
Montafiq, who thenceforth were powerful in southern Irak. The 
greatest event towards the end of his Caliphate was the conquest 
of Egypt by the army of Nureddln, the overthrow of the Fatimite 
dynasty, and the rise of Saladin. He was killed by his major- 
domo in Rabia II. 566 (December n 70). 

33. Reign of Mostadi. — His son and successor al-Mostadi' bi- 
amri'lldh (" he who seeks enlightenment by the orders of God ")', 
though in Egypt his name was now substituted in public prayers 
for that of the Fatimite caliph, was unable to obtain any real 
authority. By the death of Nureddln in 569 (a.d. i i 74) Saladin's 
power became firmly rooted. The dynasty founded by him is 
called that of the Ayyubites, after the name of his father Ayyub. 
Mostadi died in the month of Dhu'l-qa'da 575 (March 1180). 

S^.Reignof Nasir. — Quite a different man from his father was his 
successor al-Ndsir li-dini'lldh ("he who helps the religion of God ") . 
During his reign Jerusalem was reconquered by Saladin, 27 Rajab 
583 (October 2nd, n 87). Not long before that event the well- 
known Spanish traveller Ibn Jubair visited the empire of Saladin, 
and came to Bagdad in 580, where he saw the caliph himself. 
Nasir was very ambitious; he had added Khuzistan to bis 
. dominions, and desired to become also master of Media (Jabal, or 
Persian Irak, as it was called in the time of the Seljuks) . Here, 
however, he came into conflict with the then mighty prince of 
Khwarizm (Khiva), who, already exasperated because the 
caliph refused to grant him the honours he asked for, resolved 
to overthrow the Caliphate of the Abbasids, and to place a 
descendant of Ali on the throne of Bagdad. In his anxiety, 
Nasir took a step which brought the greatest misery upon 
western Asia, or at least accelerated its arrival. 

In the depths of Asia a great conglomeration of east Turkish 
tribes (Tatars or Mongols), formed by a terrible warrior, known 
under his honorific title Jenghiz Khan, had conquered the 
northern provinces of China, and extended its power to the 
frontiers of the Transoxianian regions. To this heathen chief the 
Imam of the Moslems sent a messenger, inducing him to attack 
the prince of Khwarizm, who already had provoked the Mon- 
golian by a disrespectful treatment of his envoys. Neither he nor 
the caliph had the slightest notion of the imminent danger they 
conjured up. When Nasir died, Ramadan 622 (October 1225), 
the eastern provinces of the empire had been trampled down by 
the wild hordes, the towns burned, and the inhabitants killed 
without mercy. 

35. Reign of Zdhir. — Al-Zdhir bi-amri'lldh (" the victorious 
through the orders of God ") died within a year after his father's 
death, in Rajab 623 (July 1226). He and his son and successor 
are praised as beneficent and just princes. 

36. Reign of Mostansir. — Al-Mostansir billdh (" he who asks 
help from God ") was caliph till his death in Jornada II. 640 
(December 1242). In the year 624 (1227) Jenghiz Khan died, 
but the Mongol invasion continued to advance with immense 
strides. The only man who dared, and sometimes with success, 
to combat them was Jelaleddin, the ex-king of Khwarizm, but 
after his death in 628 (a.d. 1231) all resistance was paralysed. 

37. Reign of Mostasim. — Al-Mosta'sim billdh ("he who clings 
to God for protection "), son of Mostansir, the last caliph of 
Bagdad, was a narrow-minded, irresolute man, guided moreover 



54 



CALIVER— CALIXTUS 



by bad counsellors. In the last month of the year 653 (January 
1256) Hulaku or Hulagu, the brother of the gteat khan of the 
Mongols, crossed the Oxus, and began by destroying all the 
strongholds of the Isma'ilis. Then the turn of Bagdad came. 
On the nth of Muharram 656 (January 1258) Hulaku arrived 
under the walls of the capital. In vain did Mostasim sue for 
peace. Totally devoid of dignity and heroism, he ended by 
surrendering and imploring mercy from the barbarian victor. 
On the 4th of Saphar (February 10th) he came with his retinue into 
the camp. The city was then given up to plunder and slaughter; 
many public buildings were burnt; the caliph, after having 
been compelled to bring forth all the hidden treasures of the 
family, was killed with two of his sons and many relations. 
With him expired the eastern Caliphate of the Abbasids, 
which had lasted 524 years, from the entry of Abu'l- Abbas into 
Kufa. 

In vain, three years later, did Abu'l-Qasim Ahmad, a scion of 
the race of the Abbasids, who had taken refuge in Egypt with 
Bibars the Mameluke sultan, and who had been proclaimed 
caliph under the title al-Mostansir billdh (" he who seeks help 
from God "), make an effort to restore a dynasty which was now 
for ever extinct. At the head of an army he marched against 
Bagdad, but was defeated and killed before he reached that city. 
Then another descendant of the Abbasids, who also had found an 
asylum in Egypt, was proclaimed caliph at Cairo under the name 
of al-Hakim bi-amri'lldh (" he who decides according to the 
orders of God "). His sons inherited his title, but, like their 
father, remained in Egypt without power or influence (see Egypt : 
History, " Mahommedan period ")■ This shadow of sovereignty 
continued to exist till the conquest of Egypt by the Turkish 
sultan Selim I., who compelled the last of them, Motawakkil, to 
abdicate in his favour (see Turkey: History). He died at 
Cairo, a pensionary of the Ottoman government, in 1538. 

Another scion of the Abbasid family, Mahommed, a great- 
grandson of the caliph Mostansir, found at a later period a 
refuge in India, where the sultan of Delhi received him with 
the greatest respect, named him Makhdumzadeh, " the Master's 
son," and treated him as a prince. Ibn Battita saw him when 
he visited India, and says that he was very avaricious. On his 
return to Bagdad the traveller found there a young man, son of 
this prince, who gained a single dirhem daily for serving as imam 
in a mosque, and did not get the least relief from his rich father. 
It seems that this Mahommed, or his son, emigrated later to 
Sumatra, where in the old Samutra the graves of their descendants 
have been lately discovered. (M. J. de G.) 

CALIVER, a firearm used in the 16th century. The word is 
an English corruption of " calibre," and arises from the " arque- 
bus of calibre," that is, of standard bore, which replaced the 
older arquebus. " Caliver," therefore, is practically synonymous 
with " arquebus." The heavier musket, fired from a rest, re- 
placed the caliver or arquebus towards the close of the century. 

CALIXTUS, or Callistus, the name of three popes. 

Calixtus I., pope from 217 to 222, was little known before 
the discovery of the book of the Philosophumena. From this 
work, which is in part a pamphlet directed against him, we 
learn that Calixtus was originally a slave and engaged in banking. 
Falling on evil times, he was brought into collision with the 
Jews, who denounced him as a Christian and procured his exile 
to Sardinia. On his return from exile he was pensioned by Pope 
Victor, and, later, was associated by Pope Zephyrinus in the 
government of the Roman church. On the death of Zephyrinus 
(217) he was elected in his place and occupied the papal chair 
for five years. His theological adversary Hippolytus, the author 
of the Philosophumena, accused him of having favoured the 
modalist or Patripassian doctrines both before and after his 
election. Calixtus, however, condemned Sabellius, the most 
prominent champion of that system. Hippolytus accused him 
also of certain relaxations of discipline. It appears that Calixtus 
reduced the penitential severities applied until his time to 
those guilty of adultery and other analogous sins. Under 
Calixtus and his two immediate successors, Hippolytus was 
the leader of a schismatic group, organized by way of protest 



against the election of Calixtus. Calixtus died in 222, in cir- 
cumstances obscured by legends. In the time of Constantine 
the Roman church reckoned him officially among the martyr 
popes. (L. D.*) 

Calixtus II. (d. 1124), pope from 1110 to 1124, was Guido, 
a member of a noble Burgundian family, who became archbishop 
of Vienne about 1088, and belonged to the party which favoured 
reform in the Church. In September 1 1 1 2, after Pope Paschal II. 
had made a surrender to the emperor Henry V., Guido called a 
council at Vienne, which declared against lay investiture, and 
excommunicated Henry. In February 11 19 he was chosen pope 
at Cluny in succession to Gelasius II., and in opposition to the 
an ti -pope Gregory VIII. , who was in Rome. Soon after his 
consecration he opened negotiations with the emperor with a 
view to settling the dispute over investiture. Terms of peace 
were arranged, but at the last moment difficulties arose and the 
treaty was abandoned; and in October 11 19 both emperor and 
anti-pope were excommunicated at a synod held at Reims. 
The journey of Calixtus to Rome early in n 20 was a triumphal 
march. He was received with great enthusiasm in the city, 
while Gregory, having fled to Sutri, was delivered into his hands 
and treated with great ignominy. Through the efforts of some 
German princes negotiations between pope and emperor were 
renewed, and the important Concordat of Worms made in 
September n 22 was the result. This treaty, made possible by 
concessions on either side, settled the investiture controversy, 
and was confirmed by the Lateran council of March n 23. 
During his short reign Calixtus strengthened the authority of 
the papacy in southern Italy by military expeditions, and restored 
several buildings within the city of Rome. During preparations 
for a crusade he died in Rome on the 13th or 14th of December 
1 1 24. 

See M. Maurer, Pabst Calixt II. (Munich, 1889); U. Robert, 
Histoire du pape Calixte II. (Paris, 1891) ; and A. Hauck's Real- 
encyklopadie, Band iii. (Leipzig, 1897). 

Calixtus III. (c. 1378-1458), pope from 1455 to 1458, was a 
Spaniard named Alphonso de Borgia, or Borja. A native of 
Xativa, he gained a great reputation as a jurist, becoming pro- 
fessor at Lerida; in 1429 he was made bishop of Valencia, and 
in 1444 a cardinal, owing his promotion mainly to his close 
friendship with Alphonso V., king of Aragon and Sicily. Chosen 
pope in April 1455, ne was ver y anxious to organize a crusade 
against the Turks, and having sold many of his possessions, 
succeeded in equipping a fleet. Neither the princes nor the 
people of Europe, however, were enthusiastic in this cause, 
and very little result came from the pope's exertions. During 
his papacy Calixtus became involved in a quarrel with his former 
friend, Alphonso of Aragon, now also king of Naples, and after 
the king's death in June 1438 he refused to recognize his ille- 
gitimate son, Ferdinand, as king of Naples, asserting that this 
kingdom was a fief of the Holy See. This pope was notorious for 
nepotism, and was responsible for introducing his nephew, 
Rodrigo Borgia, afterwards Pope Alexander VI., to Rome. He 
died on the 6th of August 1458. 

See A. Hauck's Realencyklopadie, Band iii. (Leipzig, 1897). 

CALIXTUS, GEORG (1586-1656), Lutheran divine, was born 
at Medelby, a village of Schleswig, in 1586. After studying 
philology, philosophy and theology at Helmstadt, Jena, Giessen, 
Tubingen and Heidelberg, he travelled through Holland, France 
and England, where he became acquainted with the leading 
Reformers. On his return in 1614 he was appointed professor 
of theology at Helmstadt by the duke of Brunswick, who had 
admired the ability he displayed when a young man in a dispute 
with the Jesuit Augustine Turrianus. In 1613 he published a 
book, Disputationes de Praecipuis Religionis Christianae Capitibus, 
which provoked the hostile criticism of orthodox scholars; in 
1619 he published his Epitome theologiae, and some years later 
his Theologia Moralis (1634) and De Arte Nova Nihusii. Roman 
Catholics felt them to be aimed at their own system, but they 
gave so great offence to Lutherans as to induce Statius Buscher 
to charge the author with a secret leaning to Romanism. Scarcely 
had he refuted the accusation of Buscher, when, on account of 



CALL— CALLAO 



53 



his intimacy with the Reformed divines at the conference of 
Thorn (1645), and his desire to effect a reconciliation between 
them and the Lutherans, a new charge was preferred against him, 
principally at the instance of Abraham Calovius (1612-1686), of 
a secret attachment to Calvinism. In fact, the great aim of his 
life was to reconcile Christendom by removing all unimportant 
differences. The disputes to which this attitude gave rise, 
known in the Church as the Syncretistic controversy, lasted 
during the whole lifetime of Calixtus, and distracted the Lutheran 
church, till a new controversy arose with P. J. Spener and the 
Pietists of Halle. Calixtus died in 1656. 

There is a monograph on Calixtus by E. L. T. Henke (2 vols., 
1853-1856); see also Isaak Dorner, Gesch. d. protest. Theol. pp. 606- 
624; and especially Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie. 

CALL (from Anglo-Saxon ceallian, a common Teutonic word, 
cf. Dutch kallen, to talk or chatter), to speak in a loud voice, and 
particularly to attract some one's attention by a loud utterance. 
Hence its use for a visit at a house, where the name of the 
occupier, to whom the visit was made, was called aloud, in early 
times, to indicate the presence of the visitor. It is thus trans- 
ferred to a short stay at a place, but usually with the idea of a 
specific purpose, as in " port of call," where ships stop in passing. 
Connected with the idea of summoning by name are such uses as 
" roll-call " or " call-over," where names are called over and 
answered by those present; similar uses are the " call to the 
bar," the summoning at an Inn of Court of those students 
qualified to practise as barristers, and the " call within the bar " 
to the appointment of king's counsel. In the first case the " bar " 
is that which separates the benchers from the rest of the body 
of members of the Inn, in the other the place in a court of law 
within which only king's counsel, and formerly serjeants-at-law, 
are allowed to plead. " Call " is also used with a particular 
reference to a divine summons, as of the calling of the apostles. 
It is thus used in nonconformist churches of the invitation to 
serve as minister a particular congregation or chapel. It is from 
this sense of a vocatio or summons that the word " calling " is 
used, not only of the divine vocation, but of a man's ordinary 
profession, occupation or business. In card games " call " is 
used, in poker, of the demand that the hand of the highest 
bettor be exposed or seen, exercised by that player who equals 
his bet; in whist or bridge, of a certain method of play, the 
" call " for a suit or for trumps on the part of one partner, to 
which the other is expected to respond; and in many card 
games for the naming of a card, irregularly exposed, which is 
laid face up on the table, and may be thus " called " for, at 
any point the opponent may choose. 

" Call " is also a term on the English and American stock 
exchanges for a contract by which, in consideration of a certain 
sum, an" option " is given by the person making or signing the 
agreement to another named therein or his order or to bearer, 
to " call " for a specified amount of stock at a certain day for a 
certain price. A " put," which is the reverse of a " call," is the 
option of selling (putting) stock at a certain day for a certain 
price. A combined option of either calling or putting is termed 
a " straddle," and sometimes on the American stock exchange a 
"spread-eagle." (See further Stock Exchange.) The word is also 
used, in connexion with joint-stock companies, to signify a demand 
for instalments due on shares, when the capital of the company 
has not been demanded or "called "up at once. (See Company.) 

CALLANDER, a police burgh of Perthshire, Scotland, 16 m. 
north-west of Stirling by the Caledonian railway. Pop. (1001) 
1458. Situated oh the north bank of the Teith, here crossed by a 
three-arched bridge, and sheltered by a ridge of wooded hills, it is 
in growing repute as a health resort. A mile and a half north- 
east are the Falls of Bracklinn (Gaelic, "white-foaming pool"), 
formed by the Keltie, which takes a leap of 50 ft. down the red 
sandstone gorge on its way to the Teith. Two miles north-west 
of Callander is the Pass of Leny, " the gate of the Highlands," 
and farther in the same direction is Loch Lubnaig, on the shores 
of which stand the ruins of St Bride's chapel. Callander owes 
much of its prosperity to the fact that it is the centre from 
which the Trossachs is usually visited, the route being that 



described in Scott's Lady of the Lake. The ascent of Ben Ledi is 
commonly made from the town. 

CALLAO, a city, port and coast department of Peru, 85 m. 
west of Lima, in 12 04' S., 77° 13' W. Pop. (1905) 31,128, of 
whom 3349 were foreigners. The department includes the city 
and its environs, Bella vista and La Punta, and the neighbouring 
islands, San Lorenzo, Fronton, the Palominos, &c, and covers 
an area of 14-J sq. m. Callao is the principal port of the republic, 
its harbour being a large bay sheltered by a tongue of land on the 
south called La Punta, and by the islands of San Lorenzo and 
Fronton. The anchorage is good and safe, and the harbour is 
one of the best on the Pacific coast of South America. The city 
stands on the south side of the bay, and is built on a flat point of 
land only 8 ft. above sea-level. The houses are for the most 
part low and cheaply built, and the streets are narrow, badly 
paved, irregular and dirty. The climate is good and the coast 
is swept by cool ocean breezes, the average temperatures 
ranging from 65 to 77 F., but notwithstanding this, Callao 
has a bad reputation for fevers and contagious diseases, chiefly 
because of its insanitary condition. Its noteworthy public 
buildings are the custom-house and its storehouses which occupy 
the old quadrangular fortress built by the Spanish government 
between 1770 and 177s, and cover 15 acres, the prefecture, the 
military and naval offices and barracks, the post-office, three 
Catholic churches, a hospital, market, three clubs and some 
modern commercial houses. The present city is half a mile north 
of the site of the old town, which was destroyed by an earthquake 
and tidal wave in 1746. For a short time the commercial 
interests of the stricken city centred at Bellavista, ij m. east, 
where wheat granaries were built and still remain, but later the 
greater convenience of a waterside site drew the merchants and 
population back to the vicinity of the submerged town. The 
importance of Callao in colonial times, when it was the only open 
port south of Panama, did not continue under the new political 
order, because of the unsettled state of public affairs and the loss 
of its monopoly. This decline in its prosperity was checked, 
and the modern development of the port began, when a railway 
was built from Callao into the heart of the Andes, and Callao is 
now an important factor in the development of copper-mining. 
The port is connected with Lima by two railways and an electric 
tramway, with Oroya by railway 138 m. long, and with Cerro 
de Pasco by railway 221m. A short railway also runs from the 
port to the Bellavista storehouses. The port is provided with 
modern harbour improvements, consisting of sea-walls of concrete 
blocks, two fine docks with berthing spaces for 30 large vessels, 
and a large floating-dock (300 ft. long on the blocks and capable 
of receiving vessels up to 21 ft. draught and 5000 tons weight), 
which was built in Glasgow and was sent out to Callao in 1863. 
The docks are provided with gas and electric lights, 18 steam 
cranes for loading and discharging vessels, a triple line of railway 
and a supply of fresh water. Callao was formerly the head- 
quarters in South America of the Pacific Steam Navigation 
Co., Ltd. (incorporated 1840), but Valparaiso now occupies 
that position. There are, owing perhaps to the proximity of 
Lima, few industrial establishments in the city; among them are 
a large sugar refinery, some flour-mills, a brewery, a factory 
for making effervescent drinks, and a number of foundries and 
repair shops. Being a port of the first class, Callao is an im- 
portant distributing centre for the coasting trade, in which a 
large number of small vessels are engaged. The foreign steam- 
ship companies making it a regular port of call are the Pacific 
Steam Navigation Co. (British), the Compafiia Sud- America 
( Chilean) , the Kosmos and Roland lines ( German) , the Merchants 
line (New York), and a Japanese line from the ports of Japan 
and China. A subsidized Peruvian line is also contemplated to 
ply between the Pacific ports of South America with an eventual 
extension of the service to Europe. The arrivals from and 
clearances for foreign ports in 1907 were as follows: — 



Arrivals 
Clearances 



Steamers. .Sailing Vessels. 

No. Tonnage. No. Tonnage. 

5i8 937,302 924 174.165 

517 937,7o6 _ 931 163,365 



CALLCO'TT— CALLIAS AND HIPPONICUS 



The exports from Callao are guano, sugar, cotton; wool, hides, 
silver, copper, gold and forest products, and the imports include 
timber and other building materials, cotton and other textiles, 
general merchandise for personal, household and industrial 
uses, railway material, coal, kerosene, wheat, flour and other 
food stuffs. The maintenance of peace and order, and the mining 
development of the interior, have added to the trade and pros- 
perity of the port. 

The history of Callao has been exceptionally eventful. It was 
founded in 1537, two years after Pizarro had founded Lima. 
As the port of that capital and the only open port below Panama 
it grew rapidly in importance and wealth. It was raised to the 
dignity of a city in 1671. The appearance of Sir Francis Drake 
in the bay in 1578 led to the fortification of the port, which 
proved strong enough to repel an attack by the Dutch in 1624. 
The city was completely destroyed and partly submerged by the 
great earthquake of the 28th of October 1746, in which about 
6000 persons perished. The new city was strongly fortified and 
figured prominently in the struggle for independence, and also 
in the various revolutions which have convulsed the republic. 
Its political autonomy dates from 1836, when it was made a 
coast department. The Callao fortifications were bombarded by 
a Spanish fleet under Admiral Mendez Nunez on the 2nd of May 
1866, when there were heavy losses both in lives and material. 
Again, in 1880, the city was bombarded by the Chileans, though 
it was almost defenceless, and fell into the possession of the 
invaders after the capture of Lima in the following year. Before 
the surrender all the Peruvian naval vessels in the harbour were 
sunk, to prevent their falling into the possession of the enemy. 
CALLCOTT, SIR AUGUSTUS WALL (1770-1844), English 
landscape painter, was born at Kensington in 1779 and died 
there in 1844. His first study was music; and he sang for 
several years in the choir of Westminster Abbey. But at the age 
of twenty he had determined to give up music, and had exhibited 
his first painting at the Royal Academy. He gradually rose to 
distinction, and was elected an associate in 1807 and an aca- 
demician in 1810. In 1827 he received the honour of knighthood; 
and, seven years later, was appointed surveyor of the royal 
pictures. His two principal subject pictures — " Raphael and 
the Fornarina," and " Milton dictating to his Daughters," are 
much inferior to his landscapes, which are placed in the highest 
class by their refined taste and quiet beauty. 

His wife, MARiA,Lady Callcott (1786-1844), whom he married 
in 1827, was a daughter of Admiral Dundas and widow of 
Captain Thomas Graham, R.N. (d. 182 2) . With her first husband 
she travelled in India, South Africa and South America, where 
she acted for some time as teacher of Donna Maria, who became 
queen of Portugal in 1826; and in the company of her second 
husband she spent much time in the south of Europe. She 
published accounts of her visits to India (1812), and to the 
environs of Rome (1820); Memoirs of Poussin (1820); a 
History of France; a History of Spain (1828); Essays toward a 
History of Painting (1836); Little Arthur's History of England 
(1836) ; and the Scripture Herbal (1842). 

CALLCOTT, JOHN WALL (1766-1821), English musician, 
brother of Sir Augustus Callcott, was born at Kensington on the 
20th of November 1766. At the age of seven he was sent to a 
neighbouring day-school, where he continued for five years, 
studying chiefly Latin and Greek. During this time he frequently 
went to Kensington church, in the repairs of which his father was 
employed, and the impression he received on hearing the organ 
of that church seems to have roused his love for music. The 
organist at that time was Henry Whitney, from whom Callcott 
received his first musical instruction. He did not, however, 
choose music as a profession, as he wished to become a surgeon. 
But on witnessing a surgical operation he found his nervous 
system so seriously affected by the sight, that he determined to 
devote himself to music. His intimacy with Dr Arnold and 
other leading musicians of the day procured him access to artistic 
circles; he was deputy organist at St George the Martyr, Queen 
Square, Bloomsbury, from 1783 to 1785, in which year his success- 
ful competition for three out of the four prize medals offered by 



the " Catch Club " soon spread his reputation as composer of 
glees, catches, canons and other pieces of concerted vocal music. 
The compositions with which he won these medals were — the 
catch " O beauteous fair," the canon " Blessed is he," and the 
glee " Dull repining sons of care." In these and other similar 
compositions he displays considerable skill and talent, and some 
of his glees retain their popularity at the present day. In 1787 
Callcott helped Dr Arnold and others to form the " Glee Club." 
In 1789 he became one of the two organists at St Paul's, Covent 
Garden, and from 1793 to 1802 he was organist to the Asylum for 
Female Orphans. As an instrumental composer Callcott never 
succeeded, not even after he had taken lessons from Haydn. But 
of far greater importance than his compositions are his theoretical 
writings. His Musical Grammar, published in 1806 (3rd ed., 
1817), was long considered the standard English work of musical 
instruction, and in spite of its being antiquated when compared 
with modern standards, it remains a scholarly and lucid treatment 
of the rudiments of the art. Callcott was a much-esteemed 
teacher of music for many years. In 1800 he took his degree of 
Mus.D. at Oxford, where fifteen years earlier he had received his 
degree of bachelor of music, and in 1805 he succeeded Dr Crotch 
as musical lecturer at the Royal Institution. Towards the end of 
his life his artistic career was twice interrupted by the failure of 
his mental powers. He died at Bristol after much suffering on 
the 15th of May 1821. A posthumous collection of his most 
favourite vocal pieces was published in 1824 with a memoir of 
his life by his son-in-law, William Horsley, himself a composer 
of note. 

Callcott's son, William Hutchins Callcott (1807-1882), in- 
herited to a large extent the musical gifts of his father. His song, 
" The last man," and his anthem, " Give peace in our time, O 
Lord," were his best-known compositions. 

CALLIAS, tyrant of Chalcis in Euboea. With the assistance 
of Philip II. of Macedon, which he hoped to obtain, he contem- 
plated the subjugation of the whole island. But finding that 
Philip was unwilling to help him, Callias had recourse to the 
Athenians, although he had previously (350 B.C.) been engaged 
in hostilities with them. With the support of Demosthenes, he 
was enabled to conclude an alliance with Athens, and the tribute 
formerly paid by Eretria and Oreus to Athens was handed over 
to him. But his plan of uniting the whole of Euboea under his 
rule, with Chalcis as capital, was frustrated by Philip, who set up 
tyrants chosen by himself at Eretria and Oreus. Subsequently, 
when Philip's attention was engaged upon Thrace, the Athenians 
in conjunction with Callias drove out these tyrants, and Callias 
thus became master of the island (Demosthenes, De Pace, p. 58; 
Epistola Philippi, p. 159; Diod. Sic. xvi. 74). At the end of his 
life he appears to have lived at Athens, and Demosthenes pro- 
posed to confer the citizenship upon him (Aeschines, Contra 
Ctesiphontem, 85, 87). 

CALLIAS and HIPPONICUS, two names borne alternately by 
the heads of a wealthy and distinguished Athenian family. 
During the 5th and 4th centuries B.C. the office of daduchus or 
torch-bearer at the Eleusinian mysteries was the hereditary 
privilege of the family till its extinction. The following members 
deserve mention. 

1. Callias, the second of the name, fought at the battle of 
Marathon (490) in priestly attire. Some time after the death of 
Cimon, probably about 445 B.C., he was sent to Susa to conclude 
with Artaxerxes, king of Persia, a treaty of peace afterwards 
misnamed the " peace of Cimon." Cimon had nothing to do 
with it, and he was totally opposed to the idea of peace with 
Persia (see Cimon). At all events Callias's mission does not 
seem to have been successful ; he was indicted for high treason 
on his return to Athens and sentenced to a fine of fifty talents. 

See Herodotus vii. 151; Diod. Sic. xii. 4; Demosthenes, De 
Falsa Legatione, p. 428 ; Grote recognizes the treaty as a historical 
fact, History of Greece, ch. xlv., while Curtius, bk. iii. ch. ii., denies the 
conclusion of any formal treaty; see also Ed. Meyer, Forschungeru, 
ii. ; J. B. Bury in Hermathena, xxiv. (1898). 

2. Hipponicus, son of the above. Together with Eurymedon 
he commanded the Athenian forces in the incursion into Boeotian 
territory (426 B.C.) and was slain at the battle of Delium (424). 



CALLIMACHUS— -CALLISTO 



57 



His wife, whom he divorced, subsequently became the wife of 
Pericles; one of his daughters, Hipparete, married Alcibiades; 
another, the wife of Theodorus, was the mother of the orator 
Isocrates. 

See Thucydides iii. 91; Diod. Sic. xii. 65; Andocides, Contra 
Alcibiadem, 13. 

3. Callias, son of the above, the black sheep of the family, was 
notorious for his profligacy and extravagance, and was ridiculed 
by the comic poets as an example of a degenerate Athenian 
(Aristophanes, Frogs, 429, Birds, 283, and schol. Andocides, De 
Mysteriis, 1 10-13 1). The scene of Xenophon's Symposium and 
Plato's Protagoras was laid at his house. He was reduced to a 
state of absolute poverty and, according to Aelian ( Var. Hist. iv. 
23), committed suicide, but there is no confirmation of this. In 
spite of his dissipated life he played a certain part in public 
affairs. In 392 he was in command of the Athenian hoplites at 
Corinth, when the Spartans were defeated by Iphicrates. In 371 
he was at the head of the embassy sent to make terms with Sparta. 
Tfie peace which was the result was called after him the " peace 
of Callias." 

See Xenophon, Hellenica, iv. 5, vi. 3 ; and Dklian League. 

CALLIMACHUS, an Athenian sculptor of the second half of the 
5th century B.C. Ancient critics associate him with Calamis, 
whose relative he may have been. He is given credit for two 
inventions, the Corinthian column and the running borer for 
drilling marble. The most certain facts in regard to him are that 
he sculptured some dancing Laconian maidens, and made a 
golden lamp for the Erechtheum (about 408 B.C.) ; and that he 
used to spoil his works by over-refinement and excessive labour. 

CALLIMACHUS, Greek poet and grammarian, a native of 
Cyrene and a descendant of the illustrious house of the Battiadae, 
flourished about 250 B.C. He opened a school in the suburbs of 
Alexandria, and some of the most distinguished grammarians 
and poets were his pupils. He was subsequently appointed 
by Ptolemy Philadelphus chief librarian of the Alexandrian 
library, which office he held till his death (about 240). His 
Pinakes (tablets), in 120 books, a critical and chronologically 
arranged catalogue of the library, laid the foundation of a history 
of Greek literature. According to Suidas, he wrote about 800 
works, in verse and prose; of these only six hymns, sixty-four 
epigrams and some fragments are extant; a considerable 
fragment of the Hecale, an idyllic epic, has also been discovered 
in the Rainer papyri (see Kenyon in Classical Review, November 
1893). His Coma Berenices is only known from the celebrated 
imitation of Catullus. His Aitia (causes) was a collection of 
elegiac poems in four books, dealing with the foundation of 
cities, religious ceremonies and other customs. According to 
Quintilian (Instit. x. 1. 58) he was the chief of the elegiac poets; 
his elegies were highly esteemed by the Romans, and imitated by 
Ovid, Catullus and especially Propertius. The extant hymns 
are extremely learned, and written in a laboured and artificial 
style. The epigrams, some of the best specimens of their kind, 
have been incorporated in the Greek Anthology. Art and learn- 
ing are his chief characteristics, unrelieved by any real poetic 
genius; in the words of Ovid {Amores, i. 15) — 

" Quamvis ingenio non valet, arte valet." 

Editions. — Hymns, epigrams and fragments (the last collected 
by Bentley) by J. A. Ernesti (1761), and O. Schneider (1870-1873) 
(with elaborate indices and excursuses) ; hymns and epigrams, by 
A. Meineke (1861), and U. Wilamowitz-Mollendorff (1897). See Neue 
Bruchstiicke aus der Hekale des Kallimachus, by T. Gomperz (1893) ; 
also G. Knaack, Callimachea (1896); A. Beltrami, GV Inni di Calli- 
macho e il Nomo di Terpandro (1896) ; K. Kuiper, Studia Callimachea 
(1896) ; A. Hamette, Les tipigrammes de Callimaque: etude critique 
el litteraire (Paris, 1907). There are English translations (verse) by 
W. Dodd (1755) and H. W. Tytler (1793) ; (prose) by J. Banks (1856). 
See also Sandys, Hist, of Class. Schol. i. (ed. 1906), p. 122. 

CALLINUS of Ephesus, the oldest of the Greek elegiac poets 
and the creator of the political and warlike elegy. He is supposed 
to have flourished between the invasion of Asia Minor by the 
Cimmerii and their expulsion by Alyattes (630-560 B.C.). During 
his lifetime his own countrymen were also engaged in a life-and- 
death struggle with the Magnesians. These two events give the 
key to his poetry, in which he endeavours to rouse the indolent 



Ionians to a sense of patriotism. Only scanty fragments of his 
poems remain; the longest of these (preserved in Stobaeus, 
Florilegium, li. 19) has even been ascribed to Tyrtaeus. 

Edition of the fragments by N. Bach (1831), and in Bergk, Poetae 
Lyrici Graeci (1882). On the date of Callinus, see the histories of 
Greek literature by Mure and Miiller; G. H. Bode, Geschichte 'der 
hellenischen Dichtkunst, ii. pt. i. (1838); and G. Geiger, De Callini 
Aetate (1877), who places him earlier, about 642. 

CALLIOPE, the muse of epic poetry, so named from the sweet- 
ness of her vioce (Gr. icaXXos, beauty; 6\//, voice). In Hesiod she 
was the last of the nine sisters, but yet enjoyed a supremacy over 
the others. (See also Muses, The.) 

CALLIRRHOE, in Greek legend, second daughter of the river- 
god Achelous and wife of Alcmaeon (q.v.). At her earnest 
request her husband induced Phegeus, king of Psophis in Arcadia, 
and the father of his first wife Arsinoe (or Alphesiboea), to hand 
over to him the necklace and peplus (robe) of Harmonia (q.v.), 
that he might dedicate them at Delphi to complete the cure of 
his madness. When Phegeus discovered that they were really 
meant for Callirrhoe, he gave orders for Alcmaeon to be waylaid 
and killed (Apollodorus iii. 7, 2. 5-7; Thucydides ii. 102). 
Callirrhoe now implored the gods that her two young sons might 
grow to manhood at once and avenge their father's dea|;h. 
This was granted, and her sons Amphoterus and Acarnan slew 
Phegeus with his two sons, and returning with the necklace and 
peplus dedicated them at Delphi (Ovid, Metam. ix. 413). 

CALLISTHENES (c. 360-328 B.C.) , of Olynthus, Greek historian, 
a relative and pupil of Aristotle, through whose recommendation 
he was appointed to attend Alexander the Great in his Asiatic 
expedition. He censured Alexander's adoption of oriental 
customs, inveighing especially against the servile ceremony of 
adoration. Having thereby greatly offended the king, he was 
accused of being privy to a treasonable conspiracy and thrown 
into prison, where he died from torture or disease. His melan- 
choly end was commemorated in a special treatise (KaXXtc&wrjs 
fj Tepl irevdovs) by his friend Theophrastus, whose acquaint- 
ance he made during a visit to Athens. Callisthenes wrote 
an account of Alexander's expedition, a history of Greece from 
the peace of Antalcidas (387) to the Phocian war (357), a 
history of the Phocian war and other works, all of which have 
perished. The romantic life of Alexander, the basis of all the 
Alexander legends of the middle ages, originated during the 
time of the Ptolemies, but in its present form belongs to the 
3rd century a.d. Its author is usually known as pseudo- Callis- 
thenes, although , in the Latin translation by Julius Valerius 
Alexander Polemius (beginning of the 4th century) it is ascribed 
to a certain Aesopus; Aristotle, Antisthenes, Onesicritus and 
Arrian have also been credited with the authorship. There are 
also Syrian, Armenian and Slavonic versions, in addition to 
four Greek versions (two in prose and two in verse) in the middle 
ages (see Krumbacher, Geschichte der byzantinischen Litteratur, 
1897, p. 849). Valerius's translation was completely superseded 
by that of Leo, arch-priest of Naples in the 10th century, the so- 
called Historia de Preliis. 

See Scriptores rerum Alexandri Magni (by C. W. Miiller, in the 
Didot edition of Arrian, 1846), containing the genuine fragments 
and the text of the pseudo-Callisthenes, with notes and introduc- 
tion; A. Westermann, De Callisthene Olynihio et Pseudo-Callisthene 
Commentatio (1838-1842); J. Zacher, Pseudo-Callisthenes (1867); 
W. Christ, Geschichte der griechischen Litteratur (1898), pp. 363, 819; 
article by Edward Meyer in Ersch and Gruber's Allgemeine Ency- 
klopadie; A. Ausfeld, Zur Kritik des griechischen Alexanderromans 
(Bruchsal, 1894) ; Plutarch, Alexander, 52-55; Arrian, Anab. iv. 10- 
14; Diog. Laertius v. 1; Quintus Curtius viii. 5-8; Suidas s.v. 
See also Alexander the Great (ad fin.). For the Latin trans- 
lations see Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Roman Literature (Eng. trans.), 
§ 399; and M. Schanz, Geschichte der romischen Litteratur, iv. i.,p.43. 

CALLISTO, in Greek mythology, an Arcadian nymph, daughter 
of Lycaon and companion of Artemis. She was transformed into 
a bear as a penalty for having borne to Zeus a son, Areas, the 
ancestor of the Arcadians. Hera, Zeus and Artemis are all 
mentioned as the authors of the transformation. Areas, when 
hunting, encountered the bear Callisto, and would have shot her, 
had not Zeus with swift wind carried up both to the skies, where 
he placed them as a constellation. In another version, sJie was 



58 



CALLISTRATUS— CALLOVIAN 



slain by Artemis. Callisto was originally only an epithet of the 
Arcadian Artemis herself. 

See Apollodorus iii. 8; Ovid, Metam. ii. 381-530; R. Franz, De 
Callistus fabula (1890), which deals exhaustively with the various 
forms of the legend. 

CALLISTRATUS, Alexandrian grammarian, flourished at the 
beginning of the 2nd century B.C. He was one of the pupils of 
Aristophanes of Byzantium, who were distinctively called 
Aristophanei. Callistratus chiefly devoted himself to the 
elucidation of the Greek poets; a few fragments of his com- 
mentaries have been preserved in the various collections of 
scholia and in Athenaeus. He was also the author of a miscel- 
laneous work called Sd^/uiktA, used by the later lexicographers, 
and of a treatise on courtesans (Athenaeus iii. 125 B, xiii. 501 D). 
He is not to be confused with Callistratus, the pupil and successor 
of Isocrates and author of a history of Heraclea in Pontus. 

See R. Schmidt, De Callistrato Aristophaneo, appended to 
A. Nauck's Aristophanis Byzantii Fragmenta (1848); also C. W. 
Miiller, Fragmenta Hisloricorum Graecorum, iv. p. 353 note. 

CALLISTRATUS, an Athenian poet, only known as the author 
of a hymn in honour of Harmodius (q.v.) and Aristogeiton. This 
ode, which is to be found in Athenaeus (p. 695), has been beauti- 
fully translated by Thomas Moore. 

CALLISTRATUS, Greek sophist and rhetorician, probably 
flourished in the 3rd century. He wrote 'EK^pcuras, descriptions 
of fourteen works of art in stone or brass by distinguished 
artists. This little work, which is written in a dry and affected 
style, without any real artistic feeling, is usually edited with the 
Ei/com of Philostratus. 

Edition by Schenkl-Reisch (Teubner series, 1902) ; see also C. G. 
Heyne, Opuscula Academica, v. pp. 196-221, with commentary on the 
Descriptiones ; F. Jacobs, Ammadversiones criticae in Callistrati 
statuas (1797). 

CALLISTRATUS of Aphidnae, Athenian orator and general in 
the 4th century B.C. For many years, as prostates, he supported 
Spartan interests at Athens. On account of the refusal of the 
Thebans to surrender Oropus, which on his advice they had been 
allowed to occupy temporarily, Callistratus, despite his mag- 
nificent defence (which so impressed Demosthenes that he 
resolved to study oratory), was condemned to death, 361 B.C. 
He fled to Methone in Macedonia, and on his return to Athens 
in 355 he was executed. , 

See Xenophon, Hellenica, iii. 3, vi. 2 ; Lycurgus, In Leocr. 93. 

CALLOT, JACQUES (1592-1635), French engraver, was born 
at Nancy in Lorraine, where his father, Jean Callot, was a herald- 
at-arms. He early discovered a very strong predilection for art, 
and at the age of twelve quitted home without his father's 
consent, and set out for Rome where he intended to prosecute 
his studies. Being utterly destitute of funds he joined a troop of 
Bohemians, and arrived in their company at Florence. In this 
city he had the good fortune to attract the notice of a gentleman 
of the court, who supplied him with the means of study; but he 
removed in a short time to Rome, where, however, he was 
recognized by some relatives, who immediately compelled him 
to return home. Two years after this, and when only fourteen 
years old, he again left France contrary to the wishes of his 
friends, and reached Turin before he was overtaken by his elder 
brother, who had been despatched in quest of him. As his 
enthusiasm for art remained undiminished after these disappoint- 
ments, he was at last allowed to accompany the duke of Lorraine's 
envoy to the papal court. His first care was to study the art of 
design, of which in a short time he became a perfect master. 
Philip Thomasin instructed him in the use of the graver, which, 
however, he ultimately abandoned, substituting the point as 
better adapted for his purposes. From Rome he went to Florence, 
where he remained till the death of Cosimo II., the Maecenas of 
these times. On returning to his native country he was warmly 
received by the then duke of Lorraine, who admired and encour- 
aged him. As his fame was now spread abroad in various 
countries of Europe, many distinguished persons gave him 
commissions to execute. By the Infanta Isabella, sovereign of 
the Low Countries, he was commissioned to engrave a design of 
the siege of Breda; and at the request of Louis XIII. he designed 
the siege of Rochelle and the attack on the Isle of Re. When,. 



however, in 163 1 he was desired by that monarch to execute an 
engraving of the siege of Nancy, which he had just taken, Callot 
refused, saying, " I would rather cut off my thumb than do 
anything against the honour of my prince and of my country "; 
to which Louis replied that the duke of Lorraine was happy in 
possessing such subjects as Callot. Shortly after this he returned 
to his native place, from which the king failed to allure him with 
the offer of a handsome pension. He engraved in all about 1600 
pieces, the best of which are those executed in aquafortis. No 
one ever possessed in a higher degree the talent for grouping a 
large number of figures in a small space, and of representing with 
two or three bold strokes the expression, action and peculiar 
features of each individual. Freedom, variety and naivetS 
characterize all his pieces. His Fairs, his Miseries of War, his 
Sieges, his Temptation of St Anthony and his Conversion of St 
Paul are the best-known of his plates. 

See also Edouard Meaume, Recherches sur la vie de Jacques Callot 
(i860). 

CALLOVIAN (from Callovium, the Latinized form of Kellaways, 
a village not far from Chippenham in Wiltshire), in geology, the 
name introduced by d'Orbigny for the strata which constitute 
the base of the Oxfordian or lowermost stage of the Middle 
Oolites. The term used by d'Orbigny in 1844 was " Kellovien," 
subsequently altered to " Callovien " in 1849; William Smith 
wrote "Kellaways" or "Kelloways Stone" towards the close 
of the 18th century. In England it is now usual to speak of the 
Kellaways Beds; these comprise (1) the Kellaways Rock, 
alternating clays and sands with frequent but irregular con- 
cretionary calcareous sandstones, with abundant fossils; and 
(2) a lower division, the Kellaways Clay, which often contains 
much selenite but is poor in fossils. The lithological characters 
are impersistent, and the sandy phase encroaches sometimes 
more, sometimes less, upon the true Oxford Clay. The rocks 
may be traced from Wiltshire into Bedfordshire, Lincolnshire 
and Yorkshire, where they are well exposed in the cliffs at 
Scarborough and Gristhorpe, at Hackness (90 ft.), Newtondale 
(80 ft.), and Kepwick (100 ft.). In Yorkshire, however, the 
Callovian rocks lie upon a somewhat higher palaeontological 
horizon than in Wiltshire. In England, Kepplerites calloviensis 
is taken as the zone fossil; other common forms are Cosmoceras 
modiolare, C. gowerianum, Belemnites oweni, Ancyloceras callo- 
viense, Nautilus calloviensis, Avicula ovalis, Gryphaea bilobata, &c. 

On the European continent the " Callovien " stage is used in a 
sense that is not exactly synonymous with the English Callovian; 
it is employed to embrace beds that lie both higher and lower in 
the time-scale. Thus, the continental Callovien includes the 
following zones: — • 
Upper Callovien f Zone of Peltoceras athleta, Cosmoceras Duncani, 
(Divesien) \ Quenstedtoceras Lamberti and Q. mariae. 

{Zone of Reineckia anceps, Stephanoceras co*o- 
natum and Cosmoceras jason and a lower 
zone of C. gowerianum and Macrocephalites 
macrocephalus. 

Rocks of Callovian age (according to the continental classifica- 
tion) are widely spread in Europe, which, with the exception of 
numerous insular masses, was covered by the Callovian Sea. The 
largest of these land areas lay over Scandinavia and Finland, 
and extended eastward as far as the 40th meridian. In arctic 
regions these rocks have been discovered in Spitzbergen, Franz 
Josef Land, the east coast of Greenland, and Siberia. They 
occur in the Hebrides and Skye and in England as indicated 
above. In France they are well exposed on the coast of Calvados 
between Trouville and Dives, where the marls and clays are 
200 ft. thick. In the Ardennes clays bearing pyrites and oolitic 
limonite are about 30 ft. thick. Around Poitiers the Callovian 
is 100 ft. thick, but the formation thins in the direction of the 
Jura. 

Clays and shales with ferruginous oolites represent the Callovian 
of Germany; while in Russia the deposits of this age are mainly 
argillaceous. In North America Callovian fossils are found in 
California; in South America in Bolivia. In Africa they have 
been found in Algeria and Morocco, in Somaliland and Zanzibar, 
and on the west coast of Madagascar. In India they are 



CALM— CALOMEL 



59 



represented by the shales and limestones of the Chari series of 
Cutch. Callovian rocks are also recorded from New Guinea 
and the Moluccas. 

See Jurassic; also A. de Lapparent, Traite de geologie, vol. ii. 
(5th ed., 1906), and H. B. Woodward, " The Jurassic Rocks of 
Britain," Mem. Geol. Survey, vol. v. (J. A. H.) 

CALM, an adjective meaning peaceful, quiet; particularly 
used of the weather, free from wind or storm, or of the sea, 
opposed to rough. The word appears in French caime, through 
which it came into English, in Spanish, Portuguese and Italian 
calma. Most authorities follow Diez (Etym. Wbrterbuck der 
romanischen Sprachen) in tracing the origin to the Low Latin 
cauma, an adaptation of Greek Kavfia, burning heat, kclUw, to burn. 
The Portuguese calma has this meaning as well as that of quiet. 
The connexion would be heat of the day, rest during that period, 
so quiet, rest, peacefulness. The insertion of the /, which in 
English pronunciation disappears, is probably due to the Latin 
color, heat, with which the word was associated. 

CALMET, ANTOINE AUGUSTIN (1672-1757), French Bene- 
dictine, was born at Mesnil-la-Horgne on the 26th of February 
1672. At the age of seventeen he joined the Benedictine order, 
and in 1698 was appointed to teach theology and philosophy at 
the abbey of Moyen-Moutier. He was successively prior at Lay, 
abbot at Nancy and of Senones in Lorraine. He died in Paris 
on the 25th of October 1757. The erudition of Calmet's exegeti- 
cal writings won him a reputation that was not confined to the 
Roman Catholic Church, but they have failed to stand the test 
of modern scholarship. The most noteworthy are: — Commentaire 
de la Bible (Paris, 23 vols., 1707-17 16), and Dictionnaire historique, 
geographique, critique, chronologique et UttSral de la Bible (Paris, 
2 vols., 1720). These and numerous other works and editions of 
the Bible are known only to students, but as a pioneer in a branch 
of Biblical study which received a wide development in the 
19th century, Calmet is worthy of remembrance. As a histori- 
cal writer he is best known by his Histoire eccUsiastique et 
civile de la Lorraine (Nancy, 1728), founded on original research 
and various useful works on Lorraine, of which a full list is given 
In Vigouroux's Dictionnaire de la Bible. 

See A. Digot, Notice biographique et litteraire sur Dom Augustin 
Calmet (Nancy, i860). 

CALNE, a market town and municipal borough in the Chippen- 
ham parliamentary division of Wiltshire, England, 99 m. west 
of London by the Great Western railway. Pop. (1901) 3457. 
Area, 356 acres. It lies in the valley of the Calne, and is sur- 
rounded by the high table-land of Salisbury Plain and the 
Marlborough Downs. The church of St Mark has a nave with 
double aisles, and massive late Norman pillars and arches. The 
tower, which fell in 1628, was perhaps rebuilt by Inigo Jones. 
Other noteworthy buildings are a grammar school, founded by 
John Bentley in 1660, and the town-hall. Bacon-curing is the 
staple industry, and there are flour, flax and paper mills. The 
manufacture of broadcloth, once of great importance, is almost 
extinct. Calne is governed by a mayor, four aldermen and 
twelve councillors. 

In the 10th century Calne (Canna, Koine) was the site of a 
palace of the West-Saxon kings. Calne was the scene of the 
synod of 978 when, during the discussion of the question of 
celibacy, the floor suddenly gave way beneath the councillors, 
leaving Archbishop Dunstan alone standing upon a beam. 
Here also a witenagemot was summoned in 997. In the Domes- 
day Survey Calne appears as a royal borough; it comprised 
forty-seven burgesses and was not assessed in hides. In 1565 
the borough possessed a gild merchant, at the head of which 
were two gild stewards. Calne claimed to have received a charter 
from Stephen and a confirmation of the same from Henry III., 
but no record of these is extant, and the charter actually issued 
to the borough by James II. in 1687 apparently never came into 
force. The borough returned two members to parliament more 
or less irregularly from the first parliament of Edward I. until the 
Reform Bill of 1832. From this date the borough returned one 
member only until, by the Redistribution of Seats Act of 1885, the 
privilege was annulled. In 1303 Lodovicus de Bello Monte, 



prebendary of Salisbury, obtained a grant of a Saturday market 
at the manor of Calne, and a three days' fair at the feast of 
St Mary Magdalene; the latter was only abandoned in the 19th 
century. Calne was formerly one of the chief centres of cloth 
manufacture in the west of England, but the industry is extinct. 

CALOMEL, a drug consisting of mercurous chloride, mercury 
subchloride, Hg 2 Cl 2 , which occurs in nature as the mineral 
horn-quicksilver, found as translucent crystals belonging to the 
tetragonal system, with an adamantine lustre, and a dirty white 
grey or brownish colour. The chief localities are Idria, Ober- 
moschel, Horowitz in« Bavaria and Almaden in Spain. It was 
used in medicine as early as the 16th century under the names 
Draco mitigalus, Manna metallorum, Aquila alba, Mercurius dulcis ; 
later it became known as calomel, a name probably derived 
from the Greek ko.\6s, beautiful, and /xe\as, black, in allusion 
to its blackening by ammonia, or from ko\6s and jueXi, honey, 
from its sweet taste. It may be obtained by heating mercury in 
chlorine, or by reducing mercuric chloride (corrosive sublimate) 
with mercury or sulphurous acid. It is manufactured by heating 
a mixture of mercurous sulphate and common salt in iron 
retorts, and condensing the sublimed calomel in brick chambers. 
In the wet way it is obtained by precipitating a mercurous salt 
with hydrochloric acid. Calomel is a white powder which 
sublimes at a low red heat; it is insoluble in water, alcohol and 
ether. Boiling with stannous chloride solution reduces it to 
the metal; digestion with potassium iodide gives mercurous 
iodide. Nitric acid oxidizes it to mercuric nitrate, while 
potash or soda decomposes it into mercury and oxygen. Long 
continued boiling with water gives mercury and mercuric 
chloride; dilute hydrochloric acid or solutions of alkaline 
chlorides convert it into mercuric chloride on long boiling. 

The molecular weight of mercurous chloride has given occasion 
for much discussion. E. Mitscherlich determined the vapour 
density to be 8 • 3 (air = 1 ) , corresponding to HgCl. The supporters 
of the formula Hg 2 Cl 2 pointed out that dissociation into mercury 
and mercuric chloride would give this value, since mercury is a 
monatomic element. After contradictory evidence as to whether 
dissociation did or did not occur, it was finally shown by Victor 
Meyer and W. Harris (1894) that a rod moistened with potash 
and inserted in the vapour was coloured yellow, and so con- 
clusively proved dissociation. A. Werner determined the mole- 
cular weights of mercurous, cuprous and silver bromides, iodides 
and chlorides in pyridine solution, and obtained results point- 
ing to the formula HgCl, etc. However, the double formula, 
Hg 2 Cl 2 , has been completely established by H. B. Baker (Journ. 
Chem. Soc, 1900, 77, p. 646) by vapour density determinations 
of the absolutely dry substance. 

Calomel possesses certain special properties and uses in 
medicine which are dealt with here as a supplement to the 
general discussion of the pharmacology and therapeutics of 
mercury (q.v.). Calomel exerts remote actions in the form of 
mercuric chloride. The specific value of mercurous chloride is 
that it exerts the valuable properties of mercuric chloride in the 
safest and least irritant manner, as the active salt is continuously 
and freshly generated in small quantities. Its pharmacopeial 
preparations are the " Black wash," in which calomel and lime 
react to form mercurous oxide, a pill still known as " Plummer's 
pill " and an ointment. Externally the salt has not any par- 
ticular advantage over other mercurial compounds, despite the 
existence of the official ointment. Internally the salt is given in 
doses — for an adult of from one-half to five grains. It is an 
admirable aperient, acting especially on the upper part of the 
intestinal canal, and causing a slight increase of intestinal 
secretion. The stimulant action occurring high up in the canal 
(duodenum and jejunum), it is well to follow a dose of calomel 
with a saline purgative a few hours afterwards. The special 
value of the drug as an aperient depends on its antiseptic power 
and its stimulation of the liver. The stools are dark green, 
containing calomel, mercuric sulphide and bile which, owing to 
the antiseptic action, has not been decomposed. The salt is often 
used in the treatment of syphilis, but is probably less useful than 
certain other mercurial compounds. It is also employed for 



6o 



CALONNE^-CALORIMETRY 



fumigation;: the patient sits naked with a blanket over him, on a 
cane -bottomed chair, under which twenty grains of calomel are 
volatilized by a spirit-lamp; in about twenty minutes the 
calomel is effectually absorbed by the skin. • 

CALONNE, CHARLES ALEXANDRE DE (1734-1802), French 
statesman, was born at Douai of a good family. He entered the 
profession of the law, and became in succession advocate to the 
general council of Artois, procureur to the parlement of Douai, 
master of requests, then intendant of Metz (1768) and of Lille 
(1774). He seems to have been a man of great business capacity, 
gay and careless in temperament, and thoroughly unscrupulous 
in political action. In the terrible crisis of affairs preceding the 
French Revolution, when minister after minister tried in vain 
to replenish the exhausted royal treasury and was dismissed for 
want of success, Calonne was summoned to take the general 
control of affairs. He assumed office on the 3rd of November 
1783. He owed the position to Vergennes, who for three years 
and a half continued to support him ; but the king was not well 
disposed towards him, and, according to the testimony of the 
Austrian ambassador, his reputation with the public was ex- 
tremely poor. In taking office he found " 600 millions to pay 
and neither money nor credit." At first he attempted to 
develop the latter, and to carry on the government by means of 
loans in such a way as to maintain public confidence in its 
solvency. In October 1785 he recoined the gold coinage, and he 
developed the caisse a" escompte. But these measures failing, he 
proposed to the king the suppression of internal customs, duties 
and the taxation of the property of nobles and clergy. Turgot 
and Necker had attempted these reforms, and Calonne attributed 
their failure to the malevolent criticism of the parlements. 
Therefore he had an assembly of " notables "called together in 
January 1787. Before it he exposed the deficit in the treasury, 
and proposed the establishment of a subvention territoriale, 
which should be levied on all property without distinction. This 
suppression of privileges was badly received by the privileged 
notables. Calonne, angered, printed his reports and so alienated 
the court. Louis XVI. dismissed him on the 8th of April 1787 
and exiled him to Lorraine. The joy was general in Paris, where 
Calonne, accused of wishing to augment the imposts, was known 
as " ■ Monsieur Deficit." In reality his audacious plan of reforms, 
which Necker took up later, might have saved the monarchy had 
it been firmly seconded by the king. Calonne soon afterwards 
passed over to England, and during his residence there kept Up a 
polemical correspondence with Necker on the finances. In 1789, 
when the states-general were about to assemble, he crossed over 
to Flanders in the hope of being allowed to offer himself for 
election, but he was sternly forbidden to enter France. In 
revenge he joined the tmigrt party at Coblenz, wrote in their 
favour, and expended nearly all the fortune brought him by his 
wif e , a wealthy widow. In 1 80 2 , having again taken up his abode 
in London, he received permission from Napoleon to return to 
France. He died on the 30th of October 1802, about a month 
after his arrival in his native country. 

See Ch. Gomel, Les Causes financiires de la Revolution (Paris, 1893) ; 
R. Stourm, Les Finances de Vancien regime et de la Revolution (2 vols., 
Paris, 1885); Susane, La Tactique financi&re de Calonne, with biblio- 
graphy (Paris, 1902). 

CALORESCENCE (from the Lat. color, heat), a term invented 
by John Tyndall to describe an opticalphenomenon, the essential 
feature of which is the conversion of rays belonging to the dark 
infra-red portion of the spectrum into the more refrangible visible 
rays, i.e. heat rays into rays of light. Such a transformation 
had not previously been observed, although the converse pheno- 
menon, i.e. the conversion of short waves of light into longer or 
less refrangible waves, had been shown by Sir G. G. Stokes to 
occur in fluorescent bodies. Tyndall's experiments, however, 
were carried out on quite different lines, and have nothing to do 
with fluorescence (q.v.). His method was to sift out the long 
dark waves which are associated with the short visible waves 
constituting the light of the sun or of the electric arc and to 
concentrate the former to a focus. If the eye was placed at the 
focus, no sensation of light was observed, although small pieces 



of charcoal or blackened platinum foil were immediately raised 
to incandescence, thus giving rise to visible rays. 

The experiment is more easily carried out with the electric 
light than with sunlight, as the former contains a smaller pro- 
portion of visible rays. According to Tyndall, 90% of the 
radiation from the electric arc is non-luminous. The arc being 
struck in the usual way between two carbons, a concave mirror, 
placed close behind it, caused a large part of the radiation to be 
directed through an aperture in the camera and concentrated to 
a focus outside. In front of the aperture were placed a plate of 
transparent rock-salt, and a flat cell of thin glass containing a 
solution of iodine in carbon bisulphide. Both rock-salt and 
carbon bisulphide are extremely transparent to the luminous 
and also to the infra-red rays The iodine in the solution, 
however, has the property of absorbing the luminous rays, while 
transmitting the infra-red rays copiously, so that in sufficient 
thicknesses the solution appears nearly black. Owing to the 
inflammable nature of carbon bisulphide, the plate of rock-salt 
was found to be hardly a sufficient protection, and Tyndall 
surrounded the iodine cell with an annular vessel through which 
cold water was made to flow. Any small body which was a goqd 
absorber of dark rays was rapidly heated to redness when placed 
at the focus. Platinized platinum (platinum foil upon which a 
thin film of platinum had been deposited electrolytically) and 
charcoal were rendered incandescent, black paper and matches 
immediately inflamed, ordinary brown paper pierced and 
burned, while thin white blotting-paper, owing to its transparency 
to the invisible rays, was scarcely tinged. A simpler arrange- 
ment, also employed by Tyndall, is to cause the rays to be re- 
flected outwards parallel to one another, and to concentrate them 
by means of a small flask, containing the iodine solution and used 
as a lens, placed some distance from the camera. The rock-salt 
and cold water circulation can then be dispensed with. 

Since the rays used by Tyndall in these experiments are similar 
to those emitted by a heated body which is not hot enough to be 
luminous, it might be thought that the radiation, say from a hot 
kettle, could be concentrated to a focus and employed to render 
a small body luminous. It would, however, be impossible by such 
means to raise the receiving body to a higher temperature than 
the source of radiation. For it is easy to see that if, by means of 
lenses of rock-salt or mirrors, we focused all or nearly all the rays 
from a small surface on to another surface of equal area, this 
would not raise the temperature of the second surface above that 
of the first; and we could not obtain a greater concentration of 
rays from a large heated surface, since we could not have all parts 
of the surface simultaneously in focus. The desired result could 
be obtained if it were possible, by reflection or otherwise, to cause 
two different rays to unite without loss and pursue a common 
path. Such a result must be regarded as impossible of attain- 
ment, as it would imply the possibility of heat passing from one 
body to another at a higher temperature, contrary to the second 
law of thermodynamics (q.v.). Tyndall used the dark rays from 
a luminous source, which are emitted in a highly concentrated 
form, so that it was possible to obtain a high temperature, which 
was, however, much lower than that of the source. 

A full account of Tyndall's experiments will be found in his Heat, 
a Mode of Motion. (J. R. C.) 

CALORIMETRY, the scientific name for the measurement of 
quantities of heat (Lat. color), to be distinguished from ther- 
mometry, which signifies the measurement of temperature. A 
calorimeter is any piece of apparatus in which heat is measured. 
This distinction of meaning is purely a matter of convention, but 
it is very rigidly observed. Quantities of heat may be measured 
indirectly in a variety of ways in terms of the different effects of 
heat on material substances. The most important of these 
effects are (a) rise of temperature, (b) change of state, (c) trans- 
formation of energy. 

§ 1. The rise of temperature of a body, when heat is imparted 
to it, is found to be in general nearly proportional to the quantity 
of heat added. The thermal capacity of a body is measured by 
the quantity of heat required to raise its temperature one degree, 
and is necessarily proportional to the mass of the body for bodies 



CALORIMETRY 



61 



of the same substance under similar conditions. The specific 
heat of a substance is sometimes denned as the thermal capacity 
of unit mass, but more often as the ratio of the thermal capacity 
of unit mass of the substance to that of unit mass of water at 
some standard temperature. The two definitions are identical, 
provided that the thermal capacity of unit mass of water, at a 
standard temperature, is taken as the unit of heat. But the 
specific heat of water is often stated in terms of other units. In 
any case it is necessary to specify the temperature, and sometimes 
also the pressure, since the specific heat of a substance generally 
depends to some extent on the external conditions. The methods 
of measurement, founded on rise of temperature, may be classed 
as thermometric methods, since they depend on the observation of 
change of temperature with a thermometer. The most familiar 
of these are the method of mixture and the method of cooling. 

§ 2. The Method of Mixture consists in imparting the quantity 
of heat to be measured to a known mass of water, or some other 
standard substance, contained in a vessel or calorimeter of known 
thermal capacity, and in observing the rise of temperature pro- 
duced, from which data the quantity of heat may be found as 
explained in all elementary text-books. This method is the most 
generally convenient and most readily applicable of calorimetric 
methods, but it is not always the most accurate, for various reasons. 
Some heat is generally lost in transferring the heated body to the 
calorimeter; this loss may be minimized by performing the trans- 
ference rapidly, but it cannot be accurately calculated or eliminated. 
Some heat is lost when the calorimeter is raised above the tempera- 
ture of its enclosure, and before the final temperature is reached. 
This can be roughly estimated by observing the rate of change of 
temperature before and after the experiment, and assuming that the 
loss of heat is directly proportional to the duration of the experiment 
and to the average excess of temperature. It can be minimized by 
making the mixing as rapid as possible, and by using a large calori- 
meter, so that the excess of temperature is always small. The latter 
method was generally adopted by J. P. Joule, but the rise of tem- 
perature is then difficult to measure with accuracy, since it is neces- 
sarily reduced in nearly the same proportion as the correction. 
There is, however, the advantage that the correction is rendered 
much less uncertain by this procedure, since the assumption that 
the loss of heat is proportional to the temperature-excess is only 
true for small differences of temperature. Rumford proposed to 
eliminate this correction by starting with the initial temperature 
of the calorimeter as much below that of its enclosure as the final 
temperature was expected to be above the same limit. This method 
has been very generally recommended, but it is really bad, because, 
although it diminishes the absolute magnitude of the correction* 
it greatly increases the uncertainty of it and therefore the probable 
error of the result. The coefficient of heating of a calorimeter when 
it is below the temperature of its surroundings is seldom, if ever, the 
same as the coefficient of cooling at the higher temperature, since 
the convection currents, which do most of the heating or cooling, are 
rarely symmetrical in the two cases, and moreover, the duration 
of the two stages is seldom the same. In any case, it is desirable to 
diminish the loss of heat as much as possible by polishing the exterior 
of the calorimeter to diminish radiation, and by suspending it by 
non-conducting supports, inside a polished case, to protect it from 
draughts. It is also very important to keep the surrounding condi- 
tions as constant as possible throughout the experiment. This may 
be secured by using a large water-bath to surround the apparatus, 
but in experiments of long duration it is necessary to use an accurate 
temperature regulator. The method of lagging the calorimeter with 
cotton-wool or other non-conductors, which is often recommended, 
diminishes the loss of heat considerably, but renders it very uncertain 
and variable, and should never be used in work of precision. The bad 
conductors take so long to reach a steady state that the rate of loss 
of heat at any moment depends on the past history more than on 
the temperature of the calorimeter at the moment. A more serious 
objection to the use of lagging of this kind is the danger of its absorb- 
ing moisture. The least trace of damp in the lagging, or of moisture 
condensed on the surface of the calorimeter, may produce serious 
loss of heat by evaporation. This is another objection to Rumford's 
method of cooling the calorimeter below the surrounding temperature 
before starting. Among minor difficulties of the method may be 
mentioned the uncertainty of the thermal capacity of the calorimeter 
and stirrer, and of the immersed portion of the thermometer. This 
is generally calculated by assuming values for the specific heats of 
the materials obtained by experiment between loo" C. and 20° C. 
Since the specific heats of most metals increase rapidly with rise of 
temperature, the values so obtained are generally too high. It is 
best to make this correction as small as possible by using a large 
calorimeter, so that the mass of water is large in proportion to that 
of metal. Analogous difficulties arise in the application of other 
calorimetric methods. The accuracy of the work in each case 
depends principally on the skill and ingenuity of the experimentalist 
in devising methods of eliminating the various sources of error. 



The form of apparatus usually adopted for the method of mixtures 
is that of Regnault with slight modifications, and figures and des- 
criptions are given in all the text-books. Among special method, 
which have been subsequently developed there are two. which deserve 
mention as differing in principle from the common type. These 
are (i) the constant temperature method, (2) the continuous flow 
method. 

The constant temperature method of mixtures was proposed by 
N. Hesehus (Jour. Phys., 1888, vii. p. 489). Cold water at a known 




Fig. 1. 

temperature is added to the calorimeter, immediately after dropping 
in the heated substance, at such a rate as to keep the temperature 
of the calorimeter constant, thus eliminating the corrections for 
the water equivalent of the calorimeter and the external loss of heat. 
The calorimeter is surrounded by an air-jacket connected to a 
petroleum gauge which indicates any small change of temperature 
in the calorimeter, and enables the manipulator to adjust the supply 
of cold water to compensate it. The apparatus as arranged by 
F. A. Waterman is shown in fig. 1 (Physical Review, 1896, iv. p. 161). 
A is the calorimetric tube, 
B the air-jacket and L 
the gauge. H is an electric 
heater for raising the body 
to a suitable temperature, 
which can swing into place 
directly over the calori- 
meter. W is a conical can 
containing water cooled 
by ice I nearly to o°, which 
is swung over the calori- 
meter as soon as the hot 
body has been introduced 
and the heater removed. 
The cold water flow is 
regulated by a tap S with 
a long handle O, and its 
temperature is taken by a 
delicate thermometer with 
its bulb at G. The method 
is interesting, but the 
manipulations and obser- 
vations involved are more 
troublesome than with the 
ordinary type of calori- 
meter, and it may be 
doubted whether any ad- 
vantage is gained in 
accuracy. 

The continuous flow 
method is specially applic- 
able to the important case 
of calorific value of gaseous 
fuel, where a large quan- 
tity of heat is continu- 
ously generated at a 
nearly uniform rate by combustion. 




Fig. 2. 



Fig. 2 illustrates a recent 
type of gas calorimeter devised by C. V. Boys (Proc. R.S-, J 906; 
A. 77, p. 122). The heated products of combustion from the burner 
B impinge on a metal box H, through which water is circulating, and 
then pass downwards and outvvards through a spiral cooler which re- 
duces them practically to the atmospheric temperature. A steady 
stream of water enters the apparatus by the inflow thermometer O, 



62 



CALORIMETRY 



flows through the spiral coolers N and M, and finally through the box 
H, where it is well mixed before passing the outflow thermometer P. 
As soon as a steady state is reached, the difference of temperature 
between the outflow and inflow thermometers, multiplied by the 
current of water in grammes per minute gives the heat per minute 
supplied by combustion. The gas current is simultaneously ob- 
served by a suitable meter, which, with subsidiary corrections for 
pressure, temperature, &c, gives the necessary data for deducing 
calorific value. 

A continuous flow calorimeter has been used by the writer for 
measuring quantities of heat conveyed by conduction (see Con- 
duction of Heat), and also for determining the variation of the 
specific heat of water. In the latter case two steady currents of water 
at different temperatures, say o° and ioo° are passed through an 
equalizer, and the resulting temperature measured without mixing 
the currents, which are then separately determined by weighing. 
This is a very good method of comparing the mean specific heats 
over two ranges of temperature such as 0-50, and 50-100, or 0-20 
and 20-40, but it is not so suitable as the electric method^ described 
below for obtaining the actual specific heat at any point of the 
range. 

§ 3. Method of Cooling. — A common example of this method 
is the determination of the specific heat of a liquid by filling a 
small calorimeter with the liquid, raising it to a convenient 
temperature, and then setting it to cool in an enclosure at a 
steady temperature, and observing the time taken to fall through 
a given range when the conditions have become fairly steady. 
The same calorimeter is afterwards filled with a known liquid, 
such as water, and the time of cooling is observed through the 
same range of temperature, in the same enclosure, under the 
same conditions. The ratio of the times of cooling is equal to the 
ratio of the thermal capacities of the calorimeter and its contents 
in the two cases. The advantage of the method is that there is 
no transference or mixture; the defect is that the whole measure- 
ment depends on the assumption that the rate of loss of heat is 
the same in the two cases, and that any variation in the con- 
ditions, or uncertainty in the rate of loss, produces its full effect 
in the result, whereas in the previous case it would only affect a 
small correction. Other sources of uncertainty are, that the rate 
of loss of heat generally depends to some extent on the rate of 
fall of temperature, and that it is difficult to take accurate 
observations on a rapidly falling thermometer. As the method 
is usually practised, the calorimeter is made very small, and the 
surface is highly polished to diminish radiation. It is better to 
use a fairly large calorimeter to diminish the rate of cooling and 
the uncertainty of the correction for the water equivalent. The 
surface of the calorimeter and the enclosure should be perma- 
nently blackened so as to increase the loss of heat by radiation as 
much as possible, as compared with the losses by convection and 
conduction, which are less regular. For accurate work it is 
essential that the liquid in the calorimeter should be continuously 
stirred, and also in the enclosure, the lid of which must be water- 
jacketed, and kept at the same steady temperature as the sides. 
When all these precautions are taken, the method loses most of 
the simplicity which is its chief advantage. It cannot be satis- 
factorily applied to the case of solids or powders, and is much 
less generally useful than the method of mixture. 

§ 4. Method of Fusion. — The methods depending on change of 
state are theoretically the simplest, since they do not necessarily 
involve any reference to thermometry, and the corrections for 
external loss of heat and for the thermal capacity of the con- 
taining vessels can be completely eliminated. They nevertheless 
present peculiar difficulties and limitations, which render their 
practical application more troublesome and more uncertain than 
is usually supposed. They depend on the experimental fact that 
the quantity of heat required to produce a given change of state 
(e.g. to convert one gramme of ice at o° C. into water at o° C, or 
one gramme of water at ioo° C. into steam at 100° C.) is always 
the same, and that there need be no change of temperature during 
the process. The difficulties arise in connexion with the deter- 
mination of the quantities of ice melted or steam condensed, and 
in measuring the latent heat of fusion or vaporization in terms of 
other units for the comparison of observations. The earlier forms 
of ice-calorimeter, those of Black, and of Laplace and Lavoisier, 
were useless for work of precision, on account of the impossibility 
of accurately estimating the quantity of water left adhering to 



the ice in each case. This difficulty was overcome by the inven- 
tion of the Bunsen calorimeter, in which the quantity of ice 
melted is measured by observing the diminution of volume, but 
the successful employment of this instrument requires consider- 
able skill in manipulation. The sheath of ice surrounding the 
bulb must be sufficiently continuous to prevent escape of heat, 
but it must not be so solid as to produce risk of strain. The 
ideal condition is difficult to secure. In the practical use of the 
instrument it is not necessary to know both the latent heat of 
fusion of ice and the change of volume which occurs on melting; 
it is sufficient to determine the change of volume per calorie, or 
the quantity of mercury which is drawn into the bulb of the 
apparatus per unit of heat added. This can be determined by a 
direct calibration, by inserting a known quantity of water at a 
known temperature and observing the contraction, or weighing 
the mercury drawn into the apparatus. In order to be inde- 
pendent of the accuracy of the thermometer employed for 
observing the initial temperature of the water introduced, it 
has been usual to employ water at 100° C, adopting as unit of 
heat the " mean calorie," which is one-hundredth part of the heat 
given up by one gramme of water in cooling from ioo° to o c C. 
The weight of mercury corresponding to the mean calorie has 
been determined with considerable care by a number of observers 
well skilled in the use of the instrument. The following are some 
of their results: — Bunsen, 15-41 mgm.; Velten, 15-47 mgm.; 
Zakrevski, 15-57 mgm,; Staub, 15-26 mgm. The explanation of 
these discrepancies in the fundamental constant is not at all 
clear, but they may be taken as an illustration of the difficulties 
of manipulation attending the use of this instrument, to which 
reference has already been made. It is not possible to deduce a 
more satisfactory value from the latent heat and the change of 
density, because these constants are very difficult to determine. 
The following are some of the values deduced by well-known 
experimentalists for the latent heat of fusion: — Regnault, 79-06 
to 79-24 calories, corrected by Person to 79-43; Person, 79-99 
calories; Hess, 80-34 calories; Bunsen, 80-025 calories. Regnault, 
Person and Hess employed the method of mixture which is 
probably the most accurate for the purpose. Person and Hess 
avoided the error of water sticking to the ice by using dry ice at 
various temperatures below o° C, and determining the specific 
heat of ice as well as the latent heat of fusion. These discrep- 
ancies might, no doubt, be partly explained by differences in the 
units employed, which are somewhat uncertain, as the specific 
heat of water changes rapidly in the neighbourhood of 0° C; but 
making all due allowance for this, it remains evident that the 
method of ice-calorimetry, in spite of its theoretical simplicity, 
presents grave difficulties in its practical application. 

One of the chief difficulties in the practical use of the Bunsen 
calorimeter is the continued and often irregular movement of the 
mercury column due to slight differences of temperature, or pressure 
between the ice in the calorimeter and the ice 
bath in which it is immersed. C. V. Boys 
{Phil. Mag., 1887, vol. 24, p. 214) showed that 
these effects could be very greatly reduced by 
surrounding the calorimeter with an outer tube, 
so that the ice inside was separated from the 
ice outside by an air space which greatly 
reduces the free passage of heat. The present 
writer has found that very- good results may be 
obtained by enclosing the calorimeter in a 
vacuum jacket (as illustrated in fig. 3), which 
practically eliminates conduction and convec- 
tion. If the vacuum jacket is silvered inside, 
radiation also is reduced to such an extent 
that, if the vacuum is really good, the external 
ice bath may be dispensed with for the majority 
of purposes. If the inner bulb is filled with 
mercury instead of water and ice, the same 
arrangement answers admirably as a Favre 
and Silbermann calorimeter, for measuring 
small quantities of heat by the expansion of 
the mercury. 

The question has been raised by E. L. Nichols (Phys. Rev. vol. 8, 
January 1899) whether there may not be different modifications of 
ice with different densities, and different values of the latent heat 
of fusion. He found for natural pond-ice a density 0-9179 and for 
artificial ice 0-9161. J. Vincent (Phil. Trans. A. 198, p. 463) also 
found a density -9160 for artificial ice, which is probably very nearly 




Fig. 3. 



CALORIMETRY 



63 



correct. If such variations of density exist, they may introduce 
some uncertainty in the absolute values of results obtained with the 
ice calorimeter, and may account for some of the discrepancies above 
enumerated. 

§ 5. The Method of Condensation was first successfully applied 
by J. Joly in the construction of his steam calorimeter, a full 
description of which will be found in text-books. The body to be 
tested is placed in a special scale-pan, suspended by a fine wire 
from the arm of a balance inside an enclosure which can be filled 
with steam at atmospheric pressure. The temperature of the 
enclosure is carefully observed before admitting steam. The 
weight of steam condensed on the body gives a means of calculat- 
ing the quantity of heat required to raise it from the atmospheric 
temperature up to 100° C. in terms of the latent heat of vaporiza- 
tion of steam at ioo° C. There can be no appreciable gain or 
loss of heat by radiation, if the admission of the steam is 
sufficiently rapid, since the walls of the enclosure are maintained 
at ioo° C, very nearly. The thermal capacity of the scale-pan, 
&c, can be determined by a separate experiment, or, still better, 
eliminated by the differential method of counterpoising with an 
exactly similar arrangement on the other arm of the balance. 
The method requires very delicate weighing, as one calorie 
corresponds to less than two milligrammes of steam condensed; 
but the successful application of the method to the very difficult 
problem of measuring the specific heat of a gas at constant 
volume, shows that these and other difficulties have been very 
skilfully overcome. The application of the method appears to be 
practically limited to the measurements of specific heat between 
the atmospheric temperature and 100° C. The results depend on 
the value assumed for the latent heat of steam, which Joly takes 
as 536.7 calories, following Regnault. Joly has himself deter- 
mined the mean specific heat of water between 12 and ioo° C. 
by this method, in terms of the latent heat of steam as above 
given, and finds the result -9952. Assuming that the mean 
specific heat of water between 12 and ioo° is really i-ooii in 
terms of the calorie at 20 C. (see table, p. 66), the value of the 
latent heat of steam at 100° C, as determined by Joly, would be 
540-2 in terms of the same unit. The calorie employed by 
Regnault is to some extent uncertain, but the difference is hardly 
beyond the probable errors of experiment, since it appears from 
the results of recent experiments that Regnault made an error 
of the same order in his determination of the specific heat of 
water at ioo° C. 

§ 6. Energy MetJtods. — The third general method of calorimetry, 
that based on the transformation of some other kind of energy 
into the form of heat, rests on the general principle of the con- 
servation of energy, and on the experimental fact that all other 
forms of energy are readily and completely convertible into the 
form of heat. It is therefore often possible to measure quantities 
of heat indirectly, by measuring the energy in some other form 
and then converting it into heat. In addition to its great 
theoretical interest, this method possesses the advantage of 
being frequently the most accurate in practical application, since 
energy can be more accurately measured in other forms than in 
that of heat. The two most important varieties of the method are 
(a) mechanical, and (b) electrical. These methods have reached 
their highest development in connexion with the determination of 
the mechanical equivalent of heat, but they may be applied with 
great advantage in connexion with other problems, such as the 
measurement of the variation of specific heat, or of latent heats 
of fusion or vaporization. 

§ 7. Mechanical Equivalent of Heat. — The phrase " mechanical 
equivalent of heat " is somewhat vague, but has been sanctioned 
by long usage. It is generally employed to denote the number 
of units of mechanical work or energy which, when completely 
converted into heat without loss, would be required to produce 
one heat unit. The numerical value of the mechanical equivalent 
necessarily depends on the particular units of heat and work 
employed in the comparison. The British engineer prefers to 
state results in terms of foot-pounds of work in any convenient 
latitude per pound-degree-Fahrenheit of heat. The continental 
engineer prefers kilogrammetres per kilogramme-degree-centi- 



Jtm- 



grade. For scientific use the C.G.S. system of expression in ergs 
per gramme-degree-centigrade, or " calorie," is the most appro- 
priate, as being independent of ,the value of gravity. A more 
convenient unit of work or energy, in practice, on account of the 
smallness of the erg, is the joule, which is equal to io- 7 ergs, or one 
watt-second of electrical energy. On account of its practical 
convenience, and its close relation to the international electrical 
units, the joule has been recommended by the British Association 
for adoption as the absolute unit of heat. Other convenient 
practical units of the same kind would be the watt-hour, 3600 
joules, which is of the same order of magnitude as the kilo- 
calorie, and the kilowatt-hour, which is the ordinary commercial 
unit of electrical energy. 

§ 8. Joule. — The earlier work of Joule is now chiefly of historical 
interest, but his later measurements in 1878, which were undertaken 
on a larger scale, adopting G. 
A. Hirn's method of measuring 
the work expended in terms of 
the torque and the number of 
revolutions, still possess 
value as experimental evidence. 
In these experiments (see fig. 4) 
the paddles were revolved by 
hand at such a speed as to 
produce a constant torque on 
the calorimeter h, which was 
supported on a float to in a 
vessel of water v, but was kept 
at rest by the couple due to a 
pair of equal weights k sus- 
pended from fine strings pass- 
ing round the circumference of 
a horizontal wheel attached to 
the calorimeter. Each experi- 
ment lasted about forty 
minutes, and the rise of tem- 
perature produced was nearly 
3 C. The calorimeter con- 
tained about 5 kilogrammes 
of water, so that the rate 
of heat-supply was about 6 
calories per second. Joule's 



II 


I 1 




■—^ 



a 


W 


1 , ^ 








l l 


ll 


w 






V , 




Fig. 4. 



final result was 772-55 foot-pounds at Manchester per poun i-degree- 
Fahrenheit at a temperature of 62 F., but individual experiments 
differed by as much as 1 %. This result in C.G.S. measure is equi- 
valent to 4-177 joules per calorie at 16-5° C, on the scale of Joule's 
mercury thermometer. His thermometers were subsequently cor- 
rected to the Paris scale by A- Schuster in 1895, which had the effect 
of reducing the above figure to 4-173. 

§ 9. Rowland. — About the same time H. A. Rowland {Proc. Amer. 
Acad. xv. p. 75, 1880) repeated the experiment, employing the same 
method, but using a larger calorimeter (about 8400 grammes) and 
a petroleum motor, so as to obtain a greater rate of heating (about 
84 calories per second), and to reduce the importance of the un- 
certain correction for external loss of heat. Rowland's apparatus 
is shown in fig. 5. The calorimeter was suspended by a steel wire, 
the torsion of which made the equilibrium stable. The torque was 
measured by weights O and P suspended by silk ribbons passing 
over the pulleys n and round the disk kl. The power was transmitted 
to the paddles by bevel wheels/, g, rotating a spindle passing through 
a stuffing box in the bottom of the calorimeter. The number of 
revolutions and the rise of temperature were recorded on a chrono- 
graph drum. He paid greater attention to the important question 
of thermometry, and extended his researches over a much wider 
range of temperature, namely 5 ° to 35 ° C. His experiments revealed 
for the first time a diminution in the specific heat of water with rise 
of temperature between 0° and 30° C, amounting to four parts in 
io-ooo per l°C. His thermometers were compared with a mercury 
thermometer standardized in Paris, and with a platinum thermo- 
meter standardized by Griffiths. The result was to reduce the co- 
efficient of diminution of specific heat at 15° C. by nearly one half, 
but the absolute value at 20° C. is practically unchanged. Thus 
corrected his values are as follows :— 

Temperature . io° 15 20 25 30 35 

Joules per cal. . 4-197 4-188 4-181 4-176 4-175 4-177 
These are expressed in terms of the hydrogen scale, but the difference 
from the nitrogen scale is so small as to be within the limits of ex- 
perimental error in this particular case. Rowland himself considered 
his results to be probably correct to one part in 500, and supposed 
that the greatest uncertainty lay in the comparison of the scale of 
his mercury thermometer with the air thermometer. Thesubsequent 
correction, though not carried out strictly under the conditions of 
the experiment, showed that the order of accuracy of his work about 
the middle of the range from 15° to 25° was at least I in 1000, and 
probably 1 in 2000. At 30 he considered that, owing to the increas- 
ing magnitude and uncertainty of the radiation correction, there 



6 4 



CALORIMETRY 



" might be a small error in the direction of making the equivalent 
too great, and that the specific heat might go on decreasing; to even 
40 C." The results considered with reference to the variation of 



«=£> 




Fig. 5. 

the specific heat of water are shown in the curve marked Rowland 
in Fig. 6. 

§ 10. Osborne Reynolds and W.H.Moorby {Phil. Trans. ,1897, p. 381) 
determined the mechanical equivalent of the mean thermal unit 
between o° and 100 C.,ona very large scale, with a Froude- Reynolds 
hydraulic brake and a steam-engine of 100 h.p. This brake is practi- 
cally a Joule calorimeter, ingeniously designed to churn the water 
in such a manner as to develop the greatest possible resistance. 
The admission of water at o° C. to the brake was controlled by hand 
in such a manner as to keep the outflow nearly at the boiling-point, 
the quantity of water in the brake required to produce a constant 
torque being regulated automatically, as the speed varied, by a valve 
worked by the lifting of the weighted lever attached to the brake. 




Fig. 6. 

The accompanying illustration (fig. 7) shows the brake lagged with 
cotton-wool, and the 4-ft. lever to which the weights are suspended. 
The power of the brake may be estimated by comparison with the 
size of the rope pulley seen behind it on the same shaft. With 
300 pounds on a 4-ft. lever at 300 revolutions per minute, the rate of 
generation of heat was about 12 kilo-calories per second. In spite 
of the large range of temperature, the correction for external loss 
of heat amounted to only 5%, with the brake uncovered, and was 
reduced to less than 2 % by lagging. This is the special advantage 
of working on so large a scale with so rapid a generation of heat. 
But, for the same reason, the method necessarily presents peculiar 
difficulties, which were not overcome without great pains and in- 
genuity. The principal troubles arose from damp in the lagging 
which necessitated the rejection of several trials, and from dissolved 
air in the water, causing loss of heat by the formation of steam. 
Next to the radiation loss, the most uncertain correction was that 
for conduction of heat along the 4-in. shaft. These losses were as 
far as possible eliminated by combining the trials in pairs, with differ- 



ent loads on the brake, assuming that the heat-loss would be the same 
in the heavy and light trials, provided that the external temperature 
and the gradient in the shaft, as estimated from the temperature 
of the bearings, were the same. The values deduced in this manner 
for the equivalent agreed as closely as could be expected considering 
the impossibility of regulating the external condition of temperature 
and moisture with any certainty in an engine-room. The extreme 
variation of results in any one series was only from 776.63 to 779.46 
ft. -pounds, or less than 2%. This variation may have been due 
to the state of the lagging, which Moorby distrusted in spite of the 
great reduction of the heat-loss, or it may have been partly due to 
the difficulty of regulating the speed of the engine and the water- 
supply to the brake in such a manner as to maintain a constant 
temperature in the outflow, and avoid variations in the heat capacity 
of the brake. Since hand regulation is necessarily discontinuous, 
the speed and the temperature were constantly varying, so that it 
was useless to take readings nearer than the tenth of a degree. The 
largest variation recorded in the two trials of which full details are 
given, was 4-9 ° F. in two minutes in the outflow temperature, and 
four or five revolutions per minute on the speed. These variations, so 
far as they were of a purely accidental nature, would be approxi- 
mately eliminated on the mean of a large number of trials, so that 
the accuracy of the final result would be of a higher order than might 
be inferred from a comparison of separate pairs of trials. Great pains 




Fig. 7. 

were taken to discuss and eliminate all the sources of constant error 
which could be foreseen. The results of the light trials with 400 ft.- 
pounds on the brake differ slightly from those with 600 ft. -pounds. 
This might be merely accidental, or it might indicate some constant 
difference in the conditions requiring further investigation. It would 
have been desirable, if possible, to have tried the effect of a larger 
range of variation in the experimental conditions of load and speed, 
with a view to detect the existence of constant errors ; but owing to 
the limitations imposed by the use of a steam-engine, and the 
difficulty of securing steady conditions of running, this proved to be 
impossible. There can be no doubt, however, that the final result is 
the most accurate direct determination of the value of the mean 
calorie between o" and 100 C. in mechanical units. Expressed in 
joules per calorie the result is 4-1832, which agrees very closely with 
the value found by Rowland as the mean over the range 15 to 20° C. 
The value 4-183 is independently confirmed in a remarkable manner 
by the results of the electrical method described below, which give 
4-185 joules for the mean calorie, if Rowland's value is assumed as 
the starting-point, arid taken to be 4-180 joules at 20° C. 

§ 11. Electrical Methods. — The value of the international 
electrical units has by this time been so accurately determined in 
absolute measure that they afford a very good, though indirect, 
method of determining the mechanical equivalent of heat. But, 
quite apart from this, electrical methods possess the greatest 
value for calorimetry, on account of the facility and accuracy of 
regulating and measuring the quantity of heat supplied by an 
electric current. The frictional generation of heat in a metallic 
wire conveying a current can be measured in various ways, which 
correspond to slightly different methods. By Ohm's law, rod by 
the definition of difference of electric pressure or potential, we 
obtain the following alternative expressions for the quantity of 
heat H in joules generated in a time T seconds by a current of 
C amperes flowing in a wire of resistance R ohms, the difference 
of potential between the ends of the wire being E = CR volts:— 

H = ECT=ORT = &TIR . . . (1.) 
The method corresponding to the expression ORT was adopted 



CALORIMETRY 



6-5 



t>y Joule and by most of the early experimentalists. The defects 
of the earlier work from an electrical point of view lay chiefly in 
the difficulty of measuring the current with sufficient accuracy 
owing to the imperfect development of the science of electrical 
measurement. These difficulties have been removed by the great 
advances since 1880, and in particular by the introduction of 
accurate standard cells for measurements of electrical pressure. 

§ 12. Griffiths.— The method adopted by E. H. Griffiths {Phil. 
Trans., 1893, p. 361), whose work threw a great deal of light on the 
failure of previous observers to secure consistent results, corre- 
sponded to the last expression E?T/R, and consisted in regulating 
the current by a special rheostat, so as to keep the potential difference 
E on the terminals of the resistance R balanced against a given 
number of standard Clark cells of the Board of Trade pattern. The 
resistance R could be deduced from a knowledge of the temperature 
of the calorimeter and the coefficient of the wire. But in order to 
obtain trustworthy results by this method he found it necessary 
to employ very rapid stirring (2000 revolutions per minute), and to 
insulate the wire very carefully from the liquid to prevent leakage 
of the current. He also made a special experiment to find how much 
the temperature of the wire exceeded that of the liquid under the 
conditions of the experiment. This correction had been neglected 
by previous observers employing similar methods. The resistance 
R was about 9 ohms, and the potential difference E was varied from 
three to six Clark cells, giving a rate of heat-supply about 2 to 6 
watts. The water equivalent of the calorimeter was about 85 
grammes, and was determined by varying the quantity of water from 
140 to 260 or 280 grammes, so that the final results depended on a 
difference in the weight of water of 120 to 140 grammes. The range 
of temperature in each experiment was 14 to 26 C. The rate of rise 
was observed with a mercury thermometer standardized by com- 
parison with a platinum thermometer under the conditions of the 
experiment. The time of passing each division was recorded on an 
electric chronograph. The duration of an experiment varied from 
about 30 to 70 minutes. Special observations were made to deter- 
mine the corrections for the heat supplied by stirring, and that lost 
by radiation, each of which amounted to about 10% of the heat- 
supply. The calorimeter C, fig. 8, was gilded, and completely 




_K 



Fig. 8. 



surrounded by a nickel-plated steel enclosure B, forming the bulb 
of a mercury thermo-regulator, immersed in a large water-bath 
maintained at a constant temperature. 'In spite of the large cor- 
rections the results were extremely consistent, and the value of the 
temperature-coefficient of the diminution of the specific heat of 
water, deduced from the observed variation in the rate of rise at 
different points of the range 15° to 25 , agreed with the value subse- 
quently deduced from Rowland's experiments over the same range, 
when his thermometers were reduced to the same scale. Griffiths' 
final result for the average value of the calorie over this range was 
4-192 joules, taking the E.M.F. of the Clark cell at 15° C. to be 
1^4342 volts. The difference from Rowland's value, 4-181, could 
be explained by supposing the E.M.F. of the Clark cells to have in 
reality been 1-4323 volts, or about 2 millivolts less than the value 
assumed. Griffiths subsequently applied the same method to the 
measurement of the specific heat of aniline, and the latent heat of 
vaporization of benzene and water. 

§ 13. Schuster and Gannon. — The method employed by A. Schuster 
and W. Gannon for the determination of the specific heat of water in 
terms of the international electric units (Phil. Trans. A, 1895, p. 415) 
corresponded to the expression ECT, and differed in many essential 
details from that of Griffiths. The current through a platinoid 
resistance of about 31 ohms in a calorimeter containing 1500 grammes 
of water was regulated so that the potential difference on its ter- 
minals was equal to that of twenty Board of Trade Clark cells in 
series. The duration of an experiment was about ten minutes, and 
the product of the mean current and the time, namely CT, was 
measured by the weight of silver deposited in a voltameter, which 

V-3 



amounted to about 0-56 gramme. The uncertainty due to the cor- 
rection for the water equivalent was minimized by making it small 
(about 27 grammes) in comparison with the water weight. The 
correction for external loss was reduced by employing a small rise 
of temperature (only 2-22°), and making the rate of heat-supply 
relatively rapid, nearly 24 watts. The platinoid coil was insulated 
from the water by shellac varnish. The wire had a length of 760 cms., 
and the potential difference on its terminals was nearly 30 volts. The 
rate of stirring adopted was so slow that the heat generated by it 
could be neglected. The result found was 4-191 joules per calorie 
at 19 C. This agrees very well with Griffiths considering the 
difficulty of measuring so small a rise of temperature at 2° with a 
mercury thermometer. Admitting that the electro-chemical equiva- 
lent of silver increases with the age of the solution, a fact subse- 
quently discovered, and that the E.M.F. of the Clark cell is probably 
less than 1-4340 volts (the value assumed by Schuster and Gannon), 
there is no difficulty in reconciling the result with that of Rowland. 

§ 14. H. L. Callendar and H. T. Barnes (Brit. Assoc. Reports, 1897 
and 1899) adopted an entirely different method of calorimetry, as well 
as a different method of electrical measurement. A steady current 
of liquid, Q grammes per second, of specific heat, Js joules per degree, 
flowing through a fine tube, A B, fig. 9, is heated by a steady electric 
current during its passage through the tube, and the difference of 
temperature dd between the inflowing and the outflowing liquid is 
measured by a single reading with a delicate pair of differential 
platinum thermometers at A and B. The difference of potential 
E between the ends of the tube, and the electric current C through 
it, are measured on an accurately calibrated potentiometer, in terms 
of a Clark cell and a standard resistance. If hde is the radiation 
loss in watts we have the equation, 

EC = JsQde+.hde . . _. . (2). 
The advantage of this method is that all the conditions are steady, 
so that the observations can be pushed to the limit of accuracy and 




Fig. 9. 

sensitiveness of the apparatus. The water equivalent of the calori- 
meter is immaterial, since there -is no appreciable change of tem- 
perature. The heat-loss can be reduced to a minimum by enclosing 
the flow-tube in a hermetically sealed glass vacuum jacket. Stirring 
is effected by causing the water to circulate spirally round the bulbs 
of the thermometers and the heating conductor as indicated in the 
figure. The conditions can be very easily varied through a wide 
range. The heat-loss hde is determined and eliminated by varying 
the flow of liquid and the electric current simultaneously, in such 
a manner as to secure approximately the same rise of temperature 
for two or more widely different values of the flow of liquid. An 
example taken from the Electrician, September 1897, of one of the 
earliest experiments by this method on the specific heat of mercury 
will make the method clearer. The flow-tube was about r metre 
long and I millim. in diameter, coiled in a short spiral inside the 
vacuum jacket. The outside of the vacuum jacket was immersed 
in a water jacket at a steady temperature equal to that of the in- 
flowing mercury. 

Specific Heat of Mercury by continuous Electric Method 



Flow of Hg. 


Rise of Temp. 


Watts. 


Heat-loss. 


Specific Heat. 


gm./sec. 
8-753 
4-594 


de 

11-764 
12-301 


EC 

14-862 

7-912 


hd0 

0-655 
0-685 


Per gm. deg. 
) -13780 joules 
) -03297 cals. 



It is assumed as a first approximation that the heat-loss is propor- 
tional to the rise of temperature de, provided that de is nearly the 
same in both cases, and that the distribution of temperature in the 
apparatus is the same for the same rise of temperature whatever the 
flow of liquid The result calculated on these assumptions is given 
in the last column in joules, and also in calories of 20 C. The heat- 
loss in this example is large, nearly 4-5 % of the total supply, owing 
to the small flow and the large rise of temperature, but this correction 
was greatly reduced in.subsequent observations on the specific heat 
of water by the same method. In the case of mercury the liquid 
itself can be utilized to conduct the electric current. In the case of 
water or other liquids it is necessary to employ a platinum wire 
stretched along the tabe as heating conductor. This introduces 
additional difficulties of construction, but does not otherwise affect 



66 



CALORIMETRY 



the method. The absolute value of the specific heat deduced neces- 
sarily depends on the absolute values of the electrical standards 
employed in the investigation. But for the determination of relative 
values of specific heats in terms of a standard liquid, or of the varia- 
tions of specific heat of a liquid, the method depends only on the 
constancy of the standards, which can be readily and accurately 
tested. The absolute value of the E.M.F. of the Clark cells employed 
was determined with a special form of electrodynamometer 
(Callendar, Phil. Trans. A. 313, p. 81), and found to be 1-4334 volts, 
assuming the ohm to be correct. Assuming this value, the result 
found by this method for the specific heat of water at 20 C. agrees 
with that of Rowland within the probable limits of error. 

§ 15. Variation of Specific Heat of Water. — The question of the 
variation of the specific heat of water has a peculiar interest and 
importance in connexion with the choice of a thermal unit. Many 
of the uncertainties in the reduction of older experiments, such as 
those of Regnault, arise from uncertainty in regard to the unit in 
terms of which they are expressed, which again depends on the scale 
of the particular thermometer employed in the investigation. The 
first experiments of any value were those of Regnault in 1847 on the 
specific heat of water between no C. and 192° C. They were con- 
ducted on a very large scale by the method of mixture, but showed 
discrepancies of the order of 0-5 %, and the calculated results in many 
cases do not agree with the data. This may be due merely to de- 
ficient explanation of details of tabulation. We may probably take 
the tabulated values as showing correctly the rate of variation 
between 110 and 190 C, but the values in terms of any particular 
thermal unit must remain uncertain to at least 0-5% owing to the 
uncertainties of the thermometry. Regnault himself adopted the 
formula, 

s = 1 +o- 00004^+0-0000009^ (Regnault), (3) 

for the specific heat 5 at any temperature / C. in terms of the specific 
heat at 0° C. taken as the standard. This formula has since been 
very generally applied over the whole range 0° to 200 C, but the 
experiments could not in reality give any information with regard 
to the specific heat at temperatures below 100° C. The linear formula 
proposed by J. Bosscha from an independent reduction of Regnault's 
experiments is probably within the limits of accuracy between 100 
and 200 C., so far as the mean rate of variation is concerned, but 
the absolute values require reduction. It may be written — 

s = Sm + -00023 (/ — 1 00) (Bosscha-Regnault) (4). 
The work of L. Pfaundler and H. Platter, of G. A. Hirn, of J. C. 
Jamin and Amaury, and of many other experimentalists who suc- 
ceeded Regnault, appeared to indicate much larger rates of increase 
than he had found, but there can be little doubt that the 
discrepancies of their results, which often exceeded 5%, were due 
to lack of appreciation of the difficulties of calorimetric measure- 
ments. The work of Rowland by the mechanical method was the 
first in which due attention was paid to the thermometry and to 
the reduction of the results to the absolute scale of temperature. 
The agreement of his corrected results with those of Griffiths by 
a very different method, left very little doubt with regard to the 
rate of diminution of the specific heat of water at 20° C. The work 
of A. Bartoli and E. Stracciati by the method of mixture between 
0° and 30 C, though their curve is otherwise similar to Rowland's, 
had appeared to indicate a minimum at 20° C, followed by a rapid 
rise. This lowering of the minimum was probably due to some 
constant errors inherent in their method of experiment. The more 
recent work of Liidin, 1895, under the direction of Prof. J. Pernet, 
extended from o° to ioo° C., and appears to have attained as high 
a degree of excellence as it is possible to reach by the employment of 
mercury thermometers in conjunction with the method of mixture. 
His results, exhibited in fig. 6, show a minimum at 25 " C, and a 
maximum at 87 C, the values being -9935 and 1-0075 respectively 
in terms of the mean specific heat between 0° and 100 C. He paid 
great attention to the thermometry, and the discrepancies of in- 
dividual measurements at any one point nowhere exceed 0-3 %, but 
he did not vary the conditions of the experiments materially, and it 
does not appear that the well-known constant errors of the method 
could have been completely eliminated by the devices which he 
adopted. The rapid rise from 25 to 75 may be due to radiation 
error from the hot water supply, and the subsequent fall of the 
curve to the inevitable loss of heat by evaporation of the boiling 
water on its way to the calorimeter. It must be observed, however, 
that there is another grave difficulty in the accurate determination 
of the specific heat of water near 100 C. by this method, namely, that 
the quantity actually observed is not the specific heat at the higher 
temperature /, but the mean specific heat over the range 18 to /. 
The specific heat itself can be deduced only by differentiating the 
curve of observation, which greatly increases the uncertainty. The 
peculiar advantage of the electric method of Callendar and Barnes, 
already referred to, is that the specific heat itself is determined over 
a range of 8° to io" at each point, by adding accurately measured 
quantities of heat to the water at the desired temperature in an 
isothermal enclosure, under perfectly steady conditions, without 
any possibility of evaporation or loss of heat in transference. These 
experiments, which have been extended by Barnes over the whole 
range o° to ioo°, agree very tvcll with Rowland and Griffiths in the 
rate of variation at 20° C, but show a rather flat minimum of specific 



heat in the neighbourhood of 38 to 40 6 C. At higher points the rate 
of variation is very similar to that of Regnault's curve, but taking the 
specific heat at 20 as the standard of reference, the actual values 
are nearly 0-56% less than Regnault's. It appears probable that 
his values for higher temperatures may be adopted- with this reduc- 
tion, which is further confirmed by the results of Reynolds and 
Moorby, and by those of Liidin. According to the electric method, 
the whole range of variation of the specific heat between io° and 
80° is only 0-5 %. Comparatively simple formulae, therefore, suffice 
for its expression to 1 in 10,000, which is beyond the limits of accuracy 
of the observations. It is more convenient in practice to use a few 
simple formulae, than to attempt to represent the whole range by a 
single complicated expression : — 

Below 20° C. s = 0-9982 +0-000,0045 (< — 40) 2 — 0-000,0005 if — 20) 3 . 
From 20 to 60 °, 5 = 0-9982+0-000,0045 (t— 40) 2 (5). 

( i = o-9944 + -ooo-04/+o-ooo,ooo9 t? (Regnault 
Above 6o° to 200° j corrd.) 

( 5 = 1-000+0-000,22 (t — 60), (Bosscha corrd.) 

The addition of the cubic term below 20° is intended to represent 
the somewhat more rapid change near the freezing-point. This 
effect is probably due, as suggested by Rowland, to the presence of 
a certain proportion of ice molecules in the liquid, which is also 
no doubt the cause of the anomalous expansion. Above 6o° C. 
Regnault's formula is adopted, the absolute values being simply 
diminished by a constant quantity 0-0056 to allow for the probable 
errors of his thermometry. Above 100 C, and for approximate 
work generally, the simpler formula of Bosscha, similarly corrected, 
is probably adequate. 

The following table of values, calculated from these formulae, 
is taken from the Brit. Assoc. Report, 1899, with a slight modification 



Specific Heat of Water in terms of Unit at 20 


C. 4- 1 80 Joules 


t°C. 


Joules. 


s. 


h. 


Rowland. 


0° 


4-208 


1 -0094 








5° 


4-202 


1 -0054 


5-037 


5-037 


10° 


4-191 


1-0027 


10-056 


10-058 


< 


4-184 


I -001 1 


15-065 


15-068 


20° 


4- 1 80 


I- 0000 


20-068 


20-071 


K 


4-177 


0-9992 


25-065 


25-067 


3°: 


4-175 


0-9987 


30-060 


30-057 


35 o 


4- T 73 


0-9983 


35-052 


35-053 


4°: 


4-173 


0-9982 


40-044 




5°° 


4-175 


0-9987 


50-028 




6o° 


4-180 


I-OOOO 


60-020 




7°: 


4-187 


1-0016 


70-028 




80° 


4-194 


1 -0033 


80-052 




90 


4-202 


1 -0053 


90-095 


Shaw 


100° 


4-211 


1-0074 


100-158 


Regnault 


120° 


4-231 


I-0I2I 


120-35 


120-73 


I4O 


4-254 


I-OI76 


140-65 


140-88 


160 


4-280 


1-0238 


161-07 


161-20 


180 


4-309 


I-O308 


181-62 


182-14 


200° 


4-341 


1-0384 


202-33 




220° 


4-376 


1-0467 


223-20 


■ -,-». — 1..„— ■ 



to allow for the increase in the specific heat below 20 C. This was 
estimated in 1899 as being equivalent to the addition of the constant 
quantity 0-020 to the values of the total heat h of the liquid as 
reckoned by the parabolic formula (5). This quantity is now, as the 
result of further experiments, added to the values of h, and also re- 
presented in the formula for the specific heat itself by the cubic term. 

The unit of comparison in the following table is taken as the 
specific heat of water at 20 C. for the reasons given below. This 
unit is taken as being 4-180 joules per gramme-degree-centigrade 
on the scale of the platinum thermometer, corrected to the absolute 
scale as explained in the article Thermometry, which has been shown 
to be practically equivalent to the hydrogen scale. The value 4-180 
joules at 20 C. is the mean between Rowland's corrected result 
4-181 and the value 4- 1 79, deduced from the experiments of Reynolds 
and Moorby on the assumption that the ratio of the mean specific 
heat o° to ioo° to that at 20° is 1 -0016, as given by the formulae repre- 
senting the results of Callendar and Barnes. This would indicate 
that Rowland's corrected values should, if anything, be lowered. In 
any case the value of the mechanical equivalent is uncertain to at 
least 1 in 2000. 

The mean specific heat, over any range of temperature, may be 
obtained by integrating the formulae between the limits required, 
or by taking the difference of the corresponding values of the total 
heat' h, and dividing by the range of temperature. The quantity 
actually observed by Rowland was the total heat. It may be re- 
marked that starting from the same value at 5°, for the sake of 
comparison, Rowland's values of the total heat agree to I in 5000 
with those calculated from the formulae. The values of the total 
heat observed by Regnault, as reduced by Shaw, also show a very 
fair agreement, considering the uncertainty of the units. It must 
be admitted that it is desirable to redetermine the variation of the 
specific heat above ioo° C. This is very difficult on account of the 
steam-pressurt, and could not easily be accomplished by the electrical 



CALORIMETRY 



67 



method. Callendar has, however, devised a continuous method of 
mixture, which appears to be peculiarly adapted to the purpose, 
and promises to give more certain results. In any case it may be 
remarked that formulae such as those of Jamin, Henrichsen, Baum- 
gartner, Winkelmann or Dieterici, which give far more rapid rates 
of increase than that of Regnault, cannot possibly be reconciled 
with his observations, or with those of Reynolds and Moorby, or 
Callendar and Barnes, and are certainly inapplicable above ioo° C. 

§ 16. On the Choice of the Thermal Unit. — So much uncertainty 
still prevails on this fundamental point that it cannot be passed 
over without reference. There are three possible kinds of unit, 
depending on the three fundamental methods already given: 
(1) the thermometric unit, or the thermal capacity of unit mass 
of a standard substance under given conditions of temperature 
and pressure on the scale of a standard thermometer. (2) The 
latent-heat unit, or the quantity of heat required to melt or 
vaporize unit mass of a standard substance under given conditions. 
This unit has the advantage of being independent of thermometry, 
but the applicability of these methods is limited to special cases, 
and the relation of the units to other units is difficult to determine. 
(3) The absolute or mechanical unit, the quantity of heat 
equivalent to a given quantity of mechanical or electrical energy. 
This can be very accurately realized, but is not so convenient as 
(1) for ordinary purposes. 

In any case it is necessary to define a thermometric unit of class 
(1). The standard substance must be a liquid. Water is always 
selected, although some less volatile liquid, such as aniline or mercury, 
would possess many advantages. With regard to the scale of tem- 
perature, there is very general agreement that the absolute scale 
as realized by the hydrogen or helium thermometer should be 
adopted as the ultimate standard of reference. But as the hydrogen 
thermometer is not directly available for the majority of experiments, 
it is necessary to use a secondary standard for the practical definition 
of the unit. The electrical resistance thermometer of platinum 
presents very great advantages for this purpose over the mercury 
thermometer in point of reproducibility, accuracy and adaptability 
to the practical conditions of experiment. The conditions of use 
of a mercury thermometer in a calorimetric experiment are neces- 
sarily different from those under which its corrections are determined, 
and this difference must inevitably give rise to constant errors in 
practical work. The primary consideration in the definition of a 
unit is to select that method which permits the highest order of 
accuracy in comparison and verification. For this reason the de- 
finition of the thermal unit will in the end probably be referred to 
a scale of temperature defined in terms of a standard platinum 
thermometer. 

There is more diversity of opinion with regard to the question 
of the standard temperature. Many authors, adopting Regnault's 
formula, have selected 0° C. as the standard temperature, but this 
cannot be practically realized in the case of water, and his formula 
is certainly erroneous at low temperatures. A favourite tempera- 
ture to select is 4 C, the temperature of maximum density, since 
at this point the specific heat at constant volume is the same as that 
at constant pressure But this is really of no consequence, since 
the specific heat at constant volume cannot be practically realized. 
The specific heat at 4 could be accurately determined at the mean 
over the range 0° to 8° keeping the jacket at 0° C. _ But the change 
appears to be rather rapid near 0°, the temperature is inconveniently 
low for ordinary calorimetric work, and the unit at 4 would be so 
much larger than the specific heat at ordinary temperatures that 
nearly all experiments would require reduction. The natural point 
to select would be that of minimum specific heat, but if this occurs 
at 40 C. it would be inconveniently high for practical realization 
except by the continuous electrical method. It was proposed by a 
committee of the British Association to select the temperature at 
which the specific heat was 4-200 joules, leaving the exact tempera- 
ture to be subsequently determined. It was supposed at the time, 
from the original reduction of Rowland's experiments, that this 
would be nearly at io c C, but it now appears that it may be as low 
as 5 C, which would be inconvenient. This is really only an 
absolute unit in disguise, and evades the essential point., which is 
the selection of a standard temperature for the water thermometric 
unit. A similar objection applies to selecting the temperature at 
which the specific heat is equal to its mean value between o" and 
100°. The mean calorie cannot be accurately realized in practice 
in any simple manner, and is therefore unsuitable as a standard of 
comparison. Its relation to the calorie at any given temperature, 
such as 15 or 20°, cannot be determined with the same degree of 
accuracy as the ratio of the specific heat at 15 to that at 20 , if the 
scale of temperature is given. The most practical unit is the 
calorie at 15 or 20 or some temperature in the range of ordinary 
practice. The temperature most generally favoured is 15 , but 20° 
would be more suitable for accurate work. These units differ only 
by II parts in 10,000 according to Callendar and Barnes, or by 13 
in 10,000 according to Rowland and Griffiths, so that the difference 



between them is of no great importance for ordinary purposes. 
But for purposes of definition it would be necessary to take the 
mean value of the specific heat over a given range of temperature, 
preferably at least 10°, rather than the specific heat at a point which 
necessitates reference to some formula of reduction for the rate of 
variation. The specific heat at 15 would be determined with 
reference to the mean over the range 10° to 20 , and that at 20 
from the range 15° to 25°. There can be no doubt that the range 
10° to 20° is too low for the accurate thermal regulation of the 
conditions of the experiment. The range 15 to 25° would be much 
more convenient from this point of view, and a mean temperature 
of 2o c is probably nearest the average of accurate calorimetric work. 
For instance 20° is the mean of the range of the experiments of 
Griffiths and of Rowland, and is close to that of Schuster and 
Gannon. It is readily attainable at any time in a modern laboratory 
with adequate heating arrangements, and is probably on the whole 
the most suitable temperature to select. 

§ 17. Specific Heat of Gases. — In the case of solids and liquids 
under ordinary conditions of pressure, the external work of 
expansion is so small that it may generally be neglected; but 
with gases or vapours, or with liquids near the critical point, the 
external work becomes so large that it is essential to specify the 
conditions under which the specific heat is measured. The most 
important cases are, the specific heats (1) at constant volume; 
(2) at constant pressure; (3) at saturation pressure in the*case of 
a liquid or vapour. In consequence of the small thermal capacity 
of gases and vapours per unit volume at ordinary pressures, the 
difficulties of direct measurement are almost insuperable except 
in case (2). Thus the direct experimental evidence is somewhat 
meagre and conflicting, but the question of the relation of the 
specific heats of gases is one of great interest in connexion with 
the kinetic theory and the constitution of the molecule. The 
well-known experiments of Regnault and Wiedemann on the 
specific heat of gases at constant pressure agree in showing that 
the molecular specific heat, or the thermal capacity of the mole- 
cular weight in grammes, is approximately independent of the 
temperature and pressure in case of the more stable diatomic 
gases, such as H 2 ,0 2 , N 2 , CO, &c, and has nearly the same value 
for each gas. They also indicate that it is much larger, and 
increases considerably with rise of temperature, in the case of 
more condensible vapours, such as Cl 2 , Br 2 , or more complicated 
molecules, such as C0 2 ,N 2 0, NH 3 , C2H4. The direct determina- 
tion of the specific heat at constant volume is extremely difficult, 
but has been successfully attempted by Joly with his steam 
calorimeter, in the case of air and C0 2 . Employing pressures 
between 7 and 27 atmospheres, he found that the specific heat of 
air between io° and 100° C. increased very slightly with increase 
of density, but that of C0 2 increased nearly 3 % between 7 and 2 1 
atmospheres. The following formulae represent his results' for 
the specific heat $ at constant volume in terms of the density d in 
gms. per c. c. : — 

Air, i = o-i7i5+o-028(f, 

C0 2 , s = o-i65+o-2i3d+o-34d 2 . 

§ 18. Ratio of Specific Heats. — According to the elementary kinetic 
theory of an ideal gas, the molecules of which are so small and so 
far apart that their mutual actions may be neglected, the kinetic 
energy of translation of the molecules is proportional to the absolute 
temperature, and is equal to 3/2 of pv, the product of the pressure 
and the volume, per unit mass. The expansion per degree at 
constant pressure is v/8 = R/p. The external work of expansion 
per degree is equal to R, being the product of the pressure and the 
expansion, and represents the difference of the specific heats S — s, 
at constant pressure and volume, assuming as above that the in- 
ternal work of expansion is negligible. If the molecules are supposed 
to be like smooth, hard, elastic spheres, incapable of receiving any 
other kind of energy except that of translation, the specific heat at 
constant volume would be the increase per degree of the kinetic 
energy namely 3pv/2d = 3 R/2 , that at constant pressure would be 
5.R/2, and the ratio of the specific heats would be 5/3 or 1 -666. This 
appears to be actually the case for monatomic gases such as mercury 
vapour (Kundt and Warburg, 1876), argon and helium (Ramsay, 
1896). For diatomic or compound gases Clerk Maxwell supposed 
that the molecule would also possess energy of rotation, and en- 
deavoured to prove that in this case the energy would be equally 
divided between the six degrees of freedom, three of translation 
and three of rotation, if the molecule were regarded as a rigid body 
incapable of vibration-energy. In this case we should have s = $R, 
S = 4-R, 5/5 = 4/3 = 1-333. In 1879 Maxwell considered itoneof the 
greatest difficulties which the kinetic theory had yet encountered, 
that in spite of the many' other degrees of freedom of vibration 
revealed by the spectroscope, the experimental value of the ratio 



68 



CALOVIUS-^CALPURNIUS 



S/s was 1-40 for so many gases, instead of being less than 4/3. Some- 
what later L. Boltzmann suggested that a diatomic molecule regarded 
as a rigid dumb-bell or figure of rotation, might have only five 
effective degrees of freedom, since the energy of rotation about the 
axis of symmetry could not be altered by collisions between the 
molecules. The theoretical value of the ratio S/s in this case would 
be the required 7/5. For a rigid molecule on this theory the smallest 
value possible would be 4/3. Since much smaller values are found 
for more complex molecules, we may suppose that, in these cases, 
the energy of rotation of a polyatomic molecule may be greater 
than its energy of translation, or else that heat is expended in 
splitting up molecular aggregates, and increasing energy of vibration. 
A hypothesis doubtfully attributed to Maxwell is that each addi- 
tional atom in the molecule is equivalent to two extra degrees of 
freedom. From an m-atomic molecule we should then have 
S/s~l+al(2tn + i). This givesaseries of ratios 5/3, 7/5, 9/7, 11/9, 
&c, for I, 2, 3, 4, &c, atoms in the molecule, values which fall 
within the limits of experimental error in many cases. It is not at 
all clear, however, that energy of vibration should bear a constant 
ratio to that of translation, although this would probably be the 
case for rotation. For the simpler gases, which are highly dia- 
thermanous and radiate badly even at high temperature, the energy 
of vibration is probably very small, except under the special con- 
ditions which produce luminosity in flames and electric discharges. 
For such gases, assuming a constant ratio of rotation to translation, 
the specific heat at low pressures would be very nearly constant. 
For more complex molecules the radiative and absorptive powers 
are known to be much greater. The energy of vibration may be 
appreciable at ordinary temperatures, and would probably increase 
more rapidly than that of translation with rise of temperature, 
especially near a point of dissociation. This would account for 
an increase of S, and a diminution of the ratio S/s, with rise of 
temperature which apparently occurs in many vapours. The ex- 
perimental evidence, however, is somewhat conflicting, and further 
investigations are very desirable on the variation of specific heat 
with temperature. Given the specific heat as a function of the 
temperature, its variation with pressure may be determined from 
the characteristic equation of the gas. The direct methods of 
measuring the ratio S/s, by the velocity of sound and by adiabatic 
expansion, are sufficiently described in many text-books. 

I 19. Atomic and Molecular Heats.-— The ideal atomic heat is the 
thermal capacity of a gramme-atom in the ideal state of monatomic 
gas at constant volume. . This would be nearly three calories. For 
a diatomic gas, the molecular heat would be nearly five calories, 
or the atomic heat of a gas in the diatomic state would be 2-5. Esti- 
mated at constant pressure the atomic heat would be 3-5. Some 
authors adopt 2-5 and some 3-5 for the ideal atomic heat. The 
atomic heat of a metal in the solid state is in most cases larger than 
six calories at ordinary temperatures. Considering the wide varia- 
tions in the physical condition and melting points, the comparatively 
close agreement of the atomic heats of the metals at ordinary tem- 
peratures, known as Dulong and Petit's Law, is very remarkable. 
The specific heats as a rule increase with rise of temperature, in some 
cases, e.g. iron and nickel, very rapidly. According to W. A. Tilden 
{Phil. Trans., 1900), the atomic heats of pure nickel and cobalt, as 
determined from experiments at the boiling-points of O2, and CO2, 
diminish so rapidly at temperatures below 0° C. as to suggest that 
they would reach the value 2-42 at the absolute zero. This is the 
value of the minimum of atomic heat calculated by Perry from 
diatomic hydrogen, but the observations themselves might be 
equally well represented by taking the imaginary limit 3, since the 
quantity actually observed is the mean specific heat between 0° and 
— 182-5° C. Subsequent experiments on other metals at low tem- 
peratures did not indicate a similar diminution of specific heat, so 
that it may be doubted whether the atomic heats really approach 
the ideal value at the absolute zero. No doubt there must be 
approximate relations between the atomic and molecular heats of 
similar elements and compounds, but considering the great variations 
of specific heat with temperature and physical state, in alloys, 
mixtures or solutions, and in allotropic or other modifications, it 
would be idle to expect that the specific heat of a compound could 
be accurately deduced by any simple additive process from that of 
its constituents. 

Authorities. — Joule's Scientific Papers (London, 1890); Ames 
and Griffiths, Reports to the International Congress (Paris, 1900), 
" On the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat," and " On the Specific 
Heat of Water ' ' ; Griffiths, Thermal Measurement of Energy (Cam- 
bridge, 1901); Callendar and Barnes, Phil. Trans. A, 1901, "On 
the Variation of the Specific Heat of Water"; for combustion 
methods, see article Thermochemistry, and treatises by Thomsen, 
Pattison-Muir and Berthelot; see also articles Thermodynamics 
and Vaporization. (H. L. C.) 

CALOVIUS, ABRAHAM (1612-1686), German Lutheran 
divine, was born at Mohrungen in east Prussia, on the 16th of 
April 1612. After studying at Konigsberg, in 1650 he was 
appointed professor of theology at Wittenberg, where he after- 
wards became general superintendent and primarius. He died 
on the 25th of February 1686. Calovius was the most noteworthy 



of the champions of Lutheran orthodoxy in the 17 th century. 
He strongly opposed the Catholics, Calvinists and Socinians, 
attacked in particular the reconciliation policy or " syncretism " 
of Georg Calixtus (cf. the Consensus repetitus fidei vere lutheranae, 
1665), and as a writer of polemics he had few equals. His chief 
dogmatic work, Systema locorum theologicorum (12 vols. 1655- 
1677), represents the climax of Lutheran scholasticism. In his 
Biblia Illustrata (4 vols.), written from the point of view of a 
very strict belief in inspiration, his object is to refute the state- 
ments made by Hugo Grotius in his Commentaries. His Historia 
Syncretistica (1682) was suppressed. 

CALPURNIUS, TITUS, Roman bucolic poet, surnamed Siculus 
from his birthplace or from his imitation of . the style of the 
Sicilian Theocritus, most probably nourished during the reign of 
Nero. Eleven eclogues have been handed down to us under his 
name, of which the last four, from metrical considerations and 
express MS. testimony, are now generally attributed to Nemesi- 
anus (q.v.), who lived in the time of the emperor Carus and his 
sons (latter half of the 3rd century a.d.). Hardly anything is 
known of the life of Calpurnius; we gather from the poems 
themselves (in which he is obviously represented by "Cory don ") 
that he was in poor circumstances and was on the point of 
emigrating to Spain, when " Meliboeus " came to his aid. 
Through his influence Calpurnius apparently secured a post at 
Rome. The time at which Calpurnius lived has been much 
discussed, but all the indications seem to point to the time of Nero. 
The emperor is described as a handsome youth, like Mars and 
Apollo, whose accession marks the beginning of a new golden age, 
prognosticated by the appearance of a comet, doubtless the same 
that appeared some time before the death of Claudius; he 
exhibits splendid games in the amphitheatre (probably the 
wooden amphitheatre erected by Nero in 57); and in the words 

maternis causam qui vicit Iulis 1 (i. 45), 
there is a reference to the speech delivered in Greek by Nero on 
behalf of the Ilienses (Suetonius, Nero, 7; Tacitus, Annals, xii. 
58), from whom the Julii derived their family. 2 Meliboeus, the 
poet's patron, has been variously identified with Columella, 
Seneca the philosopher, and C. Calpurnius Piso. Although the 
sphere of Meliboeus's literary activity (as indicated in iv. 53) 
suits none of these, what is known of Calpurnius Piso fits in well 
with what is said of Meliboeus by the poet, who speaks of his 
generosity, his intimacy with the emperor, and his interest in 
tragic poetry. His claim is further supported by the poem De 
Laude Pisonis (ed. C. F. Weber, 1859) which has come down t© us 
without the name of the author, but which there is considerable 
reason for attributing to Calpurnius. 3 The poem exhibits a 
striking similarity with the eclogues in metre, language and 
subject-matter. The author of the Laus is young, of respectable 
family and desirous of gaining the favour of Piso as his Maecenas. 
Further, the similarity between the two names can hardly be 
accidental; it is suggested that the poet may have been adopted 
by the courtier, or that he was the son of a freedman of Piso. 
The attitude of the author of the Laus towards the subject of the 
panegyric seems to show less intimacy than the relations between 
Corydon and Meliboeus in the eclogues, and there is internal 
evidence that the Laus was written during the reign of Claudius 
(Teuffel-Schwabe, Hist, of Rom. Lit. § 306,6). 

Mention may here be made of the fragments of two short 
hexameter poems in an Einsiedeln MS., obviously belonging to 
the time of Nero, which if not written by Calpurnius, were 
imitated from him. 

1 Iulis for in ulnis according to the best MS. tradition. 

2 According to Dr R. Garnett (and Mr Greswell, as stated in 
Conington's Virgil, i. p. 123, note) the emperor referred to is the 
younger Gordian (a.d. 238). His arguments in favour of this will 
be found in the article on Calpurnius by him in the 9th edition of 
the Encyclopaedia Britannica and in the Journal of Philology, xvi., 
1888; see in answer J. P. Postgate, "The Comet of Calpurnius 
Siculus " in Classical Review, June I902. Dean Merivale {Hist, of the 
Romans under the Empire, ch. 60) and Pompei, " Intorno al Tempo 
del Poeta Calpurnio " in Atti del Istituto Veneto, v. 6 (1880), identify 
the amphitheatre with the Colosseum (Flavian amphitheatre) and 
assign Calpurnius to the reign of Domitian. 

3 It has been variously ascribed to Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, Statius 
and Saleius Bassus. 



CALTAGIRONE— CALVART 



69 



Although there is nothing original in Calpurnius, he is " a 
skilful literary craftsman." Of his models the chief is Virgil, of 
whom (under the name of Tityrus) he speaks with great en- 
thusiasm; he is also indebted to Ovid and Theocritus. Cal- 
purnius is " a fair scholar, and an apt courtier, and not devoid of 
real poetical feeling. The bastard style of pastoral cultivated by 
him, in which the description of nature is made the writer's 
pretext, while ingenious flattery is his real purpose, nevertheless 
excludes genuine pleasure, and consequently genuine poetical 
achievement. He may be fairly compared to the minor poets of 
the reign of Anne " (Garnett). 

Calpurnius was first printed in 1471, together with Silius Italicus 
and has been frequently republished, generally with Gratius 
Faliscus and Nemesianus. The separate authorship of the eclogues 
of Calpurnius and Nemesianus was established by M. Haupt's De 
Carminibus bucolicis Calpurnii et Nemesiani (1854). Editions by 
H. Schenkl (1885), with full introduction and index verborum, and by 
C. H. Keene (1887), with introduction, commentary and appendix. 
English verse translation by E. J. L. Scott (1891) ; see H. E. Butler, 
Post-Augustan Poetry (Oxford, 1909), pp. 150 foil., and F. Skutsch 
in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencydopddie, iii. 1 (1897). (J. H. F.) 

CALTAGIRONE, a city and episcopal see of the province of 
Catania, Sicily, situated 1999 ft. above sea-level, 36 m. S.W. 
of Catania direct (55 m. by rail). Pop. (1881) 25,978; (1901) 
town 35,116; commune 45,956. It is well built, and is said to be 
the most civilized provincial town in Sicily. Extensive Sicel 
cemeteries have been explored to the north of the town (Not. 
Scavi, 1904, 65), and a Greek necropolis of the 6th and 5th 
centuries B.C. has been found to the south-east (ibid. 132). 
Remains of buildings of Roman date have also been discovered ; 
but the name of the ancient city which stood here is unknown. 
The present name is a corruption of the Saracen Kalat-al-Girche 
(the castle of Girche, the chieftain who fortified it). 

CALTANISETTA, a town and episcopal see of Sicily, the 
capital of a province of the same name, 60 m. S.E. of Palermo 
direct and 83 m. by rail, situated 1930 ft. above sea-level. 
Pop. (1901) 43,303. The town is of Saracenic origin, as its name 
Kalat-al-Nisa, the "Ladies' Castle," indicates, and some ruins 
of the old castle (called Pietrarossa) still exist. Otherwise the 
town contains no buildings of artistic or historical interest, but it 
commands striking views. It is the centre of the Sicilian sulphur 
industry and the seat of a royal school of mines. Two miles east 
is the interesting Norman abbey of S. Spirito. 

CALTROP (from the Mid. Eng. calketrappe, probably derived 
from the Lat. calx, a heel, and trappa, Late Lat. for a snare), an 
iron ball, used as an obstacle against cavalry, with four spikes so 
arranged, that however placed in or on the ground, one spike 
always points upwards. It is also the botanical name for several 
species of thistles. 

CALUIRE-ET-CUIRE, a town of eastern France, in the 
department of Rhone, 25 m. N. by E. of Lyons by rail. Pop. 
(1906) 9255. It has manufactures of coarse earthenware and 
hard-ware, copper and bronze foundries and nursery-gardens. 

CALUMET (Norm. Fr. form of chalumet, from Lat. calamus, a 
reed), the name given by the French in Canada to the " peace- 
pipe " of the American Indians. This pipe occupied among the 
tribes a position of peculiar symbolic significance, and was the 
object of profound veneration. It was smoked on all ceremonial 
occasions, even on declarations of war, but its special use was at 
the making of treaties of peace. It was usually about 2§ ft. long, 
and in the west the bowl was made of red pipes tone (catlinite), a 
fine-grained, easily-worked stone of a rich red colour found 
chiefly in the Coteau des Prairies west of Big Stone Lake, Dakota. 
The quarries were formerly neutral ground among the warring 
Indian tribes, many sacred traditions being associated with the 
locality and its product (Longfellow, Hiawatha, i.). The pipe 
stem was of reed decorated with eagles' quills or women's hair. 
Native tobacco mixed with willow-bark or sumac leaves was 
smoked. The pipe was offered as a supreme proof of hospitality 
to distinguished strangers, and its refusal was regarded as a 
grievous affront. In the east and south-east, the bowl was of 
white stone, sometimes pierced with several stem holes so that 
many persons might smoke at once. 

See Joseph D. Macguire (exhaustive report, 640 pages), " Pipes and 



Smoking Customs of the American Aborigines" in Smithsonian Repott 
(American Bureau of Ethnology) for 1897, vol. i. ; and authorities 
quoted in Handbook of American Indians (Washington,^l907). 

CALUMPIT, a town of the province of Bulacan, Luzon, 
Philippine Islands, at the junction of the Quingua river with the 
Rio Grande de la Pampanga, about 25 m. N.W. of Manila. 
Pop. (1963) 13,897. It is served by the Manila & Dagupan 
railway, and the bridge across the Rio Grande is one of the 
longest in the Philippines. The surrounding country is a fertile 
plain, producing large quantities of rice, as well as sugar, Indian 
corn and a variety of fruits. Calumpit has a large rice-mill 
and one of the largest markets in the Philippines. The bridge, 
convent and church of the town were fired and completely 
destroyed by insurgent troops in 1899. The language is Tagalog. 

CALVADOS, a department of north-western France, formed 
in 1790 out of Bessin, Cinglais, Hiemois, Bocage, the Campagne 
de Caen, Auge and the western part of Lieuvin. Pop. (1906) 
403,431. Area, 2197 sq. m. It received its name from a ledge 
of rocks, stretching along the coast for a distance of about 15 m. 
between the mouths of the rivers Orne and Vire. It is bounded N. 
by the English Channel, E. by the department of Eure, S. by that 
of Orne, W. by that of Manche. The Bocage, or south-western 
part of the department, is elevated, being crossed from south-east 
to north-west by the hills of Normandy, the highest of which is 
1 197 ft.; the rest of the surface is gently undulating, and consists 
of extensive valleys watered by numerous streams which fall into 
the English Channel. The coast, formed by cliffs, sandy beaches 
or reefs, is generally inaccessible, except at the mouths of the 
principal rivers, such as the Touques, the Dives, the Orne and 
the Vire, which are navigable at high tide for several miles inland. 
Trouville is the chief of the numerous coast resorts. The climate, 
though humid and variable, is healthy. The raising of cattle, 
sheep and horses is the mainstay of the agriculture of the de- 
partment. Pasture is good and abundant in the east and north- 
west, and there is a large export trade in the butter, eggs and 
cheese (Camembert, Livarot, Pont l'Evfique) of these districts, 
carried on by Honfleur, Isigny and other ports. The plain of; 
Caen is a great centre for horse breeding. Wheat, oats, barley, 
colza and potatoes are the chief crops. The orchards of Auge 
and Bessin produce a superior kind of cider, of which upwards of 
40,000,000 gallons are made in the department; a large quantity 
of cider brandy (eau-de-vie de Calvados) is distilled. Poultry 
to a considerable amount is sent to the Paris markets, and there 
is a large output of honey and wax. The spinning and weaving 
of wool and cotton are the chief industries. Besides these, 
paper-mills, oil-mills, tanneries, saw-mills, shipbuilding yards, 
rope-works, dye-works, distilleries and bleach-fields, scattered 
throughout the department, give employment to a number of 
hands. There are productive iron-mines and building-stone, 
slate and lime are plentiful. Fisheries, chiefly of lobster, oyster 
(Courseulles), herring and mackerel, are prosecuted. Coal, timber, 
grain, salt-fish and cement are among the imports; exports 
include iron, dairy products and sand. Caen and Honfleur are 
the most important commercial ports. There is a canal 9 m. in 
length from Caen to Ouistreham on the coast. The department 
is served by the Ouest-Etat railway. It is divided into the six 
arrondissements (38 cantons, 763 communes) of Caen, Falaise, 
Bayeux, Vire, Lisieux and Pont 1'Eveque. Caen, the capital, is the 
seat of a court of appeal and the centre of an acadimie (educa- 
tional division). The department forms the diocese of Bayeux, 
in the ecclesiastical province of Rouen, and belongs to the region 
of the III. army-corps. The other principal towns are Falaise, 
Lisieux, Conde-sur-Noireau, Vire, Honfleur and Trouville (q.v.) . 

Amongst the great number of medieval churches which 
the department possesses, the fine Gothic chprch of St. Pierre- 
sur-Dives is second in importance only to those of Lisieux and 
Bayeux; that of Norrey, a good example of the Norman- Gothic 
style, and that of Tour-en-Bessin, in which Romanesque and 
Gothic architecture are mingled, are of great interest. Fontaine- 
Henri has a fine chateau of the 15th and 16th centuries. 

CALVART, DENIS (1540-1619), Flemish painter, was born at 
Antwerp. After studying landscape-painting for some time in 



70 



CALVARY—CALVI 



his native city he went to Bologna, where he perfected himself in 
the anatomy of the human form under Prospero Fontaha, and so 
completely lost the mannerism of Flemish art that his paintings 
appear to be the work of an Italian. From Bologna he went to 
Rome, where he assisted Lorenzo Sabbatini (1533-1577) in his 
works for the papal palace, and devoted much of his time to 
copying and studying the works of Raphael. He ultimately 
returned to Bologna and founded a school, of which the greatest 
ornaments are Guido and Domenichino. His works are especially 
admired for the power of grouping and colouring which they 
display. 

CALVARY, the conventional English rendering of the calvaria 
of the Vulgate, the Latin version of the Greek Kpaviov, both 
meaning " skull " and representing the Hebrew Golgotha, the 
name given to the scene of Christ's crucifixion. The term " a 
Calvary " is applied to a sculptured representation of the 
Crucifixion, either inside a church, or adjoining one in the open 
air. There are many examples of the latter in France, Italy 
and Spain. Among the most important are the Sacro Monte 
(i486) at Varallo in Piedmont, and those at Guimiliau (.1581), 
Plougastel (1602), St Thegonnec (1610), and Pleyben near 
Quimper (1670), in Brittany, all in good preservation., 

CALV& EMMA (1864- ), Spanish operatic soprano, was 
born at Madrid, and trained in Paris, making her first important 
appearance in opera at Brussels in 1882. She sang mainly in 
Paris for some years, but in 1892 was first engaged at Covent 
Garden, London, and at once became famous as the most vivid 
Carmen (in Bizet's opera) of the day. 

CALVERLEY, CHARLES STUART (1 831-1884), English poet 
and wit, and the literary father of what may be called the 
university school of humour, was born at Martley in Worcester- 
shire on the 2 2nd of December 1 83 1 . His father, the Rev. Henry 
Blayds, resumed in 1852 the old family name of Calverley, which 
his grandfather had exchanged for Blayds in 1807. It was as 
Charles Stuart Blayds that most of the son's university distinc- 
tions were attained. He went up to Balliol from Harrow in 1850, 
and was soon known in Oxford as the most daring and most 
high-spirited undergraduate of his time. He was a universal 
favourite, a delightful companion, a brilliant scholar and the 
playful enemy of all " dons." In 1851 he won the Chancellor's 
prize for Latin verse, and it is said that the entire exercise was 
written in an afternoon, when his friends had locked him into his 
rooms, declining to let him out till he had finished what they were 
confident would prove the prize poem. A year later he took his 
name off the books, to avoid the consequences of a college 
escapade, and migrated to Christ's College, Cambridge. Here he 
was again successful in Latin verse, and remains the unique 
example of an undergraduate who has won the Chancellor's prize 
at both universities. In 1856 he took second place in the first 
class in the Classical Tripos. He was elected fellow of Christ's 
(1858), published Verses and Translations in 1862, and was called 
to the bar in 1865. Owing to an accident while skating he was 
prevented from following up a professional career, and during 
the last years of his life he was an invalid. His Translations into 
English and Latin appeared in 1866; his Theocritus translated into 
English Verse in 1869; Fly Leaves in 1872; and Literary Remains 
in 1885. He died on the 17th of February 1884. Calverley was 
one of the most brilliant men of his day; and, had he enjoyed 
health, might have achieved distinction in any career he chose. 
Constitutionally indolent, he was endowed with singular gifts in 
every department of culture; he was a scholar, a musician, an 
athlete and a brilliant talker. What is left us marks only a small 
portion of his talent, but his sparkling, dancing verses, which have 
had many clever imitators, are still without a rival in their own 
line. His humour was illumined by good nature ; his satire was 
keen but kind; his laughter was of that human sort which is often 
on the verge of tears. Imbued with the classical spirit, he intro- 
duced into the making of light verse the polish and elegance of the 
great masters, and even in its most whimsical mood his verse is 
raised to the level of poetry by the saving excellence of style. 

His Complete Works,' with a biographical notice by Sir W. J. 
Sendall, appeared in 1901. (A, Wa.) 



CALVERT, the name of three English artists: Charles (1785- 
1852), a well-known landscape-painter; Edward (1803-1883), 
an important wood-engraver and follower of Blake; and 
Frederick, an excellent topographical draughtsman, whose 
work in water-colour is represented at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, and who published a volume of Picturesque Views in 
Staffordshire and Shropshire (1830). 

CALVERT, FREDERICK CRACE (1819-1873), English chemist, 
was born in London on the 14th of November 1819. From about 
1836 till 1846 he lived in France, where, after a course of study at 
Paris, he became manager of some chemical works, later acting as 
assistant to M. E. Chevreul. On his return to England he settled 
in Manchester as a consulting chemist, and was appointed 
professor of chemistry at the Royal Institution in that city. 
Devoting himself almost entirely to industrial chemistry, he 
gave much attention to the manufacture of coal-tar products, 
and particularly carbolic acid, for the production of which he 
established large works in Manchester in 1865. Besides con- 
tributing extensively to the English and French scientific 
journals, he published a work on Dyeing and Calico-Priniing. 
He died in Manchester on the 24th of October 1873. 

CALVERT, SIR HARRY, Bart. (c. 1763-1826), British general,. 
was probably born early in 1763 at Hampton, near London. He 
was educated at Harrow, and at the age of fifteen entered the 
army. In: the following year he served with his regiment in 
America, being present at the siege of Charleston, and serving 
through the campaign of Lord Cornwallis which ended with the 
surrender of Yorktown. From 1781 to 1783 he was a prisoner of 
war. Returning to England in 1784, he next saw active service 
in 1 793-1 794 in the Low Countries, where he was aide-de-camp to 
the duke of York, and in 1795 was engaged on a confidential 
mission to Brunswick and Berlin. In 1 799, having already served 
as deputy adjutant general, he was made adjutant general, 
holding the post till 1818. In this capacity he effected many 
improvements in the organization and discipline of the service. 
He greatly improved the administration of the army medical and 
hospital department, introduced regimental schools, developed 
the two existing military colleges (since united at Sandhurst), and 
was largely responsible for the founding of the Duke of York's 
school, Chelsea. In recognition of his work as adjutant general 
he was made a G.C.B. (181 5), and, on retiring from office, received 
a baronetcy (1818). In 1820 he was made governor of Chelsea 
hospital. He died on the 3rd of September 1826, at Middle 
Claydon, Buckinghamshire. 

CALVES' HEAD CLUB, a club established shortly after his 
death in derision of the memory of Charles I. Its chief meeting 
was held on the 30th of each January, the anniversary of the 
king's execution, when the dishes served were a cod's head to 
represent the individual, Charles Stuart; a pike representing 
tyranny; a boar's head representing the king preying on his 
subjects; and calves' heads representing Charles as king and his 
adherents. On the table an axe held the place of honour. After 
the banquet a copy of the king's Ikon Basilike was burnt, and 
the toast was " To those worthy patriots who killed the tyrant." 
After the Restoration the club met secretly. The first mention 
of it is in a tract reprinted in the Harleian Miscellany entitled 
" The Secret History of the Calves' Head Club." The club 
survived till 1734, when the diners were mobbed owing to the 
popular ill-feeling which their outrages on good taste provoked, 
and the riot which ensued put a final stop to the meetings. 

CALVI, a sea-port in Corsica, capital of an arrondissement in 
the N.W. of the island, 112 m. N. of Ajaccio by road. Pop. 
(1906) 1967. It is situated on the Bay of Calvi, in a malarial 
region, and is the port in Corsica nearest to France, being 109 m. 
from Antibes; the harbour, however, is exposed to the east and 
north-east winds. The modern town lies at the foot of a rock, on 
which stands the old town with its steep rock-paved streets and 
fortified walls, commanded by the Fort Muzello. Fishing is 
carried on, and timber, oil, wine, lemons and other sub-tropical 
fruits are exported to some extent. The most important buildings 
are the old palace of the Genoese governor, used as barracks, and 
the church (16th century), with the monument of the. Baglioni 



CALVIN 



7i 



family, which was intimately associated with the history of the 
town. 

Calvi was founded in the 13th century and in 1278 passed into 
the hands of the Genoese. From that date it was remarkable for 
its adherence to their side, especially in 1553 when it repulsed two 
attacks of the united forces of the French and Turks. In recogni- 
tion thereof the Genoese senate caused the words Civitas Calvi 
semper fidelis to be carved on the chief gate of the city, which still 
preserves the inscription. In 1794 Calvi was captured by the 
English, but it was retaken by the Corsicans in the following 
year. 

CALVIN, JOHN (1500-1564), Swiss divine and reformer, was 
born at Noyon, in Picardy, on the 10th of July 1 509. His father, 
Gerard Cauvin or Calvin, 1 was a notary-apostolic and procurator- 
fiscal for the lordship of Noyon, besides holding certain ecclesi- 
astical offices in connexion with that diocese. The name of his 
mother was Jeanne le Franc; she was the daughter of an inn- 
keeper at Cambrai, who afterwards came to reside at Noyon. 
Gerard Cauvin was esteemed as a man of considerable sagacity 
and prudence, and his wife was a godly and attractive lady. She 
bore him five sons, of whom John was the second. By a second 
wife there were two daughters. 

Of Calvin's early years only a few notices remain. His father 
destined him from the first for an ecclesiastical career, and paid 
for his education in the household of the noble family of Hangest 
de Montmor. In May 1521 he was appointed to a chaplaincy 
attached to the altar of La Gesine in the cathedral of Noyon, and 
received the tonsure. The actual duties of the office were in such 
cases carried out by ordained and older men for a fraction of the 
stipend. The plague having visited Noyon, the young Hangests 
were sent to Paris in August 1523, and Calvin accompanied them, 
being enabled to do so by the income received from his benefice. 
He lived with his uncle and attended as an out-student the 
College de la Marche, at that time under the regency of Mathurin 
Cordier, a man of character, learning and repute as a teacher, 
who in later days followed his pupil to Switzerland, taught at 
Neuchatel, and died in Geneva in 1 564. In dedicating to him his 
Commentary on the First Epistle to the Thessalonians, as " eximiae 
pietatis et doctrinae viro," he declares that so had he been aided 
by his instruction that whatever subsequent-progress he had made 
he only regarded as received from him, and " this," he adds, " I 
wish to testify to posterity that if any utility accrue to any from 
my writings they may acknowledge it as having in part flowed 
from thee." From the College de la Marche he removed to the 
College de Montaigu, 2 where the atmosphere was more ecclesi- 
astical and where he had for instructor a Spaniard who is 
described as a man of learning and to whom Calvin was indebted 
for some sound training in dialectics and the scholastic philosophy. 
He speedily outstripped all his competitors in grammatical 
studies, and by his skill and acumen as a student of philosophy, 
and in the college disputations gave fruitful promise of that 
consummate excellence as a reasoner in the department of 
speculative truth which he afterwards displayed. Among his 
friends were the Hangests (especially Claude), Nicolas and 
Michel Cop, sons of the king's Swiss physician, and his own 
kinsman Pierre Robert, better known as Olivetan. Such friend- 
ships testify both to the worth and the attractiveness of his 
character, and contradict the old legend that he was an unsociable 
misanthrope. Pleased with his success, the canons at Noyon 
gave him the curacy of St Martin de Marteville in September 
1527. After holding this preferment for nearly two years, he 
exchanged it in July 1529 for the cure of Pont L'fiveque, a village 

1 The family name of Calvin seems to have been written indiffer- 
ently Cauvin, Chauve, Chauvin, Calvus, Calvinus. In the con- 
temporary notices of Gerard and his family, in the capitular registers 
of the cathedral at Noyon, the name is always spelt Cauuin. The 
anagram of Calvin is Alcuin, and this in its Latinized fortn Alcuinus 
appears in two editions of his Institutio as that of the author (Audin, 
Vie de Calvin, i. 520). The syndics of Geneva address him in a letter 
written in 1540, and still preserved, as " Docteur Caulvin." In his 
letters written in French he usually signs himself " Jean Calvin." 
He affected the title of " Maitre," for what reason is not known. 

2 Pierre de Montaigu refoundcd this institution in 1388. Erasmus 
and Ignatius Loyola also studied here. 



near to Noyon, and the place to which his father originally 
belonged. He appears to have been not a little elated by his 
early promotion, and although not ordained, he preached several 
sermons to the people. But though the career of ecclesiastical 
preferment was thus early opened to him, Calvin was destined 
not to become a priest. A change came over the mind both of his 
father and himself respecting his future career. Gerard Cauvin 
began to suspect that he had not chosen the most lucrative 
profession for his son, and that the law offered to a youth of his 
talents and industry a more promising sphere. 3 He was also now 
out of favour with the cathedral chapter at Noyon. It is said also 
that John himself, on the advice of his relative, Pierre Robert 
Olivetan, the first translator of the Bible into French, had begun 
to study the Scriptures and to dissent from the Roman worship. 
At any rate he readily complied with his father's suggestion, and 
removed from Paris to Orleans (March 1528) in order to study 
law under Pierre Taisan de l'Etoile, the most distinguished 
jurisconsult of his day. The university atmosphere here was 
less ascetic than at Paris, but Calvin's ardour knew no slackening, 
and such was his progress in legal knowledge that he was fre- 
quently called upon to lecture, in the absence of one or other of 
the regular staff. Other studies, however, besides those of law 
occupied him while in this city, and moved by the humanistic 
spirit of the age he eagerly developed his classical knowledge. 
" By protracted vigils," says Beza, " he secured indeed a solid 
erudition and an excellent memory; but it is probable he at the 
same time sowed the seeds of that disease (dyspepsia) which 
occasioned him various illnesses in after life, and at last brought 
upon him premature death." 4 His friends here were Melchior 
Wolmar, a German schoolmaster and a man of exemplary 
scholarship and character, Francois Daniel, Francois de Connam 
and Nicolas Duchemin; to these his earliest letters were 
written. 

From Orleans Calvin went to Bourges in the autumn of 1529 
to continue his studies under the brilliant Italian, Andrea Alciati 
(1492-1550), whom Francis I. had invited into France and 
settled as a professor of law in that university. His friend 
Daniel went with him, and Wolmar followed a year later. By 
Wolmar Calvin was taught Greek, and introduced to the study of 
the New Testament in the original, a service which he gratefully 
acknowledges in one of his printed works. 5 The conversation of 
Wolmar may also have been of use to him in his consideration of 
the doctrines of the Reformation, which were now beginning to 
be widely diffused through France. Twelve years had elapsed 
since Luther had published his theses against indulgences — 
twelve years of intense excitement and anxious discussion, not 
in Germany only, but in almost all the adjacent countries. In 
France there had not been as yet any overt revolt against the 
Church of Rome, but multitudes were in sympathy with any 
attempt to improve the church by education, by purer morals, 
by better preaching and by a return to the primitive and un- 
corrupted faith. Though we cannot with Beza regard Calvin at 
this time as a centre of Protestant activity, he may well have 
preached at Lignieres as a reformatory Catholic of the school of 
Erasmus. Calvin's own record of his " conversion " is so scanty 
and devoid of chronological data that it is extremely difficult to 
trace his religious development with any certainty. But it seems 
probable that at least up to 1532 he was far more concerned 
about classical scholarship than about religion. 

His residence at Bourges was cut short by the death of his 
father in May 1531. Immediately after this event he went to 
Paris, where the " new learning " was now at length ousting the 
medieval scholasticism from the university. He lodged in the 
College Fortet, reading Greek with Pierre Danes and beginning 
Hebrew with Francois Vatable. It was at this time (April 1532) 
that Calvin issued his first publication, a commentary in Latin on 
Seneca's tract De dementia. This book he published at his own 
cost, and dedicated to Claude Hangest, abbot of St Eloi, a 
member of the de Montmor family, with whom Calvin had been 

3 Calv. Praef. ad Comment, in Psalmos. 

4 Jo. Calvini Vita, sub init. 

6 Epist. Dei., Comment in Ep. II. ad Corinthios praefix. 



72 



CALVIN 



brought up. It was formerly thought that Calvin published this 
work with a view to influence the king to put a stop to the attacks 
on the Protestants, but there is nothing in the treatise itself or in 
the commentary to favour this opinion. 

Soon after the publication of his first book Calvin returned 
to Orleans, where he stayed for a year, perhaps again reading 
law, and still undecided as to his life's work. He visited Noyon 
in August 1533, an d by October of the same year was settled 
again in Paris. Here and now his destiny became certain. The 
conservative theology was becoming discredited, and humanists 
like Jacques Lefevre of Etaples (Faber Stapulensis) and Gerard 
Roussel were favoured by the court under the influence of 
Margaret of Angouleme, queen of Navarre and sister of Francis I. 
Calvin's old friend, Nicolas Cop, had just been elected rector of 
the university and had to deliver an oration according to custom 
in the church of the Mathurins, on the feast of All Saints. The 
oration (certainly influenced but hardly composed by Calvin) 
was in effect a defence of the reformed opinions, especially of 
the doctrine of justification by faith alone. It is to the period 
between April 1532 and November 1533, and in particular to 
the time of his second sojourn at Orleans, that we may most 
fittingly assign the great change in Calvin which he describes 
(Praef. ad Psalmos; opera xxxi. 21-24) as his "sudden con- 
version " and attributes to direct divine agency. It must have 
been at least after his Commentary on Seneca's De Clementia 
that his heart was " so subdued and reduced to docility that in 
comparison with his zeal for true piety he regarded all other 
studies with indifference, though not entirely forsaking them. 
Though himself a beginner, many flocked to him to learn the 
pure doctrine, and he began to seek some hiding-place and means 
of withdrawal from people." This indeed was forced upon him, 
for Cop's address was more than the conservative party could 
bear, and Cop, being summoned to appear before the parlement 
of Paris, found it necessary, as he failed to secure the support 
either of the king, or of the university, to make his escape to 
Basel. An attempt was at the same time made to seize Calvin, 
but, being forewarned of the design by his friends, he also made 
his escape. His room in the College Fortet, however, was 
searched, and his books and papers seized, to the imminent 
peril of some of his friends, whose letters were found in his 
repositories. He went to Noyon, but, proceedings against him 
being dropped, soon returned to Paris. But desiring both 
security and solitude for study he left the city again about New 
Year of 1 534 and became the guest of Louis du Tillet, a canon of 
the cathedral, at Angouleme, where at the request of his host he 
prepared some short discourses, which were circulated in the 
surrounding parishes, and read in public to the people. Here, too 
in du Tillet's splendid library, he began the studies which resulted 
in his great work, the Institutes, and paid a visit to'Nerac, where 
the venerable Lefevre, whose revised translation of the Bible 
into French was published about this time, was spending his last 
years under the kindly care of Margaret of Navarre. 

Calvin was now nearly twenty-five years of age, and in the 
ordinary way would have been ordained to the priesthood. Up 
till this time his work for the evangelical cause was not so much 
that of the public preacher or reformer as that of the retiring 
but influential scholar and adviser. Now, however, he had to 
decide whether, like Roussel and other of his friends, he should 
strive to combine the new doctrines with a position in the old 
church, or whether he should definitely break away from Rome. 
His mind was made up, and on the 4th of May he resigned 
his chaplaincy at Noyon and his rectorship at Pont l'Eveque. 
Towards the end of the same month he was arrested and suffered 
two short terms of imprisonment, the charges against him 
being not strong enough to be pressed. He seems to have 
gone next to Paris, staying perhaps with fitienne de la 
Forge, a Protestant merchant who suffered for his faith in 
February 153 5. To this time belongs the story of the proposed 
meeting between Calvin and the Spanish reformer Servetus. 
Calvin's movements at this time are difficult to trace, but he 
visited both Orleans and Poitiers, and each visit marked a stage 
in his development. 



The Anabaptists of Germany had spread into France, and 
were disseminating many wild and fanatical opinions among 
those who had seceded from the Church of Rome. Among other 
notions which they had imbibed was that of a sleep of the soul 
after death. To Calvin this notion appeared so pernicious that 
he- composed a treatise in refutation of it, under the title of 
Psychopannychia. The preface to this treatise is dated Orleans 
1534, but it was not printed till 1542. In it he chiefly dwells 
upon the evidence from Scripture in favour of the belief that the 
soul retains its intelligent consciousness after its separation from 
the body — passing by questions of philosophical speculation, as 
tending on such a subject only to minister to an idle curiosity. 
At Poitiers Calvin gathered round him a company of cultured 
and gentle men whom in private intercourse he influenced 
considerably. Here too in a grotto near the town he for the first 
time celebrated the communion in the Evangelical Church of 
France, using a piece of the rock as a table. 

The year 1534 was thus decisive for Calvin. From this time 
forward his influence became supreme, and all who had accepted 
the reformed doctrines in France turned to him for counsel and 
instruction, attracted not only by his power as a teacher, but 
still more, perhaps because they saw in him so full a develop- 
ment of the Christian life according to the evangelical model. 
Renan, no prejudiced judge, pronounces him " the most Christian 
man of his time," and attributes to this his success as a reformer. 
Certain it is that already he had becorne conspicuous as a prophet 
of the new religion; his life was in danger, and he was obliged to 
seek safety in flight. In company with his friend Louis du 
Tillet, whom he had again gone to Angouleme to visit, he set out 
for Basel. On their way they were robbed by one of their servants, 
and it was only by borrowing ten crowns from their other 
servant that they were enabled to get to Strassburg, and thence 
to Basel. Here Calvin was welcomed by the band of scholars 
and theologians who had conspired to make that city the Athens 
of Switzerland, and especially by Oswald Myconius, the chief 
pastor, Pierre Viret and Heinrich Bullinger. Under the aupices 
and guidance of Sebastian Minister, Calvin now gave himself to 
the study of Hebrew. 

Francis I., desirous to continue the suppression of the Protest- 
ants but anxious, because of his strife with Charles V., not to 
break with the Protestant princes of Germany, instructed his 
ambassador to assure these princes that it was only against 
Anabaptists, and other parties who called in question all civil 
magistracy, that his severities were exercised. Calvin, indignant 
at the calumny which was thus cast upon the reformed party in 
France, hastily prepared for the press his Institutes of the Christian 
Religion, which he published " first that I might vindicate from 
unjust affront my brethren whose death was precious in the sight 
of the Lord, and, next, that some sorrow and anxiety should move 
foreign peoples, since the same sufferings threatened many." 
The work was dedicated to the king, and Calvin says he wrote it 
in Latin that it might find access to the learned in all lands. 1 
Soon after it appeared he set about translating it into French, as 
he himself attests in a letter dated October 1536. This sets at 
rest a question, at one time much agitated, whether the book 
appeared first in French or in Latin. The earliest French edition 
known is that of 1540, and this was after the work had been much 
enlarged, and several Latin editions had appeared. In its first 
form the work consisted of only six chapters, and was intended 
merely as a brief manual of Christian doctrine. The chapters 
follow a traditional scheme of religious teaching: (1) The Law, 
(as in the Ten Words), (2) Faith (as in the Apostles' Creed) 
(3) Prayer, (4) the Sacraments; to these were added (5) False 
Sacraments, (6) Christian liberty, ecclesiastical power and civil 
administration. The closing chapters of the work are more 
polemical than the earlier ones. His indebtedness to Luther is 
of course great, but his spiritual kinship with Martin Bucer of 

1 This edition forms a small 8vo of 514 pages, and 6 pages of index. 
It appeared at Basel from the press of Thomas Platter and Balthasar 
Lasius in March 1536, and was published by Johann Oporin. The 
dedicatory preface is dated 23rd August 1535. It is a masterpiece 
of apologetic literature. See W. Walker, John Calvin, 132 f., and 
for an outline of the contents of the treatise, ib. 137-149. 



CALVIN 



73 



Strassburg is even more marked. Something also he owed to 
Scotus and other medieval schoolmen. The book appeared 
anonymously, the author having, as he himself says, nothing in 
view beyond furnishing a statement of the faith of the persecuted 
Protestants, whom he saw cruelly cut to pieces by impious and 
perfidious court parasites. 1 In this work, though produced when 
the author was only twenty-six years of age, we find a complete 
outline of the Calvinist theological system. In none of the later 
editions, nor in any of his later works do we find reason to believe 
that he ever changed his views on any essential point from what 
they were at the period of its first publication. Such an instance 
of maturity of mind and of opinion at so early an age would be 
remarkable under any circumstances; but in Calvin's case it is 
rendered peculiarly so by the shortness of the time which had 
elapsed since he gave himself to theological studies. It may be 
doubted also if the history of literature presents us with another 
instance of a book written at so early an age, which has exercised 
such a prodigious influence upon the opinions and practices both 
of contemporaries and of posterity. 

After a short visit (April 1 536) to the court of Renee, duchess 
of Ferrara (cousin to Margaret of Navarre), which at that time 
afforded an asylum to several learned and pious fugitives from 
persecution, Calvin returned through Basel to France to arrange 
his affairs before finally taking farewell of his native country. 
His intention was to settle at Strassburg or Basel, and to devote 
himself to study. But being unable, in consequence of the war 
between Francis I. and Charles V., to reach Strassburg by the 
ordinary route, he with his younger brother Antoine and his 
half-sister Marie journeyed to Lyons and so to Geneva, making 
for Basel. In Geneva his progress was arrested, and his resolution 
to pursue the quiet path of studious research was dispelled by 
what he calls the " formidable obtestation " of Guillaume Farel. 2 
After many struggles and no small suffering, this energetic spirit 
had succeeded in planting the evangelical standard at Geneva; 
and anxious to secure the aid of such a man as Calvin, he entreated 
him on his arrival to relinquish his design of going farther, and to 
devote himself to the work in that city. Calvin at first declined, 
alleging as an excuse his need of securing more time for personal 
improvement, but ultimately, believing that he was divinely 
called to this task and that " God had stretched forth His hand 
upon me from on high to arrest me," he consented to remain at 
Geneva. He hurried to Basel, transacted some business, and 
returned to Geneva in August 1536. He at once began to ex- 
pound the epistles of St Paul in the church of St Pierre, and after 
about a year was also elected preacher by the magistrates with 
the consent of the people, an office which he would not accept 
until it had been repeatedly pressed upon him. His services 
seem to have been rendered for some time gratuitously, for in 
February 1537 there is an entry in the city registers to the effect 
that six crowns had been voted to him, " since he has as yet 
hardly received anything." 

Calvin was in his twenty-eighth year when he was thus 
constrained to settle at Geneva; and in this city the rest of his 
life, with the exception of a brief interval, was spent. The post 
to which he was thus called was not an easy one. Though the 
people of Geneva had cast off the obedience of Rome, it was 
largely a political revolt against the duke of Savoy, and they were 
still (says Beza) " but very imperfectly enlightened in divine 
knowledge; they had as yet hardly emerged from the filth of the 
papacy." 3 This laid them open to the incursions of those 
fanatical teachers, whom the excitement attendant upon the 
Reformation had called forth, and who hung mischievously upon 
the rear of the reforming body. To obviate the evils thence 
resulting, Calvin, in union with Farel, drew up a condensed 
statement of Christian doctrine consisting of twenty-one articles. 
This the citizens were summoned, in parties of ten each, to 
profess and swear to as the confession of their faith — a process 
which, though not in accordance with modern notions of the best 
way of establishing men in the faith, was gone through, Calvin 
tells us, " with much satisfaction." As the people took this oath 

1 Praef. ad Psalmos. 2 Ibid. 

3 Beza, Vit. Calv. an. 1536. 



in the capacity of citizens, we may see here the basis laid for that 
theocratic system which subsequently became peculiarly charac- 
teristic of the Genevan polity. Deeply convinced of the import- 
ance of education for the young, Calvin and his coadjutors were 
solicitous to establish schools throughout the city, and to enforce 
on parents the sending of their children to them; and as he had 
no faith in education apart from religious training, he drew up a 
catechism of Christian doctrine which the children had to learn 
whilst they were receiving secular instruction. Of the troubles 
which arose from fanatical teachers, the chief proceeded from 
the efforts of the Anabaptists; a public disputation was held on 
the 16th and 17th of March 1537, and so excited the populace 
that the Council of Two Hundred stopped it, declared the 
Anabaptists vanquished and drove them from the city. About 
the same time also, the peace of Calvin and his friends was much 
disturbed and their work interrupted by Pierre Caroli, another 
native of northern France, who, though a man of loose principle 
and belief, had been appointed chief pastor at Lausanne and was 
discrediting the good work done by Pierre Viret in that city. 
Calvin went to Viret's aid and brought Caroli before the com- 
missioners of Bern on a charge of advocating prayers for the dead 
as a means of their earlier resurrection. Caroli brought a 
counter-charge against the Geneva divines of Sabellianism and 
Arianism, because they would not enforce the Athanasian creed, 
and had not used the words " Trinity " and " Person " in the 
confession they had drawn up. It was a struggle between the 
thoroughgoing humanistic reformer who drew his creed solely 
from the " word of God " and the merely semi-Protestant 
reformer who looked on the old creed as a priceless heritage. In 
a synod held at Bern the matter was fully discussed, when a 
verdict was given in favour of the Geneva divines, and Caroli 
deposed from his office and banished. He returned to France, 
rejoined the Roman communion and spent the rest of his life in 
passing to and from the old faith and the new. Thus ended an 
affair which seems to have occasioned Calvin much more uneasi- 
ness than the character of his assailant, and the manifest false- 
hood of the charge brought against him, would seem to justify. 
Two brief anti-Romanist tracts, one entitled De fugiendis 
impiorum sacris, the other De sacerdotio papali abjiciendo, were 
also published early in this year. 

Hardly was the affair of Caroli settled, when new and severer 
trials came upon the Genevan Reformers. The austere sim- 
plicity of the ritual which Farel had introduced, and to which 
Calvin had conformed; the strictness with which the ministers 
sought to enforce not only the laws of morality, but certain 
sumptuary regulations respecting the dress and mode of living 
of the citizens; and their determination in spiritual matters 
and ecclesiastical ceremonies not to submit to the least dictation 
from the civil power, led to violent dissensions. Amidst much 
party strife Calvin perhaps showed more youthful impetuosity 
than experienced skill. He and his colleagues refused to ad- 
minister the sacrament in the Bernese form, i.e. with unleavened 
bread, and on Easter Sunday, 1538, declined to do so at all 
because of the popular tumult. For this they were banished 
from the city. They went first to Bern, and soon after to 
Zurich, where a synod of the Swiss pastors had been convened. 
Before this assembly they pleaded their cause, and stated what 
were the points on which they were prepared to insist as needful 
for the proper discipline of the church. They declared that they 
would yield in the matter of ceremonies so far as to employ un- 
leavened bread in the eucharist, to use fonts in baptism, and to 
allow festival days, provided the people might pursue their 
ordinary avocations after public service. These Calvin re- 
garded as matters of indifference, provided the magistrates did 
not make them of importance, by seeking to enforce them; and 
he was the more willing to concede them, because he hoped 
thereby to meet the wishes of the Bernese brethren whose 
ritual was less simple than that established by Farel at Geneva. 
But he and his colleagues insisted, on the other hand^that for the 
proper maintenance of discipline, there should be a division of 
parishes — that excommunications should be permitted, and 
should be under the power of elders chosen by the council, in 



74 



CALVIN 



conjunction with the clergy — that order should be observed in 
the admission of preachers — and that only the clergy should 
officiate in ordination by the laying on of hands. It was proposed 
also, as conducive to the welfare of the church, that the sacrament 
of the Lord's Supper should be administered more frequently, at 
least once every month, and that congregational singing of 
psalms should be practised in the churches. On these terms the 
synod interceded with the Genevese to restore their pastors; 
but through the opposition of some of the Bernese (especially 
Peter Kuntz, the pastor of that city) this was frustrated, and a 
second edict of banishment was the only response. 

Calvin and Farel betook themselves, under these circumstances, 
to Basel, where they soon after separated, Farel to go to Neu- 
chatel and Calvin to Strassburg. At the latter place Calvin 
resided till the autumn of 1541, occupying himself partly in 
literary exertions, partly as a preacher and especially an organizer 
in the French church, and partly as a lecturer on theology. 
These years were not the least valuable in his experience. In 
1539 he attended Charles V.'s conference on Christian reunion at 
Frankfort as the companion of Bucer, and in the following year 
he appeared at Hagenau and Worms, as the delegate from the 
city of Strassburg. He was present also at the diet at Regens- 
burg, where he deepened his acquaintance with Melanchthon, 
and formed with him a friendship which lasted through life. He 
also did something to relieve the persecuted Protestants of 
France. It is to this period of his life that we owe a revised and 
enlarged form of his Institutes, his Commentary on the Epistle to 
the Romans, and his Tract on the Lord's Supper. Notwithstand- 
ing his manifold engagements, he found time to attend to the 
tenderer affections; for it was during his residence at Strass- 
burg that he married, in August 1540, Idelette de Bure, the 
widow of one Jean Stordeur of Liege, whom he had converted 
from Anabaptism. In her Calvin found, to use his own words, 
" the excellent companion of his life," a " precious help " to him 
amid his manifold labours and frequent infirmities. She died in 
1549, to the great grief of her husband, who never ceased to 
mourn her loss. Their only child Jacques, born on the 28th of 
July 1542, lived only a few days. 

During Calvin's absence disorder and irreligion had prevailed 
in Geneva. An attempt was made by Cardinal Jacopo Sadoleto 
(1477-1547), bishop of Carpentras, to take advantage of this so 
as to restore the papal supremacy in that district; but this 
design Calvin, at the request of the Bernese authorities, who had 
been consulted by those of Geneva, completely frustrated, by 
writing such a reply to the letter which the bishop had addressed 
to the Genevese, as constrained him to desist from all further 
efforts. The letter had more than a local or temporary reference. 
It was a popular yet thoroughgoing defence of the whole Protest- 
ant position, perhaps the best apologia for the Reformation that 
was ever written. He seems also to have kept up his connexion 
with Geneva by addressing letters of counsel and comfort to the 
faithful there who continued to regard him with affection. It 
was whilst he was still at Strassburg that there appeared at 
Geneva a translation of the Bible into French, bearing Calvin's 
name, but in reality only revised and corrected by him from the 
version of Olivetan. Meanwhile the way was opening for his 
return. Those who had driven him from the city gradually 
lost power and office. Farel worked unceasingly for his recall. 
After much hesitation, for Strassburg had strong claims, he 
yielded and returned to Geneva, where he was received with 
the utmost enthusiasm (September 13, 1541). He entered upon 
his work with a firm determination to carry out those reforms 
which he had originally purposed, and to set up in all its integrity 
that form of church polity which he had carefully matured 
during his residence at Strassburg. He now became the sole 
directive spirit in the church at Geneva. Farel was retained 
by the Neuchatelois, and Viret, soon after Calvin's return, re- 
moved to Lausanne. His duties were thus rendered exceedingly 
onerous, and his labour became excessive. Besides preaching 
every day in each alternate week, he taught theology three days 
in the week, attended weekly meetings of his consistory, read 
the Scriptures once a week in the congregation, carried on an 



extensive correspondence on a multiplicity of subjects, prepared 
commentaries on the books of Scripture, and was engaged 
repeatedly in controversy with the opponents of his opinions. 
" I have not time," he writes to a friend, " to look out of my 
house at the blessed sun, and if things continue thus I shall 
forget what sort of appearance it has. When I have settled my 
usual business. I have so many letters to write, so many questions 
to answer, that many a night is spent without any offering of 
sleep being brought to nature." 

It is only necessary here to sketch the leading events of 
Calvin's life after his return to Geneva. He recodified the 
Genevan laws and constitution, and was the leading spirit in the 
negotiations with Bern that issued in the treaty of February 
1544. Of the controversies in which he embarked, one of the 
most important was that in which he defended his doctrine 
concerning predestination and election. His first antagonist on 
this head was Albert Pighius, a Romanist, who, resuming the 
controversy between Erasmus and Luther on the freedom of the 
will, violently attacked Calvin for the views he had expressed 
on that subject. Calvin replied to him in a work published 
in 1543, in which he defends his own opinions at length, both 
by general reasonings and by an appeal to both Scripture 
and the Fathers, especially Augustine. So potent were his 
reasonings that Pighius, though owing nothing to the gentleness 
or courtesy of Calvin, was led to embrace his views. A still more 
vexatious and protracted controversy on the same subject arose 
in 1551. Jerome Hermes Bolsec, a Carmelite friar, having 
renounced Romanism, had fled from France to Veigy, a village 
near Geneva, where he practised as a physician. Being a zealous 
opponent of predestinarian views, he expressed his criticisms 
of Calvin's teaching on the subject in one of the public con- 
ferences held each Friday. Calvin replied with much vehemence, 
and brought the matter before the civil authorities. The council 
were at a loss which course to take ; not that they doubted which 
of the disputants was right, for they all held by the views 'of 
Calvin, but they were unable to determine to what extent and 
in which way Bolsec should be punished for his heresy. The 
question was submitted to the churches at Basel, Bern, Zurich 
and Neuchatel, but they also, to Calvin's disappointment, were 
divided in their judgment, some counselling severity, others 
gentle measures. In the end Bolsec was banished from Geneva ; 
he ultimately rejoined the Roman communion and in 1577 
avenged himself by a particularly slanderous biography of 
Calvin. Another painful controversy was that with Sebastien 
Castellio (1515-1363), a teacher in the Genevan school and a 
scholar of real distinction. He wished to enter the preaching 
ministry but was excluded by Calvin's influence because he had 
criticized the inspiration of the Song of Solomon and the Genevan 
interpretation of the clause " he descended into hell." The 
bitterness thus aroused developed into life-long enmity. During 
all this time also the less strict party in the city and in the 
council did not cease to harry the reformer. 

But the most memorable of all the controversies in which 
Calvin was engaged was that into which he was brought in 1553 
with Michael Servetus (q.v.). After many wanderings, and 
after having been condemned to death for heresy at Vienne, 
whence he was fortunate enough to make his escape, Servetus 
arrived in August 1 553 at Geneva on his way to Naples. He was 
recognized in church and soon after, at Calvin's instigation, 
arrested. The charge of blasphemy was founded on certain 
statements in a book published by him in 1553, entitled Christi- 
anismi Restitutio, in which he animadverted on the Catholic 
doctrine of the Trinity, and advanced sentiments strongly 
savouring of Pantheism. The story of his trial is told elsewhere 
(see art. Servetus), but it must be noted here that the struggle 
was something more than a doctrinal one. The cause of Servetus 
was taken up by Calvin's Genevan foes headed by Philibert 
Berthelier, and became a test of the relative strength of the lival 
forces and of the permanence of Calvin's control. That Calvin 
was actuated by personal spite and animosity against Servetus 
himself may be open to discussion; we have his own express 
declaration that, after Servetus was convicted, he used no 



CALVIN 



75 



urgency that he should be put to death, and at their last inter- 
view he told Servetus that he never had avenged private injuries, 
and assured him that if he would repent it would not be his fault 
if all the pious did not give him their hands. 1 There is the fact 
also that Calvin used his endeavour to have the sentence which 
had been pronounced against Servetus mitigated, death by 
burning being regarded by him as an " atrocity," for which he 
sought to substitute death by the sword. 2 It can be justly 
charged against Calvin in this matter that he took the initiative 
in bringing on the trial of Servetus, that as his accuser he pro- 
secuted the suit against him with undue severity, and that he 
approved the sentence which condemned Servetus to death. 
When, however, it is remembered that the unanimous decision of 
the Swiss churches and of the Swiss state governments was that 
Servetus deserved to die; that the general voice of Christendom 
was in favour of this; that even such a man as Melanchthon 
affirmed the justice of the sentence; 3 that an eminent English 
divine of the next age should declare the process against him 
" just and honourable," 4 and that only a few voices here and 
there were at the time raised against it, many will be ready to 
accept the judgment of Coleridge, that the death of Servetus was 
not " Calvin's guilt especially, but the common opprobrium of 
all European Christendom." 5 

Calvin was also involved in a protracted and somewhat vexing 
dispute with the Lutherans respecting the Lord's Supper, which 
ended in the separation of the evangelical party into the two great 
sections of Lutherans and Reformed, — the former holding that in 
the eucharist the body and blood of Christ are objectively and 
consubstantially present, and so are actually partaken of by the 
communicants, and the latter that there is only a virtual presence 
of the body and blood of Christ, and consequently only a spiritual 
participation thereof through faith. In addition to these 
controversies on points of faith, he was for many years greatly 
disquieted, and sometimes even endangered, by the opposition 
offered by the libertine party in Geneva to the ecclesiastical 
discipline which he had established there. His system of church 
polity was essentially theocratic ; it assumed that every member 
of the state was also under the discipline of the church; and he 
asserted that the right of exercising this discipline was vested 
exclusively in the consistory or body of preachers and elders. 
His attempts to carry out these views brought him into collision 
both with the authorities and with the populace, — the latter 
being not unnaturally restive under the restraints imposed upon 
their liberty by the vigorous system of church discipline, and the 
former being inclined to retain in their own hands a portion of 
that power in things spiritual which Calvin was bent on placing 
exclusively in the hands of the church rulers. His dauntless 
courage, his perseverance, and his earnestness at length prevailed, 
and he had the satisfaction, before he died, of seeing his favourite 
system of church polity firmly established, not only at Geneva, 
but in other parts of Switzerland, and of knowing that it had been 
adopted substantially by the Reformers in France and Scotland. 
The men whom he trained at Geneva carried his principles into 
almost every country in Europe, and in varying degree these 
principles did much for the cause of civil liberty. 6 Nor was it 
only in religious matters that Calvin busied himself; nothing 
was indifferent to him that concerned the welfare and good order 
of the state or the advantage of its citizens. His work embraced 
everything; he was consulted on every affair, great and small, 
that came before the council, — on questions of law, police, 
economy, trade, and manufactures, no less than on questions of 
doctrine and church polity. To him the city owed her trade in 
cloths and velvets, from which so much wealth accrued to her 

1 Fidelis Expositio Errorum Serveti, sub init. Calvini, Opp. t. ix. 

2 Calvin to Farel, 20th Aug. 1553. 

3 Tuo judicio prorsus assentior. Affirmo etiam vestros magi- 
stratus juste fecisse quod hominem blasphemum, re ordine judicata, 
interfecerunt. — Melanchthon to Calvin, 14th Oct. 1554. 

4 Field On the Church, bk. iii. c. 27, vol. i. p. 288 (ed. Cambridge, 
1847). 

5 Notes on English Dromes, vol. i. p. 49. See also Table Talk, 
vol. ii. p. 282 (ed. 1835).' 

6 W. Walker, John Calvin, pp. 403-8. 



citizens; sanitary regulations were introduced by him which 
made Geneva the admiration of all visitors; and in him she 
reverences the founder of her university. This institution was in 
a sense Calvin's crowning work. It added religious education to 
the evangelical preaching and the thorough discipline already 
established, and so completed the reformer's ideal of a Christian 
commonwealth. 

Amidst these multitudinous cares and occupations, Calvin 
found time to write a number of works besides those provoked by 
the various controversies in which he was engaged. The most 
numerous of these were of an exegetical character. Including 
discourses taken down from his lips by faithful auditors, we have 
from him expository comments or homilies on nearly all the 
books of Scripture, written partly in Latin and partly in French. 
Though naturally knowing nothing of the modern idea of a 
progressive revelation, his judiciousness, penetration, and tact in 
eliciting his author's meaning, his precision, condensation, and 
concinnity as an expositor, the accuracy of his learning, the 
closeness of his reasoning, and the elegance of his style, all unite 
to confer a high value on his exegetical works. The series began 
with Romans in 1540 and ended with Joshua in 1564. In 1558- 
1559 also, though in very ill health, he finally perfected the 
Institutes. 

The incessant and exhausting labours to which Calvin gave 
himself could not but tell on his fragile constitution. Amid 
many sufferings, however, and frequent attacks of sickness, he 
manfully pursued his course; nor was it till his frail body, torn 
by many and painful diseases — fever, asthma, stone, and gout, 
the fruits for the most part of his sedentary habits and unceasing 
activity — had, as it were, fallen to pieces around him, that his 
indomitable spirit relinquished the conflict. In the early part of 
the year 1 564 his sufferings became so severe that it was manifest 
his earthly career was rapidly drawing to a close. On the 6th of 
February of that year he preached his last sermon, having with 
great difficulty found breath enough to carry him through it. He 
was several times after this carried to church, but never again 
was able to take any part in the service. With his us.ual dis- 
interestedness he refused to receive his stipend, now that he was 
no longer able to discharge the duties of his office. In the midst 
of his sufferings, however, his zeal and energy kept him in 
continual occupation; when expostulated with for such un- 
seasonable toil, he replied^ " Would you that the Lord should 
find me idle when He comes?" After he had retired from 
public labours he lingered for some months, enduring the severest 
agony without a murmur, and cheerfully attending to all the 
duties of a private kind which his diseases left him strength to 
discharge. On the 25th of April he made his will, on the 27th he 
received the Little Council, and on the 28th the Genevan 
ministers, in his sick-room; on the 2nd of May he wrote his last 
letter — to his old comrade Farel, who hastened from Neuchatel 
to see him once again. He spent much time in prayer and died 
quietly, in the arms of his faithful friend Theodore Beza, on the 
evening of the 27th of May, in the fifty-fifth year of his age. The 
next day he was buried without pomp " in the common cemetery 
called Plain-palais " in a spot not now to be identified. 

Calvin was of middle stature; his complexion was somewhat 
pallid and dark; his eyes, to the latest clear and lustrous, 
bespoke the acumen of his genius. He was sparing in his food 
and simple in his dress; he took but little sleep, and was capable 
of extraordinary efforts of intellectual toil. He had a most 
retentive memory and a very keen power of observation. He 
spoke without rhetoric, simply, directly, but with great weight. 
He had many acquaintances but few close friends. His private 
character was in harmony with his public reputation and position. 
If somewhat severe and irritable, he was at the same time 
scrupulously just, truthful, and steadfast; he never deserted a 
friend or took an unfair advantage of an antagonist; and on 
befitting occasions he could be cheerful and even facetious 
among his intimates. " God gave him," said the Little Council 
after his death, " a character of great majesty." " I have been a 
witness of him for sixteen years," says Beza, " and I think I am 
fully entitled to say that in this man there was exhibited to all an 



7 6 



CAI^VINISTIC METHODISTS 



example of the life and death of the Christian, such as it will not 
be easy to depreciate, such as it will be difficult to emulate." 

Though Calvin built his theology on the foundations laid by 
earlier reformers, and especially by Luther and Bucer, his peculiar 
gifts of learning, of logic and of style made him pre-eminently the 
theologian of the new religion. The following may be regarded as 
his characteristic tenets, though not all are peculiar to him. 

The dominant thought is the infinite and transcendent sovereignty 
of God, to know whom is the supreme end of human endeavour. 
God is made known to man especially by the Scriptures, whose 
writers were " sure and authentic amanuenses of the Holy Spirit." 
To the Spirit speaking therein the Spirit-illumined soul of man 
makes response. While God is the source of all good, man as a 
sinner is guilty and corrupt. The first man was made in the image 
and likeness of God, which not only implies man's superiority to all 
other creatures, but indicates his original purity, integrity and 
sanctity. From this state Adam fell, and in his fall involved the 
whole human race descended from him. Hence depravity and 
corruption, diffused through all parts of the soul, attach to all men, 
and this first makes them obnoxious to the anger of God, and then 
comes forth in works which the Scripture calls works of the flesh 
(Gal. v. 19). Thus all are held vitiated and perverted in all parts 
of their nature, and on account of such corruption deservedly con- 
demned before God, by whom nothing is accepted save righteousness 
innocence, and purity. Nor is that a being bou'ndforanother's offence ; 
for when it is said that we through Adam's sin have become ob- 
noxious to the divine judgment, it is not to be taken as if we, being 
ourselves innocent and blameless, bear the fault of his offence, but 
that, we having been brought under a curse through his trans- 
gression, he is said to have bound us. From him, however, not only 
has punishment overtaken us, but a pestilence instilled from him 
resides in us, to which punishment is justly due. Thus even infants, 
whilst they bring their own condemnation with them from their 
mother's womb, are bound not by another's but by their own fault. 
For though they have not yet brought forth the fruits of their 
iniquity, they have the seed shut up in them ; nay, their whole nature 
is a sort of seed of sin, therefore it cannot but be hateful and abomin- 
able to God (Instit. bk. ii. ch. i. sect. 8). 

To redeem man from this state of guilt, and to recover him from 
corruption, the Son of God became incarnate, assuming man's nature 
into union with His own, so that in Him were two natures in one 
person. Thus incarnate He took on Him the offices of prophet, 
priest and king, and by His humiliation, obedience and suffering unto 
death, followed by His resurrection and ascension to heaven, He 
has perfected His work and fulfilled all that was required in a 
redeemer of men, so that it is truly affirmed that He has merited 
for man the grace of salvation (bk. ii. ch. 13-17). But until a man 
is in some way really united to Christ so as to partake of Him, the 
benefits of Christ's work cannot be attained by him. Now it is by 
the secret and special operation of the Holy Spirit that men are 
united to Christ and made members of His body. Through faith, 
which is a firm and certain cognition of the divine benevolence 
towards us founded on the truth of the gracious promise in Christ, 
men are by the operation of the Spirit united to Christ and are made 
partakers of His death and resurrection, so that the old man is 
crucified with Him and they are raised to a new life, a life of righteous- 
ness and holiness. Thus joined to Christ the believer has life in 
Him and knows that he is saved, having the witness of the Spirit 
that he is a child of God, and having the promises, the certitude of 
which the Spirit had before impressed on the mind, sealed by the 
same Spirit on the heart (bk. iii. ch. 33-36). From faith proceeds 
repentance, which is the turning of our life to God, proceeding from 
a sincere and earnest fear of God, and consisting in the mortification 
of the flesh and the old man within us and a vivification of the Spirit. 
Through faith also the believer receives justification, his sins are 
forgiven, he is accepted of God, and is held by Him as righteous, 
the righteousness of Christ being imputed to him, and faith being 
the instrument by which the man lays hold on Christ, so that with 
His righteousness the man appears in God's sight as righteous. 
This imputed righteousness, however, is not disjoined from real 
personal righteousness, for regeneration and sanctification come 
to the believer from Christ no less than justification; the two 
blessings are not to be confounded, but neither are they to be dis- 
joined. The assurance which the believer has of salvation he 
receives from the operation and witness of the Holy Spirit ; but 
this again rests on the divine choice of the man to salvation; and 
this falls back on God's eternal sovereign purpose, whereby He has 
predestined some to eternal life while the rest of mankind are 
predestined to condemnation and eternal death. Those whom 
God has chosen to life He effectually calls to salvation, and they 
are kept by Him in progressive faith and holiness unto the end 
(bk. iii. passim). The external means or aids by which God unites 
men into the fellowship of Christ, and sustains and advances those 
who believe, are the church and its ordinances, especially the sacra- 
ments. The church universal is the multitude gathered from diverse 
nations, which though divided by distance of time and place, agree 
in one common faith, and it is bound by the tie of the same religion ; 
and wherever the word of God is sincerely preached, and the sacra- 
ments are duly administered, according to Christ's institute, there 



beyond doubt is a church of the living God (bk. iv. ch. I, sect. 7-1 1). 
The permanent officers in the church are pastors and teachers, to the 
former of whom it belongs to preside over the discipline of the 
church, to administer the sacraments, and to admonish and exhort 
the members ; while the latter occupy themselves with the exposition 
of Scripture, so that pure and wholesome doctrine may be retained. 
With them are to be joined for the government of the church certain 
pious, grave and holy men as a senate in each church ; and to others, 
as deacons, is to be entrusted the care of the poor. The election of 
the officers in a church is to be with the people, and those duly 
chosen and called are to be ordained by the laying on of the hands 
of the pastors (ch. 3, sect. 4-16). The sacraments are two — Baptism 
and the Lord's Supper. Baptism is the sign of initiation whereby 
men are admitted into the society of the church and, being grafted 
into Christ, are reckoned among the sons of God; it serves both 
for the confirmation of faith and as a confession before men. The 
Lord's Supper is a spiritual feast where Christ attests that He is the 
life-giving bread, by which our souls are fed unto true and blessed 
immortality. That sacred communication of His flesh and blood 
whereby Christ transfuses into us His life, even as if it penetrated 
into our bones and marrow, He in the Supper attests and seals; 
and that not by a vain or empty sign set before us, but there He 
puts forth the efficacy of His Spirit whereby He fulfils what He 
promises. In the mystery of the Supper Christ is truly exhibited 
to us by the symbols of bread and wine ; and so His body and blood, 
in which He fulfilled all obedience for the obtaining of righteousness 
for us, are presented. There is no such presence of Christ in the 
Supper as that He is affixed to the bread or included in it or in any 
way circumscribed ; but whatever can express the true and sub- 
stantial communication of the body and blood of the Lord, which 
is exhibited to believers under the said symbols of the Supper, is to 
be received, and that not as perceived by the imagination only or 
mental intelligence, but as enjoyed for the aliment of the eternal life 
(bk. iv. ch. 15, 17). 

The course of time has substantially modified many of these 
positions. Even the churches which trace their descent from 
Calvin's work and faith no longer hold in their entirety his views 
on the magistrate as the preserver of church purity, the utter de- 
pravity of human nature, the non-human character of the Bible, 
the dealing of God with man. But his system had an immense 
value in the history of Christian thought. It appealed to and 
evoked a high order of intelligence, and its insistence on personal 
individual salvation has borne worthy fruit. So also its insistence 
on the chief end of man " to know and do the will of God " made 
for the strenuous morality that helped to build up the modern 
world. ' Its effects are most clearly seen in Scotland, in Puritan 
England and in the New England states, but its influence was and 
is felt among peoples that have little desire or claim to be called 
Calvinist. 

Bibliography. — The standard edition of Calvin's works is that 
undertaken by the Strassburg scholars, J. W. Baum, E. Cunitz, 
E. Reuss, P. Lobstein, A. Erichson (59 vols., 1863-1900). The last 
of these contains an elaborate bibliography which was also published 
separately at Berlin in 1900. The bulk of the writings was published 
in English by the Calvin Translation Society (48 vols., Edinburgh, 
1843-1855); the Institutes have often been translated. The early 
lives by Beza and Collodon are givan in the collected editions. 
Among modern biographies are those by P. Henry, Das Leben J. 
Calvins (3 vols., Hamburg, 1 835-1 844; Eng. trans, by H. Stebbing, 
London and New York, 1849); V. Audin, Histoire de la vie, des 
ouvrages, et des doctrines de Calvin (2 vols., Paris, 1841 ; Eng. trans, 
by J. McGill, London, 1843 and 1850) unfairly antagonistic; T. H. 
Dyer, Life of John Calvin (London, 1850); E. Stahelin, J oh. Calvin, 
Leben und ausgewahlte Schriften (2 vols., Elberfeld, 1863); F. W. 
Kampschulte, Joh. Calvin, seine Kirche und sein Staat in Genf 
(2 vols., 1869, 1899, unfinished); Abel Lefranc, La Jeunesse de 
Calvin (Paris, 1888); E. Choisy, La Theocratie a Geneve au temps 
de Calvin (Geneva, 1897) ; E. Doumergue, Jean Calvin; les homines 
et les choses de son temps (5 vols., 1899-1908). See also A. M. Fair- 
bairn, " Calvin and the Reformed Church " in the Cambridge Modern 
History, vol. ii. (1904); P. Schaff's, History of the Christian Church, 
vol. vii. (1892), and R. Stahelin's article in Hauck-Herzog's Real- 
encyk. fiir prot. Theologie und Kirche. Each of these contains a 
useful bibliography, as also does the excellent life by Professor 
Williston Walker, John Calvin, the Organizer of Reformed Protes- 
tantism, " Heroes of the Reformation " series (1906). See also C. S. 
Home in Mansfield Coll. Essays (1909). (W. L. A.; A. J. G.) 

CALVINISTIC METHODISTS, a body of Christians forming a 
church of the Presbyterian order and claiming to be the only 
denomination in Wales which is of purely Welsh origin. Its 
beginnings may be traced to the labours of the Rev. Griffith 
Jones (1684-1761), of Llanddowror, Carmarthenshire, whose 
sympathy for the poor led him to set on foot a system of circu- 
lating charity schools for the education of children. In striking 
contrast to the general apathy of the clergy of the period, 
Oriffrth Jones's 7xal appealed to the public imagination, and bis 
powerful preaching exercised a widespread influence, many 



CALVINISTIG METHODISTS 



77 



travelling long distances in order to attend his ministry. There 
was thus a considerable number of earnest people dispersed 
throughout the country waiting for the rousing of the parish 
clergy. An impressive announcement of the Easter Communion 
Service, made by the Rev. Pryce Davies, vicar of Talgarth, 
on the 30th of March 1735, was the means of awakening 
Howell Harris (1714-1773) of Trevecca, and he immediately 
began to hold services in his own house. He was soon invited to 
do the same at the houses of others, and ended by becoming a 
fiery itinerant preacher, stirring to the depths every neighbour- 
hood he visited. Griffith Jones, preaching at Llanddewi Brefi, 
Cardiganshire — the place at which the Welsh Patron Saint, 
David, first became famous — found Daniel Rowland (17 13-1790), 
curate of Llangeitho, in his audience, and his patronizing attitude 
in listening drew from the preacher a personal supplication on his 
behalf, in the middle of the discourse. Rowland was deeply 
moved, and became an ardent apostle of the new movement. 
Naturally a fine orator, his new-born zeal gave an edge to his 
eloquence, and his fame spread abroad. Rowland and Harris 
had been at work fully eighteen months before they met, at a 
service in Devynock church, in the upper part of Breconshire. 
The acquaintance then formed lasted to the end of Harris's life — 
an interval of ten years excepted. Harris had been sent to 
Oxford in the autumn of 1735 to " cure him of his fanaticism," 
but he left in the following February. Rowland had never been 
to a university, but, like Harris, he had been well grounded in 
general knowledge. About 1739 another prominent figure 
appeared. This was Howell Davies of Pembrokeshire, whose 
ministry was modelled on that of his master, Griffith Jones, but 
with rather more clatter in his thunder. 

In 1736, on returning home, Harris opened a school, Griffith 
Jones supplying him with books from his charity. He also set up 
societies, in accordance with the recommendations in Josiah 
Wedgwood's little book on the subject; and these exercised a 
great influence on the religious life of the people. By far the 
most notable of Harris's converts was William Williams (17 17- 
1791), Panty Celyn, the great hymn- writer of Wales, who while 
listening to the revivalist preaching on a tombstone in the 
graveyard of Talgarth, heard the " voice of heaven," and was 
" apprehended as by a warrant from on high." He was ordained 
deacon in the Church of England, 1740, but Whitefield recom- 
mended him to leave his curacies and go into the highways and 
hedges. On Wednesday and Thursday, January 5th and 6th, 
1743, the friends of aggressive Christianity in Wales met at 
Wadford, near Caerphilly, Glam., in order to organize their 
societies. George Whitefield was in the chair. Rowland, Williams 
and John Powell — afterwards of Llanmartin — (clergymen), 
Harris, John Humphreys and John Cennick (laymen) were 
present. Seven lay exhorters were also at the meetings; they 
were questioned as to their spiritual experience and allotted 
their several spheres; other matters pertaining to the new 
conditions created by the revival were arranged. This is known 
as the first Methodist Association — held eighteen months before 
Johm Wesley's first conference (June 25th, 1744). Monthly 
meetings covering smaller districts, were organized to consider 
local matters, the transactions of which were to be reported to 
the Quarterly Association, to be confirmed, modified, or rejected. 
Exhorters were divided into two classes — public, who were 
allowed to itinerate as preachers and superintend a number of 
societies; private, who were confined to the charge of one or 
two societies. The societies were distinctly understood to be 
part of the established church, as Wedgwood's were, and every 
attempt at estranging them therefrom was sharply reproved; 
but persecution made their position anomalous. They did not 
accept the discipline of the Church of England, so the plea of 
Conformity was a feeble defence; nor had they taken out licenses, 
so as to claim the protection of the Toleration Act. Harris's 
ardent loyalty to the Church of England, after three refusals 
to ordain him, and his personal contempt for ill-treatment from 
persecutors, were the only things that prevented separation. 

A controversy on a doctrinal point — " Did God die on 
Calvary? " — raged for some time, the principal disputants 



being Rowland and Harris; and in 1751 it ended in an open 
rupture, which threw the Connexion first into confusion and then 
into a state of coma. The societies split up into Harrisites and 
Rowlandites, and it was only with the revival of 1762 that the 
breach was fairly repaired. This revival is a landmark in the 
history of the Connexion. Williams of Pant y Celyn had just 
published a little volume of hymns, the singing of which inflamed 
the people. This led the bishop of St David's to suspend 
Rowland's license, and Rowland had to confine himself to a 
meeting-house at Llangeitho. Having been turned out of other 
churches, he had leased a plot of land in 1759, anticipating the 
final withdrawal of his license, in 1763, and a spacious building 
was erected to which the people crowded from all parts on 
Sacrament Sunday. Llangeitho became the Jerusalem of Wales; 
and Rowland's popularity never waned until his physical powers 
gave way. A notable event in the history of Welsh Methodism 
was the publication in 1770, of a 4to annotated Welsh Bible by 
the Rev. Peter Williams, a forceful preacher, and an indefatigable 
worker, who had joined the Methodists in 1746, after being 
driven from several curacies. It gave birth to a new interest in 
the Scriptures, being the first definite commentary in the language. 
A powerful revival broke out at Llangeitho in the spring of 
1780, and spread to the south, but not to the north of Wales. 
The ignorance of the people of the north made it very difficult 
for Methodism to benefit from these manifestations, until the 
advent of the Rev. Thomas Charles (1755-1814), who, having 
spent five years in Somersetshire as curate of several parishes, 
returned to his native land to marry Sarah Jones of Bala. 
Failing to find employment in the established church, he joined 
the Methodists in 1784. His circulating charity schools and 
then his Sunday schools gradually made the North a new 
country. In 1791 a revival began at Bala; and this, strange to 
say, a few months after the Bala Association had been ruffled by 
the proceedings which led to the expulsion of Peter Williams 
from the Connexion, in order to prevent him from selling John 
Canne's Bible among the Methodists, because of some Sabellian 
marginal notes. 

In 1790, the Bala Association passed " Rules regarding the 
proper mode of conducting the Quarterly Association," drawn 
up by Charles; in 1801, Charles and Thomas Jones of Mold, 
published (for the association) the " Rules and Objects of the 
Private Societies among the People called Methodists." About 
1795, persecution led the Methodists to take the first step 
towards separation from the Church of England. Heavy fines 
made it impossible for preachers in poor circumstances to 
continue without claiming the protection of the Toleration Act, 
and the meeting-houses had to be registered as dissenting chapels. 
In a large number of cases this had only been delayed by so con- 
structing the houses that they were used both as dwellings and 
as chapels at one and the same time. Until 181 1 the Calvin* 
istic Methodists had no ministers ordained by themselves; their 
enormous growth in numbers and the scarcity of ministers to 
administer the Sacrament — only three in North Wales, two of 
whom had joined only at the dawn of the century — made the 
question of ordination a matter of urgency. The South Wales 
clergy who regularly itinerated were dying out; the majority of 
those remaining itinerated but irregularly, and were most of them 
against the change. The lay element, with the help of Charles and 
a few other stalwarts, carried the matter through — ordaining 
nine at Bala in June, and thirteen at Llandilo in August. In 
1823, the Confession of Faith was published; it is based on the 
Westminster Confession as " Calvinistically construed," and 
contains 44 articles. The Connexion's Constitutional Deed was 
formally completed in 1826. 

Thomas Charles had tried to arrange for taking oyer Trevecca 
College when the trustees of the Countess of Huntingdon's 
Connexion removed their seminary to Cheshunt in 1791 ; but the 
Bala revival broke out just at the time, and, when things grew 
quieter, other matters pressed for attention. A college had been 
mooted in 1816, but the intended tutor died suddenly, and the 
matter was for the tim« dropped. Candidates for the Connex- 
ional ministry were compelled to shift for themselves until 1837, 



78 



CALVISIUS— CALW 



when Lewis Edwards (1809-1887) and David Charles (1812- 
1878) opened a school for young men at Bala. North and South 
alike adopted it as their college, the associations contributing a 
hundred guineas each towards the education of their students. 
In 1842, the South Wales Association opened a college at 
Trevecca, leaving Bala to the North; the Rev. David Charles 
became principal of the former, and the Rev. Lewis Edwards of 
the latter. After the death cf Dr Lewis Edwards, Dr. T. C. 
Edwards resigned the principalship of the University College at 
Aberystwyth to become head of Bala (1801), now a purely 
theological college, the students of which were sent to the 
university colleges for their classical training. In 1905 Mr David 
Da vies of Llandinam — one of the leading laymen in the Connexion 
— offered a large building at Aberystwyth as a gift to the 
denomination for the purpose of uniting North and South in one 
theological college; but in the event of either association 
declining the proposal, the other was permitted to take possession, 
giving the association that should decline the option of joining at 
a later time. The Association of the South accepted, and that of 
the North declined, the offer; Trevecca College was turned into 
a preparatory school on the lines of a similar institution set up at 
Bala in 1891. 

The missionary collections of the denomination were given 
to the London Missionary Society from 1798 to 1840, when a 
Connexional Society was formed; and no better instances of 
missionary enterprise are known than those of the Khasia and 
Jaintia Hills, and the Plains of Sylhet in N. India. There 
has also been a mission in Brittany since 1842. 

The constitution of the denomination (called in Welsh, " Hen 
Gorph," i.e. the Old Body) is a mixture of Presbyterianism and 
Congregationalism; each church manages its own affairs and 
reports (1) to the district meeting, (2) to the monthly meeting, 
the nature of each report determining its destination. The 
monthly meetings are made up of all the officers of the churches 
comprised in each, and are split up into districts for the purpose 
of a more local co-operation of the churches. The monthly 
meetings appoint delegates to the quarterly Associations, of 
which all officers are members. The Associations of North and 
South are distinct institutions, deliberating and determining 
matters pertaining to them in their separate quarterly gatherings. 
For the purpose of a fuller co-operation in matters common to 
both, a general assembly (meeting once a year) was established 
in 1864. This is a purely deliberative conclave, worked by 
committees, and all its legislation has to be confirmed by the two 
Associations before it can have any force or be legal. The 
annual conference of the English churches of the denomination 
has no legislative standing, and is meant for social and spiritual 
intercourse and discussions. 

In doctrine the church is Calvinistic, but its preachers are far 
from being rigid in this particular, being warmly evangelical, 
and, in general, distinctly cultured. The London degree largely 
figures on the Connexional Diary; and now the Welsh degrees, 
in arts and divinity, are being increasingly achieved. It is a 
remarkable fact that every Welsh revival, since 1735, has broken 
out among the Calvinistic Methodists. Those of 1735, 1762, 
1780 and 1791 have been mentioned; those of 1817, 1832, 1859 
and 1904-1905 were no less powerful, and their history is inter- 
woven with Calvinistic Methodism, the system of which is so 
admirably adapted for the passing on of the torch. The minis- 
terial system is quite anomalous. It started in pure itineracy; 
the pastorate came in very gradually, and is not yet in universal 
acceptance. The authority of the pulpit of any individual church 
is in the hands of the deacons; they ask the pastor to supply so 
many Sundays a year — from twelve to forty, as the case may 
be — and they then fill the remainder with any preacher they 
choose. The pastor is" paid for his pastoral work, and receives 
his Sunday fee just as a stranger does; his Sundays from home 
he fills up at the request of deacons of other churches, and it is a 
breach of connexional etiquette for aminister to apply for engage- 
ments, no matter how many unfilled Sundays he may have. 
Deacons and preachers make engagements seven or eight years 
in advance. The Connexion provides for English residents 



wherever required, and the English ministers are oftener in 
their own pulpits than their Welsh brethren. 

The Calvinistic Methodists form in some respects the strongest 
church in Wales, and its forward movement, headed by Dr. John 
Pugh of Cardiff, has brought thousands into its fold since its 
establishment in 1891. Its Connexional Book Room, opened in 
1891, yields an annual profit of from £1600 to £2000, the profits 
being devoted to help the colleges and to establish Sunday 
school libraries, etc. Its chapels in 1907 numbered 1641 (with 
accommodation for 488,080), manses 229; its churches 1 num- 
bered 1428, ministers 921, unordained preachers 318, deacons 
6179; its Sunday Schools 1731, teachers 27,895, scholars 193,460, 
communicants 189,164, total collections for religious purposes 
£300,912. The statistics of the Indian Mission are equally 
good: communicants 8027, adherents 26,787, missionaries 23, 
native ministers (ordained) 15, preachers (not ordained) 60. 

The Calvinistic Methodists are intensely national in sentiment 
and aspirations, beyond all suspicion loyalists. They take a 
great interest in social, political and educational matters, and are 
prominent on public bodies. They support the Eisteddfod as the 
promoter and inspirer of arts, letters and music, and are con- 
spicuous among the annual prize winners. They thus form a 
living, democratic body, flexible and progressive in its movements, 
yet with a sufficient proportion of conservatism both in religion 
and theology to keep it sane and safe. (D. E. J.) 

CALVISIUS, SETHUS (1556-1615), German chronologer, was 
born of a peasant family at Gorschleben in Thuringia on the 
21st of February 1556. By the exercise of his musical talents 
he earned money enough for the start, at Helmstadt, of an 
university career, which the aid of a wealthy patron enabled him 
to continue at Leipzig. He became director of the music-school 
at Pforten in 1572, was transferred to Leipzig in the same 
capacity in 1594, and retained this post until his death on the 
24th of November 1615, despite the offers successively made to 
him of mathematical professorships at Frankfort and Wittenberg . 
In his Opus Chronologicum (Leipzig, 1605, 7th ed. 1685) he 
expounded a system based on the records of nearly 300 eclipses. 
An ingenious, though ineffective, proposal for the reform of the 
calendar was put forward in his Elenchus Calendarii Gregoriani 
(Frankfort, 161 2); and he published a book on music, Melodiae 
condendae ratio (Erfurt, 1592), still worth reading. 

For details see V. Schmuck's Leichenrede (1615); J. Bertuch's 
Chronicon Portense (1739); F. W. E. Rost's Oratio ad renovendam 
S. Calvisii memoriam (1805); J. G. Stallbaum's Nachrichten iiber 
die Cantoren an der Thomasschule (1842); Allgemeine Deutsche 
Biographie; Poggendorff's Biog.-Litterarisches Handworterbuch. 

CALVO, CARLOS (1 824-1 906), Argentine publicist and 
historian, was born at Buenos Aires on the 26th of February 
1824, and devoted himself to the study of the law. In i860 he 
was sent by the Paraguayan government on a special mission to 
London and Paris. Remaining in France, he published in 1 863 
his Der echo international teorico y practico de Europa y America, in 
two volumes, and at the same time brought out a French version. 
The book immediately took rank as one of the highest modern 
authorities on the subject, and by 1887 the first French edition 
had become enlarged to six volumes. Sefior Calvo's next 
publications were of a semi-historical character. Between 1862 
and 1869 he published in Spanish and French his great collection 
in fifteen volumes of the treaties and other diplomatic acts of the 
South American republics, and between 1864 and 1875 his 
Annates historiques de la revolution de V Amirique latine, in five 
volumes. In 1884 he was one of the founders at the Ghent 
congress of the Institut de Droit International. In the following 
year he was Argentine minister at Berlin, and published his 
Dictionnaire du droit international public et prive in that city, 
Calvo died in May 1906 at Paris. 

CALW or Kalw, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of 
Wurttemberg, on the Nagold, 34 m. S.W. of Stuttgart by rail. 
Pop. (1905), 4943. It contains a Protestant and a Roman 
Catholic Church, two schools, missionary institution, and a fine 

1 Adherents and members in scattered hamlets and attending 
different meeting-houses or chapels, often combine to form one 
society or church. 



CALYDON— CAMALDULIANS 



79 



public library. The industries include spinning and weaving 
queries in wool and cotton. Carpets, cigars and leather are
also manufactured. The timber trade, chiefly with the Nether- 
lands, is important. The place is in favour as a health resort. 

The name of Calw appears first in 1037. In the middle ages 
the town was under the dominion of a powerful family of counts, 
whose possessions finally passed to Wiirttemberg in 1345. In 
1634 the town was taken by the Bavarians, and in 1692 by 
the French. 

CALYDON (Ka\vScov), an ancient town of Aetolia, according to 
Pliny, 75 Roman m. from the sea, on the river Euenus. It was 
said to have been founded by Calydon, son of Aetolus; to have 
been the scene of the hunting, by Meleager and other heroes, of 
the famous Calydonian boar, sent by Artemis to lay waste the 
fields; and to have taken part in the Trojan war. In historical 
times it is first mentioned (391 B.C.) as in the possession of the 
Achaeans, who retained it for twenty years, by the assistance of 
the Lacedaemonian king, Agesilaus, notwithstanding the attacks 
of the Arcarnanians. After the battle of Leuctra (371 B.C.) it was 
restored by Epaminondas to the Aetolians. In the time of 
Pompey it was a town of importance; but Augustus removed 
its inhabitants to Nicopolis, which he founded to commemorate 
his victory at Actium (31 B.C.). The wallsof Calydon are almost 
certainly to be recognized in the Kastro of Kurtaga. These 
comprise a circuit of over 2 m., with one large gate and five 
smaller ones, and are situated on a hill on the right or west bank 
of the Euenus. Remains of large terrace walls outside the town 
probably indicate the position of the temple of Artemis Laphria, 
whose gold and ivory statue was transferred to Patras, together 
probably with her ritual. This included a sacrifice in which all 
kinds of beasts, wild and tame, were driven into a wooden pyre 
and consumed. 

See W. M. Leake, Travels in N. Greece, i. p. 109, iii. pp. 533 sqq. ; 
W. J. Woodhouse, Aetolia, pp. 95 sqq. (E. Gr.) 

CALYPSO, in Greek mythology, daughter of Atlas (or Oceanus, 
or Nereus), queen of the mythical island of Ogygia. When 
Odysseus was shipwrecked on her shores, Calypso entertained 
the hero with great hospitality, and prevailed on him to remain 
with her seven years. Odysseus was then seized with a longing 
to return to his wife and home; Calypso's promise of eternal 
youth failed to induce him to stay, and Hermes was sent by 
Zeus to bid her release him. When he set sail, Calypso died of 
grief. (Homer, Odyssey, i. 50, v. 28, vii. 254; Apollodorus i. 2, 7.) 

CAM (CAO), DIOGO (fl. 1480-1486), Portuguese discoverer, 
the first European known to sight and enter the Congo, and to 
explore the West African coast between Cape St Catherine (2°S.) 
and Cape Cross (21 50' S.) almost from the equator to Walfish 
Bay. When King John II. of Portugal revived the work of 
Henry the Navigator, he sent out Cam (about midsummer (?) 
1482) to open up the African coast still further beyond the 
equator. The mouth of the Congo was now discovered (perhaps 
in August 1482), and marked by a stone pillar (still existing, but 
only in fragments) erected on Shark Point; the great river was 
also ascended for a short distance, and intercourse was opened 
with the natives. Cam then coasted down along the present 
Angola (Portuguese West Africa), and erected a second pillar, 
probably marking the termination of this voyage, at Cape Santa 
Maria (the Monte Negro of these first visitors) in 13 26' S. He 
certainly returned to Lisbon by the beginning of April 1484, 
when John II. ennobled him, made him a cavalleiro of his house- 
hold (he was already an escudeiro or esquire in the same), and 
granted him an annuity and a coat of arms (8th and 14th of 
April 1484). That Cam, on his second voyage of 1483-1486, was 
accompanied by Martin Behaim (as alleged on the latter's 
Nuremberg globe of 1492) is very doubtful; but we know that 
the explorer revisited the Congo and erected two more pillars 
beyond the furthest of his previous voyage, the first at another 
" Monte Negro " in 15° 41' S., the second at Cape Cross in 
2i c 50', this last probably marking the end of his progress 
southward. According to one authority (a legend on the 1489 
map of Henricus Martellus Germanus), Cam died off Cape Cross; 
but Joao de Barros and others make him return to the Congo, 



and take thence a native envoy to Portugal. The four pillars 
set up by Cam on his two voyages have all been discovered 
in situ, and the inscriptions on two of them from Cape Santa 
Maria and Cape Cross, dated 1482 and 1485 respectively, are 
still to be read and have been printed; the Cape Cross padrao is 
now at Kiel (replaced on the spot by a granite facsimile) ; those 
from the Congo estuary and the more southerly Monte Negro are 
in the Museum of the Lisbon Geographical Society. 

See Barros, Decadas da Asia, Decade i. bk. iii., esp. ch. 3; Ruy 
de Pina, Chronica d' el Ret D. Joao II. ; Garcia de Resende, Chronica ; 
Luciano Cordeiro, " Diogo Cao " in Eoletim of the Lisbon Geog. Soc, 
1892; E; G. Ravenstein, "Voyages of Diogo Cao," &c, in Geog. 
Jnl. vol. xvi. (1900) ; also Geog. Jnl. xxxi. (1908). (C. R. B.) 

CAMACHO, JUAN FRANCISCO (1824-1896), Spanish states- 
man and financier, Was born in Cadiz in 1824. The first part of 
his life was devoted to mercantile and financial pursuits at 
Cadiz and then in Madrid, where he managed the affairs of and 
liquidated a mercantile and industrial society to the satisfaction 
and profit of the shareholders. In 1837 he became a captain in 
the national militia, in 1852 Conservative deputy in the Cortes 
for Alcoy, in 1853 secretary of congress, and was afterwards 
elected ten times deputy, twice senator and life senator in 
1877. Camacho took a prominent part in all financial debates 
and committees, was offered a seat in the Mon cabinet of 1864, 
and was appointed under-secretary of state finances in 1866 
under Canovas and O'Donnell. After the revolution of 1868 he 
declined the post of minister of finance offered by Marshal 
Serrano, but served in that capacity in 1872 and 1874 in Sagasta's 
cabinets. When the restoration took place, Camacho sat in the 
Cortes among the dynastic Liberals with Sagasta as leader, and 
became finance minister in 1881 at a critical moment when 
Spain had to convert, reduce, and consolidate her treasury 
and other debts with a view to resuming payment of coupons. 
Camacho drew up an excellent budget and collected taxation 
with a decidedly unpopular vigour. A few years later Sagasta 
again made him finance minister under the regency of Queen 
Christina, but had to sacrifice him when public opinion very 
clearly pronounced against his too radical financial reforms and 
his severity in collection of taxes. He was for the same reasons 
unsuccessful as a governor of the Tobacco Monopoly Company. 
He then seceded from the Liberals, and during the last years of 
his life he affected to vote with the Conservatives, who made him 
governor of the Bank of Spain. He died in Madrid on the 23rd of 
January 1896. (A. E. H.) 

CAMALDULIANS, or Camaldolese, a religious order founded 
by St Romuald. Born of a noble family at Ravenna c. 950, he- 
retired at the age of twenty to the Benedictine monastery of 
S. Apollinare in Classe; but being strongly drawn to the ere- 
mitical life, he went to live with a hermit in the neighbourhood of 
Venice and then again near Ravenna. Here a colony of hermits 
grew up around him and he became the superior. As soon as 
they were established in their manner of life, Romuald moved to 
another district and there formed a second settlement of hermits, 
only to proceed in the same way to the establishment of other 
colonies of hermits or " deserts " as they were called. In this 
way during the course of his life Romuald formed a great number 
of " deserts " throughout central Italy. His chief foundation 
was at Camaldoli on the heights of the Tuscan Apennines not far 
from Arezzo, in a vale snow-covered during half the year. 
Romuald's idea was to reintroduce into the West the primitive 
eremitical form of monachism, as practised by the first Egyptian 
and Syrian monks. His monks dwelt in separate huts around the 
oratory, and came together only for divine service and on certain 
days for meals. The life was one of extreme rigour in regard to 
food, clothing, silence and general observance. Besides the 
hermits there were lay brothers to help in carrying out the field 
work and rougher occupations. St Romuald and the early 
Camaldolese exercised considerable influence on the religious 
movements of their. time; the emperors Otto III. and Henry II. 
esteemed him highly and sought his advice on religious questions. 
Disciples of St Romuald went on missions to the still heathen 
parts of Russia, Poland and Prussia, where some of them suffered 
martyrdom. In his extreme old age St Romuald with twenty-five 



8o 



CAMARGG— CAMBACERES 



of his monks started on a missionary expedition to Hungary, 
but he was unable to accomplish the journey. He died in 1027. 
After his death mitigations were gradually introduced into the 
rule and manner of life; and in the monastery of St Michael in 
Murano, Venice, the life became cenobitical. From that time to 
the present day there have always been both eremitical and 
cenobitical Camaldolese, the latter approximating to ordinary 
Benedictine life. The Camaldolese spread all over Italy, and into 
Germany, Poland and France. Camaldoli itself exists as a 
" desert," the primitive observance of the institute being strictly 
maintained. There are a few other " deserts," all in Italy, 
except one in Poland; and there are about 90 hermits. The chief 
monastery of the cenobitical Camaldolese is S. Gregorio on the 
Caelian Hill in Rome; they number less than forty. Since the 
nth-century there have been Camaldolese nuns; at present there 
are five nunneries with 150 nuns, all belonging to the cenobitical 
branch of the order. The habit of the Camaldulians is white. 

See Helyot, Hist, des ordres religieux (1792) v. cc. 21-25; Max 
Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen (1896) i. § 29; and the art. 
" Camaldulenser " in Wetzer and Welte, Kirchenlexikon (2nd ed.), 
and Herzog, Realencyklopddie (3rd ed.). (E. C. B.) 

CAMARGO, MARIE ANNE DE CUPIS DE (1710-1770), 
French dancer, of Spanish descent, was born in Brussels on the 
15th of April 1710. Her father, Ferdinand Joseph de Cupis, 
earned a scanty living as violinist and dancing-master, and from 
childhood she was trained for the stage. At ten years of age she 
was given lessons by Mile Francoise Prevost (1680-1741), then 
the first dancer at the Paris Opera, and at once obtained an 
engagement as premiere danseuse, first at Brussels and then at 
Rouen. Under her grandmother's family name of Camargo she 
made her Paris dibut in 1726, and at once became the rage. 
Every new fashion bore her name; her manner of doing her hair 
was copied by all at court; her shoemaker — she had a tiny foot — 
made his fortune. She had many titled adorers whom she nearly 
ruined by her extravagances, among others Louis de Bourbon, 
comte de Clermont. At his wish she retired from the stage from 
1736 to 1741. In her time she appeared in seventy-eight ballets 
or operas, always to the delight of the public. She was the first 
ballet-dancer to shorten the skirt to what afterwards became the 
regulation length. There is a charming portrait of her by 
Nicolas Lancret in the Wallace collection, London. 

CAMARGUE {Insula Camaria), a thinly-populated region of 
southern France contained wholly in the department of Bouches- 
du-Rhone, and comprising the delta of the Rhone. The 
Camargue is a marshy plain of alluvial formation enclosed 
between the two branches of the river, the Grand Rhone to the 
east and the Petit Rhone to the west. Its average elevation is 
from 6| to 8 ft. The Camargue has a coast-line some 30 m. in 
length and an area of 290 sq. m., of which about a quarter consists 
of cultivated and fertile land. This is in the north and on the 
banks of the rivers. The rest consists of rough pasture grazed by 
the black bulls and white horses of the region and by large flocks 
of sheep, or of marsh, stagnant water and waste land impregnated 
with salt. The region is inhabited by flocks of flamingoes, 
bustards, partridge, and by sea-birds of various kinds. The 
Etang de Vaccares, the largest of the numerous lagoons and 
pools, covers about 23 sq. m. ; it receives three main canals con- 
structed to drain off the minor lagoons. The Camargue is 
protected by dikes from the inundations both of the sea and of 
the rivers. Inlets in the sea-dike let in water for the purposes of 
the lagoon fisheries and the salt-pans; and the river- water is 
used for irrigation and for the submersion of vines. The 
climate is characterized by hard winters and scorching summers. 
Rain falls in torrents, but at considerable intervals. The mistral, 
blowing from the north and north-west, is the prevailing wind. 
The south-eastern portion of the Camargue is known as the He 
du Plan du Bourg. A secondary delta to the west of the Petit 
Rhone goes by the name of Petite Camargue. 

CAMARINA, an ancient city of Sicily, situated on the south 
coast, about 17 m. S.E. of Gela (Terranova). It was founded by 
Syracuse in 599 B.C., but destroyed by the mother city ih 552 for 
Attempting to assert its independence. Hippocrates of Gtela 



received its territory from Syracuse and restored the town in 492, 
but it was destroyed by Gelon in 484; the Geloans, however, 
founded it anew in 461. It seems to have been in general hostile 
to Syracuse, but, though an ally of Athens in 427, it gave some 
slight help to Syracuse in 415-413. It was destroyed by the 
Carthaginians in 405, restored by Timoleon in 339 after its 
abandonment by Dionysius's order, but in 258 fell into the 
hands of the Romans. Its complete destruction dates from 
a.d. 853. The site of the ancient city is among rapidly shifting 
sandhills, and the lack of stone in the neighbourhood has led to 
its buildings being used as a quarry even by the inhabitants of 
Terranova, so that nothing is now visible above ground but a 
small part of the wall of the temple of Athena and a few founda- 
tions of houses; portions of the city wall have been traced by 
excavation, and the necropolis has been carefully explored (see 
J. Schubring in Philologus, xxxii. 490; P. Orsi in Monumenti 
dei Lined, ix. 201, 1899; xiv. 756, 1904). To the north 
lay the lake to which the answer of the Delphic oracle referred, 
jui) Kivti Kanaptvav, when the citizens inquired as to the 
advisability of draining it. 

CAMBACERES, JEAN JACQUES REGIS DE, duke of Parma 
(1753-1824), French statesman, was born at Montpellier on the 
18th of October 1753. He was descended from a well-known 
family of the legal nobility (noblesse de la robe). He was designed 
for the magistracy of his province; and in 1771, when for a time 
the provincial parlement was suppressed, with the others, by the 
chancellor Maupeou, he refused to sit in the royal tribunal 
substituted for it. He continued, however, to study law with 
ardour, and in 1774 succeeded his father as councillor in the 
court of accounts and finances of his native town. Espousing 
the principles of the Revolution in 1789, he was commissioned 
by the noblesse of the province to draw up the cahier (statement of 
principles and grievances); and the senechausste of Montpellier 
elected him deputy to the states-general of Versailles; but the 
election was annulled on a technical point. Nevertheless in 
1792 the new department of Herault, in which Montpellier is 
situated, sent him as one of its deputies to the Convention 
which assembled and proclaimed the Republic in September 
1792. In the strife which soon broke out between the Girondins 
and the Jacobins he took no decided part, but occupied himself 
mainly with the legal and legislative work which went on almost 
without intermission even during the Terror. The action of 
Cambaceres at the time of the trial of Louis XVI. (December 
25, 1792-January 20, 1793) was characteristic of his habits of 
thought. At first he protested against the erection of the 
Convention into a tribunal in these words: " The people has 
chosen you to be legislators; it has not appointed you as judges." 
He also demanded that the king should have due facilities for his 
defence. Nevertheless, when the trial proceeded, he voted with 
the majority which declared Louis to be guilty, but recommended 
that the penalty should be postponed until the cessation of 
hostilities, and that the sentence should then be ratified by the 
Convention or by some other legislative body. It is therefore 
inexact to count him among the regicides, as was done by the 
royalists after 1815. Early in 1793 he became a member of the 
Committee of General Defence, but he did not take part in the 
work of its more famous successor, the Committee of Public 
Safety, until the close of the year 1794. In the meantime he had 
done much useful work, especially that of laying down, conjointly 
with Merlin of Douai, the principles on which the legislation of 
the revolutionary epoch should be codified. At the close of 1794 
he also used his tact and eloquence on behalf of the restoration of 
the surviving Girondins to the Convention, from which they had 
been driven by the coup d'Uat of the 31st of May 1793. In the 
course of the year 179s, as president of the Committee of Public 
Safety, and as responsible especially for foreign affairs, he was 
largely instrumental in bringing about peace with Spain. Never- 
theless, not being a regicide, he was not appointed to be one of 
the five Directors to whom the control of public • affairs was 
entrusted after the Coup d'ttat of Vendemiaire 1795; but, as 
before, his powers of judgment and of tactful debating soon 
carried him to the front in the council of Five Hundred. Th« 



CAMBALUC-^CAMBAY 



8 1 



moderation of his views brought him into opposition to the 
Directors after the coup d'Uat of Fructidor (September 1797), 
and for a time he retired into private life. Owing, however, to 
the influence of Sieves, he became minister of justice in July 
1799. He gave a guarded support to Bonaparte and Sieves in 
their enterprise of overthrowing the Directory {coup d'Uat of 
Brumaire 1799). 

After a short interval Cambaceres was, by the constitution of 
December 1799, appointed second consul of France — a position 
which he owed largely to his vast legal knowledge and to the 
conviction which Sieyes entertained of his value as a mani- 
pulator of public assemblies. It is impossible here to describe in 
detail his relations to Napoleon, and the part which he played in 
the drawing up of the Civil Code, later on called the Code 
Napoleon. It must suffice to say that the skilful intervention of 
Cambaceres helped very materially to ensure to Napoleon the 
consulship for life (August 1, 1802); but the second consul is 
known to have disapproved of some of the events which followed, 
notably the execution of the due d'Enghien, the rupture with 
England, and the proclamation of the Empire (May 19, 1804). 
This last occurrence ended his title of second consul; it was 
replaced by that of arch-chancellor of the Empire. To him was 
decreed the presidence of the Senate in perpetuity. He also 
became a prince of the Empire and received in 1808 the title 
duke of Parma. Apart from the important part which he took in 
helping to co-ordinate and draft the Civil Code, Cambaceres did 
the state good service in many directions, notably by seeking to 
curb the impetuosity of the emperor, and to prevent enterprises 
so fatal as the intervention in Spanish affairs (1808) and the 
invasion of Russia (181 2) proved to be. At the close of the 
campaign of 1814 he shared with Joseph Bonaparte the responsi- 
bility for some of the actions which zealous Bonapartists have 
deemed injurious to the fortunes of the emperor. In 181 5, 
during the Hundred Days, he took up his duties reluctantly at 
the bidding of Napoleon; and after the second downfall of his 
master, he felt the brunt of royalist vengeance, being for a time 
exiled from France. A decree of 13th May 1818 restored him to 
his civil rights as a citizen of France; but the last six years of his 
life he spent in retirement. He was a member of the Academy 
till the 31st of March 1816, when a decree of exclusion was 
passed. In demeanour he was quiet, reserved and tactful, but 
when occasion called for it he proved himself a brilliant orator. 
He was a celebrated gourmet, and his dinners were utilized by 
Napoleon as a useful adjunct to the arts of statecraft. 

See A. Aubriet, Vie de Cambaceres (2nd ed., Paris, 1825). 

(J. Hl. R.) 

CAMBALUC, the name by which, under sundry modifications, 
the royal city of the great khan in China became known to Europe 
during the middle ages, that city being in fact the same that we 
now know as Peking. The word itself represents the Mongol 
Khan-Balik, " the city of the khan," or emperor, the title by 
which Peking continues, more or less, to be known to the Mongols 
and other northern Asiatics. 

A city occupying approximately the same site had been the 
capital of one of the principalities into which China was divided 
some centuries before the Christian era; and during the reigns 
of the two Tatar dynasties that immediately preceded the Mongols 
in northern China, viz. that of the Khitans, and of the Kin or 
" Golden " khans, it had been one of their royal residences. 
Under the names of Yenking, which it received from the Khitan, 
and of Chung-tu, which it had from the Kin, it holds a conspicuous 
place in the wars of Jenghiz Khan against the latter dynasty. 
He cap turedit in 1 21 s, but it was not till 1284 that it was adopted 
as the imperial residence in lieu of Karakorum in the Mongol 
steppes by his grandson Kublai. The latter selected a position 
a few hundred yards to the north-east of the old city of Chung-tu 
or Yenking, where he founded the new city of Ta-tu (" great 
capital "), called by the Mongols Taidu or Daitu, but also Khan- 
Balik; and from this time dates the use of the latter name as 
applied to this site. 

The new city formed a rectangle, enclosed by a colossal mud 
rampart, the longer sides of which ran north and south. These 



were each about 5^ English m.'in length, the shorter sides 3! m., 
so that the circuit was upwards of 18 m. The palace of the 
khan, with its gardens and lake, itself formed an inner enclosure 
fronting the south. There were eleven city gates, viz. three on 
the south side, always the formal front with the Tatars, and two 
on each of the other sides; and the streets ran wide and straight 
from gate to gate (except, of course, where interrupted by the 
palace walls), forming an oblong chess-board plan. 

Ta-tu continued to be the residence of the emperors till the 
fall of the Mongol power (1368). The native dynasty (Ming) 
which supplanted them established their residence at Nan-king 
(" South Court "), but this proved so inconvenient that Yunglo, 
the third sovereign of the dynasty, reoccupied Ta-tu, giving it 
then, for the first time, the name of Pe-king (" North Court "). 
This was the name in common use when the Jesuits entered 
China towards the end of the 16th century, and began to send 
home accurate information about China. But it is not so now; 
the names in ordinary use being King-cheng or King-tu, both 
signifying " capital." The restoration of Cambaluc was com- 
menced in 1409. The size of the city was diminished by the 
retrenchment of nearly one-third at the northern end, which 
brought the enceinte more nearly to a square form. And this 
constitutes the modern (so-called) " Tatar city " of Peking, the 
south front of which is identical with the south front of the city 
of Kublai. The walls were completed in 1437. Population 
gathered about the southern front, probably using the material of 
the old city of Yenking, and the excrescence so formed was, in 
1544, enclosed by a wall and called the " outer city." It is the 
same that is usually called by Europeans " the Chinese city." 
The ruins of the retrenched northern portion of Kublai's great 
rampart are still prominent along their whole extent, so that 
there is no room for question as to the position or true dimensions 
of the Cambaluc of the middle ages; and it is most probable, 
indeed it is almost a necessity, that the present palace stands on 
the lines of Kublai's palace. 

The city, under the name of Cambaluc, was constituted into an 
archiepiscopal see by Pope Clement V. in 1307, in favour of the 
missionary Franciscan John of Montecorvino (d. 1330); but 
though some successors were nominated it seems probable that 
no second metropolitan ever actually occupied the seat. 

Maps of the 16th and 17th centuries often show Cambaluc in 
an imaginary region to the north of China, a part of the miscon- 
ception that has prevailed regarding Cathay. The name is 
often in popular literature written Cambalu, and is by Longfellow 
accented in verse C&mb&lu. But this spelling originates in an 
accidental error in Ramusio's Italian version, which was the chief 
channel through which Marco Polo's book was popularly known. 
The original (French) MSS. all agree with the etymology in calling 
it Cambaluc, which should be accented C&mb&luc. 

CAMBAY, a native state of India, within the Gujarat division 
of Bombay. It has an area of 350 sq. m. Pop. (1901) 75,225, 
showing a decrease of 16% in the decade, due to the famine of 
1899-1900. The estimated gross revenue is £27,189; the tribute, 
£1460. In physical character Cambay is entirely an alluvial 
plain. As a separate state it dates only from about 1730, the 
time of the dismemberment of the Mogul empire. The present 
chiefs are descended from Momin Khan II., the last of the 
governors of Gujarat, who in 1742 murdered his brother-in-law, 
Nizam Khan, governor of Cambay, and established himself there. 

The town o"f Cambay had a population in 1901 of 31,780. It 
is supposed to be the Camanes of Ptolemy, and was formerly a 
very flourishing city, the seat of an extensive trade, and cele- 
brated for its manufactures of silk, chintz and gold stuffs; but 
owing principally to the gradually increasing difficulty of access 
by water, owing to the silting up of the gulf, its commerce has 
long since fallen away, and the town has become poor and 
dilapidated, The spring tides rise upwards of 30 ft., and in a 
channel usually so shallow form a serious danger to shipping. The 
trade is chiefly confined to the export of cotton. The town is 
celebrated for its manufacture of agate and carnelian ornaments, 
of reputation principally in China. The houses in many instances 
are built of stone (a circumstance which indicates the former 



82 



CAMBAY, GULF OF— CAMBODIA 



wealth of the city, as the material had to be brought from a very 
considerable distance); and remains of a brick wall, 3 m. in 
circumference, which formerly surrounded the town, enclose four 
large reservoirs of good water and three bazaars. To the south- 
east there are very extensive ruins of subterranean temples and 
other buildings half-buried in the sand by which the ancient 
town was overwhelmed. These temples belong to the Jains, and 
contain two massive statues of their deities, the one black, the 
other white. The principal one, as the inscription intimates, 
is Pariswanath, or Parswanath, carved in the reign of the 
emperor Akbar; the black one has the date of 1651 inscribed. 
In 1780 Cambay was taken by the army of General Goddard, was 
restored to the Mahrattas in 1 783, and was afterwards ceded to the 
British by the peshwa under the treaty of 1803. It was provided 
with a railway in 1901 by the opening of the n m. required 
to connect with the gaekwar of Baroda's line through Petlad. 

CAMBAY, GULF OF, an inlet in the coast of India, in the 
Gujarat division of Bombay. It is about 80 m. in length, but 
is shallow and abounds in shoals and sandbanks. It is supposed 
that the depth of water in this gulf has been decreasing for more 
than two centuries past. The tides, which are very high, run 
into it with amazing velocity, but at low water the bottom is 
left nearly dry for some distance below the latitude of the town 
of Cambay. It is, however, an important inlet, being the channel 
by which the valuable produce of central Gujarat and the 
British districts of Ahmedabad and Broach is exported; but the 
railway from Bombay to Baroda and Ahmedabad, near Cambay, 
has for some time past been attracting the trade to itself. 

CAMBER (derived through the Fr. from Lat. camera, vault), 
in architecture, the upward curvature given to a beam and 
provided for the depression or sagging, which it is liable to, 
before it has settled down to its bearings. A " camber arch " is 
a slight rise given to the straight-arch to correct an apparent 
sinking in the centre (see Arch). 

CAMBERT, ROBERT (1628-1677), French operatic composer, 
was born in Paris in 1628. He was a pupil of Chambonnieres. 
In 1655, after he had obtained the post of organist at the church 
of St Honore, he married Marie du Moustier. He was musical 
superintendent to Queen Anne of Austria, mother of Louis XIV., 
and for a time held a post with the marquis de Sourdeac. His 
earlier works, the words of which were furnished by Pierre 
Perrin, continued to be performed before the court at Vincennes 
till the death of his patron Cardinal Mazarin. In 1669 Perrin 
received a patent for the founding of the Acadimie Nationale de 
musique, the germ of the Grand Opera, and Cambert had a share 
in the administration until both he and Perrin were discarded 
in the interests of Lulli. Displeased at his subsequent neglect, 
and jealous of the favour shown to Lulli, who was musical 
superintendent to the king, he went in 1673 to London, where 
soon after his arrival he was appointed master of the band to 
Charles II. One at least of his operas, Pomone, was performed in 
London under his direction, but it did not suit the popular taste, 
and he is supposed to have killed himself in London in 1677. 
His other principal operas were Ariadne ou les amours de Bacchus 
and Les Peines et les plaisirs de V amour. 

CAMBER WELL, a southern metropolitan borough of London, 
England, bounded N. by Southwark and Bermondsey, E. by 
Deptford and Lewisham, W. by Lambeth, and extending S. to 
the boundary of the county of London. Pop, (1901) 259,339. 
Area, 4480 acres. It appears in Domesday, but the derivation 
of the name is unknown. It includes the districts of Peckham 
and Nunhead, and Dulwich (q.v.) with its park, picture-gallery 
and schools. Camberwell is mainly residential, and there are 
many good houses, pleasantly situated in Dulwich and south- 
ward towards the high ground of Sydenham. Dulwich Park 
(72 acres) and Peckham Rye Common and Park (113 acres) are 
the largest of several public grounds, and Camberwell Green 
was once celebrated for its fairs. Immediately outside the 
southern boundary lies a well-known place of recreation, 
the Crystal Palace. Among institutions may be mentioned the 
Camberwell school of arts and crafts, Peckham Road. In 
Camberwell Road is Cambridge House, a university settlement. 



founded in 1897 and incorporating the earlier Trinity settlement. 
i The parliamentary borough of Camberwell has three divisions, 
North, Peckham and Dulwich, each returning one member; 
but is not wholly coincident with the municipal borough, the 
Dulwich division extending to include Penge, outside the 
county of London. The borough council consists of a mayor, 
ten aldermen, and sixty councillors. 

CAMBIASI, LUCA (1527-1585), Genoese painter, familiarly 
known as Lucchetto da Genova (his surname is written also 
Cambiaso or Cangiagio), was born at Moneglia in the Genoese 
state, the son of a painter named Giovanni Cambiasi. He took to 
drawing at a very early age, imitating his father, and developed 
great aptitude for foreshortening. At the age of fifteen he painted, 
along with his father, some subjects from Ovid's Metamorphoses 
on the front of a house in Genoa, and afterwards, in conjunction 
with Marcantonio Calvi, a ceiling showing great daring of 
execution in the Palazzo Doria. He also formed an early friend- 
ship with Giambattista Castello; both artists painted together, 
with so much similarity of style that their works could hardly 
be told apart; from this friend Cambiasi learned much in the 
way of perspective and architecture. Luchetto's best artistic 
period lasted for twelve years after his first successes; from that 
time he declined in power, though not at once in reputation, 
owing to the agitations and vexations brought upon him by a 
passion which he conceived for his sister-in-law. His wife having 
died, and the sister-in-law having taken charge of his house and 
children, he endeavoured to procure a papal dispensation for 
marrying her; but in this he was disappointed. In 1583 he 
accepted an invitation from Philip II. to continue in the Escorial 
a series of frescoes which had been begun by Castello, now 
deceased; and it is said that one principal reason for his closing 
with this offer was that he hoped to bring the royal influence to 
bear upon the pope, but in this again he failed. Worn out with 
his disquietudes, he died in the Escorial in the second year of his 
sojourn. Cambiasi had an ardent fancy, and was a bold designer 
in a Raphaelesque mode. His extreme facility astonished the 
Spanish painters; and it is said that Philip II., watching one day 
with pleasure the offhand zest with, which Luchetto was painting 
a head of a laughing child, was allowed the further surprise of 
seeing the laugh changed, by a touch or two upon the lips, into a 
weeping expression. The artist painted sometimes with a brush 
in each hand, and with a certainty equalling or transcending that 
even, of Tintoret. He made a vast number of drawings, and was 
also something of a sculptor, executing in this branch of art a 
figure of Faith. Altogether he ranks as one of the ablest artists 
of his day. Inpersonal character, notwithstanding his executive 
energy, he is reported to have been timid and diffident. His son 
Orazio became likewise a painter, studying under Luchetto. 

The best works of Cambiasi are to be seen in Genoa. In the 
church of S. Giorgio — the martyrdom of that saint; in the Palazzo 
Imperiali Terralba, a Genoese suburb — a fresco of the " Rape of the 
Sabines " ; in S. Maria da Carignano — a " Pieta," containing his own 
portrait and (according to tradition) that of his beloved sister-in- 
law. In the Escorial he executed several pictures; one is a Paradise 
on the vaulting of the church, with a multitude of figures. For this 
picture he received 12,000 ducats, probably the largest sum that had, 
up to that time, ever been given for a single work. 

CAMBODIA ' (called by the inhabitants Sroc Khmer and by the 
French Cambodge), a country of south-eastern Asia and a pro- 
tectorate of France, forming part of French Indo-China. 

Geography. — It is bounded N. by Siam and Laos, E. by 
Annam, S.E. andS. by Cochin-China, S.W. by the Gulf of Siam, 
and W. by Siam. Its area is estimated- at approximately 
65,000 sq. m.; its population at 1,500,000, of whom some 
three-quarters are Cambodians, the rest Chinese, Annamese, 
Chams, Malays, and aboriginal natives. The whole of Cambodia 
lies in the basin of the lower Mekong, which, entering this 
territory on the north, flows south for some distance, then inclines 
south-west as far as Pnom-penh, where it spreads into a delta and 
resumes a southerly course. The salient feature of Cambodian 
geography is the large lake Tonle-Sap, in a depression 68 m. long 
from south-east to north-west and 15m. wide. It is fed by several 
1 See also Indo-China, French. 



CAMBODIA 



83 



rivers and innumerable torrents, and at flood-time serves as a 
reservoir for the Mekong, with which it is connected by a channel 
some 70 m. long, known as the Bras du Lac and joining the river at 
Pnom-Penh. In June thewatersof theMekong,swollenby therains 
and the melting of the Tibetan snows, rise to a height of 40 to 45 
ft. and flow through the Bras du Lae towards the lake, which then 
covers an area of 770 sq. m., and like the river inundates the 
marshes and forests on its borders. During the dry season the 
current reverses and the depression empties so that the lake 
shrinks to an area of 100 sq. m., and its depth falls from 45-48 ft. 
to a maximum of 5 ft. Tonle-Sap probably represents the chief 
wealth of Cambodia. It supports a fishing population of over 
30,000, most of whom are Annamese; the fish, which are taken by 
means of large nets at the end of the inundation, are either dried 
or fermented for the production of the sauce known as nuoc-mam. 
The northern and western provinces of Cambodia which fall 
outside the densely populated zone of inundation are thinly 
peopled; they consist of plateaus, in many places thickly 
wooded and intersected by mountains, the highest of which does 
not exceed 5000 ft. The region to the east of the Mekong is 
traversed by spurs of the mountains of Annam and by affluents 
of the Mekong, the most important of these being the Se-khong 
and the Tonle-srepok, which unite to flow into the Mekong at 
Stung-treng. Small islands, inhabited by a fishing population, 
fringe the west coast. 

Climate, Fauna and Flora. — The climate of Cambodia, like 
that of Cochin China, which it closely resembles, varies with the 
monsoons. During the north-east monsoon, from the middle of 
October to the middle of April, dry weather prevails and the 
thermometer averages from 77 to 8o° F. During the south- 
west monsoon, from the middle of April to the middle of 
October, rain falls daily and the temperature varies between 
8 5 and 95 . The wild animals of Cambodia include the 
elephant, which is also domesticated, the rhinoceros, buffalo and 
some species of wild ox; also the tiger, panther, leopard and 
honey-bear. Wild boars, monkeys and rats abound and are the 
chief enemies of the cultivator. The crocodile is found in the 
Mekong, and there are many varieties of reptiles, some of them 
venomous. The horse of Cambodia is only from 1 1 to 1 2 hands in 
height, but is strong and capable of great endurance; the buffalo 
is the chief draught animal. Swine are reared in large numbers. 
Nux vomica, gamboge, caoutchouc, cardamoms, teak and other 
valuable woods and gums are among the natural products. 

People. — The Cambodians have a far more marked affinity 
with their Siamese than with their Annamese neighbours. The 
race is probably the result of a fusion of the Malay aborigines of 
Indo-China with the Aryan and Mongolian invaders of the 
country. The men are taller and more muscular than the 
Siamese and Annamese, while the women are small and inclined 
to stoutness. The face is flat and wide, the nose short, the mouth 
large and the eyes only slightly oblique. The skin is dark brown, 
the hair black and, while in childhood the head is shaved with 
the exception of a small tuft at the top, in later life it is dressed 
so as to resemble a brush. Both sexes wear the langouti or loin- 
cloth, which the men supplement with a short jacket, the women 
with a long scarf draped round the figure or with a long clinging 
robe. Morose, superstitious, and given to drinking and gambling, 
the Cambodians are at the same time clean, fairly intelligent, 
proud and courageous. The wife enjoys a respected position and 
divorce may be demanded by either party. Polygamy is almost 
confined to the richer classes. Though disinclined to work, the 
Cambodians make good hunters and woodsmen. Many of them 
live on the borders of the Mekong and the great lake, in huts 
built upon piles or floating rafts. The religion of Cambodia is 
Buddhism, and involves great respect towards the dead; the 
worship of spirits or local genii is also wide-spread, and Brahman- 
ism is still maintained at the court. Monks or bonzes are very 
numerous; they live by alms and in return they teach the 
young to read, and superintend coronations, marriages, funerals 
and the other ceremonials which play a large part in the lives of 
the Cambodians. As in the rest of Indo-China, there is no 
hereditary nobility, but there exist castes founded on blood- 



relationship — the members of the royal family within the fifth 
degree (the Brah-Vansa) those beyond the fifth degree (Brah- 
Van), and the Bakou, who, as descendants of the ancient Brah- 
mans, exercise certain official functions at the court. These 
castes, as well as the mandarins, who form a class by themselves, 
are exempt from tax or forced service. The mandarins are 
nominated by the king and their children have a position at court, 
and are generally chosen to fill the vacant posts in the admini- 
stration. Under the native regime the common people attached 
themselves to one or other of the mandarins, who in return 
granted them the protection of his influence. Under French rule, 
which has modified the old usages in many respects, local govern- 
ment of the Annamese type tends to supplant this feudal system. 
Slavery was abolished by a royal ordinance of 1897. 

Cambodian idiom bears a likeness to some of the aboriginal 
dialects of south Indo-China; it is agglutinate in character and 
rich in vowel-sounds. The king's language and the royal writing, 
and also religious words are, however, apparently of Aryan 
origin and akin to Pali. Cambodian writing is syllabic and com- 
plicated. The books (manuscripts) are generally formed of palm- 
leaves upon which the characters are traced by means of a style. 

Industry and Commerce. — Iron, worked by the tribe of the 
Kouis, is found in the mountainous region. The Cambodians 
show skill in working gold and silver; earthenware, bricks, mats, 
fans and silk and cotton fabrics, are also produced to some 
small extent, but fishing and the cultivation of rice and in a minor 
degree of tobacco, coffee, cotton, pepper, indigo, maize, tea and 
sugar are the only industries worthy of the name. Factories 
exist near Pnom-Penh for the shelling of cotton-seeds. The 
Cambodian is his own artificer and self-sufficing so far as his own 
needs are concerned. Rice, dried fish, beans, pepper and oxen 
are the chief elements in the export trade of the country, which 
is in the hands of Chinese. The native plays little or no part in 
commerce. 

Trade is carried on chiefly through Saigon in Cochin-China, 
Kampot, the only port of Cambodia, being accessible solely to 
coasting vessels. With the exception of the highway from 
Pnom-Penh (q.v.) the capital, to Kampot, the roads of Cambodia 
are not suited for vehicles. Pnom-Penh communicates regularly 
by the steamers of the " Messageries Fluviales " by way of the 
Mekong with Saigon. 

Administration. — At the head of the government is the king 
(raj). His successor is either nominated by himself, in which 
case he sometimes abdicates in his favour, or else elected by the 
five chief mandarins from among the Brah Vansa. The upayu- 
vraj (obbaioureach) or king who has abdicated, the heir-pre- 
sumptive (uparaj, obbareach) and the first princess of the blood 
are high dignitaries with their own retinues. The king is 
advised by a council of five ministers, the superior members of the 
class of mandarins; and the kingdom is divided into about 
fifty provinces administered by members of that body. France 
is represented by a resident superior, who presides over the 
ministerial council and is the real ruler of the country, and by 
residents exercising supervision in the districts into which the 
country is split up for the purposes of the French administration. 
In each residential district there is a council, composed of natives 
and presided over by the resident, which deliberates on questions 
affecting the district. The resident superior is assisted by the 
protectorate council, consisting of heads of French administrative 
departments (chief of the judicial service, of public works, &c ) 
and one native " notable," and the royal orders must receive its 
sanction before they can be executed. The control of foreign 
policy, public works, the customs and the exchequer are in 
French hands, while the management of police, the collection of 
the direct taxes and the administration of justice between 
natives remain with the native government. A French tribunal 
alone is competent to settle disputes where one of the parties is 
not a native. 

The following is a summary of the local budget of Cambodia 
for 1899 and 1904: — ■ Receipts. Expenditure. 

1899 • • £235,329 £188,654 

1904 . . 250,753 229,880 



84 



CAMB0N, P. J. 



The chief sources of revenue are the direct taxes, including 
the poll-tax and the taxes on the products of the soil, which 
together amounted to £172,636 in 1904. The chief heads of 
expenditure are the civil list, comprising the personal allow- 
ance to the king and the royal family (£46,018 in 1904), 
public works (£39,593) and government house and residences 

G09,977)- 

History. — The Khmers, the ancient inhabitants of Cambodia, 
are conjectured to have been the offspring of a fusion between 
the autochthonous dwellers in the Indo-Chinese peninsula, now 
represented by the Kouis and other savage tribes, and an invading 
race from the plateaus of central Asia. As early as the 12th 
century B.C., Chinese chronicles, which are almost the only source 
for the history of Cambodia till the 5th century a.d., mention a 
region called Fou-nan, in later times appearing under the name of 
Tchin-la; embracing the basin of the Menam, it extended east- 
wards to the Mekong and may be considered approximately 
coextensive with the Khmer kingdom. Some centuries before 
the Christian era, immigrants from the east coast of India began to 
exert a powerful influence over Cambodia, into which they 
introduced Brahmanism and the Sanskrit language. This Hindu- 
izing process became more marked about the 5th century a.d., 
when, under S'rutavarman, the Khmers as a nation rose into 
prominence. The name Kambuja, whence the European form 
Cambodia, is derived from the Hindu Kambu, the name of the 
mythical founder of the Khmer race; it seems to have been 
officially adopted by the Khmers as the title of their country 
about this period. At the end of the 7th century the dynasty of 
S'rutavarman ceased to rule over the whole of Cambodia, which 
during the next century was divided into two portions ruled over 
by two sovereigns. Unity appears to have been re-established 
about the beginning of the 9th century, when with Jayavarman 
III. there begins a dynasty which embraces the zenith of Khmer 
greatness and the era during which the great Brahman monu- 
ments were built. The royal city of Angkor-Thorn (see Angkor) 
was completed under Yasovarman about a.d. 900. In the 
10th century Buddhism, which had existed for centuries in 
Cambodia, began to become powerful and to rival Brahmanism, 
the official religion. The construction of the temple of Angkor 
Vat dates probably from the first half of the 12th century, and 
appears to have been carried out under the direction of the 
Brahman Divakara, who enjoyed great influence under the 
monarchs of this period. The conquest of the rival kingdom of 
Champa, which embraced modern Cochin-China and southern 
Annam, and in the later 1 5th century was absorbed by Annam, 
may probably be placed at the end of the 12th century, in the 
reign of Jayavarman VIII., the last of the great kings. War was 
also carried on against the western neighbours of Cambodia, and 
the exhaustion consequent upon all these efforts seems to have 
been the immediate cause of the decadence which now set in. 
From the last decade of the 13th century there dates a valuable 
description of Tchin-la 1 written by a member of a Chinese 
embassy thereto. The same period probably also witnessed the 
liberation of the Thais or inhabitants of Siam from the yoke of 
the Khmers, to whom they had for long been subject, and the 
expulsion of the now declining race from the basin of the Menam. 
The royal chronicles of Cambodia, the historical veracity of 
which has often to be questioned, begin about the middle of the 
14th century, at which period the Thais assumed the offensive 
and were able repeatedly to capture and pillage Angkor-Thom. 
These aggressions were continued in the 15th century, in the 
course of which the capital was finally abandoned by the Khmer 
kings, the ruin of the country being hastened by internal revolts 
and by feuds between members of the royal family. At the end of 
the 1 6th century, Lovek, which had succeeded Angkor-Thom as 
capital, was itself abandoned to the conquerors. During that 
century, the Portuguese had established some influence in the 
country, whither they were followed by the Dutch, but after the 
middle of the 17th century, Europeans counted for little in 
Cambodia till the arrival of the French. At the beginning of the 

1 Translated by Abel Remusat, Nouveaux Melanges Asiatiques 
(1829). 



17 th century the Nguyen, rulers of southern Annam, began to 
encroach on the territory of Cochin-China, and in the course of 
that and the 18th century, Cambodia, governed by two kings 
supported respectively by Siam and Annam, became a field for 
the conflicts of its two powerful neighbours. At the end of the 
1 8th century the provinces of Battambang and Siem-reap were 
annexed by Siam. The rivalries of the two powers were con- 
cluded after a last and indecisive war by the treaty of 1 846, as a 
result of which Ang-Duong, the protege of Siam, was placed on 
the throne at the capital of Oudong, and the Annamese evacuated 
the country. In 1863, in order to counteract Siamese influence 
there, Doudart de Lagree was sent by Admiral la Grandiere to the 
court of King Norodom, the successor of Ang-Duong, and as a 
result of his efforts Cambodia placed itself under the protectorate 
of France. In 1866 Norodom transferred his capital to Pnom- 
penh. In 1867 a treaty between France and Siam was signed, 
whereby Siam renounced its right to tribute and recognized the 
French protectorate over Cambodia in return for the provinces of 
Battambang and Angkor, and the Laos territory as far as the 
Mekong. In 1884 another treaty was signed by the king, con- 
firming and extending French influence, and reducing the royal 
authority to a shadow, but in view of the discontent aroused by 
it, its provisions were not put in force till several years later. 
In 1904 the territory of Cambodia was increased by the addition 
to it of the Siamese provinces of Melupre and Bassac, and 
the maritime district of Krat, the latter of which, together 
with the province of Dansai, was in 1907 exchanged for the 
provinces of Battambang, Siem-reap and Sisophon. By the 
same treaty France renounced its sphere of influence on the 
right bank of the Mekong. In 1904 King Norodom was suc- 
ceeded by his brother Sisowath. 

See E. Aymonier, Le Cambodge (3 vols., Paris, 190O-1904); 
L. Moura, Le royaume de Cambodge (2 vols., Paris, 1883) ; A. Leclere, 
Les codes cambodgiens (2 vols., Paris, 1898), and other works on 
Cambodian law; Francis Gamier, Voyage a" exploration en Indo- 
Chine (Paris, 1873). 

CAMBON, PIERRE JOSEPH (1756-1820), French statesman, 
was the son of a wealthy cotton merchant at Montpellier. In 
1785 his father retired, leaving the direction of the business to 
Pierre and his two brothers, but in 1788 Pierre turned aside to 
politics, and was sent by his fellow-citizens as deputy suppliant 
to Versailles, where he was little more than a spectator. In 
January 1790 he returned to Montpellier, was elected a member 
of the municipality, was one of the founders of the Jacobin club 
in that city, and on the flight of Louis XVI. in 179 1, he drew up 
a petition to invite the Constituent Assembly to proclaim a 
republic, — the first in date of such petitions. Elected to the 
Legislative Assembly, Cambon became notedforhisindependence, 
his honesty and his ability in finance. He was the most active 
member of the committee of finance and was often charged to 
verify the state of the treasury. Nothing could be more false 
than the common opinion that as a financier his sole expedient 
was to multiply the emissions of assignats. His remarkable 
speech of the 24th of November 1791 is a convincing proof of his 
sagacity. In politics, while he held aloof from the clubs, and 
even from parties, he was an ardent defender of the new institu- 
tions. On the 9th of February 1792, he succeeded in having a 
law passed sequestrating the possessions of the emigres, and de- 
manded, though in vain, the deportation of refractory priests to 
French Guiana. He was the last president of the Legislative 
Assembly. Re-elected to the Convention, he opposed the pre- 
tensions of the Commune and the proposed grant of money to 
the municipality of Paris by the state. He denounced Marat's 
placards as inciting to murder, summoned Danton to give an 
account of his ministry, watched carefully over the furnishing 
of military supplies, and was a strong opponent of Dumouriez, 
in spite of the general's great. popularity. Cambon then incurred 
the hatred of Robespierre by proposing the suppression of the 
pay to the clergy, which would have meant the separation of 
church and state. His authority grew steadily. On the 15th of 
December 1792 he got the Convention to adopt a proclamation to 
all nations in favour of a universal republic. In the trial of 



GAMBON, P. P.— CAMBRAI 



85 



Louis XVI. he voted for his death, without appeal or postpone- 
ment. He attempted to prevent the creation of the Revolutionary 
Tribunal, but when called to the first Committee of Public 
Safety he worked on it energetically to organize the armies. On 
the 3rd of February 1793 he had decreed the emission of 800 
millions of assignats, for the expenses of the war. His courageous 
intervention in favour of the Girondists on the 2nd of June 1793 
served Robespierre as a pretext to prevent his re-election to the 
Committee of Public Safety. But Cambon soon came to the 
conclusion that the security of France depended upon the triumph 
of the Mountain, and he did not hesitate to accord his active co- 
operation to the second committee. He took an active share 
in the various expedients of the government for stopping the 
depreciation of the assignats. He was responsible, especially, 
for the great operation known as the opening of the Grand Livre 
(August 24), which was designed to consolidate the public debt 
by cancelling the stock issued under various conditions prior to 
the Revolution, and issuing new stock of a uniform character, so 
that all fund-holders should hold stock of the revolutionary gov- 
ernment and thus be interested in its stability. Each fund-holder 
was to be entered in the Great Book, or register of the public 
debt, for the amount due to him every year. The result of this 
measure was a rise in the face value of the assignats from 27% 
to 48 % by the end of the year. In matters of finance Cambon 
was now supreme; but his independence, his hatred of dictator- 
ship, his protests against the excesses of the Revolutionary 
Tribunal, won him Robespierre's renewed suspicion, and on 
the 8th Thermidor Robespierre accused him of being anti- 
revolutionary and an aristocrat. Cambon 's proud and vehement 
reply was the signal of the resistance to Robespierre's tyranny 
and the prelude to his fall. Cambon soon had reason to repent 
of that event, for he became one of those most violently attacked 
by the Thermidorian reaction. The royalist pamphlets and the 
journals of J. L. Tallien attacked him with fury as a former 
Montagnard. He was charged with being responsible for the dis- 
credit of the assignats, and even accused of malversations. On 
the 21st of February 1795 the project which he presented to with- 
draw four milliards of assignats from circulation, was rejected, 
and on the 3rd of April he was excluded from the committee of 
finance. On the 16th Germinal, Tallien procured a decree of ac- 
cusation against him, but he was already in safety, taking refuge 
probably at Lausanne. In any case he does not seem to have re- 
mained in Paris, although in the riot of the 1st Prairial some of the 
insurgents proclaimed him mayor. The amnesty of the 4th Bru- 
maire of the year IV. (the 5th of October 1795), permitted him to 
return to France, and he withdrew to his estate of Terral near 
Montpellier, where, during the White Terror, he had a narrow 
escape from an attempt upon his life. At first Cambon hoped to 
find in Bonaparte the saviour of the republic, but, deceived by 
the 1 8th Brumaire, he lived throughout the whole of the empire 
in peaceful seclusion. During the Hundred Days he was deputy 
for Herault in the chamber of representatives, and pronounced 
himself strongly against the return of the Bourbons, and for 
religious freedom. Under the Restoration the " amnesty " 
law of 1 816 condemned him as a regicide to exile, and he withdrew 
to Belgium, to St Jean-Ten-Noode, near Brussels, where he died 
ontheisthof February 1820. (R. A.*) 

See Bornarel, Cambon (Paris). 

CAMBON, PIERRE PAUL (1843- ), French diplomatist, 
was born on the 20th of January 1843. He was called to the 
Parisian bar, and became private secretary to Jules Ferry in the 
prefecture of the Seine. After ten years of administrative work 
in France as secretary of prefecture, and then as prefect succes- 
sively of the departments of Aube (1872), Doubs (1876), Nord 
(1877-1882), he exchanged into the diplomatic service, being 
nominated French minister plenipotentiary at Tunis. In 1886 
he became French ambassador to Madrid; was transferred to 
Constantinople in 1890, and in 1898 to London. He was decor- 
ated with the grand cross of the Legion of Honour, and became a 
member of the French Academy of Sciences. 

His brother, Jules Martin Cambon (1845- ), was called 
to the bar in 1866, served in the Franco-Prussian War and 



entered the civil service in 1871. He was prefect of the depart- 
ment of Nord (1882) and of the Rhone (1887-1891), and in 1891 
became governor-general of Algeria (see Guyot, L'muvre de 
M. Jules Cambon, Paris, 1897), where he had served in a minor 
position in 1874. He was nominated French ambassador at 
Washington in 1897, and in that capacity negotiated the pre- 
liminaries of peace on behalf of the Spanish government after the 
war with the United States. He was transferred in 1902 to 
Madrid, and in 1907 to Berlin. 

CAMBORNE, a market town in the Camborne parliamentary 
division of Cornwall, England, on the Great Western railway, 
13 m.E.N.E. of Penzance. Pop. of urban district (1901), 14,726. 
It lies on the northward slope of the central elevation of the 
county, and is in the neighbourhood of some of the most pro- 
ductive tin and copper mines. These and the manufacture of 
mining machinery employ most of the inhabitants. The parish 
church of St Martin contains several monuments and an ancient 
stone altar bearing a Latin inscription. There are science and art 
and mining schools, and practical mining is taught in South 
Condurrow mine, the school attracting a large number of students. 
It was developed from classes initiated in 1859 by the Miners' 
Association, and a three years' course of instruction is provided. 

Camborne (Cambron, Camron) formed a portion of the ex- 
tensive manor of Tehidy, which at the time of the Domesday 
Survey was held by the earl of Mortain and subsequently by the 
Dunstanville and Basset families. Its interests were economic- 
ally insignificant until the beginning of the 18th century when the 
rich deposits of copper and tin began to be vigorously worked at 
Dolcoath. It has been estimated that in 1788 this mine alone 
had produced ore worth £2,000,000 and in 1882 ore worth 
£5,500,000. As the result of the prosperity of this and other 
mines in the neighbourhood the population in i860 was double 
that of 1830, six times that of 1770 and fifteen times that of 
1660. Camborne was the scene of the scientific labours of 
Richard Trevithick (1771-1833), the engineer, born in the 
neighbouring parish of Illogan, and of William Bickford, the 
inventor of the safety-fuse, a native of Camborne. Three fairs on 
the feasts of St Martin and St Peter and on 2 5th of February were 
granted in 1708. The two former are still held, the last has been 
transferred to the 7th of March. A Tuesday market formed the 
subject of a judicial inquiry in 1768, but since the middle of the 
19th century it has been held on Saturdays. 

CAMBRAI, a town of northern France, capital of an arrondisse- 
ment in the department of Nord, 37 m. S.S.E. of Lille on the 
main line of the Northern railway. Pop. (1906) 21,791. Cambrai 
is situated on the right and eastern bank of the Scheldt (arms of 
which traverse the west of the town) and at one extremity of the 
canal of St Quentin. The fortifications with which it was formerly 
surrounded have been for the most part demolished. The fosses 
have been filled up and the ramparts in part levelled to make 
way, as the suburbs extended, for avenues stretching out on all 
sides. The chief survivals from the demolition are the huge 
square citadel, which rises to the east of the town, the chateau de 
Selles, a good specimen of the military architecture of the 
13th century, and, among other gates, the Porte Notre-Dame, a 
stone and brick structure of the early 17th century. Handsome 
boulevards now skirt the town, the streets of which are clean and 
well-ordered, and a large public garden extends at the foot of the 
citadel, with a statue of Enguerrand de Monstrelet the chronicler. 
The former cathedral of Cambrai was destroyed after the Revolu- 
tion. The present cathedral of Notre-Dame is a church of the 
19th century built on the site of the old abbey church of St 
S6pulchre. Among other monuments it contains that of Fenelon, 
archbishop from 1695 to 171 5, by David d'Angers. The church of 
St Gery (18th century) contains, among other works of art, a 
marble rood-screen of Renaissance workmanship. The Place 
d'Armes, a large square in the centre of the town, is bordered on 
the north by a handsome h6tel de ville built in 1634 and rebuilt 
in the 19th century. The Tour St Martin is an old church-tower 
of the 15th and 1 8th centuries transformed into a belfry. The 
triple stone portal, which gave entrance to the former archi- 
episcopal palace, is a work of the Renaissance period. The 



86 



CAMBRIA— CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 



present archbishop's palace, adjoining the cathedral, occupies 
the site of an old Benedictine convent. 

Cambrai is the seat of an archbishop and a sub-prefect, and has 
tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a board of trade- 
arbitrators, a chamber of commerce and a branch of the Bank 
of France. Its educational institutions include communal 
colleges, ecclesiastical seminaries, and schools of drawing and 
music. The library has over 40,000 volumes and there is a 
museum of antiquities and objects of art. The chief industry of 
Cambrai is the weaving of muslin {batiste) and other fine 
fabrics (see Cambric); wool-spinning and weaving, bleaching 
and dyeing, are carried on, as well as the manufacture of chicory, 
oil, soap, sausages and metal boxes. There are also large beet- 
sugar works and breweries and distilleries. Trade is in cattle, 
grain, coal, hops, seed, &c. 

Cambrai is the ancient Nervian town of Camaracum, which is 
mentioned in the Antonine Itinerary. In the 5th century it was 
the capital of the Frankish king Raguacharius. Fortified by 
Charlemagne, it was captured and pillaged by the Normans in> 
870, and unsuccessfully besieged by the Hungarians in 953. 
During the 10th, nth and 12th centuries it was the scene of 
frequent hostilities between the bishop and his supporters on the 
one hand and the citizens on the other; but the latter ultimately 
effected their independence. In 1478 Louis XL, who had 
obtained possession of the town on the death of Charles the Bold, 
duke of Burgundy, handed it over to the emperor, and in the 
16th century Charles V. caused it to be fortified with a strong 
citadel, for the erection of which the castles of Cavillers, Escau- 
doeuvres and many others were demolished. From that date to 
the peace of Nijmwegen, 1678, which assigned it to France, it 
frequently passed from hand to hand by capture or treaty. In 
1793 it was besieged in vain by the Austrians. The League of 
Cambrai is the name given to the alliance of Pope Julius II., 
Louis XII., Maximilian I., and Ferdinand the Catholic against 
the Venetians in 1508; and the peace of Cambrai, or as it is 
also called, the Ladies' Peace, was concluded in the town in 1529 
by Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis I., and Margaret of 
Austria, aunt of Charles V., in the name of these monarchs. The 
bishopric of Cambrai dates from the 5th century, and was raised 
in 1559 to the rank of an archbishopric, which continued till the 
Revolution, and has since been restored. The bishops received 
the title of count from the emperor Henry I. (919-936), and in 
1510 were raised to the dignity of dukes, their territory including 
the town itself and its territory, called Cambresis. 

See E. Bouly, Histoire de Cambrai et du Cambresis (Cambria, 
1843)- 

CAMBRIA, the Med. Lat. name for Wales. After the 
end of the western Roman empire the Cymric Celts held for a 
while both Wales and the land round the Solway (now Cumber- 
land and adjacent regions), and the former came to be called 
Cambria, the latter Cumbria, though the two names were some- 
times interchanged by early medieval writers. 

CAMBRIAN SYSTEM, in geology, the name now universally 
employed to designate the earliest group of Palaeozoic rocks 
which possesses a connected suite of fossils. The strata of this 
system rest upon the Pre-Cambrian, and are succeeded by the 
Ordovician system. Until the fourth decade of the 19th century 
all stratified rocks older than the Carboniferous had been grouped 
by geologists into a huge and indefinite " Transition Series." In 
1 83 1 Adam Sedgwick and Sir Roderick I. Murchison began the 
herculean task of studying and sub-dividing this series of rocks as 
it occurs in Wales and the bordering counties of England. 
Sedgwick attacked the problem in the Snowdon district, where 
the rocks are highly altered and displaced and where fossils are 
comparatively difficult to obtain; Murchison, on the other hand, 
began to work at the upper end of the series where the strati- 
graphy is simple and the fossils are abundant. Murchison 
naturally 4nade the most of the fossils collected, and was soon able 
to show that the transition series could be recognized by them, 
just as younger formations had fossils peculiar to themselves; as 
he zealously worked on he followed the fossiliferous rocks further 
afield and continually lower in the series. This fossil-bearing I 



set of strata he first styled the " fossiliferous greywacke series," 
changing it in 1835^0 " Silurian system." 

In the same year Sedgwick introduced the name " Cambrian 
series " for the older and lower members. Murchison published his 
Silurian system in 1839, wherein he recognized the Cambrian to 
include the barren slates and grits of Harlech, Llanberis and the 
Long Mynd. So far, the two workers had been in agreement; 
but in his presidential address to the Geological Society of London 
in 1842 Murchison stated his opinion that the Cambrian contained 
no fossils, that differed from those of the Lower Silurian. Where- 
upon Sedgwick undertook a re-examination of the Welsh rocks 
with the assistance of J. W. Salter, the palaeontologist; and in 
1852 he included the Llandeilo and Bala beds (Silurian) in the 
Upper Cambrian. Two years later Murchison brought out his 
Siluria, in which he treated the Cambrian system as a mere 
local fades of the Silurian system, and he included in the latter, 
under J. Barrande's term " Primordial zone," all the lower rocks, 
although they had a distinctive fauna. 

Meanwhile in Europe and America fossils were being collected 
from similar rocks which were classed as Silurian, and the use of 
" Cambrian " was almost discarded, because, following Murchison, 
it was taken to apply only to a group of rocks without a charac- 
teristic fauna and therefore impossible to recognize. Most of 
the Cambrian rocks were coloured as Silurian on the British 
official geological maps. 

Nevertheless, from 1851 to 1855, Sedgwick, in his writings on 
the British palaeozoic deposits, insisted on the independence of 
the Cambrian system, and though Murchison had pushed his 
Silurian system downward in the series of rocks, Sedgwick 
adhered to the original grouping of his Cambrian system, and 
even proposed to limit the Silurian to the Ludlow and Wenlock 
beds with the May Hill Sandstone at the base. This attitude he 
maintained until the year of his death (1873), when there appeared 
his introduction to Salter's Catalogue of Cambrian and Silurian- 
Fossils. 

It is not to be supposed that one of these great geologists was 
necessarily in the wrong; each had right on his side. It was 
left for the subsequent labours of Salter and H. Hicks to prove 
that the rocks below the undoubted lower Silurian of Murchison 
did indeed possess a characteristic fauna, and their work was con- 
firmed by researches going on in other countries. To-day the 
recognition of the earliest fossil-bearing rocks, below the Llan- 
deilo formation of Murchison, as belonging to the Cambrian 
system, and the threefold subdivision of the system according to 
palaeontological evidence, may be regarded as firmly established. 

It should be noted that A. de Lapparent classifies the Cambrian 
as the lowest stage in the Silurian, the middle and upper stages 
being Ordovician and Gothlandian. E. Renevier proposed to use 
Silurique to cover the same period with the Cambrian as the 
lowest series, but these differences of treatment are merely 
nominal. Jules Marcou and others have used Taconic (Taconian) 
as the equivalent of Cambrian, and C.Lapworth proposed to apply 
the same term to the lowest sub-division only; he had also used 
" Annelidian " in the same sense. These names are of historical 
interest alone. 

Cambrian Rocks. — The lithological characters of the Cambrian 
rocks possess a remarkable uniformity in all quarters of the 
globe. Muds, sands, grits and conglomerates are the predominant 
types. In Scotland, North America and Canada important 
deposits of limestone occur and subordinate limestones are 
found in the Cambrian of central Europe. 

In some regions, notably in the Baltic province and in parts of 
the United States, the rocks still retain their original horizon- 
tality of deposition, the muds are scarcely indurated and the 
sands are still incoherent; but in most parts of the world they 
bear abundant evidence of the many movements and stresses to 
which they have been exposed through so enormous a period of 
time. Thus, we find them more frequently, folded, tilted and 
cleaved ; the muds have become shales, slates, phyllites or 
schists, the grey and red sands and conglomerates have become 
quartzites and greywackes, while the limestones are very gener- 
ally dolomitized. In the Cambrian limestones, as in their more 



CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 



»7 



recent analogues, layers and nodules of chert and phosphatized 
material are not wanting. 

Igneous rocks are not extensively developed; in Wales they 
form an important feature and occur in considerable thickness; 




Distribution of 

Cambrian Rocks 




wF&^ w^0$ 




Areas in which marine deposits are known. 

Areas gained by the Sea between the beginning 

and dose of the Period. 

1 \Unknown. The broken lines indicate the possible 

1 \distribution of Land and Sen, 



n 



alter Ds Lapp&rent 



Emery Valker 5C. 



they are represented by lavas of olivine-diabase and by con- 
temporaneous tuffs which are traversed by later granite and 
quartz felsite. In the Cambrian of Brittany there are acid 
lavas and tuffs. Quartz porphyry, diabase and diorite appear 
in the Ardennes. In Bohemia, North America and Canada 
igneous rocks have been observed. 

In China, on the Yang-tse river, a thick deposit has been found 
full of boulders of diverse kinds of rock, striated in the manner 
that is typical of glacial action. A similar deposit occurs in the 
Gaisa beds near the Varanger Fjord in Norway. These forma- 
tions lie at the base of the lowest Cambrian strata and may 
possibly be included in the pre- Cambrian, though in Norway 
they are clearly resting upon a striated floor of crystalline rocks. 

Cambrian Life. — In a general survey of the life of this period, 
as it is revealed by the fossils, three outstanding facts are ap- 
parent: (1) the great divergence between the Cambrian fauna 
and that of the present day; (2) the Cambrian life assemblage 
differs in no marked manner from that of the succeeding Ordovi- 
cian and Silurian periods; there is a certain family likeness 
which unites all of them; (3) the extraordinary complexity and 
diversity not only in the assemblage as a whole but within 
certain limited groups of organisms. Although in the Cambrian 
strata we have the oldest known fossiliferous rocks — if we leave 
out of account the very few and very obscure organic remains 
hitherto recorded from the pre-Cambrian — yet we appear to 
enter suddenly into the presence of a world richly peopled with a 
suite of organisms already far advanced in differentiation; the 
Cambrian fauna seems to be as far removed from what must 
have been the first forms of life, as the living forms of this remote 
period are distant from the creatures of to-day. 

With the exception of the vertebrates, every one of the great 
classes of animals is represented in Cambrian rocks. Simple 
protozoa appear in the form of Radiolaria; Lithistid sponges 
are represented by such forms as Archaeoscyphia, Hexactinellid 
sponges by Protospongia; Graptolites {Diciyograptus (Diclyo- 
nemo)) come on in the higher parts of the system. Medusa-like 
casts have been found in the lower Cambrian of Scandinavia 
(Medusina) and in the mid-Cambrian of Alabama (Brooksella) . 
Corals, Archaeocyathus, Spirocyathus, &c, lived in the Cambrian 
seas along with starfishes (Palaeasterina) , Cystideans, Protocys- 
tites, Trochocystites and possibly Crinoids, Dendrocrinus. An- 
nelids left their traces in burrows and casts on the sea-floor 
(Arenicolites, Cruziana, Scolithus, &c). Crustacea occupied an 
extremely prominent place; there were Phyllocarids such as 
Hymenocaris, and ' Ostracods like Entomidella; but by far the 
most important in numbers and development were the Trilo- 



bites, now extinct, but in palaeozoic times so abundant. In the 
Cambrian period trilobites had already attained their maximum 
size; some species of Paradoxides were nearly 2 ft. long, but in 
company with these monsters were tiny forms like Agnostus and 
Microdiscus. Many of the Cambrian trilobites appear to have 
been blind, and they had not at this period developed that 
flexibility in the carapace that some forms acquired later. 

Brachiopods were fairly abundant, particularly the non- 
articulated forms {Obolus, Lingulella, Acrotreta, Discinopsis, 
&c); amongst the articulate genera are Kutorgina, Orthis, 
Khynchonella. It is a striking fact that certain of these non- 
articulate "lamp-shells" are familiar inhabitants of our present 
seas. Each of the principal groups of true mollusca was repre- 
sented: Pelecypods (Modioloides); Gasteropods (Scenella, 
Pleurotomaria, Trochonema) ; Pteropods (Hyolithellus, Hyo- 
lithes, S alter ella); Cephalopods {Orthoceras, Cystoceras) . Of 
land plants no traces have yet been discovered. Certain 
markings on slates and sandstones, such as the " fucoids " of 
Scandinavia and Scotland, the Phycoides of the Fichtelgebirge, 
Eophyton and other seaweed-like impressions, may indeed be 
the casts of fucoid plants; but it is by no means sure that 
many of them are not mere inorganic imitative markings or the 
tracks or casts of worms. Oldhamia, a delicate branching body, 
abundant in the Cambrian of the south-east of Ireland, is probably 
a calcareous alga, but its precise nature has not been satisfactorily 
determined. 

Cambrian Stratigraphy. — Wherever the Cambrian strata have 
been carefully studied it has now been found possible and con- 
venient to arrange them into three series, each of which is charac- 
terized by a distinctive genus of trilobite. Thus we have a 
Lower Cambrian with Olenellus, a middle series with Paradoxides 
and an Upper Cambrian with Olenus. It is true that these 
fossils are not invariably present in every occurrence of Cambrian 
strata, but this fact notwithstanding, the threefold division holds 
with sufficient constancy. An uppermost series lies above the 
Olenus fauna in some areas; it is represented by the Tremadoc 
beds in Britain or by the Dictyonema beds or Euloma-Niobe 
fauna elsewhere. Three regions deserve special attention: (1) 
Great Britain, the area in which the Cambrian was first differ- 
entiated from the old " Transition Series "; (2) North America, 
on account of the wide-spread occurrence of the rocks and the 
abundance and perfection of the fossils; and (3) Bohemia, 
made classic by the great labours of J. Barrande. 

Great Britain and Ireland. — The table on p. 88 contains the names 
that have been applied to the subdivisions of the Cambrian strata 
in the areas of outcrop in Wales a nd England ; at the same time it 
indicates approximately their relative position in the system. 

In Scotland the upper and middle series are represented by a 
thick mass of limestone and dolomite, the Durness limestone 
(1500 ft.). In the lower series are, in descending order, the " Ser- 
pulite grits " or " Salterella beds," the " Fucoid beds " and the 
" Eriboll quartzite," which is divided into an upper " Pipe rock " 
and lower " Basal quartzite." 

The Cambrian rocks of Ireland, a great series of purple and green 
shales, slates and grits with beds of quartzite, have not yet yielded 
sufficient fossil evidence to permit of a correlation with the Welsh 
rocks, and possibly some parts of the series may be transferred in 
the future to the overlying Ordovician. 

North America. — On the North American continent, as in Europe, 
the Cambrian system is divisible into three series: (1) the lower 
or " Georgiaa," with Olenellus fauna; (2) the middle or " Acadian," 
with Paradoxides or Dikelocephalus fauna; (3) the upper or " Pots- 
dam," with Olenus fauna (with Saratogan or St Croix as synonyms 
for Potsdam). The lower division appears on the Newfoundland 
and Labrador coasts, and is traceable thence, in a great belt south- 
west of those points, through Maine and the Hudson-Champlain 
valley into Alabama, a distance of some 2000 m.; and the rocks 
are brought up again on the western uplift, in Nevada, Idaho, Utah, 
western Montana and British Columbia. The middle division covers 
approximately the same region as the lower one, and in addition 
it is found in the states of Texas, Oklahoma, and Arizona, in 
western Montana, and possibly in western Wisconsin. The lower 
division, in addition to covering the areas already indicated, spreads 
over the interior of the United States. 

Bohemia. — The Cambrian rocks of^this country are now recognized 
by J. F. Pompeskj to comprise the Paradoxidian and Olenelledian 
groups. They were made famous through the researches of Barrande. 
The Cambrian system is covered by his stages " B " and ' C " ; the 



88 



CAMBRIAN SYSTEM 



former a barren series of conglomerates and quartzites, the latter 
a series of grey and green fissile shales 1200 ft. thick with sandstones, 
greywackes and conglomerates. 

Scandinavia. — Here the Cambrian system is only distinguished 
clearly on the eastern side, where the three subdivisions are found 
in a thin series of strata (400 ft.), in which black concretion-bearing 





North Wales. 


South Wales. 


Midland and West of England. 


Shropshire. 


Malvern Hills. 


Nuneaton. 


Upper Cambrian 
Olenus fauna 


Tremadoc slates 


Tremadoc beds 


Shineton shales 


Bronsil shales, 


Upper Stocking- 


(Eitloma-Niobe 




and shales with 


grey (Niobe 


ford shales 




fauna) 




Dictyonema 


fauna) 


(Merivale shales) 




Lingula flags 


Lingula flags 




Malvern black 
shales (White- 
leaved-oak 
shales) 






(1) Dolgellybeds 












(2) Ff est i niog 








Middle Stocking- 




beds 








ford shales, 
(Oldbury shales) 




(3) Maentwrog 












beds 










Middle Cam- 


Menevian beds 


Menevian beds 








brian, Paradox- 












ides fauna 




Solva group 


Comley or Holly- 


Hollybush sand- 


Lower Stocking- 








bush sandstone 


stone 


ford shales 








with upper 




(Purley shales) 








Comley lime- 












stone 






Lower Cambrian, 


Harlech grits and 


Caerfai group 


Lower Comley 


Hollybush sand- 


Upper Hartshill 


Olenellus fauna 


Llanberis slates 




limestone 
Wrekin quartzite 


stone with Mal- 
vern quartzite 
and conglomer- 
ate at the base 


quartzite. Hyo- 
lith.es shales and 
limestone 

Middle arid lower 
Hartshill quart- 
zite and the 
quartzite of the 












Lickey Hills 



shales play an important part. Limestones and shales with the 
Euloma-Niobe fauna come at the top. The upper series {Olenus) 
has been minutely zoned by W. C. Brogger, S. A. Tullberg and J. C. 
Moberg. In the middle series (Paradoxides) three thin limestone 
bands have been distinguished, the Fragmenten-Kalk, the Exulans- 
Kalk and the Andrarums-Kalk. 

On the Norwegian side the Cambrian is perhaps represented by 
the Roros schists which lie at the base of a great series of crystal- 
line schists, the probable equivalent of Ordovician and Silurian 
rocks. 

Baltic Province. — The Cambrian rocks in this region are nearly all 
soft sediments, some 600 ft. thick; they reach from the Guff of 
Finland towards Lake Ladoga. At the base is the so-called " blue 
clay " (really greenish) with ferruginous sandstones and with a 
fucoidal sandstone at its summit. This division is the equivalent 
of the Lower Cambrian. Above the fucoidal sandstone an im- 
portant break appears in the system, for the Paradoxides and Olenus 
divisions are absent. The upper members are the " Ungulite grit " 
and about 20 ft. of Dictyonema shale. Cambrian rocks have been 
traced into Siberia (lat. 71 °) and on the island of Vaigatch. 

Central Europe. — Besides the Bohemian region previously men- 
tioned, Cambrian rocks are present in Belgium and the north of 
France, in Spain and the Thiiringer Wald. In the Ardennes the 
system is represented by grits and sandstones, shales, slates and 
quartz schists, and includes also whet slates and some igneous rocks. 
A. Dumont has arranged the whole series {Terrain ardennais) into 
three systems, an upper " Salmien," a middle " Revinien " and a 
lower " Devillien," but J. Gosselet has subsequently proposed to 
unite the two lower groups in one. 

France. — -In northern France Cambrian rocks, mostly purple 
conglomerates and red shales, rest with apparent unconformability 
upon pre-Cambrian strata in Brittany, Normandy and northern 
Poitou. In the Rennes basin limestones — often dolomitic — are 
associated with quartzites and conglomerates; silicious limestones 
also occur in the Sarthe region. Farther south, around the old 
lands of Languedoc, equivalents of the two upper divisions of the 
Cambrian have been recorded ; and the uppermost members of the 
system appear in Herault. Patches of Cambrian rocks are found 
in the Pyrenees. 

In Spain slates and quartzites, the slates of Rivadeo, more than 
9000 ft. thick, are followed by the middle Cambrian beds of La Vega, 
thick quar^ites with limestone, slates and iron ores. Cambrian 
rocks occur also in the provinces of Seville and Ciudad-Real. Upper 
Cambrian strata have been found in upper Alemtejo in Portugal. 

In Russian Poland is a series of conglomerates, quartzites and 
shales; some of the beds yield a Paradoxides fauna. 



In the Thiiringer Wald are certain strata, presumably Cambrian 
since the uppermost beds contain the Euloma-Niobe fauna. 

Sardinia contains both middle and upper Cambrian. The Cam- 
brian system is represented in the Salt Range of India by the Neo- 
bolus or Khussack beds, which may possibly belong to the middle 
subdivision. The same group is probably represented in Corea 

and the Liao-tung by 
the thick " Sinisian " 
formation of F. von 
Richthofen. 

In South America 
upper Cambrian rocks 
have been recorded from 
north Argentina. 

The Lower Cambrian 
has been found at vari- 
ous places ,in South 
Australia; and in Tas- 
mania a thick series of 
strata appears to be in 
part at least of Upper 
Cambrian age. 

General Physical 
Conditions in the Cam- 
brian Period. — The 
Cambrian rocks previ- 
ously described are all 
such as would result 
from deposition, in 
comparatively shallow 
seas, of the products 
of degradation of land 
surfaces by the ordinary 
agents of denudation. 
Evidences of shallow 
water conditions are 
abundant; very fre- 
quently on the bedding 
surfaces of sandstones 
and other rocks we find cracks made by the sun's heat and 
pittings caused by the showers that fell from the Cambrian sky, 
and these records of the weather of this remote period are pre- 
served as sharply and clearly as those made only to-day on our 
tidal reaches. Ripple marks and current bedding further point, to 
the shallowness of the water at the places where the rocks were 
made. 

No Cambrian rocks are such as would be formed in the abysses 
of the sea— although the absence of well-developed eyes in the 
trilobites has led some to assume that this condition was an 
indication that the creatures lived in abyssal depths. 

At the close of the pre-Cambrian, many of the deposits of 
that period must have been elevated into regions of fairly high 
ground; this we may assume from the nature of the Cambrian 
deposits which are mainly the product of the denudation of such 
ground. Over the land areas thus formed, the seas in Cambrian 
time gradually spread, laying down first the series known as 
Lower Cambrian, then by further encroachment on the land the 
wider spread Upper Cambrian deposits — in Europe, the middle 
series is the most extensive. Consequently, Cambrian strata are 
usually unconformable on older rocks. 

During the general advance of the sea, local warpings of the 
crust may have given rise to shallow lagoon or inland-lake con- 
ditions. The common occurrence of red strata has been cited in 
support of this view. 

Compared with some other periods, the Cambrian was free 
from extensive volcanic disturbances, but in Wales and in 
Brittany the earlier portions of this period were marked by 
voluminous outpourings; a condition that was feebly reflected 
in central and southern Europe. 

No definite conclusions can be drawn from the fossils as to the 
climatic peculiarities of the earth in Cambrian times. The red 
rocks may in some cases suggest desert conditions; and there is 
good reason to suppose that in what are now Norway and China 
a glacial cold prevailed early in the period. 

Considerable variations occur in the thickness of Cambrian 
deposits, which may generally be explained by the greater 



CAMBRIC— CAMBRIDGE, EARLS AND DUKES OF 



89 



rapidity of deposition in some areas than in others. Nothing 
could be more striking than the difference between the thick- 
nesses in western and eastern Europe; in Brittany the deposits 
are over 24,000 ft. thick, in Wales at least 12,000 ft., in western 
England they are only 3000 ft., and in northern Scotland 2000 ft., 
while no farther east than Scandinavia the complete Cambrian 
succession is only about 400 ft. thick. Again, in North America, 
the greatest thicknesses are found along the mountainous regions 
on the west and on the east — reaching 12,000 ft. in the latter 
and probably nearly 40,000 ft. in the former (in British 
Columbia) — while over the interior of the continent it is seldom 
more than 1000 ft. thick. 

Any attempt to picture the geographical conditions of the 
Cambrian period must of necessity be very imperfect. It was 
pointed out by Barrande that early in Palaeozoic Europe there 
appeared two marine provinces— a northern one extending from 
Russia to the British Isles through Scandinavia and northern 
Germany, and a southern one comprising France, Bohemia, the 
Iberian peninsula and Sardinia. It is assumed that some kind 
of land barrier separated these two provinces. Further, there is 
a marked likeness between the Cambrian of western Europe and 
eastern America; many fossils of this period are common to 
Britain, Sweden and eastern Canada; therefore it is likely that a 
north Atlantic basin existed. Prof. Kayser suggests thaf there 
was also a Pacific basin more extensive than at present; this is 
borne out by the similarity between the Cambrian faunas of 
China, Siberia and Argentina. The same author postulates an 
Arctic continent, bordering upon northern Europe, Greenland 
and North America; an African-Brazilian continent across the 
present south Atlantic, and a marine communication between 
Australia and India, where the faunas have much in common. 
References. — The literature devoted to the Cambrian period 
is very voluminous, important contributions having been made 
by A. Sedgwick, Sir R. I. Murchison, H. Hicks, C. Lapworth, T. 
Groom, J. W. Salter, J. E. Marr, C. D. Walcott, G. F. Matthew, 
E. Emmons, E. Billings, J. Barrande, F. Schmidt, W. C. Brogger, 
5, A. Tullberg, S. L. Torngrist, G. Linnarsson and many others. 
A good general account of the period will be found in Sir A. Geikie's 
Text-Book of Geology, vol. ii. 4th ed. 1903 (with references), and 
from an American point of view, in T. C. Chamberlin and R. D. 
Salisbury's Geology, vol. ii., 1906 (references to American sources). 
See also J. E. Marr, The Classification of the Cambrian and Silurian 
Rocks,^ 1883 (with bibliography up to the year of publication); 
A. Geikie Q. J. Geol. Soc, 1891, xlvii., Ann. address, p. 90; F. Freeh, 
" Die geographische Verbrcitung und Entwickelung des Cambrium," 
Compte Rendu. Congres Geol. Internat. 18 Q7, St-Petersbourg (1899); 
Geological Literature added to the Geological Society's Library, pub- 
lished annually since 1893. (J- A. H.) 

CAMBRIC, a word derived from Kameryk or Kamerijk, the 
Flemish name of Cambrai, a town in the department of Nord, 
France, where the cloth of this name is said to have been first 
made. It was originally made of fine linen. There is a record 
of a privy purse expenditure in 1 530 for cambric for Henry VIII. 's 
shirts. Cambric has been used for many years in the manufacture 
of handkerchiefs, collars, cuffs, and for fine underclothing; also 
for the best shrouds, and for fine baby linen. The yarns for 
this cloth are of very fine quality, and the number of threads 
and picks often reaches and sometimes exceeds 120 per inch. 
Embroidery cambric is a fine linen used for embroidery. Batiste, 
said to be called after Baptiste, a linen-weaver of Cambrai, is a 
kind of cambric frequently dyed or printed. All these fabrics are 
largely copied in cheaper materials, mixtures of tow and cotton, 
and in many cases cotton alone, taking the place of the original 
flax line yarns. 

CAMBRIDGE, EARLS AND DUKES OF. Under the Norman 
and early Plantagenet kings of England the earldom of Cam- 
bridge was united with that of Huntingdon, which was held 
among others by David I., king of Scotland, as the husband of 
earl Waltheof's daughter, Matilda. As a separate dignity the 
earldom dates from about 1340, when William V., count (after- 
wards duke) of Juliers, was created earl of Cambridge by King 
Edward III.; and in 1362 (the year after William's death) 
Edward created his own son, Edmund of Langley, earl of Cam- 
bridge, the title being afterwards merged in that of duke of York, 
which was bestowed upon Edmund in 13S5. Edmund's elder 



son, Edward, earl of Rutland, who succeeded his father as duke 
of York and earl of Cambridge in 1402; appears to have resigned 
the latter dignity in or before 1414, as in this year his younger 
brother, Richard, was made earl of Cambridge. In the following 
year Richard was executed for plotting against King Henry V., 
and his title was forfeited, but it was restored to his son, Richard, 
who in 141 5 became duke of York in succession to his uncle 
Edward. Subsidiary to the dukedom of York the title was held 
by Richard, and after his death in 1460 by his son Edward, 
afterwards King Edward IV., becoming extinct on the fall of the 
Yorkist dynasty. 

In 1619 King James I., anxious to bestow an English title upon 
James Hamilton, 2nd marquess of Hamilton (d. 1625), created 
him earl of Cambridge, a title which came to his son and successor 
James, 3rd marquess and first duke of Hamilton (d. 1649). In 
1651 when William, 2nd duke of Hamilton, died, his English title 
became extinct. 

Again bestowed upon a member of the royal house, the title of 
earl of Cambridge was granted in 1659 by Charles II. to his 
brother Henry, duke of Gloucester, only to become extinct on 
Henry's death in the following year. In 1661 Charles, the infant 
son of James, duke of York, afterwards King James II., was 
designated as marquess and duke of Cambridge, but the child 
died before the necessary formalities were completed. However, 
two of James's sons, James (d. 1667) and Edgar (d. 1671), were 
actually created in succession dukes of Cambridge, but both died 
in childhood. After the passing of the Act of Settlement in 1701 
it was proposed to grant an English title to George Augustus, 
electoral prince of Hanover, who, after his grandmother, the 
electress Sophia, and his father, the elector George Louis, was 
heir to the throne of England; and to give effect to this proposal 
George Augustus was created marquess and duke of Cambridge 
in November 1706. The title lapsed when he became king of 
Great Britain and Ireland in 1727, but it was revived in 1801 in 
favour of Adolphus Frederick, the seventh son of George III. He 
and his son are dealt with below. 

Adolphus Frederick, duke of Cambridge (1774-1850), was 
born in London on the 24th of February 1774. Having studied 
at the university of Gottingen, Adolphus Frederick served in the 
Hanoverian and British armies, and, in November 1801, was 
created earl of Tipperary and duke of Cambridge, becoming a 
member of the privy council in the following year. The duke is 
chiefly known for his connexion with Hanover. In 1813, on the 
conclusion of the war, the electorate of Hanover was raised to 
the rank of a kingdom, and in the following year the duke was 
appointed viceroy. He held this position until the separation of 
Great Britain and Hanover in 1837, and displaying tact and 
moderation, appears to have ruled the country with great success 
during a difficult period. Returning to England the duke became 
very popular, and was active in supporting many learned and 
benevolent societies. He died in London on the 8th of July 1850. 
In 1818 he married Augusta (1797-1889), daughter of Frederick, 
landgrave of Hesse-Cassel. He left three children: his successor, 
George; Augusta Caroline (b. 1822), who married Frederick 
William, grand duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz; and Mary Adelaide 
(1833-1897), who married Francis, duke of Teck. 

George William Frederick Charles, duke of Cam- 
bridge (1819-1904), was born at Hanover on the 26th of 
March 1819. He was thus about two months older than his 
cousin,. Queen Victoria, and was for that period in the line of 
succession to the British throne. He was educated at Hanover 
by the Rev. J. R. Wood, a canon of Worcester. In November 
1837, after he had served for a short time in the Hanoverian 
army, the rank of colonel in the British army was conferred upon 
him, and he was attached to the staff at Gibraltar from October 
1838 to April 1839. After serving in Ireland with the 12th 
Royal Lancers, he was appointed in April 1842 colonel of the 
17th Light Dragoons (now Lancers). From 1843 to 1845 he 
was colonel on the staff in the Ionian Islands, and was then 
promoted major-general. In October 1846 he took command 
of the Limerick district, and shortly afterwards of the Dublin 
district. In 1850 his father died, and he succeeded to the 



9° 



CAMBRIDGE, R. O— CAMBRIDGE 



dukedom. Being appointed inspector of cavalry in 1852, he held 
that post until 1854, when, upon the outbreak of the Crimean 
War, he was placed in command of the 1st division (Guards and 
Highland brigades) of the British army in the East. In June 
of the same year he was promoted lieutenant-general. He was 
present at the battles of the Alma, Balaklava and Inkerman, 
and at the siege of Sevastopol. On the 15th of July 1856 he was 
appointed general commanding-in-chief, on the 9th of November 
1862 field marshal, and by letters patent, 1887, commander- 
in-chief. The long period during which he held the command 
of the army was marked by many changes. The Crimean War 
brought to light great administrative defects, and led to a re- 
grouping of the departments, which, with the whole personnel 
of the army, were brought under the authority of the secretary 
of state for war. The constitutional changes involved did not, 
however, affect seriously the organization of the military forces. 
Only in 1870, after the successes of Prussia had created a pro- 
found impression, were drastic changes introduced by Card well 
into the entire fabric of the army. The objects of the reformers 
of 1870 were undoubtedly wise; but some of the methods 
adopted were open to question, and were strongly resented by 
the duke of Cambridge, whose views were shared by the majority 
of officers. Further changes were inaugurated in 1880, and again 
the duke found much to criticize. His opinions stand recorded 
in the voluminous evidence taken by the numerous bodies 
appointed to inquire into the condition of the army. They show 
a sound military judgment, and, as against innovations as such, 
a strong attachment to the old regimental system. That this 
judgment and this attachment were not so rigid as was generally 
supposed is proved by his published correspondence. Throughout 
the period of change, while protesting, the duke invariably 
accepted and loyally endeavoured to carry out the measures 
on which the government decided. In a memorandum addressed 
to Mr Childers in 1880 he defined his attitude as follows:— 
" Should it appear, however, that for reasons of state policy it 
is necessary that the contemplated changes should be made, 
I am prepared to carry them out to the best of my ability." 
This attitude he consistently maintained in all cases in which his 
training and associations led him, rightly or wrongly, to deprecate 
changes the need for which was not apparent to him. His 
judgment was especially vindicated in the case of an ill-advised 
reduction of the artillery carried out by Mr. Stanhope. Under 
the order in council of February 1888, the whole responsibility 
for military duties of every kind was for the first time centred 
upon the commander-in-chief. This, as pointed out by the 
Hartington commission in 1890, involved " an excessive 
centralization " which " must necessarily tend to weaken the 
sense of responsibility of the other heads of departments, and 
thus to diminish their efficiency." The duke of Cambridge, whose 
position entailed many duties apart from those strictly apper- 
taining to a commander-in-chief, could not give personal atten- 
tion to the vast range of matters for which he was made nominally 
responsible. On the other hand, the adjutant-general could 
act in his name, and the secretary of state could obtain military 
advice from officials charged with no direct responsibility. 
The effect was to place the duke in a false position in the eyes 
of the army and of the country. If the administration of 
the army suffered after 1888, this was due to a system which 
violated principles. His active control of its training during 
the whole period of his command was less hampered, and more 
directly productive of good results. 

Throughout his long term of office the duke of Cambridge 
evinced a warm interest in the welfare of the soldier, and great 
experience combined with a retentive memory made him a 
master of detail. He was famous for plain, and strong, 
language; but while quick to condemn deviations from 
the letter of regulations, and accustomed to insist upon great 
precision in drill, he was never a martinet, and his natural 
kindliness made him ready to bestow praise. Belonging to the 
older generation of soldiers, he could not easily adapt himself 
to the new conditions, and in dispensing patronage he was some- 
what distrustful of originality, while his position as a member of 



the royal family tended to narrow his scope for selection. He 
was ' thus inclined to be influenced by considerations of pure 
seniority, and to underrate the claims of special ability. The 
army, however, always recognized that in the duke of Cambridge 
it had a commander-in-chief devoted to its interests, and keenly 
anxious amid many difficulties to promote its well-being. The 
duke resigned the commandership-in-chief on the 1st of November 
1895, and was succeeded by Lord Wolseley, the duties of the 
office being considerably modified. He was at the same time 
gazetted honorary colonel-in-chief to the forces. He was made 
ranger of Hyde Park and St James's Park in 1852, and of 
Richmond Park in 1857; governor of the Royal Military 
Academy in 1862, and its president in 1870, and personal aide- 
de-camp to Queen Victoria in 1882. He died on the 17th of 
March 1904 at Gloucester House, London. The chief honours 
conferred upon him were: G.C.H., 1825; K.G., 1835; G.C.M.G., 
1845; G.C.B., 1855; K.P., 1861; K.T., 1881. From 1854 he 
was president of Christ's hospital. The duke of Cambridge was 
married to Louisa Fairbrother, who took the name of FitzGeorge 
after her marriage. She died in 1890. 

See Rev. E. Sheppard, George, Duke of Cambridge; a Memoir 
of his Private Life (London, 1906) ; and Willoughby Verner, Military 
Life of the Duke of Cambridge (1905). 

CAMBRIDGE, RICHARD OWEN (1717-1802), English poet, 
was born in London on the 14th of February 1717. He was 
educated at Eton and at St John's College, Oxford. Leaving 
the university without taking a degree, he took up residence at 
Lincoln's Inn in 1737. Four years later he married, and went to 
live at his country seat of Whitminster, Gloucestershire. In 
1751 he removed to Twickenham, where he enjoyed the society 
of many notable persons. Horace Walpole in his letters makes 
many jesting allusions to Cambridge in the character of news- 
monger. He died at Twickenham on the 17th of September 
1802. His chief work is the Scribleriad (r75i), a mock epic 
poem, the hero of which is the Martinus Scriblerus of Pope, 
Arbuthnot and Swift. The poem is preceded by a dissertation 
on the mock heroic, in which he avows Cervantes as his master. 
The satire shows considerable learning, and was eagerly read 
by literary people; but it never became popular, and the 
allusions, always obscure, have little interest for the present-day 
reader. He made a valuable contribution to history in his 
Account of the War in India . . . on the Coast of Coromandel 
from the year 17 50 to 1760 . . . (1761). He had intended to write 
a history of the rise and progress of British power in India, 
but this enterprise went no further than the work just named, 
as he found that Robert Orme, who had promised him the use 
of his papers, contemplated the execution of a similar plan. 

The Works of Richard Owen Cambridge, Esq., including several 
Pieces never before published, with an Account of his Life and Char- 
acter by his Son, George Owen Cambridge (1803), includes, besides the 
Scribleriad, some narrative and satirical poems, and about twenty 
papers originally published in Edward Moore's paper called The 
World. His poems are included in A. Chalmers's English Poets(i8l6). 

CAMBRIDGE, a municipal and parliamentary borough, the 
seat of a university, and the county town of Cambridgeshire, 
England, 56 m. N. by E. of London by the Great Eastern 
railway, served also by the Great Northern, London & North- 
western and Midland lines. Pop. (1901) 38,379. It lies in a flat 
plain at the southern border of the low Fen country, at an 
elevation of only 30 to 50 ft. above sea-level. The greater part of 
the town is situated on the east (right) bank of the Cam, a 
tributary of the Ouse, but suburbs extend across the river. To 
the south and west the slight hills bordering the fenland rise 
gently. The parliamentary borough of Cambridge returns one 
member. The municipal borough is under a mayor, 1 2 aldermen, 
and 36 councillors. Area, 3233 acres. 

Cambridge University 1 shares with that of Oxford the first 
place among such institutions in the British empire. It is the 
dominating factor in the modern importance of History 
the town, and it is therefore necessary to outline 
the historical conditions which led to its establishment. The 
geographical situation of Cambridge, in its present appearance 
1 See also Universities. 



CAMBRIDGE 



9 1 



possessing little attraction or advantage, calls nevertheless for 
first consideration. Cambridge, in fact, owed its growth to its 
position on a natural line of communication between the east and 
the midlands of England, flanked on the one hand by the deep 
forests which covered the uplands, on the other by the unreclaimed 
fens, then desolate and in great part impenetrable. The import- 
ance of this highway may be judged from the number of early 
earthworks in the vicinity of Cambridge; and the Castle Hill, at 
the north side of the present town (near the west bank of the 
river), is perhaps a British work. Roman remains discovered in 
the same locality give evidence of the existence of a small town 
or village at the junction of roads; the name of Camboritum is 
usually attached to it, but without certainty. The modern name 
of Cambridge has no connexion with this. The present form of 
the name has usually been derived from a corruption of the 
original name Grantebrycge or Grantabridge (Skeat); but Mr 
Arthur Gray points out that there is no documentary evidence 
for this corruption in the shape of such probable intermediate 
forms as Grantebrig or Crantebrig. On the other hand, he brings 
evidence to show that the name Cantebrig, though not applied to 
the whole town, was very early given to that quarter of it near 
the Cante brig, i.e. the bridge over the Cante (the ward beyond 
the Great Bridge was called " Parcelle of Cambridge " as late as 
1340); in this quarter, close to the bridge, Cambridge castle was 
built by the Conqueror, and from the castle and the castle- 
quarter the name spread within sixty years to the whole town, 
the similarity between the names Grantebrig and Cantebrig 
playing some part in this extension ( The Dual Origin of the Town 
of Cambridge, p. 3 1) . Granta is the earlier and still an alternative 
name of the river Cam, this more common modern form having 
been adopted in sympathy with the modern name of the town. 
Cambridge had a further importance from its position at the head 
of river navigation, and a charter of Henry I., in which the town 
is already referred to as a borough, grants it exclusive rights as 
a river-port, and regulates traffic and tolls. The wharves lay 
principally along that part of the river where are now the 
celebrated " backs " of some of the colleges, whose exquisite 
grounds slope down to the water. The great Sturbridge or 
Stourbridge Fair at Barnwell, formerly one of the most important 
in England, is a further illustration of the ancient commercial 
importance of Cambridge; the oldest known charter concerning 
it dates from the opening of the 13th century, though its initiation 
may perhaps be placed a century before. 

Concerning the early municipal history of Cambridge little is 
known, but at the time of the Domesday survey its citizens felt 
themselves strong enough to protest against the exactions of the 
Norman sheriff, Roger Picot; and the town had attained a 
considerable degree of importance when, in 1068, William the 
Conqueror built a castle on the site known as Castle Hill, and used 
it as a base of queries against Hereward the Wake and the
insurgents of the fenland. Cambridge, however, has practically 
no further military history. From the 14th century onward 
materials were taken from the castle by the builders of colleges, 
while the gatehouse, the last surviving portion, was removed in 
1842. 

The medieval spirit of emulation between the universities of 
Cambridge and Oxford resulted in a series of remarkable fables 
to account for the foundation of both. That of Cambridge was 
assigned to a Spanish prince, Cantaber, in the 4321st year after 
the Creation. A charter from King Arthur dated 531, and the 
transference of students from Cambridge to Oxford by King 
Alfred, were also claimed as historical facts. The true germ of 
the university is to be sought in the religious foundations in the 
town. The earliest to be noticed is the Augustinian house of St 
Giles, founded by Hugoline, wife of Roger Picot the sheriff, in 
1092; this was removed in n 12 to Barnwell, where the chapel 
dedicated to St Andrew the Less is practically the sole remnant 
of its buildings. In 1224 the Franciscans came to Cambridge, 
and later in the same century a number of other religious orders 
settled here, such as the Dominicans, the Gilbertines and the 
Carmelites, who had before been established at Newnham. 
Students were gradually attracted to these several religious 



houses, and Cambridge was already recognized as a centre of 
learning when, in 1 231, Henry III. issued a writ for its governance 
as such, among other provisions conferring certain disciplinary 
powers on the bishop of Ely. It soon became evident that the 
influence of the religious orders on those who came to them for 
instruction was too narrow. This was recognized elsewhere, for 
it was in order to counteract that influence that Walter de 
Merton drew up the statute of governance for his foundation of 
Merton College, Oxford, a statute which was soon afterwards 
used as a model by Hugh de Balsham, bishop of Ely, when, in 
1 281-1284 he founded the first Cambridge college, Peterhouse. 

The friction between town and university, due in the main to 
the conflict of their jurisdictions, the tradition of which, as in the 
sister university, died hard in the annual efforts of some under- 
graduates to revive the " town and gown " riots, culminated 
during the rebellion of Wat Tyler (1381) in an episode which is 
alone worthy of record and may serve to illustrate the whole. 
This was an attack by the rabble, instigated, it is said, by the 
more reputable townspeople, on the colleges, several of which 
were sacked. The attack was ultimately defeated by the courage 
and resource of Henry Spenser or Le Dispencer, bishop of 
Norwich. The relations of the university of Cambridge with the 
crown were never so intimate as those of Oxford. Henry III. 
fortified the town with two gates, but these were burnt by the 
rebellious barons; and in much later times the two first of the 
Stuart kings, and the two first of the Georges, cultivated friendly 
personal relations with the university. During the civil war the 
colleges even melted down their plate for the war chest of King 
Charles; but Cambridge showed little of the stubborn royalism 
of Oxford, and submitted to the Commonwealth without serious 
resistance. 

The history of collegiate foundation in Cambridge after that of 
Peterhouse may be followed through the ensuing description of 
the colleges, but for ease of reference these are dealt colieees 
with in alphabetical order. The main street which 
traverses the town from south to north, parallel to, and at a 
short distance from the river, is known successively as Trumping- 
ton Street, King's Parade, Trinity Street, St John's Street and 
Bridge Street. The majority of the colleges lie on either side of 
this street, and chiefly between it and the river. Those of St 
John's, Trinity, Trinity Hall, Clare, King's and Queens' present 
the famous " backs " towards the river, which is crossed by a 
series of picturesque bridges leading to the gardens and grounds 
on the opposite bank. 

Christ's College is not among the group indicated above; it 
stands farther to the east, in St Andrew's Street. It was founded 
in 1505 by the Lady Margaret Beaufort, mother of Henry VII. 
It incorporated God's House, which had been founded by 
William Bingham, a cleric of London, in 1439, had been removed 
when the site was required for part of King's College, and had 
been refounded with the countenance of Henry VI. in 1448. 
This was a small house, but the Lady Margaret's endowment 
provided for a master, twelve fellows and forty-seven scholars. 
Edward VI. added another fellowship and three scholarships 
and the present number of fellows is fifteen. There are certain 
exhibitions in election to which preference is given to schools 
in the north of England — Giggleswick, Kirkby Lonsdale, Skipton 
and Sedbergh. The buildings of Lady Margaret's foundation 
were in great part faced in classical style in the 17th century; 
a building east of the old quadrangle is also of this period, and 
is ascribed to Inigo Jones. The rooms occupied by the foundress 
herself are preserved, though in an altered condition, as are 
those of the poet Milton, who was educated here, and with whom 
the college has many associations. In the fine gardens is an 
ancient mulberry tree believed to have been planted by him. 
Among illustrious names connected with this college are John 
Leland the antiquary, Archdeacon Paley, author of the Evidences, 
and Charles Darwin, while Henry More and others of the school 
of Cambridge Platonists in the 17th century were educated here. 

Clare College lies close to the river, south of Trinity Hall. In 
1326 the university erected a hall, known as University Hall, to 
accommodate a number of students, and in 1338 Elizabeth de 



9 2 



CAMBRIDGE 



Burgh, countess of Clare, re-endowed the hall, which took the 
name of Clare Hall, and only became known as college in 1856. 
There was a strong ecclesiastical tendency in this foundation; 
six out of the twenty fellows were to be priests when elected. 
The foundation now consists of a master and fifteen fellows, 
besides scholars, of whom three receive emoluments from the 
endowment of Lady Clare. The old college buildings were in 
great part destroyed by fire in 1521; the present buildings 
date from 1638 to 1715, and are admirable examples of their 
period. They surround a very beautiful quadrangle, and the 
back towards the river is also fine. Unconfirmed tradition 
indicates the poet Chaucer as an alumnus of this college; other 
famous men associated with it were Hugh Latimer the martyr, 
Ralph Cudworth, one of the " Platonists," and Archbishop 
Tillotson. 

Corpus Christi College (commonly called Corpus) stands 
on the east side of Trumpington Street. The influence of 
medieval gilds in Cambridge, the character of which was 
primarily religious, was exceedingly strong. About the be- 
ginning of the 14th century there is first mentioned the gild of 
St Mary, which was connected with Great St. Mary's church. 
The gild was at this time prosperous, but about 1350, when 
the idea of the foundation of a college by the gilds was matured, 
the fraternity of St Mary lacked the means to proceed save by 
amalgamating with another gild, that of Corpus Christi. The 
age of this institution, whose church was St Benedict's or St 
Bene't's, is not known. By the two gilds, therefore, the "House 
of Scholars of Corpus Christi and the Blessed Virgin Mary" 
was founded in 1352, the foundation being the only instance 
of its kind. In early times it was commonly known as St Bene't's 
from the church connected with the Corpus gild which stands over 
against the college, and served as its chapel for nearly three 
centuries. The foundation consists of a master and twelve 
fellows, with scholars of the old and later foundations. The 
ancient small quadrangle remains, and is of historical rather 
than architectural interest. The great quadrangle dates from 
1823-1825. The library contains the famous collection of MSS. 
bequeathed by .Archbishop Matthew Parker, alumnus of the 
college, in the 16th century. 

Downing College is in the southern part of the town, to the 
east of Trumpington Street. Sir George Downing, baronet, of 
Gamlingay Park, who died in 1749, left estates to various 
relations, who died without issue. In this event, Downing's will 
provided for the foundation of a college, but the heirs contested 
the will with the university, and in spite of a decision against 
them in 1769, continued to hold the estates for many years, so 
that it was not until 1800 that the charter for the college was 
obtained. The foundation-stone was laid in 1807, and the two 
ranges of buildings, in classical style, represent all that was 
completed of an intended quadrangle. The foundation consists 
of a master, professors of English law and of medicine, six 
fellows and six scholars. 

Emmanuel College overlooks St Andrew's Street. It was 
founded in 1 584 by Sir Walter Mildmay (c. 1 5 20-1 589) , chancellor 
of the exchequer and privy councillor under Queen Elizabeth. 
The foundation, considerably enlarged from the original, consists 
of a master, sixteen fellows and thirty scholars. There are further 
scholarships on other foundations which are awarded by pre- 
ference to pupils of Uppingham and other schools in the midlands. 
Emmanuel was noted from the outset as a stronghold of Puritan- 
ism; it is indeed recorded that Elizabeth rallied the founder 
on his intention that this should be so. Mildmay assuredly had 
the welfare of the church primarily at heart, and he attempted 
to provide against the life residence of fellows, which he con- 
sidered an unhealthy feature in some colleges. The site of 
Emmanuel was previously occupied by a Dominican friary, 
and some of its buildings were adapted to collegiate uses. There 
is only a little of the earliest building remaining; the greater 
part Of the present college dates from the second half of the 
18th century. The chapel, however, is by Sir Christopher Wren 
(1677). Richard Holdsworth, Gresham professor, and William 
Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, were masters of this college; I 



Bishops JoseprrTTall and Thomas Percy were among its alumni, 
as was John Harvard, principal founder of the great American 
college which bears his name. 

Gonville and Caius College (commonly called Caius, pronounced 
Kees), stands mainly on the west side of Trinity Street. It arose 
out of an earlier foundation. In 1348 Edmund Gonvile or Gonevill 
founded the hall of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, which 
was commonly called Gonville Hall, for the education of twenty 
scholars in dialectic and other sciences, with endowment for 
a master and three fellows. This hall stood on part of the present 
site of Corpus, but on the death of its founder in 1351 it was 
moved to the north-west corner of the site of the present Caius, 
by William Bateman, bishop of Norwich and founder of Trinity 
Hall. The famous physician John Caius (q.v.) , who was educated 
at this small institution, later conceived the idea of refounding 
and enlarging it, obtained a charter to do so in 1557, and became 
master of the new foundation of Gonville and Caius College. 
The foundation consists of a master and not less than twenty- 
two fellows, exclusive of the provision under the will of William 
Henry Drosier (d. 1889), doctor of medicine and fellow of the 
college, for the endowment of seven additional fellowships. 
Since its refoundation by Caius, the college has had a peculiar 
connexion with the study of medicine, while, besides many 
eminent physicians, Sir Thomas Gresham, Judge Jeffreys, 
Robert Hare, Jeremy Taylor, Henry Wharton and Lord Thurlow 
are among its noted names. Three sides of the main quadrangle, 
Tree Court, including the frontage towards Trinity Street, are 
modern (1870). The interior of this court is picturesque, and 
the design of the smaller Caius Court was inspired by Caius 
himself. He also designed the gates of Honour, Virtue and 
Humility, of which the two first stand in situ; the gate of 
Honour is a peculiarly good example of early Renaissance work. 
Caius is buried in the chapel. 

Jesus College lies apart from and to the north-east of the 
majority of the colleges. It was founded in 1496 by John 
Alcock, 1 bishop of Ely. The site was previously occupied by a 
Benedictine nunnery dedicated to St Radigund, which was 
already in existence in the first half of the 12th century and was 
claimed by Alcock to have been founded from Ely, to the bishops 
of which it certainly owed much. The name given to Alcock's 
college was that of " the most Blessed Virgin Mary, St John the 
Evangelist, and the glorious Virgin Saint Radigund," but it 
appears that the founder himself intended the name to be Jesus 
College. He provided for a master and six fellows, but the 
foundation now consists of a master and sixteen fellows, with 
twenty scholars or more. There are several further scholarships 
confined to the sons of clergymen of the Church of England. 
Architecturally Jesus is one of the most interesting colleges in 
Cambridge, for Alcock retained, and there still remains, a con- 
siderable part of the old buildings of the nunnery. The most 
important of these is the church, which Alcock, by removing 
most of the nave and other portions, converted into the usual 
form of a college chapel. The tower, however, is retained. The 
bulk of the building is an admirable example of Early English 
work, but there are traces of Norman; and Alcock added certain 
Perpendicular features. Of the rest of the college buildings, 
the hall is Alcock's work, the brick gatehouse is a fine structure 
of the close of the 15th century, while the cloister is a little later, 
and stands on the site of the nuns' cloister. Another court dates 
from the 17th and early 18th centuries, and there is a considerable 
amount of modern building. The most famous name connected 
with Jesus College is that of Cranmer. Among many others are 
Sir Thomas Elyot, John Bale, John Pearson, bishop of Chester, 
Hugh Peters, Gilbert Wakefield, Thomas Malthus, Laurence 
Sterne and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. 

King's College has its fine frontage upon the western side of 
King's Parade. It was founded by King Henry VI. in 1441. 
The first site was small and circumscribed, and in 1443 the existing 
site was with difficulty cleared of dwellings. The king designed 
a close connexion between this college and his other foundation 
at Eton; he provided for a provost and for seventy scholars, 
all of whom should be Etonians. In 1861 open scholarships 



CAMBRIDGE 



93 



were instituted, and the foundation now consists of a provost, 
forty-six fellows and forty-eight scholars. Half the scholarships 
are still appropriated to Eton. An administrative arrangement 
peculiar to King's College is that by which the provost has 
absolute authority within its walls, to the exclusion of officers 
of the University. The chief architectural ornament of the 
college, and one of the most notable in the town, is the magnifi- 
cent Perpendicular chapel, comparable with those of St George 
at Windsor and Henry VII. at Westminster Abbey. The 
building was begun in 1446, and extended (apart from the 
interior fittings) over nearly seventy years. Within, the most 
splendid features are the fan-vaulting which extends throughout 
the chapel, the noble range of stained-glass windows, which 
date for the most part from the early part of the 16th century, 
and the wooden organ screen, which, with part of the stalls, is 
of the time of Henry VIII. The college services are celebrated 
for the beauty of their music. The bulk of the other collegiate 
buildings are of the 18th century or modern. The old court 
of King's College is occupied by the modern university library, 
north of the chapel; the gateway, a good example (1444), is 
preserved. John Frith the Martyr, Richard Croke, Giles 
Fletcher, Richard Mulcaster, Sir William Temple, William 
Oughtred, the poet Waller, and Horace Walpole and others of 
his family are among many illustrious alumni of the college. 

Magdalene College (pronounced Maudlin) stands on the west 
bank of the Cam, near the Great Bridge. In 1428 the Bene- 
dictines of Crowland Abbey founded a home for student monks 
on this site, and in 15 19 Edward, duke of Buckingham, partly 
secularized this institution by founding Buckingham College 
in connexion with it. After the dissolution of the monastery, 
Thomas, Baron Audley of Walden, erected Magdalene in place 
of the former house in 1542. The foundation consists of a 
master and seven fellows, besides scholars. There are some 
valuable exhibitions appropriated to Wisbech school. The 
appointment of the master is peculiar, the office being in the gift 
of the occupant of Audley End, an estate near Saffron Walden, 
Essex. Some parts of the original building are preserved, but 
the most notable portion of the college is the Pepysian library, 
dating c. 1 700. It contains the very valuable collection of books 
bequeathed by Samuel Pepys to the college, at which he was a 
student. Buckingham College had Archbishop Cranmer as a 
lecturer; Charles Kingsley and Charles Stewart Parnell were 
educated at Magdalene. 

Pembroke College stands to the east of Trumpington Street. 
It was founded in 1347 by Mary de St Paul, widow of Aylmer 
de Valence, carl of Pembroke. Henry VI. made notable bene- 
factions to it. The foundation consists of a master and thirteen 
fellows, and there are six scholarships on the original foundation, 
besides others of later institution. The older existing buildings 
are mainly of the 18th century, but much of the original fabric 
was removed and rebuilt in 1874. The chapel is of the middle of 
the 17th century, and is ascribed to Sir Christopher Wren. The 
poets Spenser and Gray, Nicholas Ridley the martyr, Archbishop 
Whitgift and William Pitt were associated with this college; 
and from the number of bishops whose names are associated 
with it the college has obtained the style of collegium episcopale. 

Petcrhousc or St Peter's College is on the west side of Trump- 
ington Street, almost opposite Pembroke. It has already been 
indicated as the oldest Cambridge college (1284). Hugh de 
Balsham, the founder, had settled some secular scholars in the 
ancient Augustinian Hospital of St John in 1280, but the experi- 
ment was not a success. Nor did he carry out his full intentions 
as regards Peterhouse, the foundation of which followed on the 
failure of the fusion of his scholars with the hospital; but 
Simon Montagu, his successor in the bishopric of Ely, carried 
on his work, and in 1344 gave the college a code of statutes in 
which the influence of the Merton code is plainly visible. A 
master and fourteen fellows formed the original foundation, but 
the present consists of a master, and not less than eleven fellows 
and twenty- three scholars. The hall retains some original work; 
it was first built out of a legacy from the founder. The library 
building (c. 1590) is due to a legacy from Dr Andrew Pernc I 



(master 1554-1580) ; and Dr Matthew Wren (master 1625-1634), 
uncle of the famous architect Sir Christopher Wren, directed 
the building of the chapel and cloisters. The most famous name 
connected with the college is that of Cardinal Beaufort. 

Queens' College stands at the south of the riverside group, and 
one of its ranges of buildings rises immediately from the river. 
A college of St Bernard had been established in 1445 by Andrew 
Docket or Dokett, rector of St Botolph's church, who had also 
been principal of a hostel, or students' lodge, of St Bernard. 
He sought and obtained the patronage of Margaret of Anjou, 
wife of Henry VI., who undertook the foundation of a new house 
on another site in 1448, to bear the name of Queens'. Docket 
became the first master. In 1465 Elizabeth Woodville, wife of 
Edward IV., became the college's second foundress. The 
foundation consists of a president and eleven fellows. The 
buildings are exceedingly picturesque. The main quadrangle, 
of red brick, was completed very soon after the foundation. 
The smaller cloister court, towards the river, retains building 
of the same period, and the beautiful wooden gallery of the 
president's lodge deserves notice. Another court is called 
Erasmus's; the rooms which he is said to have occupied remain, 
and a walk in the college garden across the river bears his name. 

St Catharine's College, on the west side of Trumpington Street, 
was founded by Dr Robert Woodlark or Wodelarke, chancellor 
of the university and (1452) provost of King's College. It was 
opened in 1473, but the charter of incorporation dates from 1475. 
The foundation provided for a master (Woodlark being the first) 
and three fellows; there are now six fellows, and twenty-six 
scholars. The principal buildings, surrounding a court on three 
sides, date mainly from a complete reconstruction of the college 
at the close of the 17th century. 

St John's College, at the north of the riverside group of colleges, 
was founded in 1511 by the Lady Margaret Beaufort, also 
foundress of Christ's College. It replaced the Hospital of St 
John, which dated from the early years of the 13th century, 
and has been mentioned already in connexion with Peterhouse. 
The Lady Margaret died before the college was firmly established, 
and her designs were not carried out without many difficulties, 
which were overcome chiefly by the exertions of John Fisher, 
bishop of Rochester, one of her executors. Thirty-two fellow- 
ships were endowed, but subsequent endowments allowed 
extension, and the foundation now consists of a master, fifty-six 
fellows, sixty scholars and nine sizars. A large number of 
exhibitions are appropriated to special schools. Of the four 
courts of St John's, the easternmost is the original, and has a very 
fine Tudor gateway of brick. The chapel is modern (1863-1869), 
an ornate example of the work of Sir Gilbert Scott. The second 
court, practically unaltered, dates from 1 598-1602. In this there 
is a beautiful Masters' gallery, panelled, with a richly-moulded 
ceiling; it is now used as a combination room or fellows' common- 
room. The third court, which contains the library (1624), backs 
on to the river, and the fourth, which is on the opposite bank, 
was built c. 1830. A covered bridge connects the two, and is 
commonly called the Bridge of Sighs from a certain resemblance 
to the bridge of that name at Venice. Among the notable names 
connected with this college are Cecil, Lord Burghley, Thomas 
Cartwright, Wentworth, earl of Strafford, Roger Ascham, 
Richard Bentley, John Cleveland, the satirist, Thomas Baker, the 
historian, Lord Palmerston, Professor Adams, Sir John Herschel, 
Bishop Colenso, Dr Benjamin Kennedy, Dean Merivale, Home 
Tooke, Samuel Parr and William Wilberforce, and the poets 
Herrick (afterwards of Trinity Hall) and Wordsworth. 

Selwyn College, standing west of the river (Sidgwick Avenue), 
was founded in 1882 by public subscription in memory of George 
Augustus Selwyn, bishop of New Zealand and afterwards of 
Lichfield, for the purpose of giving university education with 
economy " combined," according to the charter, " with Christian 
training, based upon the principles of the Church of England." 

Sidney Sussex College faces Sidney Street. It was founded 
under the will (1588) of the Lady Frances Sidney, dowager 
countess of Sussex (d. 1589), and received its charter in 1S96. 
The foundress provided for a master, ten fellows and twenty 



94 



CAMBRIDGE 



scholars, but thirty-six scholarships are now provided. The 
original buildings were of brick, but they were plastered over 
and greatly altered by Wyatville about 1830. The Grey Friars 
had occupied the site, and part of their buildings remained in 
the chapel until 1777. A beautiful block of new buildings, 
with a cloister, was erected in 1890. The most famous name 
associated with the college is that of Oliver Cromwell, who was 
a fellow commoner, as also was Thomas Fuller, author of the 
Worthies of England. 

Trinity College, the front of which is on Trinity Street, is the 
largest collegiate foundation in Cambridge, and larger than any 
in Oxford. It was founded in 1546 by King Henry VIII. and 
absorbed several earlier institutions — King's Hall (founded 
by Edward III. in 1336), St Michael's or Michaelhouse (founded 
by Hervey de Stanton, chancellor of the exchequer under 
Edward II., in 1323), Fyswick or Physick's Hostel, belonging 
to Gonville Hall, and other hostels. Henry's original foundation 
was for a master and sixty fellows and scholars, but Queen 
Mary and other later benefactors enabled extensions to be made, 
and the foundation now consists of a master (appointed by the 
crown), at least sixty fellows, seventy-four scholars and sixteen 
sizars, with minor scholars, chaplains librarian and the regius 
professors of Divinity, Hebrew and Greek. Major scholarships 
are open to undergraduates, not being of standing to take the 
degree of bachelor of arts, as well as to non-members of the 
university under nineteen years of age, while minor scholarships 
and exhibitions are open only to the latter. There are valuable 
exhibitions appropriated to certain schools, of which the most 
important are those confined to Westminster school. Trinity 
College is entered from Trinity Street by the King's Gateway 
(1518-1535) preserved from King's Hall, but subsequently 
altered. The principal or Great Court is the largest in Cambridge 
and very fine. Its buildings are of different dates. In the centre 
is a picturesque fountain, erected by Thomas Neville, master 
(1593-1615), under whose direction much of the building was 
carried out. The chapel on the north side of the court was 
begun in the reign of Mary. The carved oak fittings within 
date from the mastership of Richard Bentley (1 700-1 742). The 
organ is particularly fine. A statue of Sir Isaac Newton by 
Roubiliac stands in the antechapel, and Richard Porson and 
William Whewell are buried here. The hall on the west of the 
court is Neville's work (1605), and very beautiful. The second 
court is also his foundation and bears his name. The library 
on the west side is the work of Sir Christopher Wren. Its interior 
is excellent, and besides busts of some of the vast number of 
famous men connected with Trinity, it contains a statue of Lord 
Byron by the Danish sculptor Thorvaldsen. The New Court, 
Gothic in style, was begun in 1823. The beautiful grounds and 
walks of the college extend down to and beyond the river. 
The college has extended its buildings to the opposite side of 
Trinity Street, where the two courts known as Whewell's Hostel 
were built (c. i860) at the charge of Dr William Whewell during 
his mastership. The eminent alumni of this great college are 
too numerous to admit of selection. 

Trinity Hall, which lies near the river, south of Trinity, was 
founded by William Bateman, bishop of Norwich, in 1350. On 
the site there had been, for about twenty years before the founda- 
tion , a house of mona stic students from Ely. The present college 
is alone in preserving the term Hall in its title. The foundation 
consists of a master and thirteen fellows, and the study of law, 
which the founder had especially in mind, is provided for by 
lectureships, and not less than three studentships tenable by 
graduates of the college. The buildings are for the most part 
modern or modernized, but the interior of the library well 
preserves its character of the early part of the 17th century. 

Of the churches of Cambridge one has long been recognized as 
the church of the university, namely Great St Mary's, which 

stands in the centre of the town, between King's 
buildings* P ara de and Market Hill. It is a fine Perpendicular 

structure, founded in 1478; but the tower was not 
completed until 1608. Some Decorated details are preserved 
from a former building. The university preachers deliver their 



sermons in this church, but it was formerly the meeting-place 
of the university for the transaction of business, for learned 
disputations and for secular festivals. The " Cambridge 
chimes " struck by the clock are famous, and a curfew is rung 
each evening on the great bell. The Senate House, standing 
opposite Great St Mary's, dates from 1730 and is classical in 
style. The buildings of the university library, in the immediate 
vicinity, enclose two quadrangles, and in part occupy the site 
of the old court of King's College. One of the quadrangles 
was formerly occupied by the schools or lecture rooms, but as 
the library grew it usurped their place. Important modern ad- 
ditions date from 1842, 1864 and 1888. The facade of the old 
schools is an excellent work of 1758. The library is one of those 
which is entitled to receive, under the Copyright Act, a copy of 
every book published in the United Kingdom. The Fitzwilliam 
Museum, a massive classical building, was begun in 1837 to 
contain the bibliographical and art collection bequeathed by 
Richard, Viscount Fitzwilliam, in 18 16. The museum of 
archaeology (classical, general and local, 1884), is connected 
with the Fitzwilliam Museum. The Pitt Press (1833), housing 
the university printing establishment, was begun out of the 
residue of a fund for erecting the statues of William Pitt in 
Hanover Square, London, and Westminster Abbey. It stands 
near Pembroke, Pitt's college. The Selwyn Divinity School 
(1879), opposite St John's College, was built largely at the charge 
of Dr William Selwyn, Lady Margaret professor of divinity. 
The museums and lecture rooms (begun in 1863) are extensive 
buildings on each side of Downing Street. Include?! in these 
are the museum of zoology, which had its origin in collections 
made by Sir Busick Harwood, professor of anatomy in 
1785-1814, and contains the collection of fishes made by 
Charles Darwin in the ship "Beagle"; the medical school, 
botanical museum and herbarium, mineralogical museum, 
engineering laboratory (1894), optical and astronomical lecture 
room, chemical laboratory (1887), and the Cavendish laboratory 
for physical research (1874), the gift of William Cavendish, 
7th duke of Devonshire and chancellor of the university. The 
Sedgwick Geological Museum, opened by King Edward VII. 
in 1904, commemorates Adam Sedgwick, Woodwardian pro- 
fessor of geology, and originated in the collections of Dr 
John Woodward (d. 1728). Adjoining this building, in Down- 
ing Street is the law library, founded on a bequest from Miss 
Rebecca Flower Squire (d. 1898) with the law school. The 
observatory (1824) is on the outskirts of the town in Mad- 
ingley Road, and the botanic garden (founded 1762, and removed 
to its present site in 1831) borders Trumpington Road. The 
club-rooms and debating hall of the Cambridge Union Society 
are adjacent to the Holy Sepulchre church. 

The non-collegiate students of the university (i.e those who 
receive the university education and possess the same status as 
collegiate students without belonging to any college) have 
lecture and other rooms and a library in Fitzwilliam Hall. This 
body was created in 1869. The students reside in lodgings. 
There are two women's colleges — Girton, established in 1873 on 
the north-western outskirts of the town, having been previously 
opened at Hitchin in 1869, and Newnham (1875), originally (1873) 
a hall of residence for students attending special lectures for 
women. Among other educational establishments mention must 
be made of the Leys school, founded in 1875 by prominent Wes- 
leyans for non-sectarian education, and the Perse School, an 
ancient foundation remodelled in 1902. 

Out of a number of ancient churches in Cambridge, two, 
besides Great St Mary's, deserve special notice. In St Bene- 
dict's or Benet's, which has been already mentioned 
in connexion with Corpus College, the tower is of uni y ers i ty 
great interest, being the oldest surviving building in buildings. 
Cambridge, of pre-Norman workmanship, having rude 
ornamentation on the exterior and the tower arch within. The 
church of the Holy Sepulchre in Bridge Street is one of the four 
ancient round churches in England. Its supposed date is 1120- 
1140, but although it is doubtless to be associated with the 
Knights Templars, the circumstances of its foundation are not 



CAMBRIDGE 



95 



adminis- 
tration. 



known. The chancel is practically a modern reconstruction, 
and an extensive restoration, which has been adversely criticized, 
was applied by the Cambridge Camden Society to the whole 
fabric in 1841. At several of the villages neighbouring or 
suburban to Cambridge there are churches of interest, as at 
Chesterton, Trumpington, Grantchester (where the name indi- 
cates a Roman station, borne out by the discovery of remains), 
Fen Ditton and Barnwell, near which is the Norman Sturbridge 
chapel. In Cambridge itself there is a Norman house, .much 
altered, which by a tradition of unknown origin bears the name 
of the School of Pythagoras. 

The university is a corporate body, including all the colleges. 
These, however, are also corporations in themselves, and have 
University tneir own statutes, but they are further subject to the 
constttu- paramount laws of the university. The university 
Hon and statutes of Queen Elizabeth were only replaced in 
1858. The statutes as revised by a commission in 
that year were soon found to require emendation; in 
1872 another commission was appointed, and in 1882 new 
statutes received the approval of the queen in council. The 
head of the university is the chancellor. He is a member of the 
university, of high rank and position, elected by the senate. 
Being generally non-resident, he delegates his administrative 
duties to the vice-chancellor, who is the head of a college, and 
is elected for one year by the senate. The principal executive 
officers under the vice-chancellor are as follows. The two 
proctors have as their main duty that of disciplinary officers 
over the members of the university in statu pupillari. In each 
year two colleges nominate one proctor each, according to a 
fixed rotation which gives the larger colleges a more frequent 
choice than the smaller. The proctors are assisted by four 
pro-proctors. The public orator is the spokesman of the senate 
upon such public occasions as the conferring of honorary 
degrees. The librarian has charge of the university library. 
The registrary, with his assistant, records the proceedings of 
the senate, &c, and has charge of documents. The university 
returns two members to parliament, elected by the members of 
the senate. The chancellor and sex viri (elected by the senate) 
form a court for offences against the university statutes by 
members not in statu pupillari. The chancellor and six heads of 
colleges, appointed by the senate, form a court of discipline for 
members in statu pupillari. 

The senate in congregation is the legislative body. Those who 
have votes in it are the chancellor, vice-chancellor, doctors of 
divinity, law, medicine, science, letters and music, 
and masters of art, law, surgery and music. The 
council of the senate, consisting of the chancellor, vice-chancellor, 
four heads of colleges, four professors and eight other members 
of the senate chosen by the vice-chancellor, brings all proposals 
(called Graces) before the senate. The revenues of the university 
are derived chiefly from fees at matriculation, for certain ex- 
aminations, and for degrees, from a tax upon all members of the 
university, and from contributions by the colleges, together with 
the profits of the University Press. A financial board, consisting 
of the vice-chancellor ex officio and certain elected members, 
administers the finances of the university. There are boards for 
each of the various faculties, and a General Board of Studies, 
with the vice-chancellor at the head. There are university 
professors, readers or lecturers in a large number of subjects. 
The oldest professorship is the Lady Margaret professorship of 
divinity, instituted by the founders of Christ's and St John's 
Colleges in 1502. In 1540 Henry VIII. founded the regius 
professorships of divinity, civil law, physic, Hebrew and Greek. 

The head of a college generally bears the title of master, as 
indicated above in the account of the several colleges. It has 
College a ' so been seen that the foundation of each college 
organiza- includes a certain number of fellows and scholars. 
Hon— The affairs of the college are managed by the head and 
the fellows, or a committee of fellows. The scholars, 
and other members in statu pupillari are generally 
termed collectively undergraduates. Those who receive ' no 
emoluments (and therefore pay the full fees) are technically 



Senate. 



under- 
graduates. 



called pensioners, and form the bulk of the undergraduates. 
Another group of students receiving emoluments are termed 
sizars ; the primary object of sizarships is to open the university 
course to men of limited means. The title of fellow-commoners 
belongs to wealthy students who pay special fees and have the 
right of dining at the fellows' tables. This class has virtually 
ceased to exist. As regards his work, the undergraduate in 
college is under the intimate direction of his tutor; the discip- 
linary officer in college is the dean. Besides the foundation 
scholarships in each college there are generally certain scholar- 
ships and exhibitions founded by private or special benefactions ; 
these are frequently awarded for the encouragement of specific 
branches of study, or are confined wholly, or by preference, to 
students from certain schools. 

The total number of students is about 3000. The colleges 
cannot accommodate this number, so that a student commonly 
spends some part of his residence in lodgings, which gesld- ' 
are licensed by, and under the control of, the university ence and 
authorities. Such residence implies no sacrifice of examina- 
membership of a college. There are three terms — ons " 
Michaelmas (October), Lent and Easter (summer). They 
include together not less than 227 days, though the actual period 
of residence for undergraduates is about 24 weeks annually. 
Undergraduates usually begin residence in Michaelmas term. 
An elementary examination or other evidence of qualification is 
required for admission to a college. After nine terms' (three 
years') residence an undergraduate can take the first degree, that 
of bachelor of arts (b.a.). The examinations required for the 
ordinary b.a. degree are — (1) Previous examination or Little-go 
(usually taken in the first term of residence or at least in the first 
year), including classics, mathematics and a gospel in Greek and 
Paley's Evidences of Christianity, or an additional Greek or Latin 
classic and logic. (2) General examination in classics and 
mathematics, with a portion of English history, &c. (3) Special 
examination in a subject other than classical or mathematical. 
Candidates for honours are required to pass the Previous examina- 
tion with certain additional subjects; they then have only a 
" tripos. " examination in one of the following subjects — mathe- 
matics, classics, moral sciences, natural sciences, theology, law, 
history, oriental languages, medieval and modern languages, 
mechanical sciences, economics. The mathematical tripos is 
divided into two parts, in the first of which, down to 1909, the 
candidates were classed in the result as Wranglers, Senior 
Optimes and Junior Optimes. There was also an individual 
order of merit, the most proficient candidate being placed at the 
head of the list as Senior Wrangler. But in 1906 a number of 
important reforms of this tripos were proposed by the Mathe- 
matical Board, and among these the abolition of the individual 
order of merit was recommended and passed by the senate. It 
is not employed in any other tripos. The classical tripos is also 
in two parts, to the second of which certain kindred subjects are 
added (ancient philosophy, history, &c). Individual order of 
merit is not observed in either part, the candidates being grouped 
in classes. There are a large number of university prizes and 
scholarships on special foundations. Such are the Smith's prizes 
for mathematics and natural philosophy, on the foundation 
(1768) of Robert Smith, master of Trinity, awarded up to 1883 
after examination, but since then for an essay on some branch of 
each subject, and the Chancellor's medals, of which two have 
been awarded annually in classics since the foundation of the 
prizes in 1751 by Thomas Holies, duke of Newcastle. 

The university may adopt as affiliated colleges institutions in 
the United Kingdom or in any part of the British empire which 
fulfil certain conditions as to the education of adult 
students. Attendance at these institutions is counted as colleges. 
equivalent to a certain period of residence at Cambridge 
University in the event of a student wishing to pursue his work 
here. There are over twenty such affiliated colleges. There are 
also, in England, certain " affiliated centres." These are towns 
in which there is no affiliated college, but students who have 
there attended a course of education managed in connexion 
with the university by a committee may enter the university 



9 6 



CAMBRIDGE 



with privileges similar to those enjoyed by students from 
affiliated colleges. 

The principal social function of the university is the '■' May 
Week " at the close of the Easter term. It actually takes place 
Ma eek * n J une an< ^ ' asts l° n g er than a week. There is a great 
influx of visitors into Cambridge for this occasion. 
The first four days are occupied by the college boat-races on the 
Cam, and on subsequent days there are college balls, concerts, 
theatrical performances and other entertainments. On the 
Tuesday after the races there is a Congregation, at which prize 
exercises are recited, and usually, but not invariably, a number 
of honorary degrees are conferred on eminent men by invitation. 
This final period of the academic year is called Commencement, 
or in Latin Comitia Maxima. 

Authorities. — For details of the administration of the university 
and colleges, regulations as to studies, prizes, scholarships, &c, see 
the annual Cambridge University Calendar and The Students' Hand- 
book to tlie University and Colleges of Cambridge; see also R. Willis 
and J. W. Clark, Architectural History of the University of Cambridge 
(3 vols., Cambridge, 1886); J. Bass Mullinger, History of the Uni- 
versity of Cambridge from the Earliest Times to the Accession of 
Charles I. (2 vols., 1873-1884; third vol., 1909); and smaller 
History of Cambridge, in Longman's "Epoch" Series (1888); 
J. W. Clark, Cambridge, Historical and Picturesque (London, 1890) ; 
T. D. Atkinson, Cambridge Described and Illustrated, with intro- 
duction by J. W. Clark (London, 1897) ; F. W. Maitland, Township 
and Borough (Cambridge, 1898); C. W. Stubbs, Cambridge, in 
"Mediaeval Towns" series (London, 1905); Arthur Gray, The 
Dual Origin of the Town of Cambridge (publications of the Cambridge 
Antiquarian Soc, new ser. No. 1, Cambridge, 1908); J. W. Clark, 
Liber memorandorum ecclesie de Bernewelle (Cambridge, 1907), with 
an introduction by F. W. Maitland. For the individual colleges, 
see the series of College Histories, by various authors (London, 1899 
et seq.). 

CAMBRIDGE, a city and the county-seat of Dorchester 
county, Maryland, U.S.A., on the Choptank river, near Chesa- 
peake Bay, about 60 m. S.E. of Baltimore. Pop. (1890) 4192; 
(1900) 5747 (1958 being negroes); (1910)6407. It is served by the 
Cambridge branch of the Philadelphia, Baltimore & Washing- 
ton railway (Pennsylvania railway), which connects with the 
main line at Seaford, 30 m. distant, and with the Baltimore, 
Chesapeake & Atlantic at Hurlock, 16 m. distant; and by 
steamers of the Baltimore, Chesapeake & Atlantic railway 
company. It is a business centre for the prosperous farming 
region by which it is surrounded, and is a shipping point for 
oysters and fish; among its manufactures are canned fruits 
and vegetables, flour, hominy, phosphates, underwear and 
lumber. Cambridge was founded in 1684, received its present 
name in 1686, and was chartered as a city in 1900. 

CAMBRIDGE, a city and one of the county-seats of Middlesex 
county, Massachusetts, U.S.A., situated on the Charles river, 
in the outskirts of Boston, of which it is in effect a part, although 
under separate government. Pop. (1880) 52,669; (1890) 
70,028; (1900) 91,886; (1910 census) 104,839. Of the 
total population in 1900, 30,446 were foreign-born, including 
11,235 Irish, 9613-English Canadians, 1944 English, 1483 French 
Canadians and 1584 Swedish; and 54,200 were of foreign 
parentage (both parents foreign-born), including 24,961 of Irish 
parentage, 9829 of English-Canadian parentage, 2587 of English 
parentage, and 2 288 of French-Canadian parentage. Cambridge 
is entered directly by only one railway, the Boston & Maine. 
The township, now practically built over by the city, contained 
originally several separate villages, the names of which are still 
used as a convenience in designating corresponding sections of 
the municipality: Old Cambridge, North Cambridge, Cam- 
bridgeport and East Cambridge, the last two being manufactur- 
ing and commercial districts. 

Old Cambridge is noted as the seat of Harvard University 
(q.v.) and as a literary and scientific centre. Radcliffe College 
(1879), for women, practically a part of Harvard; an Episcopal 
Theological School (1867), and the New Church (Swedenborgian 
or New Jerusalem) Theological School (1866) are other educa- 
tional institutions of importance. To Cambridge also, in 1908, 
was removed Andover Theological Seminary, a Congregational 
institution chartered in 1807, opened in Andover, Massachusetts, 



in 1808 (re-incorporated under separate trustees in 1907). This 
seminary is one of the oldest and most famous theological institu- 
tions in the United States; it grew out of the theological teaching 
previously given in Phillips Academy, and was founded by the 
widow of Lt.-Governor Samuel Phillips, her son John Phillips 
and Samuel Abbot (1 732-181 2). The instruction was strongly 
Calvinistic in the earlier period, but the seminary has always 
been " equally open to Protestants of every denomination." 
Very liberal aid is given to students, and there is no charge for 
tuition. The Bibliotheca Sacra, founded in 1843 by Edward 
Robinson and in 1844 taken over by Professors Bela B. Edwards 
and Edwards A. Park, and the Andover Review (1884-1893), have 
been the organs of the seminary. In 1886 some of its professors 
published Progressive Orthodoxy, a book which made a great stir 
by its liberal tone, its opposition to supernaturalism and its 
evident trend toward the methods of German " higher criticism." 
Legal proceedings for the removal of five professors, after the 
publication of this book, failed; and their successful defence 
helped to secure greater freedom in thought and in instruction 
in American Presbyterian and Congregational theological 
seminaries. The seminary is now affiliated with Harvard 
University, though it remains independent and autonomous. 

Cambridge is a typical New England city, built up in detached 
residences, with irregular streets pleasantly shaded, and a 
considerable wealth of historic and literary associations. There 
are many reminders of the long history of Harvard, and of the 
War of Independence. Cambridge was the site of the camp of 
the first American army, at the outbreak of the war, and from 
it went the detachment which intrenched on Bunker's Hill. 
Here are the Ap thorp House (built in 1760), in which General 
Burgoyne and his officers were lodged as prisoners of war in 
1777; the elm under which, according to tradition, Washington 
took command of the Continental Army on the 3rd of July 1775; 
the old Vassall or Craigie House (1759), where Washington lived 
in 1775-1776, and which was later the home of Edward Everett, 
Joseph E. Worcester, Jared Sparks and (1837-1882) Henry W. 
Longfellow. Elbridge Gerry lived and James Russell Lowell 
Was born, lived and died in " Elmwood " (built in 1767); Oliver 
Wendell Holmes was born in Cambridge also; John Fiske, the 
historian, lived here; and there are many other literary associa- 
tions, attractive and important for those interested in American 
letters. In Mt Auburn Cemetery are buried many artists, poets, 
scholars and other men and women of fame. Cambridge is 
one of the few American cities possessing a crematorium (1900). 
The municipal water-works are excellent. A handsome bridge 
joining Cambridgeport to Boston (cost about $2,250,000) was 
opened late in 1906. Four other bridges span the Charles river 
between the two cities. A dam between East Cambridge and 
Boston, traversed by a roadway 150 ft. wide, was in the process 
of construction in 1907; and an extension of the Boston subway 
into Cambridge to the grounds of Harvard University, a distance 
of about 3 m., was projected. The city government is admini- 
stered almost entirely under the state civil-service laws, Cam- 
bridge having been a leader in the adoption of its provisions. 
A non-partisan association for political reform did excellent 
work from 1890 to 1900, when it was superseded by a non- 
partisan party. Since 1887 the city has declared yearly by 
increasing majorities for prohibition of the liquor traffic. The 
high schools enjoy a notable reputation. A handsome city hall 
(cost $235,000) and public library (as well as a manual training 
school) were given to the city by Frederick H. Rindge, a one- 
time resident, whose benefactions to Cambridge aggregated 
in value $650,000. Cambridge has many manufacturing estab- 
lishments, and in 1905 the city's factory products were valued 
at $42,407,064, an increase of 45-8% over their value in 1900. 
The principal manufactures are slaughtering and meat-packing 
products, foundry and machine-shop products, rubber boots and 
shoes, rubber belting and hose, printing and publishing products, 
carpentering, pianos and organs, confectionery and furniture. 
Cambridge is one of the chief publishing centres of the country. 
The tax valuation of property in 1906 ($105,153,235) was more 
than $1000 per inhabitant. 



CAMBRIDGE—CAMBRIDGESHIRE 



97 



Cambridge is "one of the few American towns that may be 
said to have owed their very name and existence to the pursuit 
of letters " (T. W. Higginson). Its site was selected in 1630 
by Governor Winthrop and others as suitable for fortifications 
and defence, and it was intended to make it the capital of the 
Massachusetts Bay Colony; but as Boston's peninsular position 
gave it the advantage in commerce and in defence against the 
Indians, the plan fell through, although up to 1638 various 
sessions of the general court and particular courts were held 
here. The township records (published) are continuous since 
1632. A direct tax for the wooden " pallysadoe " about Cam- 
bridge led the township of Watertown in 1632 to make the first 
protest in America against taxation without representation. 
The settlement was firsfknown as the " New Towne," but in 
1638 was named Cambridge in honour of the English Cambridge, 
where several score of the first immigrants to the colony were 
educated. The oldest college in America (Harvard) was founded 
here in 1636. In 1639 there was set up in Cambridge the first 
printing press of British North America (Boston having none 
until 1676). Other notable dates in history are 1637 and 1647, 
when general synods of New England churches met at Cambridge 
to settle disputed doctrine and define orthodoxy; the departure 
for Connecticut of Thomas Hooker's congregation in 1636; the 
meeting of the convention that framed the present constitution 
of the commonwealth, 1779-1780; the separation of the Con- 
gregationalists and Unitarians of the first parish church, in 1829; 
and the grant of a city charter in 1846. The original township 
of Cambridge was very large, and there have been successively 
detached from it, Newton (1691), Lexington (1713), Brighton 
(1837) and Arlington (1867). 

See Lucius R. Paige, History of Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1630- 
1877 (Boston, Mass., 1877); T. W. Higginson, Old Cambridge 
(New York, 1899) ; Arthur Gilman (ed.), The Cambridge of Eighteen 
Hundred and Ninety-Six (Cambridge, 1896); and Historic Guide 
to Cambridge (Cambridge, 1907.) 

CAMBRIDGE, a city and the county-seat of Guernsey county, 
Ohio, U.S.A., on Wills Creek, about 75 m. E. by N. of Columbus. 
Pop. (1890) 4361; (1900) 8241, of whom 407 were foreign- 
born; (1910 census) 11,327. It is served by the Baltimore & 
Ohio and the Pennsylvania railways, and is connected by an 
electric line with Byesville (pop. in 1910, 3156), about 7 m. S. 
Cambridge is built on a hill about 800 ft. above sea-level. 
There is a public library. Coal, oil, natural gas, clay and iron 
are found in the vicinity, and among the city's manufactures are 
iron, steel, glass, furniture and pottery. The value of its 
factory products in 1905 was $2,440,917. The municipality 
owns and operates the water-works. Cambridge was first settled 
in 1798 by emigrants from the island of Guernsey (whence the 
name of the county); was laid out as a town in 1806; was 
incorporated as a village in 1837; and was chartered as a city 
in 1893. 

CAMBRIDGE PLATONISTS, a school of philosophico-religious 
thinkers which flourished mainly at Cambridge University in the 
second half of the 17th century. The founder was Benjamin 
Whichcote and the chief members were Ralph Cudworth, 
Richard Cumberland, Joseph Glanvill, Henry More and John 
Norris (see separate articles). Other less important members 
were Nathanael Culverwel (d. 1651?), Theophilus Gale (1628- 
1678), John Pordage (1607-1681), George Rust (d. 1670), John 
Smith (1618-1652) and John Worthington (1618-1671). They 
represented liberal thought -at the time and were generally 
known as Latitudinarians. Their views were due to a reaction 
against three main tendencies in contemporary English thought: 
the sacerdotalism of Laud and his followers, the obscurantist 
sectaries and, most important of all, the doctrines of Hobbes. 
They consist chiefly of a reconciliation between reason and 
religion, resulting in a generally tolerant spirit. They tend 
always to mysticism and the comtemplation of things transcen- 
dental. In spite of inaccuracy and the lack of critical capacity 
in dealing with their authorities both ancient and modern, the 
Cambridge Platonists exercised a valuable influence on English 
theology and thought in general. Their chief contributions to 

v. 4 



thought were Cudworth's theory of the " plastic nature " of 
God, More's elaborate mysticism, Norris's appreciation of Male- 
branche, Glanvill's conception of scepticism as an aid to Faith,- 
and, in a less degree, the harmony of Faith and Reason elaborated 
by Culverwel. The one doctrine on which they all combined to 
lay especial emphasis was the absolute existence of right and 
wrong quite apart from the theory of divine authority. Their 
chief authorities were Plato and the Neo-platonists (between 
whom they made no adequate distinction), and among modern 
philosophers, Descartes, Malebranche and Boehme. From these 
sources they attempted to evolve a philosophy of religion, 
which would not only refute the views of Hobbes, but would 
also free theology finally from the errors of scholasticism, 
without plunging it in the newer dangers of unfettered rational- 
ism (see Ethics). 

See Tulloch, Rational Theology in England in the 17th Century, 
Hallam, Literature of Europe (chap, on Philosophy from 1650 to 1700; 
Hunt, Religious Thought in England; von Stein, Sieben Biicher zur 
Geschichte des Platonismus (1862), and works on individual philo- 
sophers appended to biographies. 

CAMBRIDGESHIRE, an eastern county of England, bounded 
N. by Lincolnshire, E. by Norfolk and Suffolk, S. by Essex and 
Hertfordshire, and W. by Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire and 
Northamptonshire, The area is 858-9 sq. m. The greater part 
of the county falls within the district of the Fens, and is flat, 
elevated only a few feet above sea-level, and intersected with 
innumerable drainage channels. The physical characteristics of 
this district, and the history of its reclamation from a marshy 
and in great part uninhabitable condition, fall for consideration 
under the heading Fens. Except in the south of the county the 
scenery of the flat land is hardly ever varied by rising ground or 
wood, and owes the attraction it possesses rather to individuality 
than to beauty. At the south-eastern and southern boundaries, 
and to the west of Cambridge, bordering the valley of the Cam on 
the north, the land rises in gentle undulations; but for the rest, 
such elevations as the Gog Magog Hills, S.E. of Cambridge, and 
the gentle hillock on which the city of Ely stands, are. isolated 
and conspicuous from afar. The principal rivers are the Ouse 
and its tributaries in the south and centre, and the Nene 
in the north; the greater part of the waters of both these 
rivers within Cambridgeshire flow in artificial channels, of 
which those for the Ouse, two great parallel cuts between 
Earith and Denver Sluice, in Norfolk, called the Bedford 
Rivers, form the most remarkable feature in the drainage of 
the county, The old main channel of the Ouse, from Ely 
downward to Denver (below which are tidal waters), is filled 
chiefly by the waters of the Cam or Granta, which joins the 
Ouse 3 m. above Ely, the Lark (which with its feeder, the 
Kennett, forms the boundary of the county with Suffolk for a 
considerable distance) and the Little Ouse, forming part of the 
boundary with Norfolk. 

Geology. — By its geological features, Cambridgeshire is 
divisible into three well-marked regions; in the south and 
south-east are the low uplands formed by the Chalk; north of 
this, but best developed in the south-west, is a clay and greensand 
area; all the remaining portion is alluvial Fenland. The general 
strike of the rocks is along a south-west and north-east line, the 
dip is south-easterly. The oldest rock is the Jurassic Oxford 
Clay, which appears as an irregular strip of elevated flat ground 
reaching from Croxton by Conington and Fenny Drayton to 
Willingham and Rampton. Eastward and northward it no doubt 
forms the floor of the Fen country, and at Thorney and Whittlesea 
small patches rise like islands, through the level fen alluvium. 
The Coralline Oolite, with the Els worth or St Ives rock at the 
base, occurs as a small patch, covered by Greensand, at Upware, 
whence many fossils have been obtained; elsewhere its place is 
taken by the Ampthill Clays, which are passage beds between the 
Oxford and Kimmeridge Clays. The latter clay lies in a narrow 
strip by Papworth St Agnes, Oakington and Cottenham; a 
large irregular outcjrop surrounds Haddenham and Ely, and 
similar occurrences are at March, Chatteris and Manea. Above 
the Kimmeridge Clay comes the Lower Greensand, sandy for the 

11 



9 8 



CAMBRIDGESHIRE 



greater part, but here and there hardened into the condition 
known as " Carstone," which has been used as an inferior 
building-stone. This formation is thickest in the south-west ; it 
extends from the border by Gamlingay, Cuxton and Cottenham, 
and appears again in outliers at Upware, Ely and Haddenham. 
The Gault forms a strip of flat ground, 4 to 6 m. wide, running 
roughly parallel with the course of the river Cam, from Guilden 
Morden through Cambridge to Soham; it is a stiff blue clay 
200 ft. thick in the south-west, but is thinner eastward. At the 
bottom of the chalk is the Chalk Marl, 10 to 20 ft. thick, with 
a glauconitic and phosphatic nodule-bearing layer at its base, 
known as the Cambridge Greensand. This bed has been largely 
worked for the nodules and for cement; it contains many 
fossils derived from the Gault below. Several outliers of Chalk 
Marl lie upon the Gault west of the Cam. The Chalk comprises 
all the main divisions of the formation, including the Totternhoe 
stone, Melbourn rock and Chalk rock. Much glacial boulder 
clay covers all the higher ground of the county; it is a stiff 
brownish clay with many chalk fragments of travelled rocks. 
Near Ely there is a remarkable mass of chalk, evidently trans- 
ported by ice, resting on and surrounded by boulder clay. 
Plateau gravel caps some of the chalk hills, and old river gravels 
occur at lower levels with the bones of mammoth, rhinoceros and 
other extinct mammals. The low-lying Fen beds are marly silt 
with abundant peat beds and buried forests; at the bottom is a 
gravel layer of marine origin. 

Industries. — The climate is as a whole healthy, the fens being 
so carefully drained that diseases to which dwellers in marshy 
districts are commonly liable are practically eliminated. The 
land is very fertile, and although some decrease is generally 
apparent in the acreage under grain crops, Cambridgeshire is 
one of the principal grain-producing counties in England. 
Nearly nine-tenths of the total area is under cultivation, and an 
unusually small proportion is under permanent pasture. Wheat 
is the chief grain crop, but large quantities of barley and oats are 
also grown. Among green crops potatoes occupy a large and 
increasing area. Dairy-farming is especially practised in the 
south-west, where the district of the Cam valley has long been 
known as the Dairies; and much butter and cheese are sent to 
the London markets. Sheep are pastured extensively on the 
higher ground, but the number of these and of cattle for the 
county as a whole is not large. Beans occupy a considerable 
acreage, and fruit-growing and market-gardening are important 
in many parts. There is no large manufacturing industry 
common to the county in general; among minor trades brewing 
is carried on at several places, and brick-making and lime- 
burning may also be mentioned. 

Communications. — The principal railway serving the county is 
the Great Eastern, of which system numerous branch lines centre 
chiefly upon Cambridge, Ely and March. Cambridge is also 
served by branches of the Great Northern line from Hitchin, 
of the London & North- Western from Bletchley and Bedford, 
and of the Midland from Kettering. A trunk line connecting 
the eastern counties with the north and north-west of England 
runs northward from March under the joint working of the Great 
Northern and Great Eastern companies. The artificial water- 
ways provide the county with an extensive system of inland 
navigation; and a considerable proportion of the industrial 
population is employed on these. In this connexion the building 
of boats and barges is carried on at several towns. 

Population and Administration.- — The area of the ancient 
county is 549,723 acres, with a population in 1891 of 188,961, 
and in 1901 of 190,682. The ancient county includes the two 
administrative counties of Cambridge in the south and the Isle 
of Ely in the north. The liberty of the Isle of Ely was formerly 
of the independent nature of a county palatine, but ceased to 
be so under acts of 1836 and 1837. Its area is 238,048 acres, 
and that of the administrative county of Cambridge 315,171 
acres. Cambridgeshire contains seventeen hundreds. The 
municipal boroughs are Cambridge, the county town (pop. 
38,379), in the administrative county of Cambridge, and Wisbech 
(9381) in the Isle of Ely. The other urban districts are — -in the 



administrative county of Cambridge, Chesterton (9591), and in 
the Isle of Ely, Chatteris (4711), Ely (7713), March (7565) and 
Whittlesey (3909). Among other considerable towns Soham 
(4230) and Littleport (4181), both in the neighbourhood of Ely. 
may be mentioned. The town of Newmarket, which, although 
wholly within the administrative county of West Suffolk, is 
mainly in the ancient county of Cambridgeshire, is famous for 
its race-meetings. The county is in the south-eastern circuit, 
and assizes are held at Cambridge. Each administrative county 
has a court of quarter sessions, and the two are divided into ten 
petty sessional divisions. The borough of Cambridge has a 
separate court of quarter sessions, and this borough and Wisbech 
have separate commissions of the peace. The university of 
Cambridge exercises disciplinary jurisdiction over its members. 
There are 168 entire civil parishes in the two administrative 
counties. Cambridgeshire is almost wholly in the diocese of Ely 
and the archdeaconries of Ely and Sudbury, but small portions 
are within the dioceses of St Albans and Norwich. There are 
194 ecclesiastical parishes or districts wholly or in part within 
the county. The parliamentary divisions are three, namely. 
Northern or Wisbech, Western or Chesterton, and Eastern or 
Newmarket, each returning one member. The county also 
contains the parliamentary borough of Cambridge, returning 
one member; and the university of Cambridge returns two 
members. 

History. — The earliest English settlements in what is now 
Cambridgeshire were made about the 6th century by bands of 
Engles, who pushed their way up the Ouse and the Cam, and 
established themselves in the fen-district, where they became 
known as the Gyrwas, the districts corresponding to the modern 
counties of Huntingdonshire and Cambridgeshire being dis- 
tinguished as the lands of the North Gyrwas and the South 
Gyrwas respectively. At this period the fen-district stretched 
southward as far as Cambridge, and the essential unity which 
it preserved is illustrated later by its inclusion under one 
sheriff, chosen in successive years from Cambridgeshire proper, 
the Isle of Ely and Huntingdonshire. In 656 numerous lands in 
the neighbourhood of Wisbech were included in the endowment 
of the abbey of Peterborough, and in the same century religious 
houses were established at Ely and Thorney, both of which, 
however, were destroyed during the Danish invasions of the 
9th century. After the treaty of Wedmore the district became 
part of the Danelaw. On the expulsion of the Danes by Edward 
in the 10th century it was included in East Anglia, but in the 
nth century was again overrun by the Danes, who in the course 
of their devastations burnt Cambridge. The first mention of 
the shire in the Saxon Chronicle records the valiant resistance 
which it opposed to the invaders in 1010 when the rest of East 
Anglia had taken ignominious flight. The shire-system of 
East Anglia was in all probability not definitely settled before 
the Conquest, but during the Danish occupation of the 9th century 
the district possessed a certain military and political organization 
round Cambridge, its chief town, whence probably originated 
the constitution and demarcation of the later shire. At the time 
of the Domesday Survey the county was divided as now, except 
that the Isle of Ely, which then formed two hundreds having 
their meeting-place at Witchford, is now divided into the four 
hundreds of Ely, Wisbech, North Witchford and South Witch- 
ford, while Cambridge formed a hundred by itself. The 
hundred of Fiendish was then known as Flamingdike. Cam- 
bridgeshire was formerly included in the diocese of Lincoln, 
until, on the erection of Ely to a bishop's see in 1109, almost the 
whole county was placed in that diocese. In 1291 the whole 
county, with the exception of parishes in the deanery of Fordham 
and diocese of Norwich, constituted the archdeaconry of Ely, 
comprising the deaneries of Ely, Wisbech, Chesterton, Cambridge, 
Shingay, Bourn, Barton and Camps. The Isle of Ely formerly 
constituted an independent franchise in which the bishops 
exercised quasi-palatinate rights, and offences were held to be 
committed against the bishop's peace. These privileges were 
considerably abridged in the reign of Henry VIII. , but the Isle 
still had separate civil officers, appointed by the bishop, chief 



CAMBUSLANG— CAMBYSES 



99 



among whom were the chief justice, chief bailiff, deputy bailiff 
and two coroners. The bishop is still cuslos rotulorum of the 
Isle. Cambridgeshire has always been remarkable for its lack 
of county families, and for the frequent changes in the ownership 
of estates. No Englishmen retained lands of any importance 
after the Conquest, and at the time of the Domesday Survey 
the chief lay proprietors were Alan, earl of Brittany, whose 
descendants the Zouches retained estates in the county until 
the 15th century; Picot the sheriff, whose estates passed to 
the families of Peverell and Peche; Aubrey de Vere, whose 
descendants retained their estates till the 16th century; and 
Hardwinus de Scalariis, ancestor of the Scales of Whaddon. 

From the time of Hereward's famous resistance to the Con- 
queror in the fen-district, the Isle of Ely was intimately concerned 
with the great political struggles of the country. It was defended 
against Stephen by Bishop Nigellus of Ely, who fortified Ely 
and Aldreth, and the latter in 1144 was held for the empress 
Maud by Geoffrey de Mandeville. During the struggles between 
John and his barons, Faukes de Breaute was made governor of 
Cambridge Castle, which, however, surrendered to the barons 
in the same year. The Isle of Ely was seized by the followers 
of Simon de Montfort in 1266, but in 1267 was taken by Prince 
Edward. At the Reformation period the county showed much 
sympathy with the Reformers, and in 1642 the knights, gentry 
and commoners of Cambridgeshire petitioned for the removal 
of all unwarrantable orders and dignities, and the banishment 
of popish clergy. In the civil war of the 17th century 
Cambridgeshire was one of the associated counties in which the 
king had no visible party, though the university assisted him 
with contributions of plate and money. 

Cambridgeshire has always been mainly an agricultural 
county. The Domesday Survey mentions over ninety mills 
and numerous valuable fisheries, especially eel-fisheries, and 
contains frequent references to wheat, malt and honey. The 
county had a flourishing wool-industry in the 14th century, 
and became noted for its worsted cloths. The Black Death of 
1349 and the ravages committed during the Wars of the Roses 
were followed by periods of severe depression, and in 1439 several 
Cambridgeshire towns obtained a remission of taxation on the 
plea of poverty. In the 16th century barley for malt was grown 
in large quantities in the south, and the manufacture of willow- 
baskets was carried on in the fen-districts. Saffron was extens- 
ively cultivated in the 1 8th century, and paper was manufactured 
near Sturbridgc. Sturbridge fair was at this period reckoned 
the largest in Europe, the chief articles of merchandise being 
wool, hops and leather; and the Newmarket races and horse- 
trade were already famous. Large waste areas were brought 
under cultivation in the 17 th century through the drainage 
of the fen-district, which was brought to completion about 
1652 through the labours of Cornelius Vermuyden, a Dutchman. 
The coprolite industry was very profitable for a short period 
from 1850 to 1880, and its decline was accompanied by a general 
industrial and agricultural depression. Cambridgeshire returned 
three members to parliament in 1290, and in 1295 the county 
returned two members, the borough of Cambridge two members, 
and the city of Ely two members, this being the sole return for 
Ely. The university was summoned to return members in 1300 
and again in 1603, but no returns are recorded before 1614, 
after which it continued to return two members. Under the 
Reform Act of 1832 the county returned three members. 
. Antiquities. — In ecclesiastical architecture Cambridgeshire 
would be rich only in the possession of the magnificent cathedral 
at Ely and the round church of the Holy Sepulchre, Jesus 
College and King's College chapels, and many other examples 
in Cambridge. But there are many fine churches elsewhere. 
At Thorney, a small town in the north of the county, which owes 
much in appearance to the 8th duke of Bedford (d. 1872), the 
parish church is actually a portion of the church of an abbey 
said to date originally from the 7 th century, and refounded in 
972 by Ethelwold, bishop of Winchester, as a Benedictine 
monastery. The church is partly fine Norman. Another 
Norman building of special interest is Sturbridge chapel near 



Cambridge, which belonged to a lepers' hospital. To this 
foundation King John granted a fair, which became, and continued 
until the 18th century, one of the most important in England. It 
is still held in September. At Swaffham Prior there are remains 
of two churches in one churchyard, the tower of one being good 
Transitional Norman, while that of the other is Perpendicular, 
the upper part octagonal. Among many Early English examples 
the church of Cherry Hinton near Cambridge may be mentioned. 
The churches of Trumpington and Bottisham are fine specimens 
of the Decorated style; in the first is a famous brass to Sir 
Roger de Trumpington (1289). As Perpendicular examples the 
tower and spire of St Mary's, Whittlesey, and the rich wooden 
roof of Outwell church, may be selected. Monastic remains 
are scanty. Excluding the town of Cambridge there are no 
domestic buildings, either ancient or modern, of special note, 
with the exception of Sawston Hall, in the south of the county, 
a quadrangular mansion dated 1557-1584. 

Authorities. — See D. and S. Lysons, Magna Britannia, vol. ii. 
part i. (London, 1808) ; C. C. Babington, Ancient Cambridgeshire 
(Cambridge, 1883); R. Bowes, Catalogue of Books printed at or 
relating to Cambridge (Cambridge, 1891 et seq.) ; E. Conybeare, 
History of Cambridgeshire (London, 1897); Victoria County History, 
Cambridgeshire. 

CAMBUSLANG, a town of Lanarkshire, Scotland. It is situ- 
ated near the Clyde, 45 m. S.E. of Glasgow (of which it is a 
residential suburb) by the Caledonian railway. Pop. (1891) 
8323; (1901) 12,252. Its leading industries include coal-mining, 
turkey-red dyeing and brick-making. It contains one of the 
largest steel works in the United Kingdom. Among the chief 
edifices are a public hall, institute and library. It was the 
birthplace of John Claudius London (1783-1843), the land- 
scape gardener and writer on horticulture, whose Arboretum et 
Fruticetum Britannicum still ranks as an authority. 

CAMBYSES (Pers. Kambujiya) , the name borne by the father 
and the son of Cyrus the Great. When Cyrus conquered Babylon 
in 539 he was employed in leading religious ceremonies (Chronicle 
of Nabonidus), and in the cylinder which contains Cyrus's 
proclamation to the Babylonians his name is joined to that of 
his father in the prayers to Marduk. On a tablet dated from the 
first year of Cyrus, Cambyses is called king of- Babel. But his 
authority seems to have been quite ephemeral; it was only in 
530, when Cyrus set out on his last expedition into the East, 
that he associated Cambyses on the throne, and numerous 
Babylonian tablets of this time are dated from the accession 
and the first year of Cambyses, when Cyrus was " king of the 
countries " {i.e. of the world). After the death of his father in 
the spring of 528 Cambyses became sole king. The tablets dated 
from his reign in Babylonia go down to the end of his eighth 
year, i.e. March 521 B.C. 1 Herodotus (iii. 66), who dates his reign 
from the death of Cyrus, gives him seven years five months, i.e. 
from 528 to the summer of 521. For these dates cf. Ed. Meyer, 
Forschungen zur alien Geschichte, ii. 470 ff. 

The traditions about Cambyses, preserved by the Greek 
authors, come from two different sources. The first, which 
forms the main part of the account of Herodotus (iii. 2; 4; 
10-37), is of Egyptian origin. Here Cambyses is made the 
legitimate son of Cyrus and a daughter of Apries (Herod, iii. 2, 
Dinon fr. n, Polyaen. viii. 29), whose death he avenges on the 
successor of the usurper Amasis. (In Herod, iii. 1 and Ctesias 
ap. Athen. xiii. 560 D, this tradition is corrected by the Persians: 
Cambyses wants to marry a daughter of Amasis, who sends 
him a daughter of Apries instead of his own daughter, and by 
her Cambyses is induced to begin the war.) His great crime is 
the killing of the Apis, for which he is punished by madness, 
in which he commits many other crimes, kills his brother and his 
sister, and at last loses his empire and dies from a wound in the hip, 
at the same place where he had wounded the sacred animal. 
Intermingled are some stories derived from the Greek mercen- 
aries, especially about their leader Phanes of Halicarnassus, who 

1 On the much discussed tablet, which is said to date from his 
nth year, the writer had at first written " 10th year of Cyrus," 
and then corrected this date into " 1st year of Cambyses"; see 
Strassmaier, Inschriften von Cambyses, No. 97. 



IOO 



CAMDEN, EARL 



betrayed Egypt to the Persians. In the Persian tradition the 
crime of Cambyses is the murder of his brother; he is further 
accused of drunkenness, in which he commits many crimes, and 
thus accelerates his ruin. These traditions are found in different 
passages of Herodotus, and in a later form, but with some 
trustworthy detail about his household, in the fragments of 
Ctesias. With the exception of Babylonian dated tablets and 
some Egyptian inscriptions, we possess no contemporary evidence 
about the reign of Cambyses but the short account of Darius in 
the Behistun inscription. It is impossible from these sources to 
form a correct picture of Cambyses' character; but it seems 
certain that he was a wild despot and that he was led by 
drunkenness to many atrocious deeds. 

It was quite natural that, after Cyrus had conquered Asia, 
Cambyses should undertake the conquest of Egypt, the only 
remaining independent state of the Eastern world. Before he 
set out on his expedition he killed his brother Bardiya (Smerdis), 
whom Cyrus had appointed governor of the eastern provinces. 
The date is given by Darius, whereas the Greek authors narrate 
the murder after the conquest of Egypt. The war took place in 
525, when Amasis had just been succeeded by his son Psam- 
metichus III. Cambyses had prepared for the march through 
the desert by an alliance with Arabian chieftains, who brought a 
large supply of water to the stations. King Amasis had hoped 
that Egypt would be able to withstand the threatened Persian 
attack by an alliance with the Greeks. But this hope failed; 
the Cyprian towns and the tyrant Polycrates of Samos, who 
possessed a large fleet, now preferred to join the Persians, and 
the commander of the Greek troops, Phanes of Halicarnassus, 
went over to them. In the decisive battle at Pelusium the 
Egyptians were beaten, and shortly afterwards Memphis was 
taken. The captive king Psammetichus was executed, having 
attempted a rebellion. The Egyptian inscriptions show that 
Cambyses officially adopted the titles and the costume of the 
Pharaohs, although we may very well believe that he did not 
conceal his contempt for the customs and the religion of the 
Egyptians. From Egypt Cambyses attempted the conquest of 
Ethiopia (Cush), i.e. the kingdom of Napata and Meroe, the 
modern Nubia. But his army was not able to cross the deserts; 
after heavy losses he was forced to return. In an inscription 
from Napata (in the Berlin museum) the Ethiopian king Nastesen 
relates that he had beaten the troops of Kembasuden, i.e. 
Cambyses, and taken all his ships (H. Schafer, Die Aethiopische 
Konigsinschrift des Berliner Museums, 1901). Another expedi- 
tion against the great oasis failed likewise, and the plan of attack- 
ing Carthage was frustrated by the refusal of the Phoenicians 
1 operate against their kindred. Meanwhile in Persia a usurper, 
the Magian Gaumata, arose in the spring of 522, who pretended 
to be the murdered Bardiya (Smerdis). He was acknowledged 
throughout Asia. Cambyses attempted to march against him, 
but, seeing probably that success was impossible, died by his 
own hand (March 521). This is the account of Darius, which 
certainly must be preferred to the traditions of Herodotus and 
Ctesias, which ascribe his death to an accident. According to 
Herodotus (iii. 64) he died in the Syrian Ecbatana, i.e. Hamath; 
Josephus {Ant. xi. 2. 2) names Damascus; Ctesias, Babylon, 
which is absolutely impossible. 

See A. Lincke, Kambyses in der Sage, Litteratur und Kunst des 
Mittelalters, in Aegyptiaca: Festschrift fur Georg Ebers (Leipzig 
1897), pp. 41-61; also Persia: Ancient History. (Ed. M.) 

CAMDEN, CHARLES PRATT, ist Earl (1714-1794), lord 
chancellor of England, was born in Kensington in 17 14. He was 
a descendant of an old Devonshire family of high standing, the 
third son of Sir John Pratt, chief-justice of the king's bench in 
the reign of George I. He received his early education at Eton 
and King's College, Cambridge. In 1734 he became a fellow of 
his college, and in the following year obtained his degree of B.A. 
Having adopted his father's profession, he had entered the 
Middle Temple in 1728, and ten years later he was called to the 
bar. He practised at first in the courts of common law, travelling 
also the western circuit. For some years his practice was so 
limited, and he became so much discouraged, that he seriously 



thought of turning his back on the law and entering the church. 
He listened, however, to the advice of his friend Sir Robert 
Henley, a brother barrister, afterwards known as Lord Chancellor 
Northington, and persevered, working on and waiting for success. 
The first case which brought him prominently into notice and 
gave him assurance of ultimate success was the government 
prosecution, in 1752, of a bookseller, William Owen, for a libel on 
the House of Commons. 

His speech for the defence contributed much to the verdict for 
the defendant. In 1757, through the influence of William Pitt 
(afterwards earl of Chatham), with whom he had formed an 
intimate friendship while at Eton, he received the appointment 
of attorney-general. The same year he entered the House of 
Commons as member for the borough of Downton in Wiltshire. 
He sat in parliament four years, but did not distinguish himself 
as a debater. His professional practice now largely increased. 
One of the most noticeable incidents of his tenure of office as 
attorney-general was the prosecution of Dr. J. Shebbeare (1709- 
1788), a violent party writer of the day, for a libel against the 
government contained in his notorious Letters to the People of 
England, which were published in the years 1756-1758. As a 
proof of Pratt's moderation in a period of passionate party 
warfare and frequent state trials, it is noted that this was the 
only official prosecution for libel which he set on foot. In 
January 1762 Pratt was raised to the bench as chief-justice of the 
common pleas. He was at the same time knighted. Soon after 
his elevation the nation was thrown into great excitement about 
the prosecution of John Wilkes, and the question involved in it 
of the legality of " general warrants." Chief-Justice Pratt 
pronounced, with decisive and almost passionate energy, against 
their legality, thus giving voice to the strong feeling of the nation 
and winning for himself an extraordinary degree of popularity 
as one of the " maintainers of English constitutional liberty." 
Honours fell thick upon him in the form of addresses from the city 
of London and many large towns, and of presentations of freedom 
from various corporate bodies. In July 1765 he was raised to 
the peerage as Baron Camden, of Camden Place, in the county of 
Kent; and in the following year he was removed from the court 
of common pleas to take his seat as lord chancellor (July 30, 
1766). This seat he retained less than four years; for although 
he discharged its duties in so efficient a manner that, with one 
exception, his decisions were never reversed on appeal, he took 
up a position of such uncompromising hostility to the govern- 
ments of the day, the Grafton and North administrations, on 
the greatest and most exciting matters, the treatment of the 
American colonies and the proceedings against John Wilkes, 
that the government had no choice but to require of him the 
surrender of the great seal. He retired from the court of chancery 
in January 1770, but he continued to take a warm interest in 
the political affairs and discussions of the time. He continued 
steadfastly to oppose the taxation of the American colonists, and 
signed, in 1778, the protest of the Lords in favour of an address 
to the king on the subject of the manifesto of the commissioners 
to America. In 1782 he was appointed president of the 
council under the Rockingham administration, but retired in the 
following year. Within a few months he was reinstated in this 
office under the Pitt administration, and held it till his death. 
Lord Camden was a strenuous opponent of Fox's India Bill, took 
an animated part in the debates on important public matters 
till within two years of his death, introduced in 1786 the scheme 
of a regency on occasion of the king's insanity, and to the last 
zealously defended his early views on the functions of juries, 
especially of their right to decide on all questions of libel. He 
was raised to the dignity of an earl in May 1786, and was at the 
same time created Viscount Bayham. Earl Camden died in 
London on the 18th of April 1794. His remains were interred in 
Seale church in Kent. 

CAMDEN, JOHN JEFFREYS PRATT, 2ND Earl and ist 
Marquess (1759-1840), only son of the ist earl, was born on the 
nth of February 1759, and was educated at Trinity College, 
Cambridge. In 1780 he was chosen member of parliament for 
Bath, and he obtained the lucrative position of teller of the 



CAMDEN, W^CAMDEN 



iot 



exchequer, an office which he kept until his death, although 
after 1812 he refused to receive the large income arising from it. 
In the ministry of William Pitt, Pratt was successively a lord of 
the admiralty and a lord of the treasury; then, having suc- 
ceeded his father in the earldom in 1794, he was appointed lord- 
lieutenant of Ireland in 1 795. Disliked in Ireland as an opponent 
of Roman Catholic emancipation and as the exponent of an 
unpopular policy, Camden's term of office was one of commotion 
and alarm, culminating in the rebellion of 1798. Immediately 
after the suppression of the rising he resigned, and in 1804 
became secretary for war and the colonies under Pitt, and in 
1 805 lord president of the council. He was again lord presi- 
dent from 1807 to 181 2, after which date he remained for some 
time in the cabinet without office. In 181 2 he was created 
earl of Brecknock and Marquess Camden. He died on the 8th 
of October 1840, and was succeeded by his only son, George 
Charles, 2nd marquess (1799-1866). The present marquess is 
his descendant. Camden was chancellor of the university of 
Cambridge and a knight of the Garter. 

CAMDEN, WILLIAM (1551-1623), English antiquary and 
historian, was born in London on the 2nd of May 1551. His 
father, Sampson Camden, a native of Lichfield, had settled in 
London, and, as a painter, had become a member of the company 
of painter-stainers. His mother, Elizabeth, belonged to the old 
Cumberland family of Curwen. Young Camden received his 
early education at Christ's Hospital and St Paul's school, and 
in 1566 went to Magdalen College, Oxford, probably as a servitor 
or chorister. Failing to obtain a demyship at Magdalen he re- 
moved to Broadgates Hall, afterwards Pembroke College, and 
later to Christ Church, where he was supported by his friend, 
Dr Thomas Thornton, canon of Christ Church. As a defender 
of the established religion he was soon engaged in controversy, 
and his failure to secure a fellowship at All Souls' College is 
attributed to the hostility of the Roman Catholics. In 1570 
he supplicated in vain for the degree of B.A., and although a 
renewed application was granted in 1573 it is doubtful if he ever 
took a degree; and in 1571 he went to London and devoted 
himself to antiquarian studies, for which he had already acquired 
a taste. 

Camden spent some time in travelling in various parts of 
England collecting materials for his Britannia, a work which 
was first published in 1586. Owing to his friendship with Dr 
Gabriel Goodman, dean of Westminster, Camden was made 
second master of Westminster school in 1575; and when Dr 
Edward Grant resigned the headmastership in 1593 he was 
appointed as his successor. The vacations which he enjoyed 
as a schoolmaster left him time for study and travel, and during 
these years he supervised the publication of three further 
editions of the Britannia. Although a layman he was granted 
the prebend of Ilfracombe in 1589, and in 1597 he resigned his 
position at Westminster on being made Clarencieux king-at-arms, 
an appointment which caused some ill-feeling, and the York 
herald, Ralph Brooke, led an attack on the genealogical accuracy 
of the Britannia, and accused its author of plagiarism. Camden 
replied to Brooke in an appendix to the fifth edition of the 
Britannia, published in 1600, and his reputation came through 
the ordeal untarnished. Having brought out an enlarged and 
improved edition of the Britannia in 1607, he began to work on a 
history of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to which he had been 
urged by Lord Burghley in 1597. The first part of this history 
dealing with the reign down to 1588 was published in 1615 under 
the title Annates rerum Anglicarum et Hibernicarum regnante 
Elizabetha. With regard to this work some controversy at 
once arose over the author's treatment of Mary, queen of Scots. 
It was asserted that Camden altered his original narrative in 
order to please James L, and, moreover, that the account which 
he is said to have given to his friend, the French historian, 
Jacques de Thou, differed substantially from his own. It seems 
doubtful if there is any truth in either of these charges. The 
second part of this work, finished in 1617, was published, after 
the author's death, at Leiden in 1625 and in London in 1627, 
In 1622 Camden carried out a plan to found a history lectureship 



at Oxford. He provided an endowment from some lands at 
Bexley, and appointed as the first lecturer, his friend, Degory 
Wheare. The present occupant of the position is known as the 
Camden professor of ancient history. His concluding years were 
mainly spent at Chislehurst, where he had taken up his residence 
in 1609, and in spite of recurring illnesses he continued to work 
at material for the improvement of the Britannia and kindred 
subjects. He died at Chislehurst on the 9th of November 1623, 
and was buried in Westminster Abbey, where a monument now 
stands to his memory. 

The Britannia, the first edition of which is dedicated to Burgh- 
ley, is a survey of the British islands written in elegant Latin. 
It was first translated into English in 1610, probably under the 
author's direction, and other translations have subsequently 
appeared, the best of which is an edition edited by Richard 
Gough and published in three volumes in 1789, and in four 
volumes in 1806. The Annates has been translated into French, 
and English translations appeared in 1635, 1675 and 1688. 
The Latin version was published at Leiden in 1639 and 1677, 
and under the editorship of T, Hearne at Oxford in 17 17. In 
addition to these works Camden compiled a Greek grammar, 
Institutio Graecae Grammatices Compendiaria, which became 
very popular, and he published an'edition of the writings of Asser, 
Giraldus Cambrensis, Thomas Walsingham and others, under the 
title, Anglica, Hibernica, Normannica, Cambrica, a veteribus 
scripta, published at Frankfort in 1602, and again in 1603. 
He also drew up a list of the epitaphs in Westminster Abbey, 
which was issued as Reges, Reginae, Nobiles et alii in ecclesia 
collegiata Beati Petri Westmonasterii sepulti. This was enlarged 
and published again in 1603 and 1606. In 1605 he published 
his Remains concerning Britain, a book of collections from the 
Britannia, which quickly passed through seven editions; and 
he wrote an official account of the trial of the Gunpowder Plot 
conspirators as Actio in Henricum Garnetum, Societatis Jesuiticae 
in Anglia superiorem et caeteros. 

Camden, who refused a knighthood, was a man of enormous 
industry, and possessed a modest and friendly disposition. 
He had a large number of influential friends, among whom were 
Archbishop Ussher, Sir Robert Cotton, John Selden, the French 
jurist Brisson, and Isaac Casaubon. His correspondence was 
published in London in 1691 by Dr Thomas Smith under the title, 
Vita Gulielmi Camdeni et Illustrium virorum ad G. Camdenum 
Epistolae. This- volume also contains his Memorabilia de seipso; 
his notes of the reign of James L; and other interesting matter. 
In 1838 the Camden Society was founded in his honour, and 
much valuable work has been done under its auspices. 

CAMDEN, a city and the county-seat of Camden county, 
New Jersey, U.S.A., on the Delaware river, directly opposite 
Philadelphia, Pa. Pop. (1880) 41,659; (1890) 58,313; (1900) 
75,935> of whom 10,097 wer e foreign-born and 5576 were 
negroes; (1910) 94,538. It is a terminus of the Atlantic 
City, the West Jersey & Sea Shore, and the Pennsylvania 
( Amboy division) railways, and is also served by river and coasting 
steamboat lines. Camden is practically a suburb of Philadelphia, 
with which it is connected by ferries. It has several pleasant 
residential sections, and among its public buildings are the 
city hall, the Camden county court house, the post office, the 
free public library, the Cooper hospital and the West Jersey 
homeopathic hospital. The high school has a thoroughly 
equipped manual training department. The city owns and 
operates its water- works system,and is an important manufactur- 
ing and ship-building centre, among its manufactories being 
chemical works; asbestos, wall-paper, oil-cloth and morocco- 
leather factories; woollen, worsted and yarn mills; preserving 
factories; iron and steel mills; boot and shoe factories; and 
ship-yards. In 1900 the total value of the city's manufactured 
products was $20,451,874 (of which $17,969,954 was the value 
of factory products, which in 1905 had increased 86-5% to 
$33>587,273), several of the largest items being worsted goods 
($2,090,991 in 1900, and $2,528,040 in 1905); leather, tanned, 
curried and finished ($1,515,935 in 1900, and $6,364,928 in 
1905); oil-cloth ($1,638,556 in 1900); pickles, preserves and 



102 



CAMDEN— CAMEL 



sauces ($683, 358 in 1900), and wooden ships and boats ($409,500 
in 1900, and $361,089 in 1905, when the value of the iron and 
steel ship-building industry was $4,673,504). The first settlers 
on the site of Camden came in 1679, but for a century the settle- 
ment consisted of isolated farms and a small group of houses 
about the ferry by which travellers from the east crossed to 
Philadelphia. The early settlers were largely Quakers. About 
1773 Jacob Cooper laid out a town near the ferry, and gave it 
the name Camden in honour of Lord Chancellor Camden, who 
had been one of the strongest opponents of the Stamp Act. 
The settlement, however, was known variously as"Pluckemin," 
" The Ferry " and " Cooper's Ferry " until about the time of 
the War of 181 2. Until 1828 it was administratively a part 
of the town of Newton, Gloucester county, but in that year, 
with more than a thousand inhabitants, it was chartered as a 
city under its present name. During the British occupation 
of Philadelphia in the War of Independence, a British force 
was stationed here, and Camden was the scene of several skir- 
mishes between the British troops and the New Jersey irregular 
militia. Camden was the home of Walt Whitman from 1873 
until his death. 

CAMDEN, a town and the county-seat of Kershaw county, 
South Carolina, U.S.A., near the Wateree river, 33 m. N.E. of 
Columbia. Pop. (1890) 3533; (1900) 2441; this decrease was 
due to the separation from Camden during the decade of its 
suburb "Kirkwood," re-annexed in 1905; (1910) 3569. It is 
served by the Atlantic Coast Line, the Seaboard Air Line and 
the Southern railways. Camden is situated about 100 ft. above 
the river, which is navigable to this point. The town is a winter 
resort, chiefly for Northerners. Cotton, grain and rice are 
produced in the vicinity, and there are some manufactories, 
including cotton mills, a cotton-seed oil mill and planing mills. 
Camden, first known as Pine Tree Hill, is one of the oldest 
interior towns of the state, having been settled in 1758; in 1768 
the present name was adopted in honour of Lord Chancellor 
Camden. The town was first incorporated in 1791; its present 
charter dates from 1890. For a year following the capture of 
Charleston by the British in May 1780, during the War of 
Independence, Camden was the centre of important military 
queries. It was occupied by the British under Cornwallis in
June 1780, was well fortified and was garrisoned by a force 
under Lord Rawdon. On the 16th of August Gen. Horatio 
Gates, with an American force of about 3600, including some 
Virginia militia under Charles Porterfield (1 750-1 780) and Gen. 
Edward Stevens (1745-1820), and North Carolina militia under 
Gen. Richard Caswell (1729-1789), was defeated here by the 
British, about 2000 strong, under Lord Cornwallis, who had 
joined Rawdon in anticipation of an attack by Gates. Soon 
after the engagement began a large part of the Americans, 
mostly North Carolina and Virginia militia, fled precipitately, 
carrying Gates with them ; but Baron De Kalb and the Maryland 
troops fought bravely until overwhelmed by numbers, De Kalb 
himself being mortally wounded. A monument was erected to 
his memory in 1825, Lafayette laying the corner-stone. The 
British loss in killed, wounded and missing was 324; the 
American loss was about 800 or 900 killed and 1000 prisoners, 
besides arms and baggage. On the 3rd of December Gates was 
superseded by Gen. Nathanael Greene, who after Cornwallis had 
left the Carolinas, advanced on Camden and arrived in the 
neighbourhood on the 19th of April 1781. Considering his force 
(about 1450) insufficient for an attack on the fortifications, he 
withdrew a short distance north of Camden to an advantageous 
position on Hobkirk's Hill, where on the 25th of April Rawdon, 
with a force of only 950, took him somewhat by surprise and 
drove him from the field. The casualties on each side were nearly 
equal: American 271; British 258. On the 8th of May Rawdon 
evacuated the town, after burning most of it. On the 24th of 
February 186 5, during the Civil War, a part of Gen. W.T.Sherman's 
army entered Camden and burned stores of tobacco and cotten, 
and several buildings. (See American War of Independence.) 

See also T. J. Kirkland and R. M. Kennedy, Historic Camden 
(Columbia, S.C., 1905). 



CAMEL (from the Arabic Djemal or the Heb. Gamal), the 
name of the single-humped Arabian Camelus dromedarius, but 
also applied to the two-humped central Asian C. bactrianus and 
to the extinct relatives of both. The characteristics of camels 
and their systematic position are discussed under the headings 
Tylopoda and Artiodactyla. The two living species are 
distinguishable at a glance. It may be mentioned that the 
Bactrian camel, which is a shorter-legged and more ponderous 
animal than the Arabian species, grows an enormously long and 
thick winter coat, which is shed in blanket-like masses in spring. 
The Arabian camel, which is used not only in the country from 
which it takes its name, but also in North Africa and India, and 
has been introduced into Australia and North America, is known 
only as a domesticated animal. On the other hand, the Bactrian 
species, which is employed throughout a large tract of central 
Asia in the domesticated condition, appears, according to recent 
researches, to exist in the wild state in some of the central 
Asian deserts. From the examination of specimens collected by 
Dr Sven Hedin, Professor W. Leche shows that the wild Bactrian 
camel differs from the domesticated breed of central Asia in the 
following external characters: the humps are smaller; the long 
hair does not occupy nearly so much of the body; the colour is 
much more rufous; and the ears and muzzle are shorter. Many 
important 'differences are also recorded between the skulls of the 
two animals, and it is especially noteworthy that the last lower 
molar is smaller in the wild than in the tame race. In connexion 
with this point it should be noticed that, unlike what occurs in 
the yak, the wild animal is not larger than the tame one, although 
it is incorrect to say that the former is decidedly the inferior of 
the latter in point of stature. Dr Leche also institutes a com- 
parison between the skeletons of the wild and the tame Bactrian 
camel with the remains of certain fossil Asiatic camels, namely, 
Camelus knoblochi from Sarepta, Russia, and C. alutensis from 
the Aluta valley, Rumania. This comparison leads to the 
important conclusion that the wild Bactrian Camelus bactrianus 
ferns comes much nearer to the fossil species than it does to the 
domesticated breed, the resemblance being specially noticeable 
in the absolutely and relatively small size of the last molar. In 
view of these differences from the domesticated breed, and the 
resemblance of the skull or lower jaw to that of the extinct 
European species, it becomes practically impossible to regard 
the wild camels as the offspring of animals that have escaped 
from captivity. 

On the latter hypothesis it has been generally assumed that 
the wild camels are the descendants of droves of the domesticated 
breed which escaped when certain central Asian cities were 
overwhelmed by sand-storms. This theory, according to Pro- 
fessor Leche, is rendered improbable by Dr Sven Hedin's 
observations on the habits and mode of life of the wild camel. 
The habitat of the latter extends from the lower course of the 
Keria river to the desert at the termination of that river, and 
thence to the neighbourhood of the Achik, the ancient bed of the 
Tarim river. These animals also occur in the desert district 
south of the Tarim; but are most abundant in the deserts and 
mountains to the southward of Kuruktagh, where there are a 
few brackish-water pools, and are also common in the barren 
mountains between Kuruktagh and Choetagh. Large herds 
have also been observed in the deserts near Altyntagh. The 
capacity of camels for travelling long distances without water 
— owing to special structural modifications in the stomach — 
is familiar to all. That the Arabian species was one of the 
earliest animals to be domesticated is evident from the record 
of Scripture, where six thousand camels are said to have formed 
part of the wealth of the patriarch Job. Camels also formed 
part of the present which Pharaoh gave to Abraham, and it was 
to a company of Ishmaelites travelling from Gilead to Egypt on 
camels, laden with spices, much as their Arabian descendants do 
at the present day, that Joseph was sold by his brothers. 

The hump (or humps) varies in size according to the condition 
of the animal, becoming small and flaccid after hard work and 
poor diet. 

During the rutting-season male camels become exceedingly 



CAMELFORD— CAMELLIA 



savage and dangerous, uttering a loud bubbling roar and engaging 
in fierce contests with their fellows. The female carries her 
young for fully eleven months, and produces only one calf at a 
time, which she suckles for a year. Eight days after birth the 
young Arabian camel stands 3 ft. high, but does not reach its 
full growth till its sixteenth or seventeenth year; it lives from 
forty to fifty years. The flesh of the young camel resembles veal, 
and is a favourite food of the Arabs, while camel's milk forms 
an excellent and highly nutritious beverage, although it does 
not furnish butter. The long hair is shorn every summer, and 
woven into a variety of stuffs used by the Arab for clothing 
himself and his family, and covering his tent. It was in raiment 
of camel's hair that John the Baptist appeared as a preacher. 
The hair imported into Europe is chiefly used in the manufacture 
of small brushes used by painters, while the thick hide is formed 
into a very durable leather. The droppings are used as fuel, and 
from the incinerated remains of these sal-ammoniac is extracted, 
which was at one time largely exported from Egypt. 

The Bactrian camel is, if possible, of still more importance 
to many of the central Asian Mongol races, supplying them 
alike with food and raiment. It is, however, as " the ship of the 
desert," without which vast tracts of the earth's surface could 
scarcely be explored, that the camel is specially valuable. In 
its fourth year its training as a beast of burden begins, when it 
is taught to kneel and to rise at a given signal, and is gradually 
accustomed to bear increasing loads. These vary in weight 
from 500 to 1000 lb, according to the variety of camel employed, 
for of the Arabian camel there are almost as many breeds as 
there are of the horse. When crossing a desert camels are 
expected to carry their loads 25 m. a day for three days without 
drink, getting a supply of water, however, on the fourth; but 
the fleeter breeds will carry their rider and a bag of water 50 m. 
a day for five days without drinking. When too heavily laden 
the camel refuses to rise, but on the march it is exceedingly 
patient under its burden, only yielding beneath it to die. 
Relieved from its load it does not, like other animals, seek the 
shade, even when that is to be found, but prefers to kneel beside 
its burden in the broad glare of the sun, seeming to luxuriate 
in the burning sand. When overtaken by a dust-storm it falls 
on its knees, and stretching its neck along the sand, closes its 
nostrils and remains thus motionless till the atmosphere clears; 
and in this position it affords some shelter to its driver, who, 
wrapping his face in his mantle, crouches behind his beast. 

The food of the camel consists chiefly of the leaves of trees, 
shrubs and dry hard vegetables, which it is enabled to tear down 
and masticate by means of its powerful front teeth. As regards 
temperament, if, writes Sir F. Palgrave, " docile means stupid, 
well and good; in such a case the camel is the very model of 
docility. But if the epithet is intended to designate an animal 
that takes an interest in its rider so far as a beast can, that in 
some way understands his intentions, or shares them in a sub- 
ordinate fashion, that obeys from a sort of submissive or half- 
fellow-feeling with his master, like the horse or elephant, then 
I say that the camel is by no means docile — very much the 
contrary. He takes no heed of his rider, pays no attention 
whether he be on his back or not, walks straight on when once 
set agoing, merely because he is too stupid to turn aside, and 
then should some tempting thorn or green branch allure him out 
of the path, continues to walk on in the new direction simply 
because he is too dull to turn back into the right road. In a 
word, he is from first to last an undomesticated and savage 
animal rendered serviceable by stupidity alone, without much 
skill on his master's part, or any co-operation on his own, save 
that of an extreme passiveness. Neither attachment nor even 
habit impresses him; never tame, though not wide-awake enough 
to be exactly wild." 

For extinct camels see Tylopoda. (R- L.*) 

The Biblical expression (Matt. xix. 24, &c), " it is easier for a camel 
to go through a needle's eye," &c, is sometimes explained by saying 
that the " needle's eye " means the small gate which is opened in the 
great gate of a city, when the latter is closed for the night; but 
recent criticism (e.g. Post in Hastings' Diet., under " Camel ") throws 
doubt on this explanation, and assumes that the more violent hyper- 



103 

bole is intended. There is a various reading k&miAos (cable) for kA,l»jXos 
(camel), but Cheyne, in the Ency. Biblica, rejects this (see Cable). 

CAMELFORD, THOMAS PITT, 1ST Baron (1737-1703), 
English politician and art patron, was a nephew of the 1st earl 
of Chatham. He sat in parliament from 1761 till 1784, siding 
against his uncle and following George Grenville, who was also 
a relative; and in 1784 he was raised to the peerage. He 
dabbled in architecture and the arts generally, and was a pro- 
minent figure in the artistic circles of his day. His son Thomas 
Pitt, 2nd Baron Camelford (1775-1804), who succeeded him 
in 1793, had an adventurous and misspent career in the navy, 
but is principally remembered for his death in a duel with 
Mr Best on the 10th of March 1804, the title becoming extinct. 

CAMELLIA, a genus or subgenus of evergreen trees or shrubs 
belonging to the natural order Ternstroemiaceae, with thick 
dark shining leaves and handsome white or rose-coloured 
flowers. The name Camellia was given by Linnaeus in honour 
of George Joseph Camellus or Kamel, a Moravian Jesuit who 
travelled in Asia and wrote an account of the plants of the 
Philippine Island, Luzon, which is included in the third volume 
of John Ray's Historia Plantarum (1704). Modern botanists 
are agreed that the tea-plant, placed by Linnaeus in a separate 
genus, Thea, is too nearly allied to Camellia to admit of the 
two being regarded as distinct genera. Thea and Camellia are 
therefore now considered to represent one genus, which has been 
generally called Camellia, but more correctly Thea, as this name 
was the earlier of the two. Under the latter view Camellia is 
regarded as a subgenus or section of Thea. It contains about 
eight species, natives of India, China and Japan. Most of the 
numerous cultivated forms are horticultural products of C. 
japonica, a native of China and Japan, which was introduced 
into Europe by Lord Petre in 1739. The wild plant has red 
flowers, recalling those of the wild rose, but most of the cultivated 
forms are double. In the variety anemonaeflora nearly all the 
stamens have become transformed into small petaloid structures 
which give the flower the appearance of a double anemone. 

Another species, C. reticulata, a native of Hongkong, is also 
prized for its handsome flowers, larger than those of C. japonica, 
which are of a bright rose colour and as known in cultivation 
semi-double or double. 

Both C. sasanqua and C. drupifera, the for:ner inhabiting 
Japan and China, the latter Cochin-China and the mountains 
of India, are oil-yielding plants. The oil of C. sasanqua (of which 
sasankwa is the native Japanese name) has an agreeable odour 
and is used for many domestic purposes. It is obtained from 
the seeds by subjecting them to pressure sufficient to reduce them 
to a coarse powder, and then boiling and again pressing the 
crushed materip.1. The leaves are also used in the form of a 
decoction by the Japanese women for washing their hair; and 
in a dried state they are mixed with tea on account of their 
pleasant flavour. The oil of C. drupifera, which is closely allied 
to C. sasanqua, is used medicinally in Cochin- China. The flowers 
of these two species, unlike those of C. japonica and C. reticulata, 
are odoriferous. 

Camellias, though generally grown in the cool greenhouse, 
are hardy in the south of England and the south-west of Scotland 
and Ireland. They grow best in a rich compost of sandy peat 
and loam, and should not be allowed to get too dry at the roots; 
a liberal supply of water is especially necessary during the 
flowering period. The best position — when grown out of doors — 
is one facing north or north-west, with a wall or hedge behind 
for protection from cold winds. July is the best time for plant- 
ing; care must be taken that the roots are evenly spread, not 
matted into a ball. 

The plants are propagated by layers or cuttings, and the 
single-flowered ones also by seeds. Cuttings are taken in 
August and placed in sandy peat or loam in a cold shaded frame. 
In the following spring those which have struck are placed in a 
gentle heat, and in September or October the rooted plants are 
potted off. Camellias are also propagated by grafting or inarching 
in early spring on stocks of the common variety of C. japonica. 
The scale insect sometimes attacks the camellia. To remove 



104 



CAMEO— CAMERA OBSCURA 



the white scale, the plants are washed with a sponge and solution 
of soft soap as soon as their growth is completed, and again 
before the buds begin to swell. The brown scale may be got rid 
of by repeated washings with one of the many insecticides, but 
it should be applied at a temperature of 90°. 

CAMEO, a term of doubtful origin, applied in the first instance 
to engraved work executed in relief on hard or precious stones. 
It is also applied to imitations of such stones in glass, called 
" pastes," or on the shells of molluscous animals. A cameo is 
therefore the converse of an intaglio, which consists of an 
incised or sunk engraving in the same class of materials. For 
the history of this branch of art, and for an account of some of 
its most remarkable examples, see Gem. 

The origin of the word is doubtful and has been a matter of 
copious controversy. The New English Dictionary quotes its use 
in a Sarum inventory of 1222, " lapis unus cameu " and " magnus 
cameku." The word is in current use in the 13th century. Thus 
Matthew Paris, in his Life of Abbot Leofric of St Albans, in the 
Abbatum S. Albani Vitae, says: " retentis quibusdam nobilibus 
lapidibus insctdptis, quos camaeos vulgariter appellamus." In 
variant forms the word has found its way into most languages, e.g. 
Latin, camahutus, camahelus, camaynus; Italian, chammeo, chameo; 
French, camahieu, chemahou, camaut, camaieu. The following may 
be mentioned among the derivations that have been proposed: — 
von Hammer: camaut, the hump of a camel; Littre and others: 
camateum, an assumed Low Latin form from Kafiwrevav and 
KanaTov; Chabouillet and Babelon: /cfcijttijXia, treasures, 
connecting the word in particular with the dispersion of treasures 
from Constantinople, in 1204; King: Arabic camea, an amulet. 

For a bibliography of the question, see Babelon, Cat. des Camees 
. . . de la Bibliotheque Nationale, p. iv. 

CAMERA (a Latin adaptation of Gr. Ka.ixa.pa., an arched 
chamber), in law, a word applied at one time to the English 
judges' chambers in Serjeants' Inn, as distinct from their bench 
in Westminster Hall. It was afterwards applied to the judges' 
private room behind the court, and, hence, in the phrase in 
camera, to cases heard in private, i.e. in chambers. So far as 
criminal cases are concerned, the courts have no power to hear 
them in private, nor have they any power to order adults (men 
or women) out of court during the hearing. In civil proceedings 
at common law, it may also be laid down that the public cannot 
be excluded from the court; in Malan v. Young, 1889, 6 T.L.R. 
68, Mr Justice Denman held that he had power to hear the case 
in camera, but he afterwards stated that there was considerable 
doubt among the judges as to the power to hear cases in camera, 
even by consent, and the case was, by consent of the parties, 
finally proceeded with before the judge as arbitrator. In the court 
of chancery it is the practice to hear in private cases affecting 
wards of the court and lunatics, family disputes (by consent), 
and cases where a public trial would defeat the object of the 
action {Andrew v. Raeburn, 1874, L.R. 9 Ch. 522). In an action 
for infringement of a patent for a chemical process the defendant 
was allowed to state a secret process in camera (Badische Anilin 
und Soda Fabrik v. Gillman, 1883, 24 Ch. D. 156). The Court 
of Appeal has decided that it has power to sit in private; in 
Mellor v. Thompson, 1883, 31 Ch. D. 55, it was stated that a 
public hearing would defeat the object of the action, and render 
the respondent's success in the appeal useless. In matrimonial 
causes, the divorce court, following the practice of the ecclesi- 
astical courts under the provisions of the Matrimonial Causes Act 
1857, s. 22, hears suits for nullity of marriage on physical grounds 
in camera, but not petitions for dissolution of marriage, which 
must be heard in open court. It was also decided in Bruce v. 
Druce, 1903, 19 T.L.R. 387, that in cases for judicial separation 
the court has jurisdiction to hear the case in camera, where it is 
satisfied that justice cannot be done by hearing the case in public. 

CAMERA LUCIDA, an optical instrument invented by Dr 
William Hyde Wollaston for drawing in perspective. Closing 
one eye and looking vertically downwards with the other through 
a slip of plain glass, e.g. a microscope cover-glass, held close to 
the eye and inclined at an angle of 45 to the horizon, one can 
see the images of objects in front, formed by reflection from the 




Object 



Fig. 1. 




Object 



1st Image 



Fig. 2. 



surface of the glass, and at the same time one can also see through 

the transparent glass. The virtual images of the objects appear 

projected on the surface of a sheet of paper placed beneath the 

slip of glass, and their outline can be accurately traced with a 

pencil. This is the simplest form of the camera lucida. The 

image (see fig. 1) is, however, inverted and 

perverted, and it is not very bright owing to 

the poor reflecting power of unsilvered glass. 

The brightness of the image is sometimes in-' 

creased by silvering the glass; and on removing 

a small portion of the silver the observer can 

see the image with part of the pupil while he 

sees the paper through the unsilvered aperture ■«— « 

with the remaining part. This form of the in- lm ^ 

strument is often used in conjunction with the 

microscope, the mirror being attached to the eye-piece and the 

tube of the microscope being placed horizontally. 

About the beginning of the 19th century Dr Wollaston in- 
vented a simple form of the camera lucida which gives bright 
and erect images. A four-sided prism of glass is constructed 
having one angle of 90°, the opposite angle of 135°, and the two 
remaining angles each of 67!°. This is represented in cross- 
section and in position in fig. 2. When the pupil of the eye is 
held half over the edge of the prism a, 
one sees the image of the object with 
one half of the pupil and the paper with 
the other half. The image is formed by 
successive total reflection at the surfaces 
b c and a b. In the first place an in- 
verted image (first image) is formed in 
the face b c, and then an image of this 
image is formed in a b, and it is the 
outline of this second image seen pro- 
jected on the paper that is traced by the 
pencil. It is desirable for two reasons that the image should 
lie in the plane of the paper, and this can be secured by placing 
a suitable lens between the object and the prism. If the image 
does not lie in the plane of the paper, it is impossible to see it 
and the pencil-point clearly at the same time. Moreover, any 
slight movement of the head will cause the image to appear to 
move relatively to the paper, and will render it difficult to obtain 
an accurate drawing. 

Before the application of photography, the camera lucida was 
of considerable importance to draughtsmen. The advantages 
claimed for it were its cheapness, smallness and portability; 
that there was no appreciable distortion, and that its field was 
much larger than that of the camera obscura. It was used largely 
for copying, for reducing or for enlarging existing drawings. It 
will readily be understood, for example, that a copy will be half- 
size if the distance of the object from the instrument is double 
the distance of the instrument from the copy. (C. J. J.) 

CAMERA OBSCURA, an optical apparatus consisting of a 
darkened chamber (for which its name is the Latin rendering) 
at the top of which is placed a box or lantern containing a convex 
lens and sloping mirror, or a prism combining the lens and 
mirror. If we hold a common reading lens (a magnifying lens) 
in front of a lamp or some other bright object and at some 
distance from it, and if we hold a sheet of paper vertically at a 
suitable distance behind the lens, we see depicted on the paper 
an image of the lamp. This image is inverted and perverted. 
If now we place a plane 
mirror (e.g. a lady's hand 
glass) behind the lens and 
inclined at an angle of 45 to 
the horizon so as to reflect Jec 
the rays of light vertically 
downwards, we can produce 
on a horizontal sheet of 
paper an unperverted image 
of the bright object (fig. 1), i.e. the image has the same appear- 
ance as the object and is not perverted as when the reflection of a 
printed page is viewed in a mirror. This is the principle of the 




Mirror 
Lens 

50 

Image with Mirror 

Fig. 1. 



Image without 
Mirror 



CAMERA OBSCURA 



105 




camera obscura, which was extensively used in sketching from 
nature before the introduction of photography, although it is 
now scarcely to be seen except as an interesting side-show at 
places of popular resort. The image formed on the paper may 
be traced out by a pencil, and it will be noticed that in this case 
the image is real— not virtual as in the case of the camera 
lucida. Generally the mirror and lens are combined into a 
single piece of wo/rked glass represented in section in fig. 2. 
Rays from external objects are first re- 
fracted at the convex surface a b, then totally 
reflected at the plane surface a c, and finally 
refracted at the concave surface b c (fig. 2) 
so as to form an image on the sheet of paper 
d e. The curved surfaces take the place of 
the lens in fig. 1, and the plane surface per- 
forms the function of the mirror. The prism 
a ft c is fixed at the top of a small tent fur- 
nished with opaque curtains so as to prevent the diffused day- 
light from overpowering the image on the paper, and in the 
darkened tent the images of external objects are seen very 
distinctly. 

Quite recently, the camera obscura has come into use with 
submarine vessels, the periscope being simply a camera obscura 
under a new name. (C.J.J.) 

History. — The invention of this instrument has generally been 
ascribed, as in the ninth edition of this work, to the famous 
Neapolitan savant of the 16th century, Giovanni Battista della 
Porta, but as a matter of fact the principle of the simple camera 
obscura, or darkened chamber with a small aperture in a window 
or shutter, was well known and in practical use for observing 
eclipses long before his time. He was anticipated in the improve- 
ments he claimed to have made in it, and all he seems really to 
have done was to popularize it. The increasing importance 
of the camera obscura as a photographic instrument makes it 
desirable to bring together what is known of its early history, 
which is far more extensive than is usually recognized. In 
southern climes, where during the summer heat it is usual to 
close the rooms from the glare of the sunshine outside, we may 
often see depicted on the walls vivid inverted images of outside 
objects formed by the light reflected from them passing through 
chinks or small apertures in doors or window-shutters. From 
the opening passage of Euclid's Optics (c. 300 B.C.), which 
formed the foundation for some of the earlier middle age treatises 
on geometrical perspective, it would appear that the above 
phenomena of the simple darkened room were used by him to 
demonstrate the rectilinear propagation of light by the passage 
of sunbeams or the projection of the images of objects through 
small openings in windows, &c. In the book known as Aris- 
totle's Problems (sect. xv. cap. 5) we find the correlated problem 
of the image of the sun passing through a quadrilateral aperture 
always appearing round, and he further notes the lunated image 
of the eclipsed sun projected in the same way through the 
interstices of foliage or lattice-work. 

There are, however, very few allusions to these phenomena 
in the later classical Greek and Roman writers, and we find the 
first scientific investigation of them in the great optical treatise 
of the Arabian philosopher Alhazen (q.v.), who died at Cairo in 
a.d. 1038. He seems to have been well acquainted with the 
projection of images of objects through small apertures, and to 
have been the first to show that the arrival of the image of an 
object at the concave surface of the common nerve— or the 
retina — corresponds with the passage of light from an object 
through an aperture in a darkened place, from which it falls 
upon a surface facing the aperture. He also had some knowledge 
of the properties of concave and convex lenses and mirrors in 
forming images. Some two hundred years later, between 
a.d. 1266 and 1279, these problems were taken up by three 
almost contemporaneous writers on optics, two of whom, Roger 
Bacon and John Peckham, were Englishmen, and Vitelloor 
Witelo, a Pole. 

That Roger Bacon was acquainted with the principle of the 
camera obscura is shown by his attempt at solving Aristotle's 



problem stated above, in the treatise De Speculis, and also from 
his references to Alhazen's experiments of the same kind, but 
although Dr John Freind, in his History of Physick, has given him 
the credit of the invention on the strength of a passage in the 
Perspectiva, there is nothing to show that he constructed any 
instrument of the kind. His arrangement of concave and plane 
mirrors, by which the realistic images of objects inside the house 
or in the street could be rendered visible though intangible, 
there alluded to, may apply to a camera on Cardan's principle or 
to a method of aerial projection by means of concave mirrors, 
which Bacon was quite familiar with, and indeed was known 
long before his time. On the strength of similar arrangements of 
lenses and mirrors the invention of the camera obscura has also 
been claimed for Leonard Digges, the author of Pantometria 
(1571), who is said to have constructed a telescope from informa- 
tion given in a book of Bacon's experiments. 

Archbishop Peckham, or Pisanus, in his Perspectiva Communis 
(1270), and Vitello, in his Optics (1270), also attempted the 
solution of Aristotle's problem, but unsuccessfully. Vitello's 
work is to a very great extent based upon Alhazen and some of 
the earlier writers, and was first published in 1535. A later 
edition was published, together with a translation of Alhazen, 
by F. Risner in 1572. 

The first practical step towards the development of the camera 
obscura seems to have been made by the famous painter and 
architect, Leon Battista Alberti, in 1437, contemporaneously 
with the invention of printing. It is not clear, however, whether 
his invention was a camera obscura or a show box, but in a 
fragment of an anonymous biography of him, published in 
Muratori's Rerum Italicarum Scriptores (xxv. 296), quoted by 
Vasari, it is stated that he produced wonderfully painted 
pictures, which were exhibited by him in some sort of small 
closed box through a very small aperture, with great verisimili- 
tude. These demonstrations were of two kinds, one nocturnal, 
showing the moon and bright stars, the other diurnal, for day 
scenes. This description seems to refer to an arrangement of a 
transparent painting illuminated either from the back or the front 
and the image projected through a hole on to a white screen in a 
darkened room, as described by Porta {Mag. Nat. xvii. cap. 7) 
and figured by A. Kircher (Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae), who 
notes elsewhere that Porta had taken some arrangement of pro- 
jecting images from an Albertus, whom he distinguished from 
Albertus Magnus, and who was probably L. B. Alberti, to whom 
Porta also refers, but not in this connexion. 

G. B. I. T. Libri-Carucci dalla Sommaja (1803-1869), in his 
account of the invention of the camera obscura in Italy (Histoire 
des sciences mathematiques en Italie, iv. 303), makes no mention 
of Alberti, but draws attention to an unpublished MS. of Leonardo 
da Vinci, which was first noticed by Venturi in 1797, and has 
since been published in facsimile in vol. ii. of J. G. F. Ravaisson- 
Mollien's reproductions of the MSS. in the Institut de France at 
Paris (MS. D, fol. 8 recto). After discussing the structure of the 
eye he gives an experiment in which the appearance of the 
reversed images of outside objects on a piece of paper held in 
front of a small hole in a darkened room, with their forms and 
colours, is quite clearly described and explained with a diagram, 
as an illustration of the phenomena of vision. Another similar 
passage is quoted by Richter from folio 404b of the reproduc- 
tion of the Codice Atlantico, in Milan, published by the Italian 
government. These are probably the earliest distinct accounts 
of the natural phenomena of the camera obscura, but remained 
unpublished for some three centuries. Leonardo also discussed 
the old Aristotelian problem of the rotundity of the sun's image 
after passing through an angular aperture, but not so successfully 
as Maurolycus. He has also given methods of measuring the 
sun's distance by means of images thrown on screens through 
small apertures. He was well acquainted with the use of magni- 
fying glasses and suggested a kind of telescope for viewing the 
moon, but does not seem to have thought of applying a lens to 
the camera. 

The first published account of the simple camera obscura was 
discovered by Libri in a translation of the Architecture of 



io6 



CAMERA OBSCURA 



Vitruvius, with commentary by Cesare Caesariano, one of the 
architects of Milan cathedral, published at Como in 1521, shortly 
after the death of Leonardo, and some twenty years before 
Porta was born. He describes an experiment made by a 
Benedictine monk and architect, Dom Papnutio or Panuce, of 
the same kind as Leonardo's but without the demonstration. 

About the same time Francesco Maurolico, or Maurolycus, 
the eminent mathematician of Messina, in his Theoremata de 
Lumine et Umbra, written in 1521, fully investigated the optical 
problems connected with vision and the passage of rays of light 
through small apertures with and without lenses, and made 
great advances in this direction over his predecessors. He was 
the first correctly to solve Aristotle's problem, stated above, 
and to apply it practically to solar observations in a darkened 
room (Cosmographia, 1535)- Erasmus Reinhold has described 
the method in his edition of G. Purbach's Theoricae Novae 
Planetarum (1542), and probably got it from Maurolycus. He 
says it can also be applied to terrestrial objects, though he only 
used it for the sun. His pupil, Rainer Gemma-Frisius, used it 
for the observation of the solar eclipse of January 1544 at 
Louvain, and fully described the methods he adopted for making 
measurements and drawings of the eclipsed sun, in his De Radio 
Astronomico et Geometrico (1545)- He says they can be used for 
observation of the moon and stars and also for longitudes. The 
same arrangement was used by Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, by 
M. Moestlin and his pupil Kepler — the latter applying it in 1607 
to the observation of a transit of Mercury — also by Johann 
Fabricius, in 161 1, for the first observations of sun-spots. It is 
interesting to note this early employment of the camera obscura 
in the field of astronomical research, in which its latest achieve- 
ments have been of such pre-eminent value. 

The addition of optical appliances to the simple dark chamber 
for the purpose of seeing what was going on outside, was first 
described by Girolamo Cardan in his De Subtilitate (1550), as 
noted by Libri. The sun shining, he fixed a round glass speculum 
(orbem e vitro) in a window-shutter, and then closing it the images 
of outside objects would be seen transmitted through the 
aperture on to the opposite wall, or better, a white paper screen 
suitably placed. The account is not very clear, but seems to 
imply the use of a concave mirror rather than a lens, which 
might be suggested by the word orbem. He refers to Maurolycus' 
work with concave specula. 

We now come to Giovanni Battista della Porta, whose account 
of the camera obscura in the first edition of the Magia Naturalis, 
in four books (1558, lib. iv. cap. 2), is very similar to Caesariano's 
— a darkened room, a pyramidal aperture towards the sun, and a 
whitened wall or white paper screens, but no lens. He discloses 
as a great secret the use of a concave speculum in front of the 
aperture, to collect the rays passing through it, when the images 
will be seen reversed, but by prolonging them beyond the centre 
they would be seen larger and unreversed. This is much the 
same as Cardan's method published eight years earlier, but 
though more detailed is not very clear. He then notes the 
application to portraiture and to painting by laying colours on 
the projected images. Nothing is said about the use of a lens 
or of solar observations. The second edition, in which he in the 
same words discloses the use of a convex lens in the aperture as a 
secret he had intended to keep, was not published till 1589, 
thirty-one years after the first. In this interval the use of the 
lens was discovered and clearly described by Daniello Barbaro, a 
Venetian noble, patriarch of Aquileia, in his work La Pratica 
della perspeltiva (p. 192), published in 1568, or twenty-one 
years before Porta's mention of it. The lens used by Barbaro 
was an ordinary convex or old man's spectacle-glass; concave, 
he says, will not do. He shows how the paper must be moved 
till it is brought into the focus of the lens, the use of a diaphragm 
to make the image clearer, and also the application of the method 
for drawing in true perspective. That Barbaro was really the 
first to apply the lens to the carnera obscura is supported by 
Marius Bettinus in his Apiaria (1645), and by Kaspar Schott in 
his Magia Universalis (1657), the former taunting Porta with the 
appropriation. 



In an Italian translation of Euclid's Optica, with commentary, 
Egnacio Danti (1573), after discussing the effects of plane, 
convex and concave reflectors, fully describes the method of 
showing reversed images passing through an aperture in a 
darkened room, and shows how, by placing a mirror behind the 
aperture, unreversed images might be obtained, both effects 
being illustrated by diagrams. F. Risner, who died in 1580, 
also in his Opticae (1606) very clearly explained the reversal of 
the images of the simple camera obscura. He notes the con- 
venience of the method for solar observations and its previous 
use by some of the observers already mentioned, as well as its 
advantages for easily and accurately copying on an enlarged or 
reduced scale, especially for chorographical or topographical 
documents. This is probably the first notice of the application 
of the camera to cartography and the reproduction of drawings, 
which is one of its principal uses at the present time. In 
the Diversarum Speculationum M athematicarum et Physicarum 
(1585), by the Venetian Giovanni Battista Benedetti, there is a 
letter in which he discusses the simple camera obscura and 
mentions the improvement some one had made in it by the use 
of a double convex lens in the aperture; he also says that the 
images could be made erect by reflection from any plane mirror. 

Thus the use of the camera and of the lens with it was well 
known before Porta published his second edition of the Magia 
Naturalis in 1589. In this the description of the camera obscura 
is in lib. xvii. cap. 6. The use of the convex lens, which is given 
as a great secret, in place of the concave speculum of the first 
edition, is not so clearly described as by Barbaro; the addition 
of the concave speculum is proposed for making the images 
larger and clearer, and also for making them erect, but no details 
are given. He describes some entertaining peep-show arrange- 
ments, possibly similar to Alberti's, and indicates how the dark 
chamber with a concave speculum can be used for observing 
eclipses. There is no mention whatever of a portable box or 
construction beyond the darkened room, nor is there in his later 
work, De Refractione Optices Parte (1593), in which he discusses 
the analogy between vision and the simple dark room with an 
aperture, but incorrectly. Though Porta's merits were un- 
doubtedly great, he did not invent or improve the camera 
obscura. His only novelty was the use of it as a peep-show; 
his descriptions of it are vague, but being published in a book of 
general reference, which became popular, he acquired credit for 
the invention. 

The first to take up the camera obscura after Porta was Kepler, 
who used it in the old way for solar observations in 1600, and 
in his Ad Vitellionem Paralipomena (1604) discusses the early 
problems of the passages of light through small apertures, and 
the rationale of the simple dark chamber. He was the first to 
describe an instrument fitted with a sight and paper screen for 
observing the diameters of the sun and moon in a dark room. 
In his later book, Dioptrice (161 1), he fully discusses refraction 
and the use of lenses, showing the action of the double convex 
lens in the camera obscura, with the principles which regulate 
its use and the reason of the reversal of the image. He also 
demonstrates how enlarged images can be produced and projected 
on paper by using a concave lens at a suitable distance behind 
the convex, as in modem telephotographic lenses. He was the 
first to use the term camera obscura, and in a letter from Sir H. 
Wotton written to Lord Bacon in 1620 we learn that Kepler had 
made himself a portable dark tent fitted with a telescope lens 
and used for sketching landscapes. Further, he extended the 
work of Maurolycus, and demonstrated the exact analogy 
between the eye and the camera and the arrangement by which 
an inverted image is produced on the retina. 

In 1609 the telescope came into use, and the danger of observ- 
ing the sun with it was soon discovered. In 161 1 Johann 
Fabricius published his observations of sun-spots and describes 
how he and his father fell back upon the old method of projecting 
the sun's image in a darkened room, finding that they could 
observe the spots just as well as with the telescope. They do 
not seem to have used a lens, or thought of using the telescope 
for projecting an enlarged imase on Kepler's principle. This 



CAMERARIUS 



107 



was done in 1612 by Christoph Scheiner, who fully described his 
method of solar observation in the Rosa Ursina (1630), demon- 
strating very clearly and practically the advantages and dis- 
advantages of using the camera, without a lens, with a single 
convex lens, and with a telescopic combination of convex 
object-glass and concave enlarging lens, the last arrangement 
being mounted with an adjustable screen or tablet on an equa- 
torial stand. Most of the earlier astronomical work was done 
in a darkened room, but here we first find the dark chamber 
constructed of wooden rods covered with cloth or paper, and 
used separately to screen the observing- tablet. 

Various writers on optics in the 17th century discussed the 
principle of the simple dark chamber alone and with single or 
compound lenses, among them Jean Tarde (Les Astres de Borbon, 
1623); Descartes, the pupil of Kepler (Dioptrique, 1637); 
Bettinus (Apiaria, 1645); A. Kircher {Ars Magna Lucis et 
Umbrae, 1646); J. Hevelius (Selenographia, 1647); Schott 
Magia Universalis Naturae et Artis, 1674); C. F. M. Deschales 
(Cursus, seu Mundus Mathematicus, 1674); Z. Traber {Nervus 
Opticus, 1675), hut their accounts are generally more interesting 
theoretically than as recording progress in the practical use and 
development of the instrument. 

The earliest mention of the camera obscura in England is 
probably in Francis Bacon's De Augmentis Scientiarum, but it is 
only as an illustration of the projected images showing better 
on a white screen than on a black one. Sir H. Wotton's letter 
of 1620, already noted, was not published till 1651 {Reliquiae 
Wottonianae, p. 141), but in 1658 a description of Kepler's portable 
tent camera for sketching, taken from it, was published in a work 
called Graphice, or the most excellent Art of Painting, but no 
mention is made of Kepler. In W. Oughtred's English edition 
(1633) of the Recreations mathematiques (1627) of Jean Leurechon 
(" Henry van Etten ") there is a quaint description, with 
figures, of the simple dark chamber with aperture, and also of a 
sort of tent with a lens in it and the projection on an inner wall 
of the face of a man standing outside. The English translation 
of Porta's Natural Magick was published in 1658. 

Robert Boyle seems to have been the first to construct a box 
camera with lens for viewing landscapes. It is mentioned in his 
essay On the Systematic or Cosmical Qualities of Things (ch. vi.), 
written about 1570, as having been made several years before 
and since imitated and improved. It could be extended or 
shortened like a telescope. At one end of it paper was stretched, 
and at the other a convex lens was fitted in a hole, the image 
being viewed through an aperture at the top of the box. Robert 
Hooke, who was some time Boyle's assistant, described {Phil. 
Trans., 1668, 3, p. 741) a camera lucida on the principle of the 
magic lantern, in which the images of illuminated and inverted 
objects were projected on any desired scale by means of a broad 
convex lens through an aperture into a room where they were 
viewed by the spectators. If the objects could not be inverted, 
another lens was used for erecting the images. From Hooke's 
Posthumous Works (1705), p. 127, we find that in one of the 
Cutlerian lectures on Light delivered in 1680, he illustrated the 
phenomena of vision by a darkened room, or perspective box, 
of a peculiar pattern, the back part, with a concave white screen 
at the end of it, being cylindrical and capable of being moved 
in and out, while the fore part was conical, a double convex 
lens being fixed in a hole in front. The image was viewed 
through a large hole in the side. It was between 4 and 5 ft. 
long. 

Johann Zahn, in his Oculus Artificialis Teledioptricus (1685- 
1686), described and figured two forms of portable box cameras 
with lenses. One was a wooden box with a projecting tube in 
which a combination of a concave with a convex lens was fitted, 
for throwing an enlarged image upon the focusing screen, 
which in its proportions and application is very similar to our 
modern telephotographic objectives. The image was first thrown 
upon an inclined mirror and then reflected upwards to a paper 
screen on the top of the box. In an earlier form the image is 
thrown upon a vertical thin paper screen and viewed through a 
hole in the back of the camera. There is a great deal of practical 



information on lenses in connexion with the camera and other 
optical instruments, and the book is valuable as a repertory 
of early practical optics, also for the numerous references to 
and extracts from previous writers. An improved edition was 
published in 1702. 

Most of the writers already noticed worked out the problems 
connected with the projection of images in the camera obscura 
more by actual practice than by calculation, but William 
Molyneux, of Dublin, seems to have been the first to treat them 
mathematically in his Dioptrica Nova (1692), which was also the 
first work in English on the subject, and is otherwise an interest- 
ing book. He has fully discussed the optical theory of the dark 
chamber, with and without a lens, and its analogy to the eye. 
also several optical problems relating to lenses of various forms 
and their combinations for telescopic projection, rules for finding 
foci, &c. He does not, however, mention the camera obscura 
as an instrument in use, but in John Harris's Lexicon Technicum 
(1704) we find that the camera obscura with the arrangement 
called the " scioptric ball," and known as scioptricks, was on sale 
in London, and after this must have been in common use as a 
sketching instrument or as a show. 

Sir Isaac Newton, in his Opticks (1704), explains the principle 
of the camera obscura with single convex lens and its analogy 
with vision in illustration of his seventh axiom, which aptly 
embodies the correct solution of Aristotle's old problem. He 
also made great use of the simple dark chamber for his optical 
experiments with prisms, &c. Joseph Priestley (1772) mentions 
the application of the solar microscope, both to the small and 
portable and the large camera obscura. Many patterns of these 
two forms for sketching and for viewing surrounding scenes 
are described in W. J. 's Gravesande's Essai de perspective 
(1711), Robert Smith's Compleat System of Optics (1738), Joseph 
Harris's Treatise on Optics (1775), Charles Hutton's Philo- 
sophical and Mathematical Dictionary, and other books on optics 
and physics of that period. The camera obscura was first 
applied to photography {q.v.) probably about 1794, by Thomas 
Wedgwood. His experiments with Sir Humphrey Davy in 
endeavouring to fix the images of natural objects as seen in the 
camera were published in 1802 (Journ. Roy. Inst.). (J. Wa.) 

CAMERARIUS, JOACHIM (1500-1574), German classical 
scholar, was born at Bamberg on the 12th of April 1500. His 
family name was Liebhard, but he was generally called Kammer- 
meister, previous members of his family having held the office 
of chamberlain (camerarius) to the bishops of Bamberg. He 
studied at Leipzig, Erfurt and Wittenberg, where he became 
intimate with Melanchthon. For some years he was teacher 
of history and Greek at the gymnasium, Nuremberg. In 1530 
he was sent as deputy for Nuremberg to the diet of Augsburg, 
where he rendered important assistance to Melanchthon in 
drawing up the Confession of Augsburg. Five years later he 
was commissioned by Duke Ulrich of Wurttemberg to reorganize 
the university of Tubingen; and in 1541 he rendered a similar 
service at Leipzig, where the remainder of his life was chiefly 
spent. He translated into Latin Herodotus, Demosthenes, 
Xenophon, Homer, Theocritus, Sophocles, Lucian, Theodoretus, 
Nicephorus and other Greek writers. He published upwards of 
1 50 works, including a Catalogue of the Bishops of the Principal 
Sees; Greek Epistles; Accounts of his Journeys, in Latin verse; 
a Commentary on Plautus; a treatise on Numismatics; Euclid 
in Latin; and the Lives of Helius Eobanus Hessus, George of 
Anhalt and Philip Melanchthon. His Epistolae Familiares 
(published after his death) are a valuable contribution to the 
history of his time. He played an important part in the Re- 
formation movement, and his advice was frequently sought by 
leading men. In 1535 he entered into a correspondence with 
Francis I. as to the possibility of a reconciliation between the 
Catholic and Protestant creeds; and in 1568 Maximilian II. 
sent for him to Vienna to consult him on the same subject. 
He died at Leipzig on the 1 7th of April 1 5 74. 

See article by A. Horawitz in Allgemeine deutsche Biographie; 
C. Bursian, Die Geschichte der klassischen Philologie in Deutschland 
(1883); J. E. Sandys, Hist. Class. Schol. (ed. 1908), ii. 266. 



io8 



CAMERARIUS-^CAMERON, S. 



CAMERARIUS, JOACHIM (1534-1598), German botanist and 
physician, son of the classical scholar of the same name, was 
born at Nuremberg on the 6th of November 1 534. After finishing 
his studies in Germany he visited Italy, where he graduated as 
doctor of medicine. On his return he was invited to reside at 
the courts of several princes, but preferred to settle in his native 
town of Nuremberg, where he had a botanical garden and 
formed extensive collections. He wrote a Hortus Medicus 
(1 588) and several other works. He died at Nuremberg on the 
nth of October 1598. 

CAMERARIUS, RUDOLF JAKOB (1665-1721), German 
botanist and physician, was born at Tubingen on the 12th of 
February 1665, and became professor of medicine and director 
of the botanical gardens at Tubingen in 1687. He died at 
Tubingen on the nth of September 1721. He is chiefly known 
for his investigations on the reproductive organs of plants 
{De sexu plantarum epistola, 1694). 

CAMERINO (anc. Camerinum) , a city and episcopal see (since 
465, if not sooner; Treia is now combined with it) of the Marches, 
Italy, in the province of Macerata, 6 m. S. of the railway 
station of Castelraimondo (to which there is an electric tramway) 
which is 24 m. W. of Macerata; 2148 ft. above sea-level. 
Pop. (1901) of town, 4005; of commune, 12,083. The cathedral 
is modern, the older building having fallen in 1799; the church 
of S. Venanzio suffered similarly, but preserves a portal of the 
1 5th century. The citadel, perhaps constructed from the plans 
of Leonardo da Vinci, dates from 1503. Camerino occupies 
the site of the ancient Camerinum, the inhabitants of which 
(Camertes Umbri) became allies of the Romans in 310 b.c. (at 
the time of the attack on the Etruscans in the Ciminian Forest). 
On the other hand, the Ka/iepnot referred to in the history of 
the year 295 B.C. are probably the inhabitants of Clusium. 
Later it appears as a dependent autonomous community with 
thefoedus aequum (Mommsen, Rom. Staatsrecht, iii. 664). Two 
cohorts of Camertes fought with distinction under Marius 
against the Cimbri. It was much affected by the conspiracy of 
Catiline, and is frequently mentioned in the Civil Wars; under 
the empire it was a municipium. It belonged to ancient Umbria, 
but was on the borders of Picenum. No ancient buildings are 
visible, the Roman level lying as much as 30 ft. below the modern. 

See P. Savini, Storia della Cittd di Camerino (2nd ed., Camerino, 
1895); M. Mariani, Intorno agli antichi Camerti Umbri (Camerino, 
1900). (T. As.)_ 

CAMERON, JOHN (1579-1623), Scottish theologian, was born 
at Glasgow about 1579, and received his early education in his 
native city. After having taught Greek in the university for 
twelve months, he removed to Bordeaux, where he was soon 
appointed a regent in the college of Bergenia He did not 
remain long at Bordeaux, but accepted the offer of a chair of 
philosophy at Sedan, where he passed two years. He then 
returned to Bordeaux, and in the beginning of 1604 he was 
nominated one of the students of divinity who were maintained 
at the expense of the church, and who for the period of four 
years were at liberty to prosecute their studies in any Protestant 
seminary. During this period he acted as tutor to the two sons 
of Calignon, chancellor of Navarre. They spent one year at 
Paris, and two at Geneva, whence they removed to Heidelberg. 
In this university, on the 4th of April 1608, he gave a public 
proof of his ability by maintaining a series of theses, De triplici 
Dei cum Homine Foedere, which were printed among his works. 
The same year he was recalled to Bordeaux, where he was 
appointed the colleague of Dr Primrose; and when Francis 
Gomarus was removed to Leiden, Cameron, in 161 8, was 
appointed professor of divinity at Saumur, the principal seminary 
of the French Protestants. 

In 1620 the progress of the civil troubles in France obliged 
Cameron to seek refuge for himself and family in England. For 
a short time he read private lectures on divinity in London; 
and in 1622 the king appointed him principal of the university 
of Glasgow in the room of Robert Boyd, who had been removed 
from his office in consequence of his adherence to Presbyterian- 
ism. Cameron was prepared to accept Episcopacy, and was 



cordially disliked for his adherence to the doctrine of passive 
obedience. He resigned his office in less than a year. 

He returned to France, and lived at Saumur. After an 
interval of a year he was appointed professor of divinity at 
Montauban. The country was still torn by civil and religious 
dissensions; and Cameron excited the indignation of the more 
strenuous adherents of his own party. He withdrew to the 
neighbouring town of Moissac; but he soon returned to Montau- 
ban, and a few days afterwards he died at the age of about 
forty-six. Cameron left by his first wife several children, whose 
maintenance was undertaken by the Protestant churches in 
France. All his works were published after his death. 

His name has a distinct place in the development of Calvinistic 
theology in Europe. He and his followers maintained that the 
will of man is determined by the practical judgment of the 
mind; that the cause of men's doing good or evil proceeds from 
the knowledge which God infuses into them; and that God does 
not move the will physically, but only morally, by virtue of its 
dependence on the judgment of the mind. This peculiar doctrine 
of grace and free-will was adopted by Amyraut, Cappel, Bochart, 
Daill6 and others of the more learned among the Reformed 
ministers, who dissented from Calvin's. The Cameronites (not 
to be confused with the Scottish sect called Cameronians) 
are moderate Calvinists, and approach to the opinion of the 
Arminians. They are also called Universalists, as holding the 
universal reference of Christ's death, and sometimes Amyrald- 
ists. The rigid adherents to the synod of Dort accused them 
of Pelagianism, and even of Manichaeism, and the controversy 
between the parties was carried on with great zeal; yet the 
whole question between them was only, whether the will of man 
is determined by the immediate action of God upon it, or by 
the intervention of a knowledge which God impresses on the 
mind. 

CAMERON, RICHARD (1648 ?-i68o), founder of a Scottish 
religious sect of Cameronians, which formed the nucleus of 
the regiment of this name in the British army, was born at 
Falkland in the county of Fife. He was educated at the village 
school, and his success was so great that, while still a youth, 
he was appointed schoolmaster. In this situation he became 
acquainted with some of the more enthusiastic field-preachers. 
Persuaded by them he resigned his post and entered the family 
of Sir Walter Scott of Harden as chaplain and tutor. Refusing 
to acknowledge the Indulgence, he joined the ranks of the non- 
conforming ministers, and incited the inhabitants of the southern 
counties of Scotland to protest openly against the new edict. 
So formidable was the agitation that the government pronounced 
illegal all armed assemblages for religious purposes. Cameron 
took refuge in Holland, where he resided for some time; but 
in the autumn of 1679 (probably) he returned to Scotland, and 
once more made himself formidable to the government. Shortly 
after the defeat of the Covenanters at Bothwell Bridge in that 
year, Cameron was slain in a skirmish at the Aird's, or Airs, 
Moss, fighting bravely at the head of the few troops which he 
had been able to collect. His prayer before going into battle 
became a tradition — " Lord spare the green and take the ripe." 
After the accession of William III. the survivors were amnestied, 
and the Cameronian regiment was formed from them. 

See Andrew Lang, History of Scotland, vol. iii. (1907) ; Herzog- 
Hauck, Realencyklopadie (1897), s.v. " Cameronianer " ; A. Smellie, 
Men of the Covenant; Herkless, Richard Cameron; P. Walker, Six 
Saints of the Covenant. 

CAMERON, SIMON (1799-1889), American politician, was 
born in Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, on the 8th of March 
1799. Left an orphan at the age of nine, he early entered 
journalism, and, in banking and railway enterprises, accumulated 
a considerable fortune. He became influential in Pennsylvania 
politics, and in 184 5-1849 served in the United States Senate, 
being elected by a combination of Democratic, Whig and 
"American" votes to succeed James Buchanan. In 1854, 
having failed to secure the nomination for senator from the 
"Know-Nothing" Party, which he had recently joined, he 
became a leader of the " People's Party," as the Republican 



CAMERON, V. L— CAMERONIANS 



109 



Party was at first called in Pennsylvania. In 1857 he was 
elected to the United States Senate as a Republican, despite a 
Democratic majority in the state legislature, a fact that gave 
rise to charges of bribery. His prominence as a candidate first 
for the presidential and then for the vice-presidential nomination 
in the Republican national convention of i860 led to his being 
selected by President Lincoln as secretary of war. His adminis- 
tration of this office at a critical time was marked by his accus- 
tomed energy, but unfortunately also by partiality in the letting 
of government contracts, which brought about his resignation 
at Lincoln's request in January 1862 and his subsequent censure 
by the House of Representatives. Lincoln sent him as minister 
to Russia, but he returned in November 1862* He again served 
in the Senate (after 1872, being chairman of the committee on 
foreign relations) from 1867 until 1877, when he resigned to 
make room for his son, whose election he dictated. Cameron 
was one of the ablest political organizers the United States has 
ever known, and his long undisputed control of Pennsylvania 
politics was one of the most striking examples of " boss rule " 
in American history. The definition of an honest politician as 
" one who when he is bought will stay bought " has been 
attributed to him. He died on the 26th of June 1889. 

His son James Donald Cameron (1833- ) was born at 
Middletown, Pennsylvania, on the 14th of May 1833, graduated 
at Princeton in 1852, became actively interested in his father's 
banking and railway enterprises, and from 1863 to 1874 was 
president of the Northern Central railway. Trained in the 
political school of his father, he developed into an astute politician. 
From June 1876 to March 1877 he was secretary of war in 
President Grant's cabinet. In the Republican national conven- 
tion of 1876 he took an influential part in preventing the nomina- 
tion of James G. Blaine, and later was one of those who directed 
the policy of the Republicans in the struggle for the presidency 
between Tilden and Hayes. From 1877 until 1897 he was a 
member of the United States Senate, having been elected 
originally to succeed his father, who resigned in order to create 
the vacancy. He was chairman of the Republican national 
committee during the campaign of 1880. 

CAMERON, VERNEY LOVETT (1 844-1 804), English traveller 
in Central Africa, was born at Radipole, near Weymouth, Dorset- 
shire, on the 1st of July 1844. He entered the navy in 1857, 
served in the Abyssinian campaign of 1868, and was employed 
for a considerable time in the suppression of the East African 
slave trade. The experience thus obtained led to his being 
selected to command an expedition sent by the Royal Geographi- 
cal Society in 1873, to succour Dr. Livingstone. He was also 
instructed to make independent explorations, guided by Living- 
stone's advice. Soon after the departure of the expedition from 
Zanzibar, Livingstone's servants were met bearing the dead 
body of their master. Cameron's two European companions 
turned back, but he continued his march and reached Ujiji, 
on Lake Tanganyika, in February 1874, where he found and 
sent to England Livingstone's papers. Cameron spent some time 
determining the true form of the south part of the lake, and 
solved the question of its outlet by the discovery of the Lukuga 
river. From Tanganyika he struck westward to Nyangwe, 
the Arab town on the Lualaba previously visited by Livingstone. 
This river Cameron rightly believed to be the main stream of 
the Congo, and he endeavoured to procure canoes to follow 
it down. In this he was unsuccessful, owing to his refusal to 
countenance slavery, and he therefore turned south-west. 
After tracing the Congo-Zambezi watershed for hundreds of 
miles he reached Bihe and finally arrived at the coast on the 
28th of November 1875, being the first European to cress 
Equatorial Africa from sea to sea. His travels, which were 
published in 1877 under the title Across Africa, contain valuable 
suggestions for the opening up of the continent, including the 
utilization of the great lakes as a " Cape to Cairo " connexion. 
In recognition of his work he was promoted to the rank of 
commander, made a Companion of the Bath and given the gold 
medal of the Geographical Society. The remainder of Cameron's 
life was chiefly devoted to projects for the commercial develop- 



ment of Africa, and to writing tales for the young. He visited 
the Euphrates valley in 1878-1879 in connexion with a proposed 
railway to the Persian Gulf, and accompanied Sir Richard 
Burton in his West African journey of 1882. At the Gold Coast 
Cameron surveyed the Tarkwa region, and he was joint author 
with Burton of To the Gold Coast for Gold ( 1 883) . He was killed, 
near Leighton Buzzard, by a fall from horseback when returning 
from hunting, on the 24th of March 1894. 

A second edition of Across Africa, with new matter and corrected 
maps, appeared in 1885. A summary of Cameron's great journey, 
from his own pen, appears in Dr Robert Brown's The Story of Africa, 
vol. ii. pp. 266-279 (London, 1893). 

CAMERON OF LOCHIEL, SIR EWEN (1629-1719), Scottish 
Highland chieftain, was the eldest son of John Cameron and the 
grandson of Alan Cameron, the head of the clan Cameron. 
Having lost his father in infancy he passed part of his youth with 
the marquess of Argyll at Inveraray, leaving his guardian about 
1647 to take up his duties as chief of the clan Cameron, a position 
in which he succeeded his grandfather. In 1653 Lochiel joined 
the earl of Glencairn in his rising on behalf of Charles II., and 
after the defeat of this attempt he served the Royalist cause by 
harassing GeneralMonk. In 1681 he was knighted by Charles II., 
and in July 1689 he was with Viscount Dundee at Killiecrankie. 
He was too old to share personally in the Jacobite rising of 1715, 
but his sympathies were with the Stuarts, and his son led the 
Camerons at Sheriff muir. Lochiel, who died in February 17 19, 
is called by Macaulay the "Ulysses of the Highlands." He was a 
man of enormous strength and size, and one who met him in 1716 
says " he wrung some blood from the point of my fingers with a 
grasp of his hand." An incident showing his strength and 
ferocity in single combat is used by Sir Walter Scott in The Lady 
of the Lake (canto v.). Lochiel's son and successor, John, who 
was attainted for sharing in the rebellion of 17 15, died in Flanders 
in 1748. John's son Donald, sometimes called " gentle Lochiel," 
joined Charles Edward, the Young Pretender, in 1745, was 
wounded at Culloden, and escaped to France, dying in the same 
year as his father. The 79th regiment, or Cameron Highlanders, 
was raised from among the members of the clan in 1793 by Sir 
Alan Cameron (1753-1828). 

See Memoirs of Sir Ewen Cameron of Lochiel (Bannatyne Club, 
1842). 

CAMERONIANS, the name given to that section of the Scottish 
Covenanters (q.v.) who followed Richard Cameron (q.v.), and 
who were chiefly found among those who signed the Sanquhar 
Declaration in 1680. Known also as " Society Men," " San- 
quharians " and " Hillmen," they became a separate church 
after the religious settlement of 1690, taking the official title 
of Reformed Presbyterians in 1743. Societies of Cameronians 
for the maintenance of the Presbyterian form of worship were 
formed about 1681; their testimony, " The Informatory Vindica- 
tion," is dated 1687; and they quickly became the most pro- 
nounced and active adherents of the covenanting faith. Holding 
fast to the two covenants, the National Covenant of 1580 and 
the Solemn League and Covenant of 1643, they wished to restore 
the ecclesiastical order which had existed between 1638 and 1649, 
and were' dissatisfied with the moderate character of the religious 
settlement of 1690. Refusing to take the oaths of allegiance to 
an " uncovenanted " ruler, or to exercise any civil function, they 
passed through a period of trial and found some difficulty in 
maintaining a regular ministry; but in 1706 they were reinforced 
by some converts from the established church. They objected 
strongly to the proposal for the union of England and Scotland, 
and were suspected of abetting a rising which took place in the 
west of Scotland in 1 706 ; but there appears to be no foundation 
for the statement that they intrigued with the Jacobites, and 
they gave no trouble to the government either in 171 5 or in 1745. 
In 171 2 they publicly renewed the covenants at Auchensauch 
Hill in Lanarkshire, and in 1743 their first presbytery was 
ce-nstituted at Braehead, while a presbytery was formed in North 
America in 1774. In 1863 the Cameronians, or Reformed 
Presbyterians, decided to inflict no penalties upon those members 
who had taken the oaths, or had exercised civil functions, and 



no 



CAMEROON 



consequently a few congregations seceded. In 1876 the general 
body of the Reformed Presbyterians united with the Free Church 
of Scotland, leaving the few seceding congregations as the 
representatives of the principles of the Cameronians. In the 
British army the first battalion of the Cameronians (Scottish 
Rifles) is directly descended from the " Cameronian guard," 
which, composed of Cameronians, was embodied by the con- 
vention parliament in 1689, and was afterwards employed to 
restore order in the Highlands. 

See J. H. Burton, History of Scotland, vols. vii. and viii. (Edin- 
burgh, 1905) ; and A. Lang, History of Scotland, vol. iv. (Edinburgh, 
1907). 

CAMEROON 1 (Ger. Kamerun), a German protectorate in'West 
Africa, bounded W. by the Atlantic, N.W. by British Nigeria, 
N. by Lake Chad, E. and S. by French Congo, save for a short 



CAMEROON 




mu^b mtwAzm 



Longitude East 12° of Greenwich 



distance on the south where it is conterminous with the Spanish 
Muni river settlement. 

Boundaries and Area. — The sea frontier extends from the Rio 
del Rey, just where the great bend of the coast-line east to south 
begins, forming the Bight of Biafra, to the Campo river, a dis- 
tance of 200 m. The north-western boundary, laid down in an 
agreement between Germany and Great Britain on the 15th of 
November 1893, runs from the mouth of the Rio del Rey to the 
" rapids " of the Cross river in 8° 48' E. Thence it is continued 
in a north-east line towards Yola, as far as the confines of that 

1 This English form of the name, adopted in the 10th ed. of the 
Ency. Brit., from the German, appears preferable both to the un- 
English Kamerun and to the older and clumsy " the Cameroons." 



town. The boundary is then deflected south so as to leave 
Yola in British territory, turning north again to cross the Benue 
river at a spot 3 m. west of where the Faro joins the Benue. 
From this point the frontier goes north-east to the border of 
Lake Chad, 35 m. east of the meridian of the town ofKuka. 
The southern shores of Lake Chad for a distance of some 40 m. 
belong to the protectorate. The south and east boundaries 
were laid down by agreements between Germany and France on 
the 24th of December 1885, the 15th of March 1894 and the 
18th of April 1908. The south boundary runs in a fairly direct 
line from the mouth of the Campo river to the river Dscha (or 
Ngoko), which it follows to its confluence with the Sanga. The 
eastern boundary runs from the Sanga irregularly north to io° N., 
where it approaches the British frontier at Yola, so that at its 
narrowest part the protectorate is little more than 50 m. across. 
From io° N. the frontier turns eastwards to 
the Logone, thence going north-east to the 
Shari river, which it follows to Lake Chad. 
The protectorate has an area of about 190,000 
sq. m. Estimated population (1908) 3,500,000, 
of whom 1 1 28 were whites. 

Origin of the Name.— The name Camaroes was 
first given by the Portuguese discoverers of 
the 15th and 16th centuries to a large bay or 
estuary, lying south-east of a great mountain 
close to the sea, met with after passing the 
Niger delta. This estuary they called the Rio 
dos Camaroes (the river of Prawns), from the 
abundance of the Crustacea found therein. 
The name Camaroes was also used to designate 
the neighbouring mountains. The English 
usage until nearly the end of the 19th century 
was to confine the term " the Cameroons " to 
the mountain range, and to speak of the 
estuary as the Cameroons river. Locally it was 
often called " the Bay." On their acquisition 
of the country in 1884 the Germans extended 
the use of the name in its Teutonic form — 
Kamerun — to the whole protectorate. 

Physical Features. — Cameroon forms the 
north-west corner of the great Central African 
plateau. This becomes evident in its eastern 
section, where are wide-spreading plains, which 
farther west assume an undulating character, 
and gradually merge into a picturesque moun- 
tain range. This range, running from north 
to south, is flanked by a parallel and lower 
range in the west, with a wide valley between. 
In the north-west the Upper Guinea mountains 
send their eastern spurs across the boundary, 
and from a volcanic rift, which runs south- 
west to north-east, the Cameroon peak towers 
up, its summit 13,370 ft. high. This mountain, 
whose south-western base is washed by the 
Atlantic, is the highest point on the western 
side of Africa, and it alone of the great moun- 
tains of the continent lies close to the coast. 
From any vantage point, but especially from 
the sea, it presents a magnificent spectacle, 
while some 30 m. westward rises Clarence peak, the culminating 
point of Fernando Po. With an area, on an isolated base, of 
700 to 800 sq. m., Cameroon mountain has but two district 
peaks, Great Cameroon and Little Cameroon (5826 ft.), which 
is from foot to top covered with dense forest. The native 
designation of the highest peak is Mongo-ma-Loba, or the 
Mountain of Thunder, and the whole upper region is usually 
called Mongo-mo-Ndemi, or the Mountain of Greatness. On the 
principal summit there are a group of craters. In 1909 the 
mountain was in eruption and huge streams of lava were 
ejected. Inland the Chebchi and Mandara mountains indicate 
the direction and extent of the rift. 

The mountains of the plateau sweep grandly round to the 



Emery Waltcer sc 



CAMEROON 



in 



east on reaching the eighth degree of N. lat. Here they give 
rise to a number of small rivers, which collect in the rift and 
form the Benue, the great eastern affluent of the Niger. This 
part of the protectorate is known as Adamawa (q.v.). Farther 
north, beyond the Mandara mountains, the country, here part 
of the ancient sultanate of Bornu, slopes to the shores of Lake 
Chad, and has a general level of 800 to 1000 ft. The greater part 
of Cameroon is thus a mountainous country, with, on the coast, 
a strip of low land. In the south this is very narrow ; it widens to- 
wards the north savewhere the Cameroon peak reaches to the sea. 

At the foot of the Cameroon peak a number of estuaries cut 
deep bays which form excellent harbours. The small rivers 
which empty into them can be ascended for some miles by steam 
launches. The principal estuary, which is over 20 m. wide, is 
called, as already noted, the Cameroon river or bay. The term 
river is more particularly confined to a ramification of the estuary 
which receives the waters of the Mungo river (a considerable 
stream which flows south from the Cameroon mountains), the 
Wuri, a river coming from the north-east, and various smaller 
rivers. Under the shadow of Cameroon peak lies the bay of 
Ambas, with the islands of Ndami (Ambas) and Mondola. It 
forms a tolerable harbour/'capable of receiving large vessels. 

Traversing the central portion of the country is a large river 
known in its upper course as the Lorn, and in its lower as the 
Sanaga, which enters the ocean just to the south of the Cameroon 
estuary. Both the Lorn and the Nyong (a more southerly 
stream) rise in the central plateau, from which they descend in 
splendid cascades, breaking through the parallel coast range in 
rapids, which indicate the extent of their navigability. The 
Lokunja and Kribi are smaller rivers with courses parallel to 
and south of the Nyong. In the south-east of the colony the 
streams — of which the chief are the Dscha and Bumba — are 
tributaries of the Sanga, itself an affluent of the Congo (q.v.). 
About 100 m. of the right bank of the Sanga, from the confluence 
of the Dscha upwards, are in German territory. In the north 
the country drains into Lake Chad through the Logone and 
Shari (q.v.). Including the headwaters of the Benue the colony 
has four distinct river-systems, one connecting with the Niger, 
another with the Congo, and a third with Lake Chad, the fourth 
being the rivers which run direct to the sea. The Niger and 
Shari systems communicate, with, at high water, but one obstruc- 
tion to navigation. The connecting link is a marshy lake named 
Tuburi. From it issues the Kebbi (Mao Kebi) a tributary of 
the Benue, and through it flows a tributary of the Logone, the 
chief affluent of the Shari. The one obstruction in the waterway 
is a fall of 165 ft. in the Kebbi. 

Geology. — The oldest rocks, forming the greater mass of the 
hinterland, are gneisses, schists and granites of Archaean age. 
Along the Benue river a sandstone (Benue sandstone) forms the 
banks to 14 E. Cretaceous rocks occur around the basalt 
platform of the Cameroon mountain and generally along the 
coastal belt. Basalt and tuff, probably of Tertiary age, form 
the great mass of the Cameroon mountain, also the island of 
Fernando Po. Extensive areas in the interior, more especially 
towards Lake Chad, are covered with black earth of alluvial or 
lacustrine origin. 

Climate. — The country lies wholly within the tropics and has 
a characteristic tropical climate. In the interior four seasons 
can be distinguished; a comparatively dry and a wet one alter- 
nating. July to October are the coldest months, and also bring 
most rain, but there is hardly a month without rain. On the 
coast the temperature is high all the year round, but on the 
plateau it is cooler. Malarial fever is frequent, and even the 
Africans, especially those coming from other countries, suffer from 
it. The middle zone of the Cameroon mountain has, however, a 
temperate climate and affords excellent sites for sanatoria. 

Flora and Fauna. — The southern part of the low coast is 
chiefly grass land, while the river mouths and arms of the bays 
are lined with mangroves. The mountainous region is covered 
with primeval forest, in which timber and valuable woods for 
cabinet-making are plentiful. Most important are the Elaeis 
guineensis, Sterculia acuminata and the wild coffee tree. On 



Cameroon peak the forest ascends to 8000 ft. ; above it is grass 
land. Towards the east the forest gradually grows thinner, 
assumes a park-like appearance, and finally disappears, wide 
grass uplands taking its place. The country north of the Benue 
is rich and well cultivated. Cotton and rubber are found in 
considerable quantities, and fields of maize, corn, rice and sugar- 
cane bear witness to the fertility of the soil. 

Animals are plentiful, including the great pachyderms and 
carnivora. The latter prey on the various kinds of antelopes 
which swarm on the grass lands. Two kinds of buffaloes are 
found in the forests, which are the home of the gorilla and 
chimpanzee. Large rodents, like the porcupine and cane rat, 
are numerous. Of birds there are 316 species, and several of 
venomous snakes. 

Inhabitants. — The north of Cameroon is inhabited by Fula 
(q.v.) and Hausa (q.v.) and allied tribes, the south by Bantu- 
speaking races. The Fula came from the north and north-east, 
gradually driving the Bantu-negroes before them. They brought 
horses and horned cattle, unknown in these regions until then, 
and they founded well-organized states, like that of Adamawa, 
now divided between Cameroon and the British protectorate 
of Nigeria. In the vicinity of the rivers Benue, Faro and Kebbi, 
the people, who are good agriculturists, raise cereals and other 
crops, while on the plateaus stock-raising forms the chief pursuit 
of the inhabitants. In this northern region villages are built 
in the Sudanese zeriba style, surrounded with thorn fences; 
more important places are enclosed by a well-built wall and 
strongly fortified. Of martial disposition, the people often 
waged war with their neighbours, and also amongst themselves 
until the pacification of the hinterland by Germany at the 
beginning of the 20th century. 

The Bantu-negroes inhabit the country south of about 7 N. 
Chief among the tribes are the Dualla (q.v.), the Ba-kwiri (q.v.), 
the Ba-Long, the Ba-Farami, the Wuri, the Abo and the Ba- 
Kundu. They build square houses, are active traders and are 
ruled by independent chiefs, having no political cohesion. 
Among the Dualla a curious system of drum signals is note- 
worthy. In the coast towns are numbers of Krumen, who, 
however, rarely settle permanently in the country. The Fula, 
as also most of the Hausa, are Moslems, the other tribes are 
pagans. Missionary societies, both Protestant and Roman 
Catholic, are represented in the colony, and their schools are 
well attended, as are the schools belonging to the government. 
In all the schools German is taught, but pidgin-English is largely 
spoken at the coast towns. 

Chief Towns. — Duala, the chief town in the protectorate, is 
situated on the Cameroon estuary at the mouth of the Wuri 
river in 4 2' N. 9 42' E. It consists of various trading stations 
and native towns close to one another on the south bank of the 
river and known, before the German occupation, as Cameroon, 
Bell town, Akwa town, &c. Hickory, on the north side of the 
stream and the starting point of the railway to the interior, is 
also part of Duala, which has a total population of 22,000, includ- 
ing about 170 Europeans. Duala is the headquarters of the 
merchants and missionaries. The principal streets are wide 
and tree lined, the sanitation is good. The government offices 
are placed in a fine park in which are statues of Gustav Nachtigal 
and others. The port is provided with a floating dock. The 
seat of government is Buea, a post 3000 ft. above the sea on the 
slopes of the Cameroon mountain. Victoria is a flourishing 
town in Ambas Bay, founded by the British Baptist missionaries 
expelled from Fernando Po in 1858 (see below). Batanga and 
Campo are trading stations in the southern portion of the colony. 
On the route from Duala to Lake Chad is the large commercial 
town of Ngaundere, inhabited chiefly by Hausas and occupied 
by the Germans in 1901. Another large town is Garua on the 
Benue river. Farther north and within 30 m. of Lake Chad is 
Dikwa (Dikoa), in Bornu, the town chosen by Rabah (q.v.) as his 
capital after his conquest of Bornu. Gulfei on the lower Shari 
and Kusseri on the Logone are also towns of some note. Ngoko 
is a trading station on the Dscha, in the south-east of the pro- 
tectorate, near the confluence of that river with the Sanga . 



112 



CAMEROON 



Products and Industry. — Cameroon is rich in natural products* 
one of the most important being the oil-palm. Cocoa cultivation 
was introduced by the Germans and proved remarkably success- 
ful. Rubber is collected from the Landolphia and various 
species of Ficus. Palm-oil, palm kernels, cocoa, copal, copra, 
Calabar beans, kola-nuts and ivory are the principal exports. 
There are several kinds of finely-grained wood, amongst which 
a very dark ebony is specially remarkable. Cotton, indigo and 
various fibres of plants deserve notice. The natives grow several 
kinds of bananas, yams and batatas, maize, pea-nuts, sugar-cane, 
sorghum and pepper. Minerals have not been found in paying 
quantities. Iron is smelted by the natives, who, especially 
amongst the Hausas, are very clever smiths, and manufacture 
fine lances and arrow heads, knives and swords, and also hoes. 
Dikwa is the centre of an important trade of which the chief 
articles are coffee, sugar, velvet, silk and weapons, as well as gold 
and silver objects brought by caravans from Tripoli. The 
natives round the Cameroon estuary are clever carvers of wood, 
and make highly ornamental figure heads for their canoes, which 
also sometimes show very fine workmanship. In the interior 
the people use the wild-growing cotton and fibres of plants to 
manufacture coarse drapery and plait-work. Plantations 
founded by German industry are fairly successful. Large 
reserves are set apart for the natives by government when 
marking off the land granted to plantation companies. The 
best-known of these companies, the Siid-Kamerun, holds a 
concession over a large tract of country by the Sanga river, 
exporting its rubber, ivory and other produce via the Congo. 
The principal imports are cotton goods, spirits, building material, 
firearms, hardware and salt. The annual value of the external 
trade in the period i 900-1905 averaged about £800,000. In 1907 
the value of the trade had increased to. £1,700,000. Some 70% 
of the import and export trade was with Germany, the remainder 
being almost entirely with Great Britain. The percentage of the 
trade with Germany was increasing, that with Britain decreasing. 
Communications. — There is regular steamship communication 
with Europe by German and British boats. On the rivers which 
run into the Cameroon estuary small steam launches ply. The 
protectorate belongs to the Postal Union, and is connected by cable 
with the British telegraph station at Bonny in the Niger delta. 

An imperial guarantee of interest was obtained in 1905 for 
the construction of a railway from Hickory to Bayong, a place 
100 m. to the north, the district traversed being fertile and 
populous. From Victoria a line runs to Soppo (22 m.) near 
Buea and is continued thence northward. Another line, sanc- 
tioned in 1908, runs S.E. from Duala to the upper waters of the 
Nyong. In the neighbourhood of government stations excellent 
roads have been built. The chief towns in the coast region are 
connected by telegraph and telephone. 

Government Revenue, &c. — The administration is under the 
direction of a governor appointed by and responsible to the 
imperial authorities. The governor is assisted by a chancellor 
and other officials and an advisory council whose members are 
merchants resident in the protectorate. Decrees having the 
force of law are issued by the imperial chancellor on the advice 
of the governor. In Adamawa and German Bornu are various 
Mahommedan sultanates controlled by residents stationed at 
Garua and Kusseri. Revenue is raised chiefly by customs dues 
on spirits and tobacco and a general 10% ad valorem duty on 
most goods. A poll tax is imposed on the natives. The local 
revenue (£131,000 in 1905) is supplemented by an imperial grant, 
the protectorate in the first twenty-one years of its existence 
never having raised sufficient revenue to meet its expenditure, 
which in 1905 exceeded £230,000. Order is maintained by a 
native force officered by Germans. 

History. — Cameroon and the neighbouring coast were dis- 
covered by the Portuguese navigator, Fernando Po, towards the 
close of the 1 5th century. They were formerly regarded as with- 
in the Oil Rivers district, sometimes spoken of as the Oil Coast. 
Trading settlements were established by Europeans as early as 
the 17th century. The trade was confined to the coast, the 
Dualla and other tribes being recognized intermediaries between 



the coast " factories " and the tribes in the interior, whither 
they allowed no strange trader to proceed. They took a quantity 
of goods on trust, visited the tribes in the forest, and bartered 
for ivory, rubber and other produce. This method of trade, 
called the trust system, worked well, but when the country came 
under the administration of Germany, the system broke down, 
as inland traders were allowed to visit the coast. Before this 
happened the " kings " of the chief trading stations — Akwa and 
Bell — were wealthy merchant princes. From the beginning 
until near the end of the 19th century they were very largely 
under British influence. In 1837 the king of Bimbia, a district 
on the mainland on the north of the estuary, made over a large 
part of the country round the bay to Great Britain. In 1845, at 
which time there was a flourishing trade in slaves between 
Cameroon and America, the Baptist Missionary Society made 
its first settlement on the mainland of Africa, Alfred Saker 
(1814-1880) obtaining from the Akwa family the site for a 
mission station. In 1848 another mission station was estab- 
lished at Bimbia, the king agreeing to abolish human sacri- 
fices at the funerals of his great men. Into the Cameroon 
country Saker and his colleagues introduced the elements 
of civilization, and with the help of British men-of-war 
the oversea slave trade was finally stopped (c. 1875). The 
struggles between the Bell (Mbeli) and Akwa families were also 
largely composed. In 1858, on the expulsion of the Baptists 
from Fernando Po (<?.».), Saker founded at Ambas Bay a colony 
of the freed negroes who then left the island, the settlement 
being known as Victoria. Two years after this event the first 
German factory was established in the estuary by Messrs Woer- 
mann of Hamburg. In 1870 the station at Bimbia was given up 
by the missionaries, but that at Akwa town continued to flourish, 
the Dualla showing themselves eager to acquire education, while 
Saker reduced their language to writing. He left Cameroon in 
1876, the year before George Grenfell, afterwards famous for 
his work on theCongo, came to the country, where he remained 
three years. Like the earlier missionaries he explored the 
adjacent districts, discovering the Sanaga in its lower course. 
Although British influence was powerful and the British consul 
for the Oil Rivers during this period exercised considerable 
authority over the native chiefs, requests made by them — in 
particular by the Dualla chiefs in 1882 — for annexation by Great 
Britain, were refused or neglected, with the result that when 
Germany started on her quest to pick up unappropriated parts 
of the African coast she was enabled to secure Cameroon. A 
treaty with King Bell was negotiated by Dr Gustav Nachtigal, 
the signature of the king and the other chiefs being obtained at 
midnight on the 15th of July 1884. Five days later Mr E. H. 
Hewett, British consul, arrived with a mission to annex the 
country to Great Britain. 1 Though too late to secure King Bell's 
territory, Mr Hewett concluded treaties with all the neighbouring 
chiefs, but the British government decided to recognize the 
German claim not only to Bell town, but to the whole Cameroon 
region. Some of the tribes, disappointed at not being taken over 
by Great Britain, refused to acknowledge German sovereignty. 
Their villages were bombarded and they were reduced to sub- 
mission. The settlement of the English Baptists at Victoria, 
Ambas Bay, was at first excluded from the German protectorate, 
but in March 1887 an arrangement was made by which, while 
the private rights of the missionaries were maintained, the 
sovereignty of the settlement passed to Germany. The Baptist 
Society thereafter made over its missions, both at Ambas Bay 
and in the estuary, to the Basel Society. 

The extension of German influence in the interior was gradually 
accomplished, though not without considerable bloodshed. That 
part of Adamawa recognized as outside the British frontier was 
occupied in 1901 after somewhat severe fighting. In 1902 the 
imperial troops first penetrated into that part of Bornu reserved 
to Germany by agreements with Great Britain and France. 
They found the country in the military occupation of France. 
The French officers, who stated that their presence was due to 

1 On the 26th of July a French gunboat also entered the estuary 
on a belated annexation mission. 



CAMILING— CAMISARDS 



"3 



the measures rendered necessary by the ravages of Rabah and 
his sons, withdrew their troops into French territory. The shores 
of Lake Chad were first reached by a German military force on 
the 2nd of May 1902. In 1904 and again in 1905 there were 
native risings in various parts of the protectorate. These dis- 
turbances were followed, early in 1906, by the recall of the 
governor, Herr von Puttkamer, who was called upon to answer 
charges of maladministration. He was succeeded in 1907 by 
Dr T. Seitz. Collisions on the southern border of the protectorate 
between French and German troops led in 1905-1906 to an 
accurate survey of the south and east frontier regions and to a 
new convention (1908) whereby for the straight lines marking 
the frontier in former agreements natural features were largely 
substituted. Germany gained a better outlet to the Sanga river. 
The ascent of the Cameroon mountain was first attempted by 
Joseph Merrick of the Baptist Missionary Society in 1847; but it 
was not till 1861 that the summit was gained, when the ascent 
was made by Sir Richard Burton, Gustav Mann, a noted botanist, 
and Sefior Calvo. The starting-point was Babundi, a place on the 
seashore west of the mountain. From the south-east the summit 
was reached by Mary Kingsley in 1895. 

See Mary H. Kingsley, Travels in West Africa (London, 1897); 
Sir R. Burton, Abeokuta and the Cameroons Mountains (2 vols., 
London, 1863) ; E. B. Underhill, Alfred Saker . . . A Biography 
(London, 1884); Sir H. H. Johnston, George Grenfell and the Congo 
. . . and Notes on the Cameroons . . . (London, 1908) ; Max Buchner, 
Kamerun Skizzen und Betrachtungen (Leipzig, 1887); S. Passarge, 
Adamaua (Berlin, 1895); E. Zintgraph, Nord-Kamerun (Berlin, 
1895) ; F. Hutter, Wanderungen und Forschungen im Nqrd-Hinter-. 
land von Kamerun (Brunswick, 1902) ; F. Bauer, Die deutsche 
Niger-Benue-Tsadsee-Expedition, 1902-1903 (Berlin, 1904); C. Rene, 
Kamerun und die deutsche Tsddsee Eisenbahn (Berlin, 1905) ; O. 
Zimmermann, Durch Busch und Steppe vom Campo bis zum Schari, 
1892-1902 (Berlin, 1909) ; also British Foreign Office Reports. For 
special study of particular sciences see F. Wohltmann, Der Planta- 
genbau in Kamerun und seine Zukunft (Berlin, 1896); F. Plehn, Die 
Kamerunkiiste, Studien zur Klimatologie , Physiologie und Pathologie 
in den Tropen (Berlin, 1898) ; E. Esch, F. Solger, M. Oppenheim and 
0. Jaekel, Beitrage zur Geologie von Kamerun (Stuttgart, 1904). For 
geology the following works may also be consulted: Stromer von 
Reichenbach, Geologie der deutschen Schulzgebiete in Afrika (Berlin, 
1896); A. von Koenen, " Ober Fossilien der unteren Kreide am 
Ufer des Mungo in Kamerun," Abh. k. Wiss., Gottingen, 1897; 
E. Cohen, " Lava vom Camerun-Gebirge," Neues Jahrb. f. Min., 
1887. (F. R. C.) 

CAMILING, a town of the province of Tarlac, Luzon, Philip- 
pine Islands, on the Camiling river, about 80 m. N.N.W. of 
Manila. Pop. (1903) 25,243. In 1903 after the census had been 
taken, the adjacent towns of Santa Ignacia (pop. 191 1) and 
San Clemente (pop. 1822) were annexed to Camiling. Its pro- 
ducts are rice, Indian corn and sugar. Fine timber grows in the 
vicinity. The principal language is Ilocano; Pangasinan, too, 
is spoken. Being in an isolated position, very difficult of access 
during the rainy season, Camiling has always been infested with 
thieves and bands of outlaws, who come here for concealment. 

CAMILLUS, MARCUS FURIUS, Roman soldier and statesman, 
of patrician descent, censor in 403 B.C. He triumphed four 
times, was five times dictator, and was honoured with the title 
of Second Founder of Rome. When accused of having unfairly 
distributed the spoil taken at Veii, which was captured by him 
after a ten years' siege, he went into voluntary exile at Ardea. 
The real cause of complaint against him was no doubt his 
patrician haughtiness and his triumphal entry into Rome in a 
chariot drawn by white horses. Subsequently the Romans, 
when besieged in the Capitol by the Gauls, created him dictator; 
he completely defeated the enemy (but see Brennus and Rome: 
History, ii., " The Republic ") and drove them from Roman 
territory. He dissuaded the Romans, disheartened by the 
devastation wrought by the Gauls, from migrating to Veii, and 
induced them to rebuild the city. He afterwards fought success- 
fully against the Aequi, Volsci and Etruscans, and repelled a 
fresh invasion of the Gauls in 367. Though patrician in sym- 
pathy, he saw the necessity of making concessions to the plebeians 
and was instrumental in passing the Licinian laws. He died of 
the plague in the eighty-first year of his age (365). The story of 
Camillus is no doubt largely traditional. To this element prob- 



ably belongs the story of the schoolmaster who, when Camillus 
was attacking Falerii (q.v.), attempted to betray the town by 
bringing into his camp the sons of some of the principal inhabit- 
ants of the place. Camillus, it is said, had him whipped back, 
into the town by his pupils, and the Faliscans were so affected 
by this generosity that they at once surrendered. 

See Livy v. 10, vi. 4; Plutarch, Camillus. For the Gallic retreat, 
see Polybius ii. 18; T. Mommsen, Rbmische Forschungen, ii. pp. 113- 
152 (1879). 

CAMILLUS and CAMILLA, in Roman antiquity, originally 
terms used for freeborn children. Later, they were used to 
denote the attendants on certain priests and priestesses, especially 
the flamen dialis and flaminica and the curiones. It was neces- 
sary that they should be freeborn and the children of parents 
still alive (Dion. Halic. ii. 21). The name Camillus has been 
connected with the Cadmilus or Casmilus of the Samothracian 
mysteries, identified with Hermes (see Cabeiri). 

CAMISARDS (from camisade, obsolete Fr. for " a night attack," 
from the Ital. camiciata, formed from camicia — Fr. chemise — a 
shirt, from the fact of a shirt being worn over the armour in 
order to distinguish friends from foes), the name given to the 
peasantry of the Cevennes who, from 1702 to 1705 and for some 
years afterwards, carried on an organized military resistance to 
the dragonnades, or conversion by torture, death and confiscation 
of property, by which, in the Huguenot districts of France, the 
revocation of the edict of Nantes was attempted to be enforced. 
The Camisards were also called Barbets (" water-dogs," a term 
also applied to the Waldenses), Vagabonds, Assemblers {assemblee 
was the name given to the meeting or conventicle of Huguenots), 
Fanatics and the Children of God. They belonged to that 
romance-speaking people of Gothic descent whose mystic 
imagination and independent character made the south of 
France the most fertile nursing-ground of medieval heresy (see 
Cathars and Albigenses). At the time of the Reformation 
the same causes produced like results. Calvin was warmly 
welcomed when he preached at Nimes; Montpellier became the 
chief centre for the instruction of the Huguenot youth. It was, 
however, in the great triangular plateau of mountain called the 
C6vennes that, among the small farmers, the cloth and silk 
weavers and vine dressers, Protestantism was most intense and 
universal. These people were (and still are) very poor, but 
intelligent and pious, and of a character at once grave and fervent. 
From the lists of Huguenots sent from Languedoc to the galleys 
(1684 to 1762), we gather that the .common type of physique is 
" belle taille, cheveux bruns, visage ovale." The chief theatre 
of the revolt comprised that region of the Cevennes bounded by 
the towns of Florae, Pont-de-Montvert, Alais and Lasalle, thus 
embracing the southern portion of the department of Lozere 
(the Bas-Gevaudan) and the neighbouring district in the east 
of the department of Gard. 

In order to understand the War of the Cevennes it is necessary 
to recall the persecutions which preceded and followed the 
revocation of the edict of Nantes. It is also necessary to re- 
member the extraordinary religious movement which had for a 
great number of years agitated the Protestants of France. 
Faced by the violation of that most solemn of treaties, a treaty 
which had been declared perpetual and irrevocable by Henry IV., 
Louis XIII. and even Louis XIV. himself, they could not, in 
the enthusiasm of their faith, believe that such a crime would be 
left unpunished. But being convinced that no human power 
could give them liberty of conscience, they went to the Bible 
to find when their deliverance would come. As far back as 
1686 Pierre Jurieu published his work L' Accomplissement des 
propkSties, in which, speaking of the Apocalypse, he predicted 
the end of the persecution and the fall of Babylon — that is 
to say of Roman Catholicism — for 1689. The Revolution in 
England seemed to provide a striking corroboration of his 
prophecies, and the apocalyptic enthusiasm took so strong a 
hold on people's minds that Bossuet felt compelled to refute 
Jurieu's arguments in his Apocalypse expliqute, published in 
1689. The Lettres pastorales of Jurieu (Rotterdam, 1686-1687), 
a series of brief tracts which were secretly circulated in France, 



H 



CAMISARDS 



continued to narrate events and prodigies in which the author 
saw the intervention of God, and thus strengthened the courage 
of his adherents. This religious enthusiasm, under the influence 
of Du Serre, was manifested for the first time in the Dauphine. 
Du Serre, who was a pupil of Jurieu, communicated his mystic 
faith to young children who were called the "petits prophetes," 
the most famous of whom was a girl named " La belle Isabeau." 
Brought up on the study of the prophets and the Apocalypse, 
these children went from village to village quoting and requoting 
the most obscure and terrible passages from these ancient 
prophecies (see Antichrist). It is necessary to remember that 
at this time the Protestants were without ministers, all being in 
exile, and were thus deprived of all real religious instruction. They 
listened with enthusiasm to this strange preaching, and thousands 
of those who were called New Catholics were seen to be giving up 
attendance at Mass. The movement advanced in Languedoc 
with such rapidity that at one time there were more than three 
hundred children shut up in the prisons of Uzes on the charge 
of prophesying, and the Faculty of Medicine of Montpellier, 
which was entrusted with their examination, went so far in 
their ignorance as to pronounce these irresponsible infants 
guilty of fanaticism. After the peace of Ryswick, 1697, the 
fierceness of the persecution was redoubled in the South. " I 
will show no mercy to the preachers," wrote the terrible Baville, 
the so-called "king of Languedoc," and he kept his word. The 
people of the Cevennes were in despair, for their loyalty to the 
king had been remarkable. In 1683 on the 6th of September 
an assembly composed of fifty pastors, sixty-four noblemen and 
thirty-four notables, held at Colognac, had drawn up a statement 
of its unalterable loyalty to Louis XIV. It is important to notice 
that the revolt of the C6vennes was essentially a popular move- 
ment. Among its leaders there was not a single nobleman, but 
only men of the people, a baker, a blacksmith, some ex-soldiers; 
but by far the most extraordinary characterisic is the presence, 
no longer of children, but of men and women who declared 
themselves inspired, who fell into religious ecstasies and roused in 
their comrades the most heroic bravery in battle and at the stake. 

The assassination of the abbe du Chayla marks the beginning 
of the war of the Cevennes. The abbe, a veteran Catholic 
missionary from Siam, had been appointed inspector of missions 
in the Cevennes. There he introduced the " squeezers " (which 
resembled the Scottish "boot"), and his systematic and refined 
cruelty at last broke the patience of his victims. His murder, on 
the 23rd of July 1702, at Pont de Monvert, was the first blow in 
the war. It was planned by Esprit Seguier, who at once began to 
carry out his idea of a general massacre of the Catholic priests. 
He soon fell, and was succeeded by Laporte, an old soldier, who, 
as his troop increased, assumed the title of " the Colonel of the 
Children of God," and named his camp the " Camp of the 
Eternal." He used to lead his followers to the fight, singing 
Clement Marot's grand version of the 68th Psalm, " Que Dieu se 
montre seulement," to the music of Goudimel. Besides Laporte, 
the forest-ranger Castanet, the wool-carders Conderc and Mazel, 
the soldiers Catinat, Joany and Ravenel were selected as captains 
— all men whom the thiomanie or prophetic malady had visited. 
But the most important figures are those of Roland, who after- 
wards issued the following extraordinary despatch to the inhabit- 
ants of St Andre: — "Nous, comte et seigneur Roland, generalis- 
sime des Protestants de France, nous ordonnons que vous ayez a 
congedier dans trois jours tous les pretres et missionnaires qui sont 
chez vous, sous peine d'etre brules tout vifs, vous et eux " (Court, 
i. p. 219) ; and Jean Cavalier, the baker's boy, who, at the age of 
seventeen, commanded the southern army of the Camisards, and 
who, after defeating successively the comte de Broglie and three 
French marshals, Montrevel, Berwick and Villars, made an 
honourable peace. (See Cavalier, Jean.) 

Cavalier for nearly two years continued to direct the war. 
Regular taxes were raised, arsenals were formed in the great 
limestone caves of the district, the Catholic churches and their 
decorations were burned and the clergy driven away. Occasion- 
ally routed in regular engagements, the Camisards, through their 
desperate valour and the rapidity of their movements, were 



constantly successful in skirmishes, night attacks and ambuscades, 
A force of 60,000 was now in the field against them; among 
others, the Irish Brigade which had just returned from the 
persecutions of the Waldenses. The rising was far from being 
general, and never extended to more than three or four thousand 
men, but it was rendered dangerous by the secret and even in 
many places the open support of the people in general. On the 
other hand their knowledge of a mountainous country clothed in 
forests and without roads, gave the insurgents an enormous 
advantage over the royal troops. The rebellion was not finally 
suppressed until Baville had constructed roads throughout this 
almost savage country. 

Montrevel adopted a policy of extermination, and 466 villages 
were burned in the Upper Cevennes alone, the population being 
for the most part put to the sword. Pope Clement XL assisted 
in this work by issuing a bull against the " execrable race of the 
ancient Albigenses," and promising remission of sins to the holy 
militia which was now formed among the Catholic population, 
and was called the Florentines, Cadets of the Cross or White 
Camisards. Villars, the victor of Hochstadt and Friedlingen, 
saw that conciliation was necessary; he took advantage of the 
feeling of horror with which the quiet Protestants of Nimes and 
other towns now regarded the war, and published an amnesty. 
In May 1704 a formal meeting between Cavalier and Villars took 
place at Nimes. The result of the interview was that a document 
entitled Tres humble requite des reformes du Languedoc au Roi was 
despatched to the court. The three leading requests for liberty 
of conscience and the right of assembly outside walled towns, for 
the liberation of those sentenced to prison or the galleys under the 
revocation, and for the restitution to the emigrants of their 
property and civil rights, were all granted, — the first on condition 
of no churches being built, and the third on condition of an oath 
of allegiance being taken. The greater part of the Camisard army 
under Roland, Ravenel and Joany would not accept the terms 
which Cavalier had arranged. They insisted that the edict of 
Nantes must be restored, — "point de paix, que nous n'ayons nos 
temples." They continued the war till January 1705, by which 
time all their leaders were either killed or dispersed. 

In 1 709 Mazel and Claris, with the aid of two preaching women, 
Marie Desubas and Elizabeth Catalon, made a serious effort to 
rekindle revolt in the Vivarais. In 1711 all opposition and all 
signs of the reformed religion had disappeared. On the 8th 
of March 1715, by medals and a proclamation, Louis XIV. 
announced the entire extinction of heresy. 

What we know of the spiritual manifestations in the Cevennes 
(which much resembled those of the Swedish Raestars of Smaland 
in 1844) is chiefly derived from Le Thedtre sacre des Cevennes, 
London, 1707, reprinted at Paris in 1847; A Cry From the Desert, 
&c, by John Lacy, London, 1707; La Clef des propheties de M. 
Marion, London, 1707; Avertissements prophetiques d'Elie 
Marum, &c, London, 1707. About the date of these publications 
the three prophets of the Cevennes, Marion, Durand-Fage and 
Cavalier (a cousin of the famous Jean Cavalier) were in London 
and were objects of lively curiosity. The consistory of the French 
church in the Savoy sent a protest to the lord mayor against 
" cette secte impie et extra vagante " and the matter was tried at 
the Guildhall. Misson, author of the Thi&tre sacre, declared in 
defence of the accused, that the same spirit which had caused 
Balaam's ass to speak could speak through the mouths of these 
prophets from the Cevennes. Marion and his two friends Fatio, 
a member of the Royal Society of London, and Daud6, a leading 
savant, who acted as his secretaries, were condemned to the 
pillory and to the stocks. Voltaire relates (Siecle de Louis XIV. 
c. 36) that Marion wished to prove his inspiration by attempting 
to raise a dead body (Thomas Emes) from St Paul's churchyard. 
He was at last compelled to leave England. 1 

The inspiration (of which there were four degrees, avertissement, 

1 This curious affair provoked a lengthy controversy, which is 
described in " La Relation historique de ce qui s'est passe a Londres 
au sujet des prophetes camisards " (Republique des Lettres, 1708), 
in the study of M. Vesson, Les Prophetes camisards a Londres (1893), 
and also in the book Les Prophetes cevenols, ch. iii. (1861) by Alfred 
Dubois. 



CAMOENS 



11 5 



swffie, prophitie, dons) was sometimes communicated by a kiss at 
the assembly. The patient, who had gone through several fasts 
three days in length, became pale and fell insensible to the ground. 
Then came violent agitations of the limbs and head, as Voltaire 
remarks, " quite according to the ancient custom of all nations, 
and the rules of madness transmitted from age to age." Finally 
the patient (who might be a little child, a woman, a half-witted 
person) began to speak in the good French of the Huguenot Bible 
words such as these: " Mes freres, amendez-vous, faites penitence, 
la fin du monde approche; le jugement general sera dans trois 
mois;repentez-vousdu grand peche que vous avezcommis d'aller 
a la messe; c'est le Saint-Esprit qui parle par ma bouche " 
(Brueys, Histoire du fanatisme de notre temps, Utrecht, 1737, vol. i. 
p. 153). The discourse might go on for two hours; after which 
the patient could only express himself in his native patois, — a 
Romance idiom, — and had no recollection of his " ecstasy." All 
kinds of miracles attended on the Camisards. Lights in the sky 
guided them to places of safety, voices sang encouragement to 
them, shots and wounds were often harmless. Those entranced 
fell from trees without hurting themselves; they shed tears of 
blood; and they subsisted without food or speech for nine days. 
The supernatural was part of their life. Much literature has been 
devoted to the discussion of these marvels. The Catholics 
Flechier (in his Lettres choisies) and Brueys consider them the 
product of fasting and vanity, nourished on apocalyptic literature. 
The doctors Bertrand (Du magnitisme animal, Paris, 1826) and 
Calmeil (De la folie, Paris, 1845) speak of magnetism, hysteria 
and epilepsy, a prophetic monomania based on belief in divine 
possession. The Protestants especially emphasized the spiritu- 
ality of the inspiration of the Camisards; Peyral, Histoire des 
pasteurs du desert, ii. 280, wrote: " II fallait a cet effort gigan- 
tesque un ressort prodigieux, l'enthousiasme ordinaire n'y eut pas 
sum." Dubois, who has made a careful study of the problem, says: 
" L'inspiration cevenole nous apparait comme un phenomene 
purement spirituel." Conservative Catholics, such as Hippolyte 
Blanc in his book on L'inspiration des Camisards (1859), regard 
the whole thing as the work of the devil. The publication 
of J. F. K. Hecker's work, Die Volkskrankheiten des Mittelalters, 
made it possible to consider the subject in its true relation. This 
was translated into English in 1844 by B. G. Babington as The 
Epidemics of the Middle Ages. 

Although the Camisards were guilty of great cruelties in the 
prosecution of the war, there does not seem to be sufficient ground 
for the charge made by Marshal de Villars: " Le plupart de leurs 
chefs ont leurs demoiselles " (letter of 9th August 1704, in the 
War Archives, vol. 1797). Court replied to these unjust charges: 
" Their enemies have accused them of leading a life of licence 
because there were women in their camps. These were their wives, 
their daughters, their mothers, who were there to prepare their 
food and to nurse the wounded" (Histoire, vol. i.p. 71). 

Bibliography. — The works devoted to the history of the Cami- 
sards are very numerous. Nevertheless there exists no work speci- 
fically devoted to this extremely interesting period in French history, 
for in none of the published works has proper use been made of the 
valuable documents preserved in the archives of the ministry of 
war. Among the chief works are : — Pere Louvreleuil (priest, former 
cure of St. Germain de Calberte), Histoire du fanatisme renouvele oil 
Ton raconte les sacrileges, les maladies et les meurtres commis dans 
les Cevennes (Toulouse, 1704); M. de Brueys, Suite de I'histoire du 
fanatisme de noire temps oil I' on voit les derniers troubles des Cevennes 
(Paris, 1709) ; Lettres choisies de M. Flechier eveque de Nimes avec 
une relation des fanatiques du Vivarez (Paris, 1715); Madame de 
Merez de l'lncarnation, Memoires et journal tres fidele de ce qui s'est 
passe le 11 de may 170J jusqu'au 1 juin 1705 a Nimes touchant les 
phanatiques, published by fi. de Barthelemy (Montpellier, 1874). 
These works are written by Catholic writers immediately after the 
war of the Cevennes, and, despite their partiality, include some 
valuable documents. Memoires du marquis de Guiscard (Delft, 1 705) ; 
Maximilien Misson, Le Theatre sacre des Cevennes ou Recit de diverses 
merveilles nfiuvellement operees dans cette partie de la province de 
Languedoc (London, 1707); Misson, the author of the Voyages en 
Italie, which met with such a great success, gave prominence to 
the facts relating to the inspiration of the Camisards; the Thedtre 
also contains important extracts from the works of Benoit, Brueys, 
Guiscard and Boyer, and several original letters from Camisards; 
Histoire des Camisards, fife. (London, 1740), the anonymous work of a 
distinguished writer, which was eventually condemned by the par- 



lement of Toulouse to be torn up and burnt in 1759; Antoine Court, 
Histoire des troubles des Cevennes (3 vols., 1760), the best work of this 
period, compiled from numerous manuscript references. The war of the 
Cevennes has been treatedin several English works, e.g. A Compleat 
History of the Cevennes, giving a Particular Account of the Situation, 
fife., by a doctor of civil law (London, 1703). This work includes 
a dedication to the queen, an historical account of the people of the 
Cevennes, the bull of Pope Clement against the Camisards, and the 
bishop of Nimes's mandate publishing the bull, and a discourse on 
the obligations of the English to help the Camisards, and a form of 
prayer used in the Camisard assembly, printed in London in 1703 
under the title Formulaire de prieres des Cevennols dans leurs as- 
semblies. The History of the Rise and Downfal of the Camisards, fife. 
(London, 1709), dealt with the prophets of the Cevennes in London, 
and is only an abridged translation of Pere Louvreleuil's work. 
Among modern works are, Ernest Moret, Quinze ans du regne de 
Louis XIV (3 vols., 1859), a work which gives a remarkable history 
of the war of the Cevennes; Les Insurges protestants sous Louis XIV, 
studies and unedited documents published by G. Frosterus (1868); 
Memoires de Bonbonnoux, chief Camisard and pastor of the desert, 
published by Vielles (1883); Bonnemere, Histoire de la guerre des 
Camisards (1859). Two popular works are — F\ Puaux, Histoire 
populaire de la guerre des Camisards (1875); Anna E. Bray, The 
Revolt of the Protestants of the Cevennes with some Account of the 
Huguenots of the Seventeenth Century (London, 1870). (F. Px.) 

CAMOENS [Camoes], LUIS VAZ DE (1524-1580), the prince 
of Portuguese poets, sprang from an illustrious and wealthy 
family of Galician origin, whose seat, called the castle of Camoens, 
lay near Cape Finisterre. His ancestor, the poet Vasco Pires 
de Camoens, followed the party of Peter the Cruel of Castile 
against Henry II., and on the defeat of the former had to take 
refuge along with other Galician nobles in Portugal, where he 
founded the Portuguese family of his name. King Fernando 
received him well, and gave him posts of honour and estates, 
and though the master of Aviz sequestered some of these and 
Vasco lost others after the battle of Aljubarrota, where he 
fought on the Spanish side, considerable possessions still remained 
to him. Antao Vaz, the grandfather of Luis, married one of the 
Algarve Gamas, so that Vasco da Gama and Camoens, the dis- 
coverer of the sea route to India and the poet who immortalized 
the voyage in his Lusiads, were kinsmen. Antao 's eldest son 
Simao Vaz was born in Coimbra at the close of the 1 5th century, 
and married Anna de Sa e Macedo, who bore him an only son, 
Luis Vaz de Camoens; thus the poet, like his father and grand- 
father, was a cavalleirofidalgo, that is, an untitled noble. 

Four cities dispute the honour of being his birthplace, though 
Lisbon has the better title; and there is a like dispute about 
the year, which, however, was almost certainly 1524. The poet 
spent his childhood in Coimbra, where his father owned a pro- 
perty, and made his first studies at the college of All Saints, 
designed for " honourable poor students," and there contracted 
friendships with noblemen like D. Goncalo da Silveira and his 
brother D. Alvaro, who were inmates of the nobles' college of 
St Michael. These colleges were offshoots from and attached to 
the Augustinian monastery of Santa Cruz, an important religious 
and scholastic establishment, where the poet's uncle D. Bento 
de Camoens, a virtuous and very learned man, was professed. 
The Renaissance, though late in penetrating into Portugal, had 
by this time definitely triumphed, and the university of Coimbra, 
after its reform in 1537 under the auspices of King John III., 
boasted the best teachers drawn from every country, among 
them George Buchanan. The possession of classical culture 
was regarded as the mark of a gentleman; the colleges of Santa 
Cruz required conversation within the walls to be in Greek or 
Latin, and the university, when it absorbed the colleges, adopted 
the same rule. In these surroundings, aided by a retentive 
memory, Camoens steeped himself in the literature and mytho- 
logy of the ancients, as his works show, and he was thus able in 
after years to perfect the Portuguese language and to enrich it 
with many neologisms of classical origin. It is fortunate, however, 
for his country and his fame that he never followed the fashion 
of writing in Latin; on the contrary, except for his Spanish 
poems, he always employed his native tongue. After completing 
his grammar and rhetoric the poet entered on his university 
course for the degree of bachelor of arts, which lasted for three 
years, from 1539 to 1542, and during this period he met Jorge 



n6 



CAMOENS 



de Montemayor, the author of Diana, who was then studying 
music. He seems to have imbibed much of that encyclopaedic 
instruction to which the humanists aspired, for his writings show 
a very extensive reading, anci his scientific knowledge and faculty 
of observation compelled the admiration of the great Humboldt. 
The thoroughness of his teaching is apparent when we remember 
that he wrote his epic in the fortresses of Africa and Asia, far 
from books, and yet gave proof of acquaintance with universal 
history, geography, astronomy, Greek and Latin literature, and 
the modern poetry of Italy and Spain. Much of the credit for this 
learning must be attributed to the encouragement of D. Bento, 
now prior of Santa Cruz, who became chancellor of the university 
the very year when Camoens entered it. There is a tradition 
that this uncle destined him for the church and caused him to 
study theology. The poet's knowledge of dogma and the Bible, 
his friendly intercourse with the Lisbon Dominicans at the end of 
his life, and the share he is said to have taken in their disputa- 
tions, make the hypothesis a likely one, but he made his own 
choice and preferred a lay life. We have very little verse of his 
Coimbra time, but it seems that he began in the Italian manner, 
following the new classical school of Sa de Miranda (g.u.),and that, 
though attached to the popular muse and well acquainted with 
the national songs and romances, legends and lore, his poetry 
in the old style (medida velha) is mostly of later date. An 
exception may perhaps be found in his Auto after the manner 
of Gil Vicente (q-v.), The Amphitryons, a Portuguese adaptation 
from Plautus which was very well received. At the age of 
eighteen Camoens left Coimbra, bidding adieu to the old city 
in verses breathing the most tender saudade. Lisbon, which 
impressed Cervantes so much as to draw from him a classic 
description in the novel Persiles y Sigismunda, made an even 
greater impression on the youthful Camoens, and the Lusiads 
are full of eulogistic epithets on the city and the Tagus. 

Arriving in 1543, it has been conjectured that he became 
tutor to D. Antonio de Noronha, son of the great noble D. 
Francisco de Noronha, count of Linhares, who had lately returned 
from a French embassy to his palace at Xabregas. The poet's 
birth and talents admitted him to the society of men like D. 
Constantine de Braganza, the duke of Aveiro, the marquis of 
Cascaes, the count of Redondo, D. Manoel de Portugal and 
D. Goncalo da Silveira, son of the count of Sortelha, who died 
a Christian martyr in Monomotapa. At Xabregas Camoens 
must have met Francisco de Moraes (q.v.), who had served as 
secretary to the count of Linhares on his embassy, and there 
he probably read the MS. of Palmeirim; this would explain the 
origin of two of his roundels which are clearly founded on 
passages in the romance. Camoens had had a youthful love 
affair in Coimbra, but on Good Friday of the year 1544 he 
experienced the passion of his life. On that day in some Lisbon 
church he caught sight of D. Catherina de Ataide (daughter of 
D. Antonio de Lima, high chamberlain to the infant D. Duarte), 
who had recently become a lady-in-waiting to the queen. This 
young girl, the Nathercia of his after songs, counted then some 
thirteen years, and was destined to be his Beatrice. To see more 
of her, he persuaded the count of Linhares to introduce him to 
the court, where his poetical gifts and culture ensured him a 
ready welcome, and his fifth idyll, addressed to his patron on 
this occasion, paved the way for his entrance. Though inferior 
to his later compositions, it excels in harmony any verse pre- 
viously written in Portuguese. At first his suit probably met 
with few difficulties, and if Catherina's family regarded it 
seriously, their poverty, combined with the fact that the poet 
came of a good stock and had the future in his hands, may have 
prevented any real opposition. It was his own imprudence that 
marred his fortunes, and his consciousness of this fact gave his 
muse that moving expression, truth and saudade, which are 
lacking in the somewhat artificial productions of the sentimental 
Petrarch. But while Camoens gained protectors and admirers, 
his temperament and conduct ensured him envious foes, and the 
secret of his love got out and became the subject of gossip. All 
was not smooth with the lady, who showed herself coy; now 
yielding to her heart, she was kind; and then listening to her 



friends, who_ would have preferred a better match for her, she 
repelled her lover. Jealousy then seized him, and sick of court 
life for the moment, he gladly accompanied his patron to the 
latter's country house; but once there he recognized that 
Lisbon, was the centre of attraction for him and that he could 
not be happy at -a distance. His verses at this time reveal his 
parlous condition. He oscillates between joy and depression. 
He passes from tender regrets to violent outbursts, which are 
followed by calm and peace, while expressions of passionate love 
alternate with bold desires and lofty ambitions. It is clear that 
there was an understanding between him and Catherina and 
that they looked forward to a happy ending, and this encouraged 
him in his weary waiting and his search for a lucrative post 
which would enable him to approach her family and ask for her 
hand. From this period date the greater part of his roundels and 
sonnets, some of the odes and nearly all the eclogues. 

His fifth eclogue shows that he was seriously thinking of his 
patriotic poem in 1544; and from the fourth it seems likely 
that the Lusiads were in course of composition, and that cantos 
3 and 4 were practically completed. He had by now established 
his fame and was known as the Lusitanian Virgil, but presently 
he had a rude awakening from his dreams of love and glory. 
He had shown his affection too openly, and some infraction of 
court etiquette, about which the queen was strict, caused the 
tongue of scandal to wag; perhaps it was an affair with one of 
Catherina's brothers, even a duel, that led to the decree which 
exiled him from Lisbon. 

Camoens's rashness, self-confidence and want of respect for 
the authorities all contributed to the penalty, and the composi- 
tion of the play El Rei Seleuco would aggravate his offence in the 
eyes of John III. Produced in 1545 and derived from Plutarch, 
the plot was calculated to draw attention to the relations between 
the king and his stepmother, and to recall the action of D. Manoel 
in robbing his son John III. of his intended bride. Camoens 
composed it for a wedding festivity in the house of Estacio da 
Fonseca, and some of the verses refer so openly to his passion, 
that if, as is likely, he spoke them himself, emphasizing them 
with voice and gesture so as to publish his love to the world, this 
new boldness, combined with the subject of the piece, must have 
rendered his exile a certainty. All we know definitely, however, 
is that the court was henceforth closed to him, and in 1546 he had 
to leave Lisbon, the abode of his love and the scene of his 
triumph. Tradition says that he went to the Ribatejo and 
spent seven or eight months with his mother's relatives in or 
near Santarem, whence he poured out a number of his finest 
poems, including his Elegy of Exile and some magnificent 
sonnets, which, in vigour of ideas and beauty of expression, 
exceeded anything he had hitherto produced. Poets cannot live 
on bays, however, and pressed by necessity he determined to 
become a soldier. 

One of his best modern biographers thinks that he petitioned 
the king for liberty to commute his penalty into military service 
in Africa; but whether this be so, or whether he merely went 
there to gain his spurs, certain it is that in the autumn of 1547 he 
proceeded to Ceuta. For the next two years, the usual period of 
service there, he lived the routine life of a common soldier in this 
famous trade emporium and outpost-town, and he lost his right 
eye in a skirmish with the Moroccans, though some writers 
make the incident occur on the voyage across the straits when 
his ship was attacked by Sallee rovers. Elegy ii. and a couple 
of odes date from his stay in Ceuta. He is full of sadness and 
almost in despair, but is saved from suicide by love and memory 
of the past. He has intervals of calm and resignation, even of 
satirical humour, and these become more frequent as the term of 
his exile draws near, and in one of them he wrote his prose 
letter to a " Lisbon friend." The octaves on the Discontent of the 
World, which breathe a philosophic equanimity and lift the reader 
out of the tumult of daily life, go to show that his restless heart 
had found peace at last and that he had accustomed himself to 
solitude. 

In November 1549 the aged governor of Ceuta, D. Affonso de 
Noronha, was summoned to court and created viceroy of India, 



CAMOENS 



117 



and Camoens accompanied him to Lisbon, intending to follow him 
to the East in the armada which was due to sail in the spring of 
1550. Reaching the capital in December, the poet almost 
immediately enlisted, but when the time came for departure he 
had changed his mind. His affection for Catherina and dreams 
of literary glory detained him, and he lived on in the expecta- 
tion of obtaining a post on the strength of his services and wound. 
But month after month passed by without result, and in his 
disappointment he allied himself with a group of hot-blooded 
youths, including the ex-friar Antonio Ribeiro, nicknamed 
" the Chiado," after whom the main street of Lisbon takes its 
name, and endeavoured to forget his troubles in their society. 
He took part in their extravagances and gained the name of 
" Trinca-fortes " (" Crack-braves ") from his bohemian com- 
panions, while there were ladies who mocked at his disfigurement, 
dubbing him " devil " and " eyeless face." In the course of his 
adventures he had often to draw his sword, either as attacker or 
attacked, and he boasted that he had seen the soles of the feet of 
many but none had seen his. When the reply to his application 
came from the palace it was a negative one, and he had now 
nothing further to expect. His stock of money brought from 
Ceuta was certainly exhausted, and misery stared him- in the face, 
making him desperate. On the feast of Corpus Christi, the 1 6th 
of June 1552, he found two masked friends of his engaged in a 
•Street fight near St Dominic's convent, and joining in the fray he 
wounded one Goncalo Borges, a palace servant, with the result 
that he was apprehended and lodged in gaol. This unprovoked 
attack upon a royal servant on so holy a day constituted a serious 
offence and cost him eight months' imprisonment. In a pathetic 
sonnet he describes his terrible experiences, which made such an 
impression on him that years afterwards he recurred to them in 
his great autobiographical Canzon 10. When Borges' wound was 
completely healed, the poet's friends intervened to assist him, 
and it was arranged that on his formally imploring pardon 
Borges should grant it and desist from proceeding with the case. 
This was effected on the 13 th of February 1553, and on the 7 th 
of March the king, taking into consideration that Camoens was 
" a youth and poor and decided to serve this year in India," 
confirmed the pardon. He had been obliged to humble his pride 
and enlist again, but while he complained of his troubles he 
recognized, in his frank, honest way, that his own mistakes were 
in part the causes of them. 

After bidding good-bye to Catherina for the last time, Camoens 
set sail on Palm Sunday, the 24th of March 1553, in the " S. 
Bento," the flagship of a fleet of four vessels, under Fernao 
Alvares Cabral. His last words, he says in a letter, were those of 
Scipio Africanus, " Ingrata patria, non possidebis ossa mea." 

He relates some of his experiences on board and the events 
of the voyage in various sonnets in Elegy iii. and in the Lusiads. 
In those days the sailors navigated the ships, while the men-at- 
arms kept the day and night watches, helped in the cleaning and, 
in case of necessity, at the pumps, but the rank of Camoens 
doubtless saved him from manual work. He had much time to 
himself in his six months' voyage and was able to lay in a store of 
nautical knowledge, while tempestuous weather off the Cape of 
Good Hope led him to conceive the dramatic episode of Adamastor 
{Lusiads, canto 5). The " S. Bento," the best ship of the fleet, 
weathered the Cape safely, and without touching at Mozambique, 
the watering-place of ships bound for India, anchored at Goa in 
September. It seems probable that the idea of the Lusiads 
took further shape on the voyage out, and that Camoens modified 
his plan; cantos 3 and 4 were already written, but from an 
historical he now made it a maritime epic. The discovery of 
India became the main theme, while the history of Portugal was 
interlaced with it, and the poem ended with the espousals 
between Portugal and the ocean, and a prophecy of the future 
greatness of the fatherland. 

At the time of his arrival Goa boasted 100,000 inhabitants, 
and with its magnificent harbour was the commercial capital of 
the west of India. The first viceroy had been content with a sea 
dominion, but the great Affonso de Albuquerque saw that this 
was not enough to secure the supremacy of the Portuguese; 



recpgnizing the strategic value "of Goa, he seized it and made it 
the capital of a land empire, and built fortresses in every important 
point through the East. Since his death a succession of remark- 
able victories had made the flag of Portugal predominant, but 
the enervating climate, the pleasures and the plunder of Asia, 
began to tell on the conquerors. Corruption was' rife from the 
governor downwards, because the ruling ambition was to get 
rich and return home, and the hero of one day was a pirate the 
next. After all, it was only human nature, for a governorship 
lasted but three years and Portugal was far away, so the saying 
went round — " They are installed the first year, they rob the 
second, and then pack up in the third to sail away." Camoens 
was well received at first, owing to his talents and bravery, and 
he found the life cheap and merry, but having left his country 
with high ideals, the injustice and demoralization of manners 
he found in India soon disgusted him. He compared Goa to 
Babylon, and called it " the motherof villains and the stepmother 
of honest men." 

His first military service in the East took place in November 
1 553, when he went with a force led by the viceroy to chastise a 
petty king on the Malabar coast. The expedition only lasted 
two or three months, and after some trivial combats it returned 
to Goa. In February of the following year Camoens accom- 
panied the viceroy's son, D. Fernando de Menezes, who led an 
armada to the mouth of the Red Sea and thence up the Arabian 
coast to snap up hostile merchantmen and suppress piracy. 
Next the fleet went on to Ormuz, as was the custom with these 
annual cruises, and then to Bassora, where the poet helped to 
make some valuable prizes, and wrote a sonnet — it was ever, 
with him, " in one hand the sword, in the other the pen " ! 
Returning to Goa in November he learnt of the deaths of Prince 
John, and of his friend and pupil the young D. Antonio de 
Noronha, and paid his tribute in a feeling sonnet and eclogue. 
In February 1555 he sailed on another pirate hunt and spent 
six weary months off Cape Guardafui, varied by a visit to 
Mombasa and by further work on his epic, and only got back to 
Goa in the following September. His experiences are recorded 
in the profound and sad 10th Canzon. 

Meanwhile Francisco Barreto, an honourable and generous 
man, had become governor-general of India in the June of 1555, 
and, his appointment being popular, a reign of festivities began 
in Golden Goa to welcome his succession, in the course of which 
Camoens produced his Filodemo, a dramatized novel written in 
his court days. The same occasion probably gave birth to the 
Disparates na India (" Follies of India "), and certainly to the 
Satyr a do Torneio (" Satire of the Tourney "), which confirmed 
the poet's reputation as a sayer of sharp things and gave con- 
siderable umbrage to those whom the cap fitted. However, it 
Was not the enmities thus aroused but military duty which 
compelled him to quit Goa once more in the spring of 1556. He 
had enlisted in Lisbon for five years, the usual term, and in 
compliance with the orders of the governor he sailed for the 
Moluccas in April and there fought and versified for two years, 
though nearly all is guesswork at this period of his life. He 
appears to have spent the time between September 1556 and 
February 1557 in the island of Ternate, where he wrote Canzon 
6, revealing a state of moral depression similar to that of 
Canzon 10, and he perhaps visited Banda and Amboina. In the 
following year he took part in the military occupation of Macao, 
which the emperor of China had presented to the Portuguese in 
return for their destruction of a pirate fleet which had besieged 
Canton. The poet's five years' term of service was now over, 
and he remained at Macao many months waiting for a ship to 
carry him back to India. He had made some profit out of the 
Merct de Viagem, granted by the governor Barreto to free him 
from the poverty in which he habitually lived, and he spent his 
money royally. At the same time he continued his epic, working 
in the grotto which still bears his name. 

All seemed to be going smoothly with him until suddenly his 
fortunes took a serious turn for the worse. As the result of an 
intrigue the captain of the yearly ship from China to India, who 
acted as governor of Macao during his stay in port, imprisoned 



n8 



CAMOENS 



Camoens, and took him on board with a view of bringing him to 
trial in India. The ship, however, was wrecked in October 1559 
at the mouth of the Mekong river, and the poet had to save his 
life and his Lusiads by swimming to shore, and though he 
preserved the six or seven finished cantos of the poem, he lost 
everything else. While wandering about on the Cambodian 
coast awaiting the monsoon and a vessel to take him to Malacca, 
he composed those magnificent stanzas " By the Waters of 
Babylon," called by Lope de Vega " the pearl of all poetry," 
in which he recalls the happy days of his youth, sighs for Lisbon 
(Sion) and his love, and mourns his long exile from home. He 
got somehow to Malacca, and after a short stay there reached 
Goa, still as prisoner, in June 1561. He was straightway lodged 
in gaol, where he heard for the first time of the death of Catherina, 
and he poured out his grief in the great sonnet, Alma Minha 
Gentil. The viceroy, D. Constantius de Braganca, had recently 
returned from Jafanapatam, bringing as prize a tooth of Buddha, 
and Camoens approached him with a splendid epistle in twenty 
octaves, after the manner of Horace's ode to Augustus. It 
failed, however, to hasten the consideration of his case, but in 
September the Conde de Redondo, a good friend, came into 
office and immediately ordered his release from prison. His 
troubles were not yet at an end, however, for one Miguel 
Rodriguez Coutinho, a well-known soldier and citizen of Goa 
who lent money at usurious rates, thought the opportunity a 
good one to obtain repayment of a debt, and had Camoens 
lodged once more in gaol. As soon as he came out the poet 
composed a burlesque roundel satirizing his persecutor under the 
nickname of Fios Seccos (" dry threads "). 

Though very poor he now led an easier, even a pleasant life 
for a time. He was able to see his friends D. Vasco de Ataide, 
D. Francisco de Almeida, Heitor da Silveira, Joao Lopes Leitao 
and Francisco de Mello, all men of family and note. One day he 
invited them to a banquet, at which, instead of the usual dishes, 
each guest was served with a set of witty verses, and after these 
had been read out and chaff had gone round, the food came and 
they formed a merry party. The poet used his interest with the 
viceroy to recommend to him the naturalist Garcia da Orta, 
whose Colloquies on the simples and drugs of the East, the first 
product of the press in India, appeared in April 1563 with an 
ode by Camoens. His life for the next three years is almost a 
blank, but we know that he was hard at work finishing his epic, 
assisted by the advice of the historian Diogo do Couto, who 
became its commentator, and further that the new viceroy, his 
friend D. Antao de Noronha, nominated him to a reversion of 
the factory of Chaul, which, however, never fell into possession. 
It is clear from his writings that fourteen years in the East had 
told on Camoens. His best friends were dead or scattered, and 
he was overwhelmed with saudade. His sole ambition was to go 
home and print his poem, but he had no money to pay his 
passage. In September 1567, however, Pedro Barreto was 
named captain of Mozambique, and insisted on the poet accom- 
panying him to Sofala, at the same time lending him two hundred 
cruzades. It was part of the way home, so Camoens accepted, 
but after they reached Mozambique Barreto called in this money, 
and his debtor, being unable to pay, was detained there for two 
whole years. Here Diogo do Couto found him " so poor that he 
ate at the cost of friends, and in order that he might embark for 
the Kingdom we friends collected for him the clothes he needed 
and some gave him to eat, and that winter he finished perfecting 
the Lusiads for the press and wrote much in a book he was 
making, which he called Parnaso of Luiz de Camoes, a book of 
much learning, doctrine and philosophy, which was stolen from 
him." Thanks to Couto and others, Camoens was able to 
liquidate his debt and set sail in November 1569 in the " Santa 
Clara," and he reached Portugal on the 7th of April 1570, after 
an absence of seventeen years. 

The only wealth he brought with him from India was the MS. 
of his great poem, a " Tesoro del Luso " in the words of Cervantes. 
Moreover, he returned at an unfortunate moment — one of pest 
and famine. The great plague which had killed a quarter, or, as 
some say, half of the population of the capital, was declining, 



but a rigid quarantine prevailed, and the ship had to lie off 
Cascaes until the sanitary authorities allowed her to enter the 
Tagus. Camoens was welcomed by his mother, whom he found 
" very old and very poor " — his father had died at Goa about 
1555 — r and after a visit to Catherina 's tomb, which inspired the 
poignant sonnet 337, he set about obtaining the royal licence 
to print the Lusiads. This was dated the 24th of September 
1571 and gave him a ten years' copyright, and as soon as the 
book appeared some friendly and influential hand, perhaps D. 
Manoel de Portugal, perhaps D. Francisca de Aragao for whom 
he had rhymed in the happy days of his youth, presented the 
national epic to King Sebastian. Shortly afterwards, on the 
28th of July 1572, the king gave the poet a pension of fifteen 
milreis for the term of three years, as a reward for his services 
in India and for his poem. It was relatively a considerable sum, 
seeing that he had no great military record, and it seems even 
generous when we remember that Magellan had only received 
twelve, and had left Portugal because King Manoel would not 
give him a slight increase. , Many functionaries with families 
had less to live on, and Camoens's subsistence was secure for the 
time being, and he could afford an attendant, so that the legend 
of the slave Antonio may well be true. Moreover, he was in the 
enjoyment of the fame his poem brought him. Philip II. is 
said to have read and admired it, and the powerful minister, 
Pedro de Alcacova Carneiro, echoed the general opinion when, 
he remarked that it had only one defect, in not being short 
enough to learn by heart or long enough to have no ending. 
Tributes came from abroad too. Tasso wrote and sent Camoens 
a sonnet in his praise, Fernando de Herrera celebrated him, and 
the year 1580 saw the publication of two Spanish versions, one 
at Alcala, the other at Salamanca. His pension lapsed in 1575, 
but on the 2nd of August it was renewed for a further term; 
owing, however, to a mistake of the treasury officials, Camoens 
drew nothing for about a year and a half and fell into dire distress. 
This explains the story of Ruy da Camara, who had engaged him 
to translate the penitential psalms, and not receiving the version, 
called on the poet, who said in excuse that he had no spirit 
for such work now that he wanted for everything, and that 
his slave had asked him for a penny for fuel and he could not 
give it. 

On the 2nd of June 1 578, just before his start for the expedition 
to Africa which cost him his life and Portugal her independence, 
King Sebastian had renewed the poet's pension for a further 
period. Though Camoens had neither the health nor the means 
to accompany the splendid train of nobles and courtiers who 
followed the last crusading monarch to his doom, he began an 
epic to celebrate the enterprise, but burnt it when he heard the 
news of the battle of Alcacer. Instead, he mourned the death 
of his royal benefactor in a magnificent sonnet, and in Elegy x. 
reproached the cowardly soldiery who contributed to the rout. 
On the 31st of January 1580 the cardinal king Henry died, and, 
foreseeing the Spanish invasion, Camoens wrote in March to bis 
old friend D. Francisco de Almeida: " All will see that I so loved 
my country that I was content not only to die in her but with her." 
A great plague had been raging in Lisbon since the previous year, 
and the poet, who lay ill in his poor cottage in the rua de Santa 
Anna, depressed by the calamities of his country, fell a victim 
to it. He was removed to a hospital and there passed away, 
unmarried and the last of his line, on the 10th of June 1580. 
A Carmelite, Frei Jose Indio, attended him in his last moments 
and received the only recognition Camoens could give, his copy 
of the Lusiads. He wrote afterwards: " What more grievous 
thing than to see so great a genius thus unfortunate. I saw him 
die in a hospital in Lisbon, without a sheet to cover him, after 
having triumphed in the East Indies and sailed 5000 leagues 
by sea." The house of Vimioso supplied the winding-sheet, and 
Camoens was buried with other victims of the plague in a common 
grave in the cemetery of Santa Anna. Years later D. Goncalo 
Coutinho erected in the church of that invocation an in memoriam 
slab of marble with an inscription, and subsequently epitaphs 
were added by other admirers, but the earthquake of 1755 
damaged the building, and all traces of these last acts of homage 



CAMOENS 



119 



to genius have disappeared. The third centenary of the poet's 
death was made the occasion of a national apotheosis; and on the 
8th of June 1880 some remains, piously Relieved to be his, were 
borne with those of Vasco da Gama to the national pantheon> 
theJeronymosatBelem. ; ,i ! 

The masterpiece of Camoens, the Uusiads, is< the epos of dis- 
covery. It is written in hendecasyllabic : ott&va. vimd, and i is 
divided into ten cantos containing in all 1102 stanzas'. Its argu- 
ment is briefly as follows. After an exordium proposing the sub- 
ject \ invoking the Tagus muses and addressing King Sebastian, 
Vasco da Gama's ships are shown sailing up the East. African 
coafston their way to India. At a council of the gods the fate 
of the fleet is discussed, and Bacchus promises to thwart the 
voyage, while Venus and Mars favour the navigators; They 
arrive at Mozambique, where the governor endeavours to destroy 
them by stratagem, and, this failing., Bacchus tries other plots 
against them at Quiloa and Mombasa which are foiled by Venus. 
In answer to her appeal, Jupiter foretells the glorious feats of 
the Portuguese in the East, and sends Mercury to direct the 
voyagers to Melinde, where they are hospitably received and get 
a pilot to guide them to India. The local ruler visits the fleet 
and asks Gama about his country and its history, and in response 
the latter gives an account of the origin of the kingdom of 
Portugal, its kings and principal achievements, ending with the 
incidents of the voyage out. This recital occupies cantos ■ 3, 
4' and 5, and includes some of the most admired and most power- 
ful episodes in the poem, e.g. those of Ighez de Gastro, King 
Manoel's dream of the rivers Ganges and Indus, the speech of 
the old man of Belem and the apparition of Adamastor off the 
Cape of Good Hope. Canto 6 describes the crossing of the Indian 
Ocean from Melinde to Calicut and a fresh hostile attempt on the 
part of Bacchus. He descends to Neptune's palace, and at a 
council of the sea-gods it is resolved to order Aeolus to loose the 
winds against the Portuguese, but the tempest is quelled by Venus 
and her nymphs in answer to Gama' s prayer, and the morning 
light reveals the Ghats of India. Just before the storm, occurs 
the night scene in which Velloso entertains his shipmates with 
the story of the Twelve of England, another of the famous 
episodes. Canto 7 is taken up with the arrival at Calicut, a 
description of the country and the details of Gama's reception 
by the raja. The governor of the city visits the fleet and 
inquires about the pictures on their banners, wnereupon Paulo 
da Gama, Vasco's brother, tells him of the deeds of the early 
Portuguese kings. Meanwhile Bacchus, not to be baulked, appears 
to a priest in the guise of Mahomet, and stirs up the Moslems 
against the Christian adventurers, with the result that the raja 
charges Gama with being a leader of convicts and pirates. To 
this the captain makes a spirited reply and gets his despatch, 
but he has new snares to avoid and further difficulties to over- 
come before he is finally able to set sail on the return voyage. 
Pitying their toils, Venus determines to give the voyagers repose 
and pleasure on their way home, and directs their course to an 
enchanted island, which is described in canto 9, in the longest 
and perhaps the most beautiful episode in the poem. On landing 
they are received by the goddess and her nymphs, and general 
joy ensues, heightened by banquets and amorous play. In a 
prophetic song, the siren tells of the exploits of the Portuguese 
viceroys, governors and captains in India until the time of 
D. John de Castro, after which Tethys ascends a mountain with 
Gama, shows him the spheres after the system of Ptolemy and 
the globe of Asia and Africa, and describes the Indian life of 
St Thomas the apostle. Finally the navigators quit the island 
and reach Lisbon, and an epilogue contains a patriotic exhorta- 
tion to King Sebastian and visions of glory, which ended so 
disastrously at the battle of Alcacer. 

Though the influence of Camoens on Portuguese has been 
exaggerated, it was very considerable, and he so far fixed the 
written language that at the present day it is commonly and not 
inaccurately called " the language of Camoens." The Lusiads 
is the most successful modern epic cast in the ancient mould, 
and it has done much to preserve the corporate life of th.e Portu- 
guese people and to keep alive the spirit of nationality in times 



of adversity like the " Spanish Captivity " and the Napoleonic 
invasion. Even now it forms a powerful bond between the 
mother-country and her potentially mighty daughter-nation 
across the Atlantic, the United States of Brazil. The men of 
the Renaissance saw nothing incongruous in that mixture of 
paganism and Christianity which is found in the Lusiads as in 
Ariosto, though some modern critics, like Voltaire, consider it a 
grave artistic defect in the poem. The fact that the Lusiads 
is written in a little-known language, and its intensely national 
and almost exclusively historical character, undoubtedly militate 
against a right estimate of its value, now that Portugal, once a 
world power, has long ceased to hold the East in fee or to guide 
the destinies of Europe. But though political changes may and 
do react on literary appreciations, the Lusiads remains none 
the less a great poem, breathing the purest religious fervour, 
love of country and spirit of chivalry, with splendid imaginative 
and descriptive, passages full of the truest and deepest poetry. 
The structure is Virgilian, but the whole conception is the 
author's own, while the style is natural and noble, the diction 
nearly always correct and elegant, and the verse, as a rule, 
sonorous and full of harmony. 

■vltt addition to his epic, Camoens wrote sonnets, canzons, odes, 
sextines/ eclogues, elegies, octaves, roundels, letters and comedies. 
The roundels include cartas, motes, voltas, cantigas , trovas, 
pastorals and endechas. In the opinion of many competent 
judges Camoens only attains his true stature in his lyrics; and 
a score of his sonnets, two or three of the canzons, eclogues and 
elegies, and the Babylonian roundels will bear comparison with 
any composition of the same kind that other literatures can show. 
Referring to the Lusiads, A. von Humboldt calls Camoens a 
" great ;maritime painter," but in his best lyrics he is a thinker 
as well as a poet, and when free from the trammels of the epic 
and inherited respect for classical traditions, he reveals a person- 
ality so virile and deep, a philosophy so broad and human, a 
vision so wide, and a form and style so nearly perfect, as not only 
to make him the foremost of Peninsular bards but to entitle him 
to a place in that small company of universal poets of the first 
rank. 

The oldest and most authentic portrait of Camoens appeared 
in 1 624 with his life, by Manoel Severim de Faria. It is a kitcat 
and shows the poet in armour wearing a laurel crown; his right 
hand holds a pen, his left rests on a copy of the Lusiads, while a 
shield above shows the family arms, a dragon rising from between 
rocks; The likeness exhibits a Gothic or northern type, and the 
tradition of his red beard and blue eyes confirms it. Except for 
an ode, sonnet and elegy, all Camoens 's lyrics were published 
posthumously. 

Authorities. — The most modern and most critical biographies 
are those of Dr Theophilo Braga, Camoes, epoca e Vide (Oporto, 
1907), and of Dr Wilhelm Storck, Luis de Camoes Leben (Paderborn, 
1890), while the most satisfactory edition of the complete works is 
due to the Visconde de Juromenha (6 vols., Lisbon, 1860-1869), 
though it contains some spurious matter. While rejecting without 
good reason many of the traditions accepted by Juromenha in his 
life of the poet, Storck embroiders on his own account, and Braga 
must be preferred to him. Two volumes of Innocencio da Silva's 
Diccionario Bibliographico Portuguez (14 and 15) are entirely devoted 
to Camoens and Camoniana, the second of them dealing fully with 
the tercentenary celebrations. Among modern Portuguese studies 
Of the national epic the most important are perhaps Camoes e a 
Renascenca em Portugal, by Oliveira Martins, and Camoes e Senti- 
mento National, by Dr T. Braga (Oporto, 1891). The latter volume 
contains useful information on the various editions of Camoens, 
with an account of the texts and remarks on his plagiarists. Very 
few poets have been so often translated, and a list and estimate of 
the English translations of the Lusiads from the time of Sir Richard 
Fanshawe (1655) downwards, will be found in Sir Richard Burton's 
Camoens: His Life and His Lusiads, which, notwithstanding some 
errors, is a most informing book, and the result of a curious similarity 
of temperament and experience between master and disciple. 
Burton translated the Lusiads (2 vols., London, 1880) and the 
'Lyricks (sonnets, canzons, odes and sextines; 2 vols., London, 
1 884) , and left a version of all the minor works in MS. The accurate 
and readable version of the epic by Mr J. J. Aubertin, with the 
Portuguese text opposite, has gone through two editions (2nd ed., 
2 vols., London, 1884), and there is a version of seventy of the 
sonnets, accompanied by the Portuguese text, by the same author 
(London, 1881). (E. Pr.) 



120 



CAMORRA-^-GAMP 



CAMORRA, a secret society of Naples associated With robbery, 
blackmail and murder. The origin of the name is doubtful. 
Probably both the word and the association were introduced 
into Naples by Spaniards. There is a Spanish word camorra 
(a quarrel), and similar societies seem to have existed in>Spain 
long before the appearance of the Camorra in Naples. It was 
in 1820 that the society first became publicly known. It was 
primarily social, not political, and originated in the Neapolitan 
prisons then filled with the victims of Bourbon misrule and 
oppression, its first purpose being the protection of prisoners. 
In or about 1830 the Camorra was carried into the city by 
prisoners «who had served their terms. The members Worked 
the streets in gangs. They had special methods of communicat- 
ing with each other. They mewed like cats at the approach df 
the patrol, and crowed like cocks when a likely victim approached! 
A long sigh gave warning that the latter was not alone, a sneeze 
meant he was not " worth powder and shot," and so on. The 
society rapidly extended its power, and its queries included
smuggling and blackmail of all kinds in addition to ordinary 
road-robberies. Its influence grew to be considerable. ; Princes 
were in league with and shared the profits of the smugglers: 
statesmen and dignitaries of the church, all classes in fact, were 
involved in the society's misdeeds. From brothels the Camoifra 
drew huge fees, and it maintained illegal lottery offices. The 
general disorder of Naples was so great and the police so badly 
organized that merchants were glad to engage the Gamorrato 
superintend the loading and unloading of merchandise. Being 
non-political, the government did not interfere with the society; 
indeed its members were taken into the police service and the 
Camorra sometimes detected crimes which baffled the' authorities. 
After 1848 the society became political. In i860, when the 
constitution was granted by Francis II., the eamorristi then in 
gaol were liberated in great numbers. The association' became 
all-powerful at elections, and general disorder reigned till 186-2. 
Thereafter severe repressive measures were taken to curtail its 
power. In September 1877 there was a determined effort to 
exterminate it: fifty-seven of the most notorious eamorristi 
being simultaneously arrested in the market-place. ThoUgh 
much of its power has gone, the Camorra has remained vigorous. 
It has grown upwards, and highly-placed and well-known c'arrior- 
risti have entered municipal administrations and political life; 
In 1900 revelations as to the Camorra's power were made iii 
the course of a libel suit, and these led to the dissolution of the 
Naples municipality and the appointment of a royal* commis- 
sioner. A government inquiry also took place. As the result 
of this investigation the Honest Government League was 
formed, which succeeded in 1901 in entirely defeating the 
Camorra candidates at the municipal elections. 

The Camorra was divided into classes. There were the " swell 
mobsmen," the eamorristi who dressed faultlessly and mixed 
with and levied fines on people of highest rank. Most of these 
were well connected. There were the lower order of blackmailers 
who preyed on shopkeepers, boatmen, &c; and there were 
political and murdering eamorristi. The ranks of the society 
were largely recruited from the prisons. A youth had to serve 
for one year an apprenticeship so to speak to a fully admitted 
camorrista when he was sometimes called. picciotlo.d' honore, and 
after giving proof of courage and zeal became a picciotto di 
sgarro, one, that is, of the lowest grade of members. In some 
localities he was then called tamurro. The initiatory ceremony 
for full membership is now a mock duel in which' the arm alone 
is wounded. In early times initiation was more severe. The 
eamorristi stood round a coin laid on the ground, and at a signal 
all stooped to thrust at it with their knives while the novice had ; 
at the same time to pick the coin up, with the result that his hand 
was generally pierced through in several places. The noviciate 
as picciotto di sgarro lasted three years, during which the lad had 
to work for the camorrista who had been assigned to him as \ 
master. After initiation there was a ceremony of reception. 
The eamorristi stood round a table on which were a dagger, ! 
a loaded pistol, a glass of water or wine supposed to be poisoned 
and a lancet. The picciotto was brought in and one of his veins 



opened. Dipping his>haad' in his own blood, he held it out to 
the caihorristii arid swore to, keep .the society's secrets and obey 
orders. < Then he bad t<& stick/the dagger into the table, cock the 
pistol, and hold rthe glass to; his, mouth to shpw his readiness to 
die for the society. His master now bade him kneel before the 
dagger, placed' his right , band on the lad's head while with the 
left he fired'.oflf the pistol into the air and smashed the poison- 
glass. He then drew the dagger from the table and presented 
it to the new comrade: and embraced him, as did all the others, 
The Camorra iwas divided into centres, each; under a chief. 
There ''were twelve at Naples. The society seems at one time 
to have always 1 had a: i supreme chief. The last known was 
Aniello Ansiello, mho finally disappeared and was never arrested. 
The! chief: of every centre was elected by the members of it. All 
the earnings' of the centre were paid to and then distributed by 
him.: The camdrristd' employ, a whole vocabulary of cant terms, 
Their chief is masto or si:masto,' " sir master." When a member 
meets him he salutes with the phrase Masto, voJite niente? 
("Master, do you 'want anything-? "). The members are 
addressed ' simply airf. 

See Mohhier, La 'Camorra (Florence!, 1 r863); Umilta, Camorra et 
Afo/5f»(NeiuGhStet,- 11878)- Alongi, La Camorra (18.90); C. W. 
Heckethorh-i Secret Societies oj Ail Ages (London, 1897) ; Blasio, 
Usi e. costumi dei Camorriste (Naples, 1897), 

GAMP {from Lat. campus, field), a, term used more particularly 
in a military sense, but also generally for a temporarily organized 
place of food^and shelter in open country, as opposed to ordinary 
housing (see Camping-out). The shelter of troops in the 
field has always been of the greatest importance to their well- 
being,' and from the earliest times tents and other temporary 
shelters ; have been employed as much as possible when it is not 
feasible or advisable to; quarter the troops in barracks or in 
houses. The applied sense of. the word " camp " as a military 
post of any kind comes from the practice which prevailed in the 
Roman' ariby of fortifying every encampment. In modern 
warfare the word is' used in two ways. In the wider sense, 
' l 'earrip ! " is opposed to " billets, " " cantonments " or " quarters," 
in which the troops are scattered amongst the houses of towns 
or villages for food- and' shelter. In a purely military camp the 
Soldiers live and' sleep in 1 -an; area of open ground allotted for their 
sole usfe'. They ; are thus kept in a state of concentration and 
readiness for immediate action, and are under better disciplinary 
control than when in quarters, but they suffer more from the 
weather and from the want of comfort and warmth. In the 
restricted Sense " camp " implies tents for all ranks, and is thus 
opposed to " bivouac," in which the only shelter is that afforded 
by improvised screens, &c, or at most small tenles d'abri carried 
in sections by the men themselves. The weight of large regula- 
tion tents and the consequent increase in the number of horses 
and vehicles in the transport service are, however, disadvantages 
so grave that the employment of canvas camps in European 
warfare is ! almost a thing of the past. If the military situation 
permits, all t<roops are put into quarters, only the outpost troops 
bivouacking. This course was pursued by the German field 
armies iti 1870^-1871; even during the winter campaign. 

Circumstances may of course require occasionally a whole 
army to bivouac, but 'in theatres of war in which quarters are 
not to be depended ! upon, tents must be. provided, for no troops 
can endure many successive nights in bivouac, except in summer, 
without serious detriment to their efficiency. In a war on the 
Russo-Gerrhan 'frontier, for instance, especially if queries
were carried Cut in the autumn and winter, tents would be 
■absolutely [ essential at whatever cost of transport. In this 
connexion it may be said that a good railway system obviates 
many of the disadvantages attending the use of tents. For 
training 'purposes in peace time, standing camps are formed. 
TheSe" may be considered simply as temporary barracks. An 
entrenched camp' is an 1 area Of ground occupied by, or suitable 
for, the camps of large bodies of troops, and protected by 
fortifications. ' 

Ancient Camps.— English -writers Use "camp " as a generic 
tefrri for any remains of ancient military posts, irrespective of 



CAMPAGNA I>Ij R0M A---CAMPANELLA 



izi 



their special age, size; purpose, &fc. Thus they include : under it 
various dissimilar things. We may distinguish: (i) Roman 
"camps " (castra) of three kinds, large permanent fortresses^'small 
permanent forts (both usually built' of stone) and temporary 
earthen encampments (see Roman Army)*;. (2) Pre-Roman; 
and (3) Post-Roman camps, such as occur; on: many English 
hilltops. We know far too little, to be able to assign these to 
their special periods. Often we can say no more than that the 
"camp" is not Roman. But we know that enclosures fortified 
with earthen walls were thrown up as early as the! Bronze Age 
and probably earlier still, and that they continued: to be built 
down to Norman times. These consisted of hilltops or cliff f 
promontories or other suitable positions fortified with one or 
more lines of earthen ramparts with ditches, often attaining 
huge size. But the idea,of an artificial elevation seems to have 
come in first with the Normans.. Their mattes or earthen mounds 
crowned with wooden palisades or stone towers and surrounded 
by an enclosure on the flat constituted a new element in 
fortification and greatly aided the conquest of England. (See 
Castle.): ' •;.- ' ! 

CAMPAGNA DI ROMA, the low country siirrounding the 
city of Rome, bounded on the N.W. by> the hills, surrounding 
the lake of Bracciano, ; on the N;E. by the Sabine mountains, 
on the S.E. by the Alban hills, and on the S.W. by the sea. 
(See Latium, and Rome (province).) 

CAMPAIGN, a military term for the continuous queries of
ah army during a wax or part of a war. The name refers to the 
time when armies went into quarters during the winter and 
literally " took the field " at the opening of summer. The word 
is also used figuratively, especially in politics, of any continuous 
queries aimed at a definite object, as the '< Plan of Campaign "
ih Ireland during 1886-1887. The word is derived'from the Latin 
Campania, the plain lying south-west of the Tiber, c.f. Italian, la 
Campagna di Roma, from which came two French forms: (1) 
Champagne, the name given to the level province of that name, 
and hence the English " champaign," a'level- tract of country free 
from woods and hills; and. (2) Campagne, and the' English 
" campaign " with the restricted military meaning. ■ 

CAMPAN, JEANNE LOUISE HENRIETTE (1752-1822), 
French educator, the companion of Marie Antoinette, was born 
atParis in 1752! Her father, whose name was' Genest, was first 
clerk in the foreign office, and, although without fortune, placed 
her in the most cultivated society. At the age of fifteen she could 
speak English and Italian, and had gained so high a reputation 
for her accomplishments as to be appointed reader to the three 
daughters of Louis XV. At court she was a general favourite, and 
.When she bestowed her hand upon M: Campan, son of the 
secretary of the royal cabinet, the kirig gave her an annuity of 
5000 litres as dowry. She was soon' afterwards appointed' first 
lady of the bedchamber by Marie Antoinette; and she continued 
to be her faithful attendant till she -was forcibly separated from 
her at the sacking of the Tuileries on the 20th of June 1792. 
Madame Campan survived the dangers of the Terror, but after 
the oth Thermidor finding herself almost penniless, and being 
thrown on her own resources by the illness of 'her husband, she 
bravely determined to support herself by establishing a school at 
St Germain. The institution prospered, and was patronized by 
Hortense de Beauharnais, whose influence ledto the appointment 
of Madame Campan as superintendent of' the academy founded 
by Napoleon at Ecouen for the education of the daughters' and 
sisters of members of the Legion of Honour: This post she held 
till it was abolished at the restoration of theBourbons, when she 
retired to Mantes, _ where she spent the rest of' her life amid the 
kind attentions of affectionate friends, but saddened by the loss 
of her only son, and by the calumnies circulated on account of her 
connexion with the Bonapartes. Shedifedin 1822, .leaving : valu- 
able M imoires sur la vie priv£e de Marie Antoinette, suivis'de 
souvenirs et anecdotes historiques sur tes regnes de Louis XI.V.-X V. 
(Paris, 1823); a treatise De l' £ducatien 'des •Femmes; and one or 
two small didactic works, written* in a clear and riatural style. 
The most noteworthy thing in her educational system; and that 
vthich especially recommended it to Napoleon, , was the 1 place 



given to domestic economy in the education of girls. At Ecouen 

the pupils underwent a complete training in all branches of 

housework. 

"See Jules Flammermont, Les MSmoires de Madame de Campan 

(Paris, 1 886), and histories of the time. 



CAMPANELLA, TOMMASO (1568-1639), Italian Renaissance 
philosopher, was born at Stilo in Calabria. Before he was thirteen 
years of age he had mastered nearly all the Latin authors pre- 
sented to him. In his fifteenth year he entered the order of the 
Dominicans, attracted partly by reading the lives of Albertus 
Magnus and Aquinas, partly by his love of learning. He took a 
course in philosophy in the convent at Morgentia in Abruzzo, and 
in theology at Cosenza. Discontented with this narrow course of 
study, he happened to read the De Rerum Natura of Bernardino 
Telesio, and was delighted with its freedom of speech and its 
appeal to nature rather than to authority. His first work in 
philosophy (he was already the author of numerous poems) was a 
defence of Telesio, Philosophia sensibus demonstrata (1591). His 
attacks upon established authority having brought him into 
disfavour with the clergy, he left Naples, where he had been 
residing, and proceeded to Rome. For seven years he led an 
unsettled life, attracting attention everywhere by his talents and 
the boldness of his teaching. Yet he was strictly orthodox, and 
was an uncompromising advocate of the pope's temporal power. 
He returned to Stilo in 1598. In the following year he was 
committed to prison because he had joined those who desired to 
free Naples from Spanish tyranny. His friend Naudee, however, 
declares that the expressions used by Campanella were wrongly 
interpreted as revolutionary. He remained for twenty-seven 
years in prison. Yet his spirit was unbroken; he composed 
sonnets, and prepared a series of works, forming a complete 
system of philosophy. During the latter years of his confinement 
he was kept in the castle of Sant' Elmo, and allowed considerable 
liberty. Though, even then, his guilt seems to have been regarded 
as doubtful, he was looked upon as dangerous, and it was thought 
better to restrain him. At last, in 1626, he was nominally set at 
liberty; for some three years he was detained in the chambers of 
the Inquisition, but in 1629 he was free. He was well treated at 
Rome by the pope, but on the outbreak of a new conspiracy 
headed by his pupil, Tommaso Pignatelli, he was persuaded to go 
to Paris (1634), where he was received with marked favour by 
Cardinal Richelieu. The last "few years of his life he spent in 
preparing a complete edition of his works; but only the first 
volume appears to have been published. He died on the 21st of 
May 1639. 

Ih philosophy, Campanella was, like Giordano Bruno (q.v.), 
a follower of Nicolas of Cusa and Telesio. He stands, therefore, 
in the uncertain half-light which preceded the dawn of modern 
philosophy. The sterility of scholastic Aristotelianism, as he 
understood it, drove him to the study of man and nature, 
though he was never entirely free from the medieval spirit. 
Devoutly accepting the authority of Faith in the region of 
theology, he considered philosophy as based on perception. 
The prime fact in philosophy was to him, as to Augustine and 
Descartes, the certainty of individual consciousness. To this 
consciousness he assigned a threefold content, power, will and 
knowledge. It is of the present only, of things not as they are, 
but merely as they seem. The fact that it contains the idea of 
God is the one, and a sufficient, proof of the divine existence, 
since the idea of the Infinite must be derived from the Infinite. 
God is therefore a unity, possessing, in the perfect degree, 
those attributes of power, will and knowledge which humanity 
possesses only in part. Furthermore, since community of action 
presupposes homogeneity, it follows that the world and all its 
parts have a spiritual nature. The emotions of love and hate 
are in everything. The more remote from God, the greater the 
degree of imperfection (i.e. Not-being) in things. Of imperfect 
things, the highest are angels and human beings, who by virtue 
of the possession of reason are akin to the Divine and superior to 
the lower creation. Next comes the mathematical world of 
space,- then the corporeal world, and finally the empirical world 
with its limitations of space and time. The impulse of self- 



122 



CAMPANIA 



preservation in nature is the lowest form of religion; above this 
comes animal religion; and finally rational religion, the perfection 
of which consists in perfect knowledge, pure volition and love, 
and is union with God. Religion is, therefore, not political in 
origin; it is an inherent part of existence. The church is 
superior to the state, and, therefore, all temporal government 
should be in subjection to the pope as the representative 
of God. 

In natural philosophy Campanella, closely following Telesio; 
advocates the experimental method and lays down heat and 
cold as the fundamental principles by the strife of which all life 
is explained. In political philosophy (the Civitas Solis) he 
sketches an ideal communism, obviously derived from the 
Platonic, based on community of wives and property with state- 
control of population and universal military training. In every 
detail of life the citizen is to be under authority, and the authority 
of the administrators is to be based on the degree of knowledge 
possessed by each. The state is, therefore, an artificial organism 
for the promotion of individual and collective good. In contrast 
to More's Utopia, the work is cold and abstract, and lacking in 
practical detail. On the view taken as to his alleged complicity 
in the conspiracy of 1599 depends the vexed question as to 
whether this system was a philosophic dream, or a serious 
attempt to sketch a constitution for Naples in the event of her 
becoming a free city. The De Monorchia Hispanica contains 
an able account of contemporary politics especially Spanish. 

Thus Campanella, though neither an original nor a systematic 
thinker, is among the precursors, on the one hand, of modern 
empirical science, and on the other of Descartes and Spinoza. 
Yet his fondness for the antithesis of Being and Not-being 
(Ens and Non-ens) shows that he had not shaken off the spirit of 
scholastic thought. 

Bibliography. — For his works see Quetif-Echard, appendix to 
E. S. Cypriano, Vita Campanellae (Amsterdam, 1705 and 1722); 
Al. d'Ancona's edition, with introduction (Turin, 1854). The most 
important are De sensu rerum (1620); Realis philosophiae epilo- 
gisticae partes IV. (with Civitas Solis) (1623); Atheismus trium- 
phatus (1631); Phihs. rationalis (1637); Phiios. universalis seu 
metaph. (1637); De Monarchic, Hispanica (1640). For his life, see 
Cypriano (above); M. Baldachini, Vita e filos. di Tommaso Cam- 
panella (Naples, 1840-1853, 1847-1857); Dom. Berti, Lettere inedite 
di T. Campanella e catalogo dei suoi scritti (1878); and Nuovi docu- 
menti di T. C. (1881); and especially L. Amabile, Fra T. Cam- 
panella (3 vols., Naples, 1882). Far his philosophy H.Ritter, History 
of Phiios.; M. Carriere, Phiios. Weltanschauung d. Reformations- 
zeit, pp. 542-608; C. Dareste, Th. Morus et Campanella (Paris, 1843); 
Chr. Sigwart, Kleine Schriften, i. 125 seq.; and histories of philo- 
sophy. For his political philosophy, A. Calenda, Fra Tommaso 
Campanella e la sua dottrina sociale e politica di fronte al socialismo 
modemo (Nocera Inferiore, 1895). His poems, first published by 
Tobias Adami (1622), were rediscovered and printed again (1834) 
by J. G. Orclli; the sonnets were rendered into English verse by 
J. A. Symonds (1878). For a full bibliography see Diet, de thiol, 
cath., col. 1446 (1904). 

CAMPANIA, a territorial division of Italy. The modern 
district (II. below) is of much greater extent than that known 
by the name in ancient times. 

I. Campani was the name used by the Romans to denote the 
inhabitants first of the town of Capua and the district subject to 
it, and then after its destruction in the Hannibalic war (211 B.C.), 
to describe the inhabitants of the Campanian plain generally. 
The name, however, is pre-Roman and appears with Oscan 
terminations on coins of the early 4th (or late 5th) century B.C. 
(R. S. Conway, Italic Dialects, p. 143), which were certainly 
struck for or by the Samnite conquerors of Campania, whom the 
name properly denotes, a branch of the great Sabelline stock 
(see Sabini) ; but in what precise spot the coins were minted is 
uncertain. We know from Strabo (v. 4. 8.) and others that the 
Samnites deprived the Etruscans of the mastery of Campania in 
the last quarter of the 5th century; their earliest recorded 
appearance being at the conquest of their chief town Capua, 
probably in 438 B.C. (or 445, according to the method adopted in 
interpreting Diodorus xii. 31; on this see under Cumae), or 424 
according to Livy (iv. 37). Cumae was taken by them in 428 or 
421, Nola about the same time, and the Samnite language they 
spoke, henceforward known as Oscan, spread oyer a& Campania 



except the Greek cities* though small communities of Etruscans 
remained here and there for at least another century (Conway, 
op. cit. p. 94). The hardy warriors from the mountains took 
ovex not merely the wealth of the Etruscans, but many of their 
customs ; the haughtiness and luxury of the men of Capua was 
proverbial at Rome. This town became the ally of Rome in 
338 B.C. (iLivy viii. 14) and received the civitas sine suffragio, the 
highest status that could be granted to a community which did 
not speak Latin. By the end of the 4th century Campania was 
completely" Roman politically. Certain towns with their terri- 
tories (Neapolis, Nola, Abella, Nuceria) were nominally inde- 
pendent in alliance with Rome. These towns were faithful to 
Rome throughout the Hannibalic war. But Capua and the 
towns dependent- on it revolted (Livy xxiii.-xxvi.) ; after its 
capture in 211 Capua was utterly destroyed, and the jealousy 
and dread with which Rome had long regarded it were both 
finally appeased (cf. Cicero. Z,eg. Agrar. ii. ,88). We have between 
thirty and forty Oscan inscriptions (besides some coins) dating, 
probably, from both the 4th and the 3rd centuries ■ (Conway ( 
Italic Dialects, pp. 100-137 and 148), of which most belong to 
the curious cult described under : Jovixae, while two or three 
are curses written on lead; see Osca Lingua. 

See further Conway, op. Cit. p. 99 ff. ; J. Beloch, Campanien (2nd 
ed,), c. " Capua " ; Th. Mommsen, C.I. I., x. p. 365. (R. S. C.) 

The name Campania was first formed by Greek authors, from 
Campani (see above), and did not come into common use until the 
middle of the 1st century a.d. Polybius and Diodorus avoid it 
entirely., Varro and Livy use it sparingly, preferring Campanus 
ager. Polybius (2nd century B.C.) uses the phrase to, Telia ra 
Kara Kairvriv to express the district bounded on the north by the 
mountains of the Aurunci, on the east by the Apennines of 
Samnium, on the south by the spur of these mountains which 
ends in the peninsula of Sorrento, and on the south and west .by 
the sea, and this is what Campania meant to Pliny and Ptolemy. 
But the geographers of the time of Augustus (in whose division 
of Italy Campania, with Latium, formed the first region) carried 
the north boundary of Campania as far south as Sinuessa, and 
even the river Volturnus, while farther inland the modern village 
of San Pietro in Fine preserves the memory of the north-east 
boundary which ran between Venafrum and Casinum. On the 
east the valley of the Volturnus and the foot-hills of the Apen- 
nines as far as Abellinum formed the boundary; this town is 
sometimes reckoned as belonging to Campania, sometimes to 
Samnium. The south boundary remained unchanged. From 
the time of Diocletian onwards the name Campania was extended 
much farther north, and included the whole of Latium. This 
district was governed by a corrector, who about a.d. 333 received, 
the title oiconsuldris. It is for this reason that the district round 
Rome still bears the name of Campagna di Roma, being no doubt 
popularly connected with Ital. campo, Lat. campus. This district 
(to take its earlier extent), consisting mainly of a very fertile plain 
with hills on the north, east and south, and the sea on the south 
and west, is traversed by two great rivers, the Liris and Vol- 
turnus, divided by the Mons Massicus, which comes right down 
to the sea at Sinuessa. The plain at the mouth of the former is 
comparatively small, while that traversed by the Volturnus is 
the main plain of Campania. Both of these rivers rise in the 
central Apennines,, and only smaller streams, such as the Sarnus, 
Sebethus, Savo, belong entirely to Campania. 

The road system of Campania was extremely well developed 
and touched all , the important towns. The main lines are 
followed (though less completely) by the modern railways. The 
most important road centre of Campania was Capua, at the east 
edge of the plain. At Casilinum, 3 m. to the north-west, was the 
only bridge over the Volturnus until the construction of the Via, 
Domitiana; and here met the Via Appia, passing through 
Minturnae, Sinuessa and Pons Campanus (where it crossed the 
Savo) and the Via Latina which ran through Teanum Sidicinum 
and Cales. At Calatia,, 6 m. south-east of Capua, the Via Appia 
began to tujjn east and to approach the mountains on its way to 
Beneventum, while the Via Popillia went straight on to Nola 
(whence a load ran to Abella and Abellinum) and thence to 



CAMPANIA 



123 



Nuceria Alfaterna and the south, terminating at Regium. From 
Capua itself a road ran north to Vicus Dianae, Caiatia and Telesia, 
while to the south the so-called Via Campana (there is no ancient 
warrant for the name) led to Puteoli, with a branch to Cumae, 
Baiae and Misenum; there was also connexion between Cumae, 
Puteoli and Neapolis (see below), and another road to Atella 
and Neapolis. Neapolis could also be reached by a branch from 
the Via Popillia at Suessula, which passed through Acerrae. 
From Suessula, too, there was a short cut to the Via Appia before 
it actually entered the mountains. Domitian further improved 
the communications of this district with Rome, by the construc- 
tion of the Via Domitiana, which diverged from the Via Appia at 
Sinuessa, and followed the low sandy coast; it crossed the river 
Volturnus at Volturnum, near its mouth, by a bridge, which must 
have been a considerable undertaking, and then ran, still along 
the shore, past Liternum to Cumae and thence to Puteoli. Here 
it fell into the existing roads to Neapolis, the older Via Antiniana 
over the hills, at the back, and the newer, dating from the time 
of Agrippa, through the tunnel of Pausilypon and along the coast. 
The mileage in both cases was reckoned from Puteoli. Beyond 
Naples a road led along the coast through Herculaneum to 
Pompeii, where there was a branch for Stabiae and Surrentum, 
and thence to Nuceria, where it joined the Via Popillia. From 
Nuceria, which was an important road centre, a direct road ran 
to Stabiae, while from Salernum, n m. farther south-east but 
outside the limits of Campania proper, a road ran due north to 
Abellinum and thence to Aeclanum or Beneventum. Teanum 
was another important centre : it lay at the point where the Via 
Latina was crossed at right angles by a road leaving the Via Appia 
at Minturnae, and passing through Suessa Aurunca, while east of 
Teanum, it ran on to Allifae, and there fell into the road from 
venafrum to Telesia. Five miles north of Teanum a road branched 
off to Venafrum from the straight course of the Via Latina, and 
rejoined it near Ad Flexum (San Pietro in Fine). It is, indeed, 
probable that the original road made the detour by Venafrum, 
in order to give a direct communication between Rome and the 
interior of Samnium (inasmuch as roads ran from Venafrum to 
Aesernia and to Telesia by way of Allifae), and Th. Mommsen 
{Corp. Inscrip. Lat. x., Berlin, 1883, p. 699) denies the antiquity 
of the short cut through Rufrae (San Felice a Ruvo), though it is 
shown in Kiepert's map at the end of the volume, with a milestone 
numbered 93 upon it. This is no doubt an error bofh in placing 
and in numbering, and refers to one numbered 96 found on the 
road to Venafrum; but it is still difficult to believe that the short 
cut was not used in ancient times. The 4th and 3rd century 
coins of Telesia, Allifae and Aesernia are all of the Campanian 
type, 

Of the harbours of Campania, Puteoli was by far the most 
important from the commercial point of view. Its period of 
greatest comparative importance was the 2nd-ist century B.C. 
The harbours constructed by Augustus by connecting the Lacus 
Ayernus and Lacus Lucrinus with the sea, and that at Misenum 
(the latter the station of one of the chief divisions of the Roman 
navy, the other fleet being stationed at Ravenna), were mainly 
naval. Naples also had a considerable trade, but was less 
important than Puteoli. 

The fertility of the Campanian plain was famous in ancient as 
in modern times ; 1 the, best portion was the Cainpi Laborini or 
Leborini (called Phlegraei by the Greeks and Terra di Lavoro in 
modern times, though the name has now extended to the whole 
province of Caserta) between the roads from Capua to Puteoli and 
Cumae (Pliny, Hist. Nat. xviii. in). The loose black volcanic 
earth (terra pulla) was easier to work than the stiffer Roman soil, 
and gave three or four crops a year. The spelt, wheat and millet 
are especially mentioned, as also fruit and vegetables; and the 
roses supplied the perfume factories of Capua. The wines of the 
Mons Massicus and of the Ager, Falernus (the flat ground to the 
east and south-cast of it) were the most sought after, though other 
districts also produced good wine; but the olive was better suited 
to the slopes than to the plain, though that of Venafrum was good. 

1 The name Osci — earlier Opsci, Opusci (Gr. 'OttikoL) — presumably 
meant "tillers of the soil." 



The Oscan language remained in use in the south of Campania 
(Pompeii, Nola, Nuceria) at all events until the Social War, but 
at some date soon after that Latin became general, except in 
Neapolis, where Greek was the official language during the whole 
of the imperial period. 

See J. Beloch, Campanien (2nd ed., Breslau, 1890); Conway, 
Italic Dialects,pp. 51-57 ; Ch. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyklo- 
padie, iii. (Stuttgart, 1899), 1434. 

II. Campania in the modern sense includes a considerably 
larger area than the ancient name, inasmuch as to the comparti- 
mento of Campania belong the five provinces of Caserta, Bene- 
vento, Naples, Avellino and Salerno. 

It is bounded on the north by the provinces of Rome, Aquila 
(Abruzzi) and Campobasso (Molise), on the north-east by that of 
Foggia (Apulia), on the east by that of Potenza (Basilica ta) and 
on the south and west by the Tyrrhenian Sea. The area is 6289 
sq. m. It thus includes the whole of the ancient Campania, a 
considerable portion of Samnium (with a part of the main chain 
of the Apennines) and of Lucania, and some of Latium adjedum, 
consisting thus of a mountainous district, the greater part of which 
lies on the Mediterranean side of the watershed, with the extra- 
ordinarily fertile and populous Campanian plain (Terra di Lavoro, 
with 473 inhabitants to the square mile) between the mountains 
and the sea. The principal rivers are the Garigliano or Liri (anc. 
Liris), which rises in the Abruzzi (105 m. in length) ; the Volturno 
(94 m. in length), with its tributary the Calore; the Sarno, which 
rises near Sarno and waters the fertile plain south-east of 
Vesuvius; and the Sele, whose main tributary is the Tanagro, 
which is in turn largely fed by another Calore. The headwaters 
of the Sele have been tapped for the great aqueduct for the 
Apulian provinces. 

The coast-line begins a little east of Terracina at the lake of 
Fondi with a low-lying, marshy district (the ancient Ager 
Caecubus), renowned for its wine (see Fondi). The mountains 
(of the ancient Aurunci) then come down to the sea, and on the 
east side of the extreme promontory to the south-east is the port 
of Gaeta, a strongly fortified naval station. The east side of 
the Gulf of Gaeta is occupied by the marshes at the mouth of the 
Liri, and the low sandy coast, with its unhealthy lagoons, 
continues (interrupted only by the Monte Massico, which reaches 
the sea at Mondragone) past the mouth of the Volturno, as far 
as the volcanic district (no longer active) with its several extinct 
craters (now small lakes, the Lacus Avernus, &c.) to the west of 
Naples, which forms the north-west extremity of the Bay of 
Naples. Here the scenery completely changes: the Bay of 
Naples, indeed, is one of the most beautiful in the world. The 
island of Procida lies 2§ m. south-west of the Capo Miseno, and 
3 m. south-west of Procida is that of Ischia. In consequence 
of the volcanic character of the district there are several import- 
ant mineral springs which are used medicinally, especially at 
Pozzuoli, Castellammare di Stabia, and on the island of Ischia. 

Pozzuoli (anc. Puteoli), the most important harbour of Italy 
in the 1st century B.C., is now mainly noticeable for the large 
armour-plate and gun works of Messrs Armstrong, and for the 
volcanic earth (pozzolana) which forms so important an element 
in concrete and cement, and is largely quarried near Rome also. 
Naples, on the other hand, is one of the most important harbours 
of modern Italy. Beyond it, Torre del Greco and Torre Annun- 
ziata at the foot of Vesuvius, are active trading ports for smaller 
vessels, especially in connexion with macaroni, which is manu- 
factured extensively by all the towns along the bay. Castellam- 
mare di Stabia, on the west coast of the gulf, has a large naval 
shipbuilding yard and an important harbour. Beyond Castel- 
lammare the promontory of Sorrento, ending in the Punta della 
Campanella (from which Capri is 3 m. south-west) forms the 
south-west extremity of the gulf. The highest point of this 
mountain ridge, which is connected with the main Apennine 
chain, is the Monte S. Angelo (4735 ft.). It extends as far east 
as Salerno, where the coast plain of the Sele begins. As in the 
low marshy ground at the mouths of the Liri and Volturno, 
malaria is very prevalent. The south-east extremity of the Gulf 
of Salerno is formed by another mountain group, culminating 



124 



CAMPANI-ALIM&M&— CAMPANILE 



in the Monte Cervati (6229 ft.); and on the east side of this 
is the Gulf of Policastro, where the province of Salerno, and with 
it Campania, borders, on the province of Potenza. 

The population of Campania was 3,080,503 in 1001; that of 
the province of Caserta was 705,412, with a total of 187 com- 
munes, the chief towns being Caserta (32,709), Sta Maria Capua 
Vetere (21,825), Maddaloni (20,682), Sessa Aurunca (21,844); 
that of the province of Benevento was 256,504, with 73 communes, 
the only important town being Benevento itself (24,647); that of 
the province of Naples 1,151,834, with 69 communes, the most 
important towns being Naples ( 5 63 , 540) , Torre del Greco (33,299)) 
Castellammare di Stabia (32,841), Torre Annunziata (28,143), 
Pozzuoli (22,907); that of the province of Avellino (Principato 
Ulteriore in the days of the Neapolitan kingdom) 402,425, with 
128 communes, the chief towns being Avellino (23,760) and 
Ariano di Puglia (17,650); that of the province of Salerno 
(Principato Citeriore) 564,328, with 158 communes, the chief 
towns being Salerno (42,727), Cava dei Tirreni (23,681), Nocera 
Inferiore (19,796). Naples is the chief railway centre: a main 
line runs from Rome through Roccasecca (whence there is a 
branch via Sora to Avezzano, on the railway from Rome to 
Castellammare Adriatico), Caianello (junction for Isernia, on 
the line between Sulmona and Campobasso or Benevento), 
Sparanise (branch to Formia and Gaeta) and Caserta to Naples. 
From Caserta, indeed, there are two independent lines to Naples, 
while a main Jine runs to Benevento and Foggia across the 
Apennines. From Benevento railways run north to Vinchiaturo 
(for Isernia or Campobasso) and south to Avellino. From 
Cancello, a station on one of the two lines from Caserta to Naples, 
branches run to Torre Annunziata, and to Nola, Codola, Mercato, 
San Severino and Avellino. Naples, besides the two lines to 
Caserta (and thence either to Rome or Benevento), has local 
lines to Pozzuoli and Torregaveta (for Ischia) and two lines to 
Sarno, one via Ottaiano, the other via Pompeii, which together 
make up the circum-Vesuvian electric line, and were in connexion 
with the railway to the top of Vesuvius until its destruction in 
April 1906. The main line for southern Italy passes through 
Torre Annunziata (branch for Castellammare di Stabia and 
Gragnano), Nocera (branch for Codola), Salerno (branch for 
Mercato San Severino), and Battipaglia. Here it divides, one 
line going east-south-east to Sicignano (branch to Lagonegro), 
Potenza and Metaponto (for Taranto and Brindisi or the line 
along the east coast of Calabria to Reggio), the other going south- 
south-east along the west coast of Calabria to Reggio. 

Industrial activity is mainly concentrated in Naples, Pozzuoli 
and the towns between Naples and Castellammare di Stabia 
(including the latter) on the north-east shores of the Bay of 
Naples. The native peasant industries are (besides agriculture, 
for which see Italy) the manufacture of pottery and weaving 
with small hand-looms, both of which are being swept away by 
the introduction of machinery; but a government school of 
textiles has been established at Naples for the encouragement of 
the trade. (T. As.) 

CAMPANI-ALIMENIS, MATTEO, Italian mechanician and 
natural philosopher of the 17th century, was born at Spoleto. 
He held a curacy at Rome in 166 1, but devoted himself principally 
to scientific pursuits. As an optician he is chiefly celebrated 
for , the manufacture of the large object-glasses with which 
G. D. Cassini discovered two of Saturn's satellites, and for an 
attempt to rectify chromatic aberration by using a triple eye- 
glass; and in clock-making, for his invention of the illuminated 
dial-plate, and that of noiseless clocks, as well as for an attempt 
to correct the irregularities of the pendulum which arise from 
variations of temperature. Campani published in 1678 a work 
on horology, and on the manufacture of lenses for telescopes. 
His younger brother Giuseppe was also an ingenious optician 
(indeed the attempt to correct chromatic aberration has been 
ascribed to him instead of to Matteo), and is, besides, note- 
worthy as an astronomer, especially for his discovery, by the 
aid of a telescope of his own construction, of the spots in Jupiter, 
the credit of which was, however, also claimed by Eustachio 
Divini. 



CAMPANILE, 1 the r beH tbwer attached to the churches and 
town-halls irrltaly (from campand, a bell). Bells are supposed 
to have been first used for announcing the sacred offices by Pope 
Sabinian (604), the immediate successor to St Gregory; and 
their use by the municipalities came with the rights granted by 
kings and emperors to the citizens to enclose their towns with 
fortifications, arid assemble at the sound of a great bell. It is to 
the Lombard architects of the north of Italy that we are indebted 
for the introduction and development of the campanile, which, 
when used in connexion with a sacred building, is a feature 
peculiar to Christian architecture — Christians alone making use 
of the bell to gather the' multitude to public worship. The 
campanile of Italy serves the same purpose as the tower or 
steeple of the churches in the north and west of Europe, but 
differs from it in design and position with 1 regard to the body of 
the church. It 'is amidst always detached from the church, or 
at most Connected with it by an arcaded passage. As a rule also 
there is hever more than one campanile to a church, with a few 
exceptions, as in S: Ambrogio, Milan; the cathedral of Novara; 
S. Abbondio, Como';' S. Antonio, Padua; and some of the 
churches in south Italy and Sicily. The design differs entirely 
from the northern type; it never has buttresses, is very tall and 
thin in proportion to its height, and as a rule rises abruptly from 
the ground without base or plinth mouldings undiminished to 
the summit; it is usually divided by string-courses into storeys 
of nearly equal height, arid in north and central Italy the wall 
surface is decorated with pilaster strips and arcaded corbel 
strings. Later, the ; square tower was crowned with an octagonal 
turret, sometimes with a conical roof , as in Cremona and Modern 
cathedrals. As a rule the openings increase in number and 
dimensions as theyrise, those at the top therefore giving a light- 
ness to the structure, while the lower portions, with narrow slits 
only, impart solidity to the whole composition. 

The earliest examples are: those of the two churches of S. 
Apollinare in Classe (see Basilica, fig: 8) and S. Apollinare Nuovo 
at Ravenna, dating from the 6th century. They are circular, 
of considerable height, and probably were erected as watch 
towers or depositories for the treasures of the church. The next 
in order are those in Rome, of which there are a very large 
number in existence, dating from the 8th to the 'nth century. 
These towers are square and in several storeys, the lower part 
quite plain 'till well above the church to which they are attached. 
Above this they are; divided into storeys by brick cornices carried 
on stone corbels, generally taken from ancient buildings, the 1 
lower storeys with blind arcades and the upper storeys with open 
arcades. The earliest on record was one connected with St 
Peter's, to the atrium of which, in the middle of the 8th century, 
a bell-toweT overlaid with gold was added. One of the finest is 
that of S. Maria-in-Cosmedin, ascribed to the 8th or 9th century. 
In the lower part of it are embedded some ancient columns of the 
Composite Order belonging to the Temple of Ceres. The tower 
is 1 20 ft. high, the upper part' divided into seven storeys, the four 
upper ones with open arcades,' the bells being hung in the second 
from the top. The arches of the arcades, two or three in number, 
are recessed in two orders and rest on long impost blocks (their 
length equal to the thickness of the wall above), carried by a 
mid- wall shaft/ This type of arcade or window is found in early 
German work, except that, as a rule, there is a capital under the 
impost block. Rome is probably the source from which the 
Saxon windows were derived, the example in Worth church being 
identically' the same as those in the Roman campanili. In the 
campanile o'f'S. Alessio there are two arcades in each storey, each 
divided with a mid-wall shaft. Among others, those of SS. 
Giovanni e Paolo, S. Lorenzo in Lucina 1 , S. Francesca Romana, 
S. Croce in Gerusalemme, S. Giorgio in Velabro (fig. 1) , S. Cecilia, 
S. Pudenziana, S. Bartolommeo in Isola (982), S. Silvestro in 
Capite, are characteristic examples. On some of the towers are 
encrusted plaques of marble or of red or green porphyry, enclosed 
in a tile or moulded brick border; sometimes these plaques are 
in majolica' with Byzantine patterns. 

The early campanili of the north of Italy are of quite another 
type, the north campanile of S. Ambrogio, Milan (11 29), being 



(CAMPANILE 



125 



decorated with vertical flat >pilastei strips, four 'on each face', and 
horizontal ; arcaded corbel strings. Of- earlier date {879), the 
campanile of S. Satiro at Milan is in perfect preservation; it is 
divided into four storeys by. arched corbel tables, the upper 
storey having a similar arcade with mid-wall shaft to those in 
■Rome. One of the most notable examples in north Italy is the 
campanile of Pomposa near FeWara. It is of immense height 
and has nine storeys crowned with a lofty conical' spire, the wall 
face being divided vertically with pilaster strips- and' horizontally 




From a photograph by Alinari. i ,' • : .: 

Fig. 1. — Campanile of S. Giorgio in- Velabro, Rome.. 

with arcaded corbel tables,— this campanile^ the two towers of 
S; : Antonio, Padua, and that of S. Gottardo, Milan, of octagonal 
plan, being among the few which are thus terminated. In the 
campanile at-Torcello we find an entirely different treatment: 
doubly recessed pilaster-strips divide each face into two lofty- 
blind arcades rising from the ground to the belfry storey, over 
100 ft. high, with small slits for windows, ':the upper or belfry 
storeyhaving an arcade of four arches' on'each front. ; This is the 
type generally adopted in the campanili of Venice, where there 
are no string-courses. Thecampanilie of St Mark's wais of "similar 
design, with four lofty blind arcades on each face. The lower 
portion, built in brick, 162 ft. high,' was commenced in 002 but 



not completed till the middle of the 12th century. In 15 10 a 

belfry storey was added with an open arcade of four arches on 

each face, and slightly set back from the face of the tower above 

was a mass of masonry with pyramidal roof, the total height 

being 320 ft. On the 14th of July 1902 the whole structure 

collapsed; its age, the great weight of the additions made in 

1510, and probably the cutting away inside of the lower part, 

would seem to have been the principal contributors to this 

disaster, as the pile 

foundations were found to 

be in excellent condition. 
In central Italy the two 

fcarly campanili at Lucca 

return to the Lombard 

type of the north, with 

pilaster strips and arcaded 

Corbel strings, and the 

same is found in S. Fran- 
cesco (Assisi), S. Frediano 

(Lucca), S. Pietro-in- 

Grado and S. Michele- 

in-Orticaia (Pisa), and S. 

Maria-Novella (Florence). 

The campanile of S. Nic- 

cola, Pisa, is octagonal on 

plan, with a lofty blind 

arcade on each face like 

those in Venice, but with 

3 single string-course half- 

wayup. The gallery 

above is an open eaves 

gallery like those in north 

Italy. 

In southern Italy the 

design of the campanile 

varies again. In the two 

more important examples 

at Bari and Molfetta, there 

are two towers in each case 

attached to the east end 

of the cathedrals. The 

campanili are . in plain 

masonry, the storeys being 

suggested only by blind 

arches or windows, there 

being' neither pilaster 

strips nor string-courses. 

The same treatment is 

found at B arietta and 

Caserta Vecchia; in the 
; latter the upper storey has 
. been made octagonal with 

circular turrets at each 

angle, and this type of 

design is followed at 
■ Amalfi, the centre portion . 

being circular instead of 

octagonal and raised much 

higher. In Palermo the From a photograph by Brogi. 

campanile of the Marto- Fig. 2.— Campanileof St Mark's, Venice. 

rana, of which the two lower storeys, decorated with three concen- 
; trie blind pointed arches on each face, probably date from the 

Saracenic occupation, has angle turrets on the two upper storeys. 

The upper portions of the campanile of the cathedral have 
I similar angle turrets, which, crowned with conical roofs, group 
: well with the central octagonal spires of the towers. The two 

towers -of the west front of the cathedral at Cefalu resemble 
i those of Bari and Molfetta as regards their treatment. 

The campanili of S. Zenone, Verona, and the cathedrals of 

Siena and Prato, differ from those already mentioned in that 

they owe their decoration to the alternating courses of black 

andwhite marble. Of this type by far the most remarkable so 




126 



CAMPANILE 



far as its marble at^oration is concerned is Giotto's campanile at 
Florence, built in 1334. It measures 275 ft. high, 45 ft. square, 
and is encased in black, white and red marble, with occasional 
sculptured ornament. The angles are emphasized by octagonal 
projections, the panelling of which seems to have ruled that of 
the whole structure. There are five storeys, of which the three 
upper ones are pierced -with windows; twin arcades side by side 




From a photograph by Alinari. 

Fig. 3. — Giotto's Campanile, Florence. 

in the two lower, and a lofty triplet window with tracery in the 
belfry stage. A richly corbelled cornice crowns the structure, 
above which a spire was projected by Giotto, but never carried 
out. 

The loftiest campanile in Italy is that of Cremona, 396 ft. 
high. Though built in the second half of the 13th century, and 
showing therefore Gothic influence in the pointed windows of the 
belfry and two storeys below, and the substitution of the pointed 



for the semicircular arch of the arcaded corbel string-courses, it 
follows the Lombard type in its general design, and the same is 
found in the campanile of S. Andrea, Mantua. In the 16th 
century an octagonal lantern in two strings crowned with a 
conical roof was added. Owing to defective foundations, some 
of the Italian campanili incline over considerably; of these 
leaning towers, those of the Garisendi and Asinelli palaces at 
Bologna form, con- 
spicuous objects in 
the town; the two 
more remarkable ex- 
amples are the cam- 
panile of S. Martino 
at Este, of early 
Lombard type, and 
the leaning tower at 
Pisa, which was built 
by the citizens in 
1 1 74 to rival that of 
Venice. The Pisa 
tower is circular on 
plan, about 51 ft. in 
diameter and 172 ft. 
high. Not including 
the belfry storey, 
which is set back on 
the inner wall, it is 
divided into seven 
storeys all sur- 
rounded with an open 
gallery or arcade. 
(See Architecture, 
Plate I. fig. 62.) 
Owing to the sinking 
of the piles on the 
south side, the in- 
clination was already 
noticed when the 
tower was about 30 
ft. high, and slight 
additions in the 
height of the masonry 
on that side were in- 
introduced to correct 
the level, but with- 
out result, so that 
the . works were 
stopped for many 
years and taken up 
again in 1234 under 
the direction of 
William of Inns- 
bruck; he also at- 
tempted to rectify 
the levels by increas- 
ing the height of 
the masonry on the 
south side. At a 

later period the bel- F <* m a photograph by Alinari. 

fry storey was added. Fig. 4. — Campanile of the Palazzo del 
The inclination now Signore, Verona, 

approaches 14 ft: out of the perpendicular. The outside is built 
entirely in white marble and is of admirable workmanship, but 
it is a question whether the equal subdivision of the several 
storeys is not rather monotonous. The campanili of the churches 
of S. Nicolas and S. Michele in Orticaia, both in Pisa, are also 
inclined to, a slight extent. 

The campanili hitherto described are all attached to churches, 
but there are others belonging to civic buildings some of which 
are of great importance. The campanile of the town hall of 
Siena risqs to an enormous height, being 285 ft., and only 22 ft. 
wide; it is built in brick and crowned with a battlemented 




"«ssS 



MflttMff 

hKpBp 





CAMPANULA— CAMPBELL, G/ 



parapet carried on machicolation corbels, 16 ft. high, all in stone, 
and a belfry storey above set back behind the face of the tower. 
The campanile of the Palazzo Vecchio at Florence is similarly 
crowned, but it does not descend to the ground, being balanced 
in the centre of the main wall of the town hall. A third example 
is the fine campanile of the Palazzo-del-Signore at Verona, fig. 4, 
the lower portion built in alternate courses of brick and stone 
and above entirely in brick, rising to a height of nearly 250 ft., 
and pierced with putlog holes only. The belfry window on each 
face is divided into three lights with coupled shafts. An octagonal 
tower of two storeys rises above the corbelled eaves. 

In the campanili of the Renaissance in Italy the same general 
proportions of the tower are adhered to, and the style lent itself 
easily to its decoration; in Venice the lofty blind arcades were 
adhered to, as in the campanile of the church of S. Giorgio dei 
Greci. In that of S. Giorgio Maggiore, however, Palladio re- 
turned to the simple brickwork of Verona, crowned with a 
belfry storey in stone, with angle pilasters and columns of the 
Corinthian order in antis, and central turret with spire above. 
In Genoa there are many examples; the quoins are either 
decorated with rusticated masonry or attenuated pilasters, with 
or without horizontal string-courses, always crowned with a 
belfry storey in stone and classic cornices, which on account of 
their greater projection present a fine effect. (R. P. S.) 

CAMPANULA (Bell-flower), in botany, a genus of plants 
containing about 230 species, found in the temperate parts 
of the northern hemisphere, chiefly in the Mediterranean region. 
The name is taken from the bell-shaped flower. The plants 
are perennial, rarely annual or biennial, herbs with spikes or 
racemes of white, blue or lilac flowers. Several are native in 
Britain; Campanula rotundijolia is the harebell (q.v.) or Scotch 
bluebell, a common plant on pastures and heaths, — the delicate 
slender stem bears one or a few drooping bell-shaped flowers; 
C. Rapunculus, rampion or ramps, is a larger plant with a 
panicle of broadly campanulate red-purple or blue flowers, and 
occurs on gravelly roadsides and hedgebanks, but is rare. It 
is cultivated, but not extensively, for its fleshy roots, which 
are used, either boiled or raw, as salad. Many of the species 
are grown in gardens for their elegant flowers; the dwarf forms 
are excellent for pot culture, rockeries or fronts of borders. 
C. Medium, Canterbury bell, with large blue, purple and white 
flowers, is a favourite and handsome biennial, of which there 
are numerous varieties. C. persicifolia, a perennial with more 
open flowers, is also a well-known border plant, with numerous 
forms, including white and blue-flowered and single and double. 
C. glomerata, which has sessile flowers crowded in heads on the 
stems and branches, found native in Britain in chalky and dry 
pastures, is known in numerous varieties as a border plant. 
C. pyramidalis, with numerous flowers forming a tall pyramidal 
inflorescence, is a handsome species. There are also a number 
of alpine species suitable for rockeries, such as C. alpina, cauca- 
sica, caespitosa and others. The plants are easily cultivated. 
The perennials are propagated by dividing the roots or by young 
cuttings in spring, or by seeds. 

CAMPBELL, ALEXANDER (1788-1866), American religious 
leader, was born near Ballymena, Co. Antrim, Ireland, on the 
12th of September 1788, and was the son of Thomas Campbell 
(1763-1854), a schoolmaster and clergyman of the Presbyterian 
" Seceders." Alexander in 1809, after a year at Glasgow 
University, joined his father in Washington, Pennsylvania, 
where the elder Campbell had just formed the Christian Associa- 
tion of Washington, " for the sole purpose of promoting simple 
evangelical Christianity." With his father's desire for Church 
unity the son agreed. He began to preach in 1&10, refusing any 
salary; in 1811 he settled in what is now Bethany, West 
Virginia, and was licensed by the Brush Run Church, as the 
Christian Association was now called. In 1812, urging baptism 
by immersion upon his followers by his own example, he took his 
father's place as leader of the Disciples of Christ (q.v., popularly 
called Christians, Campbellites and Reformers). He seemed 
momentarily to approach the doctrinal position of the Baptists, 
but by his statement, " I will be baptized only into the primitive 



127 

Christian faith," by his iconoclastic preaching and his editorial 
conduct of The Christian Baptist (1823-1830), and by the tone 
of his able debates with Paedobaptists, he soon incurred the 
disfavour of the Redstone Association of Baptist churches in 
western Pennsylvania, and in 1823 his followers transferred 
their membership to the Mahoning Association of Baptist 
churches in eastern Ohio, only to break absolutely with the 
Baptists in 1830. Campbell, "who in 1829 had been elected to 
the Constitutional Convention of Virginia by his anti-slavery 
neighbours, now established The Millennial Harbinger (1830- 
1865), in which, on Biblical grounds, he opposed emancipation, 
but which he used principally to preach the imminent Second 
Coming, which he actually set for 1866, in which year he died, 
on the 4th of March, at Bethany, West Virginia, having been for 
twenty-five years president of Bethany College. He travelled, 
lectured, and preached throughout the United States and in 
England and Scotland; debated with many Presbyterian 
champions, with Bishop Purcell of Cincinnati and with Robert 
Owen; and edited a revision of the New Testament. 

See Thomas W. Grafton's Alexander Campbell, Leader of the Great 
Reformation of the Nineteenth Century (St Louis, 1897). 

CAMPBELL, BEATRICE STELLA (Mrs Patrick Campbell) 
(1865- ), English actress, was born in London, her maiden 
name being Tanner, and in 1884 married Captain Patrick 
Campbell (d. 1900). After having appeared on the provincial 
stage she first became prominent at the Adelphi theatre, London, 
in 1892, and next year created the chief part in Pinero's Second 
Mrs Tanqueray at the St James's, her remarkable impersonation 
at once putting her in the first rank of English actresses. For 
some years she displayed her striking dramatic talent in London, 
playing notably with Mr Forbes Robertson in Davidson's For 
the Crown, and in Macbeth; and her Magda (Royalty, 1900) 
could hold its own with either Bernhardt or Duse. In later 
years she paid successful visits to America, but in England 
played chiefly on provincial tours. 

CAMPBELL, GEORGE (1719-^6), Scottish theologian, was 
born at Aberdeen on the 25th of December 1719. His father, the 
Rev. Colin Campbell, one of the ministers of Aberdeen, the son of 
George Campbell of Westhall, who claimed to belong to the Argyll 
branch of the family, died in 1728, leaving a widow and six 
children in somewhat straitened circumstances. George, the 
youngest son, was destined for the legal profession, and after 
attending the grammar school of Aberdeen and the arts classes 
at Marischal College, - he was sent to Edinburgh to serve as an 
apprentice to a writer to the Signet. While at Edinburgh he 
attended the theological lectures, and when the term of his 
apprenticeship expired, he was enrolled as a regular student in 
the Aberdeen divinity hall. After a distinguished career he was, 
in 1746, licensed to preach by the presbytery of Aberdeen. From 
1748 to 1 757 he was minister of Banchory Ternan, a parish on the 
Dee, some 20 m. from Aberdeen. He then transferred to Aber- 
deen, which was at the time a centre of considerable intellectual 
activity. Thomas Reid was professor of philosophy at King's 
College; John Gregory (1724-1773), Reid's predecessor, held the 
chair of medicine; Alexander Gerard (1728-1795) was professor 
of divinity at Marischal College; and in 1760 James Beattie 
(j735~ l8o 3) became professor of moral philosophy in the same 
college. These men, with others of less note, formed themselves 
in 1 7 58 into a society for the discussions of questions in philosophy. 
Reid was its first secretary, and Campbell one of its founders. It 
lasted till about 1773, and during this period numerous papers 
were read, particularly those by Reid and Campbell, which were 
afterwards expanded and published. 

In 1 7 59 Campbell was made principal of Marischal College. In 
1763 he published his celebrated Dissertation on Miracles, in 
which he seeks to show, in opposition to Hume, that miracles are 
capable of proof by testimony, and that the miracles of Christi- 
anity are sufficiently attested. There is no contradiction, he 
argues, as Hume said there was, between what we know by 
testimony and the evidence upon which a law of nature is based; 
they are of a different description indeed, but we can without 
inconsistency believe that both are true. The Dissertation is not 



128 



CAMPBELL, J— CAMPBELL, LORD 



a complete treatise upon miracles, but with all deductions it was 
and still is a valuable contribution to theological literature. In 
1 77 1 Campbell was elected professor of theology at Marischal 
College, and resigned his city charge, although he still preached 
as minister of Greyfriars, a duty then attached to the chair. His 
Philosophy of Rhetoric, planned at Banchory Ternan years before, 
appeared in 1776, and at once took a high place among books on 
the subject. In 1778 his last and in some respects his greatest 
work appeared, A New Translation of the Gospels. The critical 
and explanatory notes which accompanied it gave the book a 
high value. 

In 1795 he was compelled by increasing weakness to resign the 
offices he held in Marischal College, and on his retirement he 
received a pension of £300 from the king. ' He died on the 3 1st of 
March 1796. 

His Lectures on Ecclesiastical History were published after his 
death with a biographical notice by G. S. Keith ; there is a uniform 
edition of his works in 6 vols. 

CAMPBELL, JOHN (1708-1775), Scottish author, was born at 
Edinburgh on the 8th of March 1708. Being designed for the 
legal profession, he was sent to Windsor, and apprenticed to an 
attorney; but his tastes soon led him to abandon the study of 
law and to devote himself entirely to literature. In 1736 he 
published the Military History of Prince Eugene and the Duke 
of Marlborough, and soon after contributed several important 
articles to the Ancient Universal History. In 1742 and 1744 
appeared the Lives of the British Admirals, in 4 vols., a popular 
work which has been continued by other authors. Besides 
contributing to the Biographia Britannica and Dodsley's Pre- 
ceptor, he published a work on The Present State of Europe, 
consisting of a series of papers which had appeared in the Museum. 
He also wrote the histories of the Portuguese, Dutch, Spanish, 
French, Swedish, Danish and Ostend settlements in the East 
Indies, and the histories of Spain, Portugal, Algarve, Navarre 
and France, from the time of Clovis till 1656, for the Modern 
Universal History. At the request of Lord Bute, he published a 
vindication of the peace of Paris concluded in 1763, embodying 
in it a descriptive and historical account of the New Sugar 
Islands in the West Indies. By the king he was appointed agent 
for the provinces of Georgia in 1 7 5 5 . His last and most elaborate 
work, Political Survey of Britain, 2 vols. 4to, was published in 
1744, and greatly increased the author's reputation. Campbell 
died on the 28th of December 1775. He received the honorary 
degree of LL.D. from the university of Glasgow in 1745. 

CAMPBELL, JOHN CAMPBELL, Baron (1779-1861), lord 
chancellor of England, the second son of the Rev. George Campbell, 
D.D., was born on the 17th of September 1779 at Cupar, Fife, 
where his father was for fifty years parish minister. For a few 
years Campbell studied at the United College, St Andrews. In 
1800 he was entered as a student at Lincoln's Inn, and, after a 
short connexion with the Morning Chronicle, was called to the 
bar in 1806, and at once began to report cases decided at nisi 
prius (i.e. on jury trial) . Of these Reports he published altogether 
four volumes, with learned notes; they extend from Michaelmas 
1807 to Hilary 1816. Campbell also devoted himself a good deal 
to criminal business, but in spite of his unceasing industry he 
failed to attract much attention behind the bar; he had changed 
his circuit from the home to the Oxford, but briefs came in slowly, 
and it was not till 1827 that he obtained a silk gown and found 
himself in that " front rank " who are permitted to have political 
aspirations. He unsuccessfully contested the borough of Stafford 
in 1826, but was elected for it in 1830 and again in 1831. In the 
House he showed an extraordinary, sometimes an excessive zeal 
for public business, speaking on all subjects with practical sense, 
but on none with eloquence or spirit. His main object, however, 
like that of Brougham, was the amelioration of the law, more by 
the abolition of cumbrous technicalities than by the assertion of 
new and striking principles. 

Thus his name is associated with the Fines and Recoveries 
Abolition Act 1833; the Inheritance Act 1833; the Doweir Act 
1833; the Real Property Limitation Act 1833; the Wills Act 
1837 ; one of the Copyhold Tenure Acts 1841 ; and the Judgments 



Act 1838. All these measures were important and were carefully- 
drawn; but their merits cannot be explained in a biographical 
notice. The second was called for by the preference which the 
common law gave to a distant collateral over the brother of the 
half-blood' of the first purchaser; the fourth conferred an 
indefeasible title on adverse possession for twenty years (a term 
shortened by Lord Cairns in 1875 to twelve years); the fifth 
reduced the number of witnesses required by law to attest wills, 
and removed the vexatious distinction which existed in this 
respect between freeholds and copyholds; the last freed an 
innocent debtor from imprisonment only before final judgment 
(or on what was termed mesne process), but the principle stated 
by Campbell that only fraudulent debtors should be imprisoned 
was ultimately given effect to for England and Wales in 1869. ' 
In one of his most cherished objects, however, that of Land 
Registration (q.v.), which formed the theme of his maiden speech 
in parliament, Campbell was doomed to disappointment. His 
most important appearance as member for Stafford was in defence 
of Lord John Russell's first Reform Bill (1831). In a temperate 
and learned speech, based on Fox's declaration against constitu- 
tion-mongering, he supported both the enfranchising and the 
disfranchising clauses, and easily disposed of the cries of " cor- 
poration robbery,"" nabob representation," " opening for young 
men of talent," &c. The following year (1832) found Campbell 
solicitor-general, a knight and member for Dudley, which he 
represented till 1834. In that year he became attorney-general 
and was returned by Edinburgh, for which he sat till 1841. 2 

His political creed declared upon the hustings there was that 
of a moderate Whig. He maintained the connexion of church 
and state, and opposed triennial parliaments and the ballot. 
In parliament he continued to lend the most effective help to the 
Liberal party. .His speech in 1835 in support of the motion for 
inquiry into the Irish Church temporalities with a view to their 
partial appropriation for national purposes (for disestablishment 
was not then dreamed of as possible) contains much terse argu- 
ment, and no doubt contributed to the fall of Peel and the 
formation of the Melbourne cabinet. The next year Campbell 
had a fierce encounter with Lord Stanley in the debate which 
followed the motion of T. Spring Rice(af terwards Lord Monteagle) 
on the repair and maintenance of parochial churches and chapels. 
The legal point in the dispute (which Campbell afterwards made 
the subject of a separate pamphlet) was whether the church- 
wardens of the parish, in the absence of the vestry, had any means 
of enforcing a rate except the antiquated interdict or ecclesiastical 
censure. It was not on legal technicalities, however, but on the 
broad principle of religious equality, that Campbell supported 
the abolition of church rates, in which he included the Edinburgh 
annuity-tax. 

In the same year he spoke for Lord Melbourne, in the action 
(thought by some to be a political conspiracy 3 ) which the Hon. 
G. C. Norton brought against the Whig premier for criminal 
conversation with his wife. At this time also he exerted himself 
for the reform of justice in the ecclesiastical courts, for the 
uniformity of the law of marriage (which he held should be a 
purely civil contract) and for giving prisoners charged with 
felony the benefit of counsel. His defence of The Times news- 
paper, which had accused Sir John Conroy, equerry to the 
duchess of Kent, of misappropriation of money (1838), is chiefly 
remarkable for the Confession — " I despair of any definition of 
libel which shall exclude no publications which ought to be 
suppressed, and include none which ought to be permitted." 
His own definition of blasphemous libel was enforced in the 

1 Two of his later acts, allowing the defendant in an action for libel 
to prove Veritas, and giving a right of action to the representatives of 
persons killed through negligence, also deserve mention. 

2 Greville in his Memoirs says that Campbell got this post on 
condition that he should not expect the ordinary promotion to the 
bench; a condition which, it if were so, he immediately violated by 
claiming the vice-chancellorship on the death of Sir John Leach. 
Pepys (Lord Cottenham) and Bickersteth (Lord Langdale) were both 
promoted to the bench in preference to Campbell. 

3 " There can be no doubt that old Wynton was at the bottom of 
it all, and persuaded Lord Grantley to urge it on for mere political 
purposes." — Greville, iii. 351. 



CAMPBELL, LORD 



129 



prosecution which, as attorney-general, he raised against the 
bookseller H. Hetherington, and which he justified on the singular 
ground that " the vast bulk of the population believe that 
morality depends entirely on revelation; and if a doubt could be 
raised among them that the ten commandments were given by 
God from Mount Sinai, men would think they were at liberty to 
steal, and women would consider themselves absolved from the 
restraints of chastity." But his most distinguished effort at the 
bar was undoubtedly the speech for the House of Commons in 
the famous case of Stockdale v. Hansard, 1837, 7 C. and P. 731. 
The Commons had ordered to be printed, among other papers, 
a report of the inspectors of prisons on Newgate, which stated 
that an obscene book, published by Stockdale, was given to the 
prisoners to read. Stockdale sued the Commons' publisher, and 
was met by the plea of parliamentary privilege, to which, however, 
the judges did not give effect, on the ground that they were 
entitled to define the privileges of the Commons, and that publica- 
tion of papers was not essential to the functions of parliament. 
The matter was settled by an act of 1840. 

In 1840 Campbell conducted the prosecution against John 
Frost, one of the three Chartist leaders who attacked the town 
of Newport, all of whom were found guilty of high treason. We 
may also mention, as matter of historical interest, the case 
before the high steward and the House of Lords which arose out 
of the duel fought on Wimbledon Common between the earl of 
Cardigan and Captain Harvey Tuckett. The law of course was 
clear that the " punctilio which swordsmen falsely do call 
honour " was no excuse for wilful murder. To the astonishment 
of everybody, Lord Cardigan escaped from a capital charge of 
felony because the full name of his antagonist (Harvey Garnett 
Phipps Tuckett) was not legally proved. It is difficult to suppose 
that such a blunder was not preconcerted. Campbell himself 
made the extraordinary declaration that to engage in a duel 
which could not be declined without infamy {i.e. social disgrace) 
was " an act free from moral turpitude," although the law 
properly held it to be wilful murder. Next year, as the Melbourne 
administration was near its close, Plunkett, the venerable 
chancellor of Ireland, was forced by discreditable pressure to 
resign, and the Whig attorney-general, who had never practised 
in equity, became chancellor of Ireland, and was raised to the 
peerage with the title of Baron Campbell of St Andrews, in the 
county of Fife. His wife, Mary Elizabeth Campbell, the eldest 
daughter of the first Baron Abinger by one of the Campbells of 
Kilmorey, Argyllshire, whom he had married in 1821, had in 
1836 been created Baroness Stratheden in recognition of the 
withdrawal of his claim to the mastership of the rolls. The post 
of chancellor Campbell held for only sixteen days, and then 
resigned it to his successor Sir Edward Sugden (Lord St Leonards). 
The circumstances of his appointment and the erroneous belief 
that he was receiving a pension of £4000 per annum for his few 
days' court work brought Campbell much unmerited obloquy. 1 
It was during the period 1 841-1849, when he had no legal duty, 
except the self-imposed one of occasionally hearing Scottish 
appeals in the House of Lords, that the unlucky dream of literary 
fame troubled Lord Campbell's leisure. 2 

Following in the path struck out by Miss Strickland in her 
Lives of the Queens of England, and by Lord Brougham's Lives of 
Eminent Statesmen, he at last produced, in 1849, The Lives of the 
Lord Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal of England, from 
the earliest times till the reign of King George IV., 7 vols. 8vo. 
The conception of this work is magnificent; its execution 
wretched. Intended to evolve a history of jurisprudence from 
the truthful portraits of England's greatest lawyers, it merely 
exhibits the ill-digested results of desultory learning, without a 
trace of scientific symmetry or literary taste, without a spark of 
that divine imaginative sympathy which alone can give flesh and 
spirit to the dead bones of the past, and without which the present 

1 See thereon J. B. Atlay, The Victorian Chancellors (1908), vol. ii. 
p. 174. 

2 In 1842 he published the Speeches of Lord Campbell at the Bar 
and in the House of Commons, with an Address to the Irish Bar as 
Lord Chancellor of Ireland (Edin., Black). 

v. 5 



becomes an unintelligible maze of mean and selfish ideas. : A 
charming style, a vivid fancy, exhaustive research, were not to be 
expected from a hard-worked barrister; but he must certainly 
be held responsible for the frequent plagiarisms, the still more 
frequent inaccuracies of detail, the colossal vanity which obtrudes 
on almost every page, the hasty insinuations against the memory 
of the great departed who were to him as giants, and the petty 
sneers which he condescends to print against his own contem- 
poraries, with whom he was living from day to day on terms of 
apparently sincere friendship. 

These faults are painfully apparent in the lives of Hardwicke, 
Eldon, Lyndhurst and Brougham, and they have been pointed 
out by the biographers of Eldon and by Lord St Leonards. 1 
And yet the book is an invaluable repertory of facts, and must 
endure until it is superseded by something better. It was 
followed by the Lives of the Chief Justices of England, from the 
Norman Conquest till the death of Lord Mansfield, 8vo, 2 vols., 
a book of similar construction but inferior merit. 

It must not be supposed that during this period the literary 
lawyer was silent in the House of Lords. He spoke frequently. 
The 3rd volume of the Protests of the Lords, edited by Thorold 
Rogers (1875), contains no less than ten protests by Campbell, 
entered in the years 1842-1845. He protests against Peel's 
Income Tax Bill of 1842; against the Aberdeen Act 1843, as 
conferring undue power on church courts; against the per- 
petuation of diocesan courts for probate and administration; 
against Lord Stanley's absurd bill providing compensation for 
the destruction of fences to dispossessed Irish tenants; and 
against the Parliamentary Proceedings Bill, which proposed 
that all bills, except money bills, having reached a certain stage 
or having passed one House, should be continued to next session. 
The last he opposed because the proper remedy lay in resolutions 
and orders of the House. He protests in favour of Lord Mont- 
eagle's motion for inquiry into the sliding scale of corn duties; 
of Lord Normanby's motion on the queen's speech in 1843, for 
inquiry into the state of Ireland (then wholly under military 
occupation) ; of Lord Radnor's bill to define the constitutional 
powers of the home secretary, when Sir James Graham opened 
Mazzini's letters. In 1844 he records a solitary protest against 
the judgment of the House of Lords in R. v. Millis, 1844, 
10 Cla. and Fin. 534, which affirmed that a man regularly 
married according to the rites of the Irish Presbyterian Church, 
and afterwards regularly married to another woman by an 
episcopally ordained clergyman, could not be convicted of 
bigamy, because the English law required for the validity of a 
marriage that it should be performed by an ordained priest. 

On the resignation of Lord Denman in 1850, Campbell was 
appointed chief justice of the queen's bench. For this post he 
was well fitted by his knowledge of common law, his habitual 
attention to the pleadings in court and his power of clear state- 
ment. On the other hand, at nisi prius and on the criminal 
circuit, he was accused of frequently attempting unduly to 
influence juries in their estimate of the credibility of evidence. 
It is also certain that he liked to excite applause in the galleries 
by some platitude about the " glorious Revolution " or the 
" Protestant succession." He assisted in the reforms of special 
pleading at Westminster, and had a recognized place with 
Brougham and Lyndhurst in legal discussions in the House of 
Lords. But he had neither t,he generous temperament nor the 
breadth of view which is required in the composition of even a 
mediocre statesman. In 1859 he was made lord chancellor of 
Great Britain, probably on the understanding that Bethell 
should succeed as soon as he could be spared from the House of 
Commons. His short tenure of this office calls for no remark. In 
the same year he published in the form of a letter to Payne Collier 
an amusing and extremely inconclusive essay on Shakespeare's 
legal acquirements. One passage will show the conjectural 

1 It was of this book that Sir Charles Wethercll said, referring to 
its author, " and then there is my noble and biographical friend who 
has added a new terror to death." See Misrepresentations in Camp- 
bell's " Lives of Lyndhurst and Brougham" corrected by St LeonnHs 
(London, 1869). 



130 



CAMPBELL, J. F.— CAMPBELL, T. 



process which runs through the book: " If Shakespeare was 
really articled to a Stratford attorney, in all probability, during 
the five years of his clerkship, he visited London several times 
on his master's business, and he may then have been intro- 
duced to the green-room at Blackfriars by one of his country- 
men connected with that theatre." The only positive piece of 
evidence produced is the passage from Thomas Nash's " Epistle 
to the Gentlemen of the Two Universities," prefixed to Greene's 
Arcadia, 1859, in which he upbraids somebody (not known to 
be Shakespeare) with having left the " trade of Noverint " and 
busied himself with " whole Hamlets " and " handfuls of 
tragical speeches." The knowledge of law shown in the plays 
is very much what a universal observer must have picked up. 
Lawyers always underestimate the legal knowledge of an intelli- 
gent layman. Campbell died on the 23rd of June 1861. It has 
been well said of him in explanation of his success, that he lived 
eighty years and preserved his digestion unimpaired. He had 
a hard head, a splendid constitution, tireless industry, a generally 
judicious temper. He was a learned, though not a scientific 
lawyer, a faithful political adherent, thoroughly honest as a 
judge, dutiful and happy as a husband. But there was nothing 
admirable or heroic in his nature. On no great subject did his 
principles rise above the commonplace of party, nor had he the 
magnanimity which excuses rather than aggravates the faults 
of others. His life was the triumph of steady determination 
unaided by a single brilliant or attractive quality. 

Authorities. — Life of Lord Campbell, a Selection from his Auto- 
biography, Diary and Letters, ed. by Hon. Mrs Hardcastle (1881); 
E. Foss, The Judges of England (1848-1864) ; W. H. Bennet, Select 
Biographical Sketches from Note-books of a Law Reporter (1867); 
E. Manson, Builders of our Law (ed. 1904) ; J. B. Atlay, The Victorian 
Chancellors, vol. ii. (1908). 

CAMPBELL, JOHN FRANCIS, of Islay (1822-1885), Gaelic 
scholar, was born on the 29th of December 1822, heir to the 
beautiful Isle of Islay, on the west coast of Argyllshire. Of this 
inheritance he never became possessed, as the estate had to be 
sold by his father, and he began life under greatly changed 
conditions. Educated at Eton and at Edinburgh University, 
he occupied at various times several minor government posts. 
His leisure was largely employed in collecting, translating and 
editing the folklore of the western Highlands, taken down from 
the lips of the natives. The results of his investigations were 
published in four volumes under the title Popular Tales of the 
West Highlands (1860-1862), and form a most important con- 
tribution to the subject, the necessary precursor to the subse- 
quent Gaelic revival in Great Britain. Campbell was also 
devoted to geology and other scientific pursuits, and he invented 
the sunshine recorder, used in most of the British meteorological 
stations. He died at Cannes on the 17th of February 1885. 

CAMPBELL, JOHN McLEOD (1800-1872), Scottish divine, 
son of the Rev. Donald Campbell, was born at Kilninver, Argyll- 
shire', in 1800. Thanks to his father he was already a good 
Latin scholar when he went to Glasgow University in 181 1. 
Finishing his course in 1817, he became a student at the Divinity 
Hall, where he gained some reputation as a Hebraist. After 
further training at Edinburgh he was licensed as preacher by the 
presbytery of Lome in 182 1. In 1825 he was appointed to the 
parish of Row on the Gareloch. About this time the doctrine 
of Assurance of Faith powerfully influenced him. He began to 
give so much prominence to the universality of the Atonement 
that his parishioners went so far as to petition the presbytery in 
1829. This petition was withdrawn, but a subsequent appeal 
in March 1830 led to a presbyterial visitation followed by an 
accusation of heresy. The General Assembly by which the charge 
was ultimately considered found Campbell guilty of teaching 
heretical doctrines and deprived him of his living. Declining an 
invitation to join Edward Irving in the Catholic Apostolic 
Church, he worked for two years as an evangelist in the High- 
lands. Returning to Glasgow in 1843, he was minister for 
sixteen years in a large chapel erected for him, but he never 
attempted to found a sect. In 1856 he published his famous 
book on The Nature of the Atonement, which has profoundly 
influenced all writing on the subject since his time. His aim is to 



view the Atonement in the light of the Incarnation. The divine 
mind in Christ is the mind of perfect sonship towards God 
and perfect brotherhood towards men. By the light of this 
divine fact the Incarnation is seen to develop itself naturally 
and necessarily as an atonement; the penal element in the 
sufferings of Christ is minimized. Subsequent critics have 
pointed out that Campbell's position was not self-consistent in 
the place assigned to the penal and expiatory element in the 
sufferings of Christ, nor adequate in its recognition of the principle 
that the obedience of Christ perfectly affirms all righteousness 
and so satisfies the holiness of God. In 1859 his health gave way, 
and he advised his congregation to join the Barony church, 
where Norman McLeod was pastor. In 1862 he published 
Thoughts on Revelation. In 1868 he received the degree of D.D. 
from Glasgow University. In 1870 he removed to Roseneath, and 
there began his Reminiscences and Reflections, an unfinished 
work published after his death by his son. Campbell was greatly 
loved and esteemed by a circle of friends, which included Thomas 
Erskine, Norman McLeod, Bishop Alexander Ewing, F. D. 
Maurice, D. J. Vaughan, and he lived to be recognized and 
honoured as a man whose opinion on theological subjects carried 
great weight. In 187 1 a testimonial and address were presented 
to him by representatives of most of the religious bodies in 
Scotland. He died on the 27th of February 1872, and was 
buried in Roseneath churchyard. (D. Mn.) 

CAMPBELL, LEWIS (1830-1908), British classical scholar, 
was born at Edinburgh on the 3rd of September 1830. His 
father, Robert Campbell, R.N., was a first cousin of Thomas 
Campbell, the poet. He was educated at Edinburgh Academy, 
and Glasgow and Oxford universities, He was fellow and tutor 
of Queen's College, Oxford (1855-1858), vicar of Milford, Hants 
(1858-1863), and professor of Greek and Gifford lecturer at the 
university of St Andrews (1863-1894). In 1894 he was elected 
an honorary fellow of Balliol. As a scholar he is best known by 
his work on Sophocles and Plato. His published works include: 
Sophocles (2nd ed., 1879); Plato, Sophistes and Polilicus (1867), 
Theaetetus (2nd ed., 1883), Republic (with Jowett, 1894); Life 
and Letters of Benjamin Jowett (with E. Abbott, 1897), Letters of 
B. Jowett (1899); Life of James Clerk Maxwell (with W. Garnett, 
new ed., 1884); A Guide to Greek Tragedy for English Readers 
(1891) ; Religion in Greek Literature (1898) ; On the Nationalisation 
of the Old English Universities (1901); Verse translations of the 
plays of Aeschylus (1890); Sophocles (1896); Tragic Drama in 
Aeschylus, Sophocles and Shakespeare (1904); Paralipomena 
Sophoclea (1907). He died on the 25th of October 1908. 

CAMPBELL, REGINALD JOHN (1867- ), British Congre- 
gationalist divine, son of a United Free Methodist minister of 
Scottish descent, was born in London, and educated at schools in 
Bolton and Nottingham, where his father successively removed, 
and in Belfast, the home of his grandfather. At an early age he 
taught in the high school at Ashton, Cheshire, and was already 
married when in 189 1 he went to Christchurch, Oxford, where 
he graduated in 1895 in the honours school of modern history. 
He had gone to Oxford with the intention of becoming a clergy- 
man in the Church of England, but in spite of the influence of 
Bishop Gore, then head of the Pusey House, and of Dean Paget 
(afterwards bishop of Oxford), his Scottish and Irish Noncon- 
formist blood was too strong, and he abandoned the idea in order 
to take up work in the Congregational ministry. He accepted a 
call, on leaving Oxford, to the small Congregational church in 
Union Street, Brighton, and quickly became famous there as a 
preacher, so much so that on Joseph Parker's death he was chosen 
as his successor (1903) at the City Temple, London. Here he 
notably enhanced his popularity as a preacher, and became one 
of the recognized leaders of Nonconformist opinion. At the end 
of 1906 he attracted widespread attention by his vigorous 
propagation of what was called the " New Theology," a restate- 
ment of Christian beliefs to harmonize with modern critical 
views and beliefs, and published a book with this title which 
gave rise to considerable discussion. 

CAMPBELL, THOMAS (1777-1844), Scottish poet, eighth son 
of Alexander Campbell, was born at Glasgow on the 27 th of 



CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN 



J 3i 



July 1777. His father, who was a cadet of the family of Campbell 
of Kirnan, Argyllshire, belonged to a Glasgow firm trading in 
Virginia, and lost his money in consequence of the American 
war. Campbell was educated at the grammar school and 
university of his native town. He won prizes for classics and for 
verse-writing, and the vacations he spent as a tutor in the 
western Highlands. His poem " Glenara " and the ballad of 
" Lord Ullin's Daughter " owe their origin to a visit to Mull. In 
May 1797 he went to Edinburgh to attend lectures on law. He 
supported himself by private teaching and by writing, towards 
which he was helped by Dr Robert Anderson, the editor of the 
British Poets. Among his contemporaries in Edinburgh were 
Sir Walter Scott, Henry Brougham, Francis Jeffrey, Dr Thomas 
Brown, John Leyden and James Grahame. To these early 
days in Edinburgh may be referred " The Wounded Hussar," 
" The Dirge of Wallace " and the " Epistle to Three Ladies." 
In 1799, six months after the publication of the Lyrical Ballads 
of Wordsworth and Coleridge, The Pleasures of Hope was pub- 
lished. It is a rhetorical and didactic poem in the taste of his 
time, and owed much to the fact that it dealt with topics near to 
men's hearts, with the French Revolution, the partition of Poland 
and with negro slavery. Its success was instantaneous, but 
Campbell was deficient in energy and perseverance and did not 
follow it up. He went abroad in June 1800 without any very 
definite aim, visited Klopstock at Hamburg, and made his way to 
Regensburg, which was taken by the French three days after his 
arrival. He found refuge in a Scottish monastery. Some of his 
best lyrics, " Hohenlinden," "Ye Mariners of England" and 
" The Soldier's Dream," belong to his German tour. He spent 
the winter in Altona, where he met an Irish exile, Anthony 
McCann, whose history suggested "The Exile of Erin." 1 He 
had at that time the intention of writing an epic on Edinburgh to 
be entitled " The Queen of the North." On the outbreak of war 
between Denmark and England he hurried home, the " Battle of 
the Baltic " being drafted soon after. At Edinburgh he was 
introduced to the first Lord Minto, who took him in the next 
year to London as occasional secretary. In June 1803 appeared 
a new edition of the Pleasures of Hope, to which some lyrics were 
added. 

In 1803 Campbell married his second cousin, Matilda Sinclair, 
and settled in London. He was well received in Whig society, 
especially at Holland House. His prospects, however, were 
slight when in 1805 he received a government pension of £200. 
In that year the Campbells removed to Sydenham. Campbell 
was at this time regularly employed on the Star newspaper, for 
which he translated the foreign news. In 1809 he published a 
narrative poem in the Spenserian stanza," Gertrude of Wyoming," 
with which were printed some of his best lyrics. He was slow and 
fastidious in composition, and the poem suffered from over- 
elaboration. Francis Jeffrey wrote to the author: " Your 
timidity or fastidiousness, or some other knavish quality, will 
not let you give your conceptions glowing, and bold, and powerful, 
as they present themselves; but you must chasten, and refine, 
and soften them, forsooth, till half their nature and grandeur is 
chiselled away from them. Believe me, the world will never 
know how truly you are a great and original poet till you venture 
to cast before it some of the rough pearls of your fancy." In 
181 2 he delivered a series of lectures on poetry in London at the 
Royal Institution; and he was urged by Sir Walter Scott to 
become a candidate for the chair of literature at Edinburgh 
University. In 1814 he went to Paris, making there the acquaint- 
ance of the elder Schlegel, of Baron Cuvier and others. His 
pecuniary anxieties were relieved in 181 5 by a legacy of £4000. 
He continued to occupy himself with his Specimens of the British 
Poets, the design of which had been projected years before. The 
work was published in 1819. It contains on the whole an 
admirable selection with short lives of the poets, and prefixed 
to it an essay on poetry containing much valuable criticism. In 
1820 he accepted the editorship of the New Monthly Magazine, 

'The original authorship of this poem was by many people assigned 
to G. Nugent Reynolds. Campbell's claim is established in Literary 
Remains of the United Irishmen, by R. R. Madden (1887). 



and in the same year made another tour in Germany. Four 
years later appeared his " Theodric," a not very successful poem 
of domestic life. He took an active share in the foundation of 
the university of London, visiting Berlin to inquire into the 
German system of education, and making recommendations 
which were adopted by Lord Brougham. He was elected lord 
rector of Glasgow University three times (1826-1829). In the 
last election he had Sir Walter Scott for a rival. Campbell 
retired from the editorship of the New Monthly Magazine in 1830, 
and a year later made an unsuccessful venture with the Metro- 
politan Magazine. He had championed the cause of the Poles 
in The Pleasures of Hope, and the news of the capture of Warsaw 
by the Russians in 1831 affected him as if it had been the deepest 
of personal calamities. " Poland preys on my heart night and 
day," he wrote in one of his letters, and his sympathy found a 
practical expression in the foundation in London of the Associa- 
tion of the Friends of Poland. In 1834 he travelled to Paris and 
Algiers, where he wrote his Letters from the South (printed 1837). 

The small production of Campbell may be partly explained 
by his domestic calamities. His wife died in 1828. Of his two 
sons, one died in infancy and the other became insane. His own 
health suffered, and he gradually withdrew from public life. 
He died at Boulogne on the 15th of June 1844, and was buried 
in Westminster Abbey. 

Campbell's other works include a Life of Mrs Siddons (1842), and 
a narrative poem, " The Pilgrim of Glencoe " (1842). See The Life 
and Letters of Thomas Campbell (3 vols., 1849), edited by William 
Beattie, M.D. ; Literary Reminiscences and Memoirs of Thomas Camp- 
bell (1 860) , by Cyrus Redding ; ThePoehcal Works of Thomas Campbell 
(1875), in the Aldine Edition of the British Poets, edited by the Rev. 
W. Alfred Hill, with a sketch of the poet's life by William Allingham ; 
and the " Oxford Edition " of the Complete Works of Thomas Campbell 
(1908), edited by J. Logie Robertson. See also Thomas Campbell in 
the Famous Scots Series, by J. C. Hadden, and a selection by 
Lewis Campbell (1904) for the Golden Treasury Series. 

CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN, SIR HENRY (1836-1908), English 
prime minister, was born on the 7th of September 1836, being the 
second son of Sir James Campbell, Bart., of Stracathro, Forfar- 
shire, lord provost of Glasgow. His elder brother James, who 
just outlived him, was Conservative M.P. for Glasgow and 
Aberdeen Universities from 1880 to 1906. Both his father and 
his uncle William Campbell, who had together founded an 
important drapery business in Glasgow, left him considerable 
fortunes; and he assumed the name of Banner'man in 1872, in 
compliance with the provisions of the will of his maternal uncle, 
Henry Bannerman, from whom he inherited a large property in 
Kent. He was educated at Glasgow University and at Trinity 
College, Cambridge (senior optime, and classical honours) ; was 
returned to parliament for Stirling as a Liberal in 1868 (after an 
unsuccessful attempt at a by-election); and became financial 
secretary at the war office (1871-1874; 1880-1882), secretary 
to the admiralty (1882-1884), and chief secretary for Ireland 
(1884-1885). When Mr Gladstone suddenly adopted the cause 
of Home Rule for Ireland, he " found salvation," to use his own 
phrase, and followed his leader. In Mr Gladstone's 1886 ministry 
he was secretary for war, and filled the same office in the Liberal 
ministry of 1892-1895. In the latter year he was knighted 
(G.C.B.). It fell to his lot as war minister to obtain the duke 
of Cambridge's resignation of the office of commander-in-chief; 
but his intended appointment of a chief of the staff in substitution 
for that office Was frustrated by the resignation of the ministry. 
It was an imputed omission on the part of the war office, and 
therefore of the war minister, to provide a sufficient supply of 
small-arms ammunition for the army which on the 21st of June 
1895 led to the defeat of the Rosebery government. Wealthy, 
popular and possessed of a vein of oratorical humour (Mr T. 
Healy had said that he tried to govern Ireland with Scottish 
jokes), Sir Henry had already earned the general respect of all 
parties, and in April 1895, when Mr Speaker Peel retired, his 
claims for the vacant post were prominently canvassed; but 
his colleagues were averse from his retirement from active 
politics and Mr Gully was selected. Though a prominent 
member of the inner Liberal circle and a stanch party man, it 
was not supposed by the public at this time that any ambition 



1^2 



CAMPBELL-BANNERMAN 



for the highest place could be associated with Sir Henry Campbell- 
Bannerman; but the divisions among the Liherals, and the 
rivalry between Lord Rosebery and Sir William Harcourt, made 
the political situation an anomalous one. The very fact that he 
was apparently unambitious of personal supremacy combined 
with his honourable record and experience to make him a safe 
man; and in December 1898, on Sir W. Harcourt's formal 
resignation of the leadership of the Opposition, he was elected 
to fill the position in the House of Commons with the general 
assent of the party. In view of its parliamentary impotence, 
and its legacy of an unpopular Home Rule programme, Sir 
Henry had a difficult task to perform, but he prudently inter- 
preted his duty as chiefly consisting in the effort to keep the 
Radical party together in the midst of its pronounced differences. 
In this he was successful, although the advent of the Boer War 
of 1899-1902 created new difficulties with the Liberal Imperialists. 
The leader of the Opposition from the first denounced the 
diplomatic steps taken by Lord Milner and Mr Chamberlain, 
and objected to all armed intervention or even preparation for 
hostilities. Sir Henry's own tendency to favour the anti-war 
section, his refusal to support the government in any way, and 
his allusion to " methods of barbarism " in connexion with the 
conduct of the British army (June 14, 1901), accentuated the 
crisis within the party; and in 1901 the Liberal Imperialists, 
who looked to Lord Rosebery (q.v.) and Mr Asquith (q.v.) for 
their political inspiration, showed pronounced signs of restiveness. 
But a party meeting was called on the 9th of July, and Sir Henry 
was unanimously confirmed in the leadership. 

The end of the war in 1902 showed the value of his persistency 
throughout the years of Liberal unpopularity and disunion. The 
political conflict once more resumed its normal condition, for the 
first time since 1892. The blunders of the government were open 
to a united attack, andMr Chamberlain's tariff-reform movement 
in 1903 provided a new rallying point in defence of the existing 
fiscal system. In the Liberal campaign on behalf of free trade 
the real leader, however, was Mr Asquith. Sir Henry's own 
principal contribution to the discussion was rather unfortunate, 
for while insisting on the blessings derived by England from its 
free-trade policy, he coupled this with the rhetorical admission 
(at Bolton in 1903) that " 12,000,000 British citizens were under- 
fed and on the verge of hunger." But Lord Salisbury's retire- 
ment, Unionist divisions, the staleness of the ministry, and the 
accumulating opposition in the country to the Education Act of 
1902 and to the continued weight of taxation, together with the 
growth of the Labour movement, and the antagonism to the 
introduction of Chinese coolies (1904) into South Africa under 
conditions represented by Radical spokesmen as those of 
" slavery," made the political pendulum swing back. A Liberal 
majority at the dissolution was promised by all the signs at 
by-elections. The government held on, but collapse was only 
a question of time (see the articles on Balfoijr, A. J., and 
Chamberlain, J.). On the 4th of December 1905 the Unionist 
government resigned, and the king sent for Sir Henry Campbell- 
Bannerman, who in a few days formed his cabinet. Lord 
Rosebery, who until a short time before had seemed likely to 
co-operate, alone held aloof. In a speech at Stirling on the 23rd 
of November, Sir Henry appeared to him to have deliberately 
flouted his well-known susceptibilities by once more writing 
Home Rule in large letters on the party programme, and he 
declared at Bodmin that he would " never serve under that 
banner." Sir Henry's actual words, which undoubtedly influenced 
the Irish vote, were that he " desired to see the effective manage- 
ment of Irish affairs in the hands of a representative Irish 
assembly. If an instalment of representative control was offered 
to Ireland, or any administrative improvement, he would advise 
the Nationalists to accept it, provided it was consistent and led 
up to their larger policy." But if Lord Rosebery once more 
separated himself from the official Liberals, his principal hench- 
men in the Liberal League were included in the cabinet, Mr 
Asquith becoming chancellor of the exchequer, Sir Edward Grey 
foreign secretary, and Mr Haldane war minister. Other sections 
of the party were strongly represented by Mr John Morley as 



secretary for India, Mr Bryce (afterwards ambassador f at 
Washington) as chief secretary for Ireland, Sir R. T. Reid (Lord 
Loreburn) as lord chancellor, Mr Augustine Birrell as education 
minister (afterwards Irish secretary), Mr Lloyd-George as 
president of the Board of Trade, Mr Herbert Gladstone as home 
secretary, and Mr John Burns — a notable rise for a Labour 
leader — as president of the Local Government Board. Lord 
Ripon became leader in the House of Lords; and Lord Elgin 
(colonial secretary) , Lord Carrington(agriculture) , Lord Aberdeen 
(lord lieutenant of Ireland), Sir Henry Fowler (chancellor of the 
duchy of Lancaster), Mr Sidney Buxton (postmaster-general), 
Mr L. V. Harcourt (first commissioner of works), and Captain 
John Sinclair (secretary for Scotland) completed the ministry, 
a place of prominence outside the cabinet being found for Mr 
Winston Churchill as undersecretary for the colonies. In 1907 
Mr R. McKenna was brought into the cabinet as education 
minister. There had been some question as, to whether Sir Henry 
Campbell-Bannerman should go to the House of Lords, but there 
was a decided unwillingness in the party, and he determined to 
keep his seat in the Commons. 

At the general election in January 1906 an overwhelming 
Liberal majority was returned, irrespective of the Labour and 
Nationalist vote, and Sir Henry himself was again elected for 
Stirling. The Liberals numbered 379, the Labour members 51, 
the Nationalists 83 , and the Unionists only 157. His premiership 
was the reward of undoubted services rendered to his party; it 
may be said, however, that, in contradistinction to the prime 
ministers for some time previous, he represented the party, rather 
than that the party represented him. It was not his ideas or 
his commanding personality, nor any positive programme, that 
brought the Liberals back to power, but the country's weariness 
of their predecessors and the successful employment at the 
elections of a number of miscellaneous issues. But as the man 
who had doggedly, yet unpretentiously, filled the gap in the days: 
of difficulty, and been somewhat contemptuously criticized by 
the Unionist press for his pains, Sir Henry was clearly marked 
out for the post of prime minister when his party got its chance; 
and, as the head of a strongly composed cabinet, he satisfied the 
demands of the situation and was accepted as leader by all 
sections. Once prime minister, his personal popularity proved 
to be a powerful unifying influence in a somewhat heterogeneous 
party; and though the illness and death (August 30, 1906) of his 
wife (daughter of General Sir Charles Bruce), whom he had married 
in i860, made his constant attendance in the House of Commons 
impossible, his domestic sorrow excited widespread sympathy 
and appealed afresh to the affection of his political followers. 
This became all the more apparent as his own health failed during 
1907; for, though he was : obliged to leave much of the leadership 
in the Commons to Mr Asquith, his possible resignation of the 
premiership was strongly deprecated; and even after November, 
when it became clear that his health was not equal to active work, 
four or five months elapsed before the necessary change became a 
fait accompli. Personal affection and political devotion had in 
these two years made him appear indispensable to the party, 
although nobody ever regarded him as in the front line of English 
statesmen so far as originality of ideas or brilliance of debating 
power were concerned. It is not the fortune of many more 
brilliant statesmen to earn this testimonial to character. From 
the beginning of the session of 1908 it was evident, however, that 
Mr Asquith, who was acting as deputy prime minister, would 
before long succeed to the Liberal leadership; and on the 5th of 
April Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's resignation was formally 
announced. He died on the 22nd of the same month. He had 
spoken in the House of Commons on the 13 th of February, but 
since then had been prostrated and unable to transact business, 
his illness dating really from a serious heart attack in the night 
of the 13th of November at Bristol, after a speech at the Colston 
banquet. 

From a party-political point of view the period of Sir Henry 
Campbell-Bannerman's premiership was chiefly marked by the 
sontinued controversies remaining from the general election of 
1906, — tariff reform and free trade, the South African question 



CAMPBELTOWN 



*33 



and the allied Liberal policy for abolishing Chinese labour, the 
administration of Ireland, and the, amendment of the Education 
Act of 1902 so as to remove its supposed denominational character. 
In his speech at the Albert Hallon the 21st of December 1005 it 
was noticeable that, before the elections, the prime minister laid 
stress on only one subject which could be regarded as part of a 
constructive programme — the necessity of doing something for 
canals, which was soon shelved to a royal commission. But in 
spite of the fiasco of the Irish Councils Bill (1907), the struggles 
over education (Mr Birrell's bill of 1906 being dropped on account 
of the Lords' amendments), the rejection by the peers of the 
Plural Voting Abolition Bill (1906), and the failure (again due 
to the Lords) of the Scottish Small Holdings Bill and Valuation 
Bill (1907), which at the time made his premiership appear to be 
a period of bitter and unproductive debate, a good many reform- 
ing measures of some moment were carried. A new Small 
Holdings Act (1907) for England was passed; the Trades 
Disputes Act (1906) removed the position of trades unions from 
the controversy excited over the Taff Vale decision; Mr Lloyd- 
George's Patents Act (1907) and Merchant Shipping Act (1906) 
were welcomed by the tariff reformers as embodying their own 
policy; a long-standing debate was closed by the passing of the 
Deceased Wife's Sister Act (1907); and acts for establishing a 
public trustee, a court of criminal appeal, a system of probation 
for juvenile offenders, and a census of production* were passed in 
1907. Meanwhile, though the Colonial Conference (re-named 
Imperial) of 1907 showed that there was a wide difference of 
opinion on the tariff question between the free-trade government 
and the colonial premiers, in one part of the empire the ministry 
took a decided step — in the establishment of a self-governing 
constitution for the Transvaal and Orange River colonies — which, 
for good or ill, would make the period memorable. Mr Haldane's 
new army scheme was no less epoch-making in Great Britain. 
In foreign affairs, the conclusion of a treaty with Russia for 
delimiting the British and Russian spheres of influence in the 
Middle East laid the foundations of entirely new relations between 
the British and Russian governments. On the other hand, so 
far as concerned the ultimate fortunes of the Liberal party, Sir 
Henry Campbell-Bannerman's premiership can only be regarded 
as a period of marking time. He had become its leader as a 
conciliator of the various sections, and it was as a conciliator, 
ready to sympathize with the strong views of all sections of his 
following, that he kept the party together, while his colleagues 
went their own ways in their own departments. His own special 
" leads " were few, owing to the personal reasons given above; 
his declaration at the Queen's Hall, London, early in 1907, in 
favour of drastic land reform, served only to encourage a number 
of extremists; and the Liberal enthusiasm against the House of 
Lords, violently excited in 1906 by the fate of the Education Bill 
and Plural Voting Bill, was rather damped than otherwise, when 
his method of procedure by resolution of the House of Commons 
was disclosed in 1907. The House passed by an enormous 
majority a resolution (introduced on June 25) " that in order to 
give effect to the will of the people, as expressed by their represent- 
atives, it is necessary that the power of the other House to alter 
or reject bills passed by this House should be so restricted by law 
as to secure that within the limits of a single parliament the final 
decision of the Commons shall prevail " ; but the prime minister's 
explanation that statutory provision should be made for two or 
three successive private conferences between the two Houses as 
to any bill in dispute at intervals of about six months, and that, 
only after that, the bill in question should be finally sent up by 
the Commons with the intimation that unless passed in that form 
it would become law over their heads, was obviously not what w r as 
wanted by enthusiastic opponents of the second chamber. The 
problem still remained, how to get the House of Lords to pass a 
" law " to restrict their own powers. After the passing of this 
resolution the cry against the House of Lords rapidly weakened, 
since it became clear at the by-elections (culminating at Peckham 
in March 1908) that the " will of the people " was by no means 
unanimously on the side of the bills which had failed to pass. 
The result of the two years was undoubtedly to revive the 



confidence of the Opposition, who found that they had outlived 
the criticisms of the general election, and both on the question 
of tariff reform and on matters of general politics were again 
holding their own. The failure of the government in Ireland 
(where the only success was Mr Birrell's introduction of the 
Universities Bill in April 1908), their internal divisions as regards 
socialistic legislation, their variance from the views of the self- 
governing colonies on Imperial administration, the admission 
after the general election that the alleged " slavery " of the 
Chinese in the Transvaal was, in Mr Winston Churchill's phrase, 
a " terminological inexactitude," and the introduction of extreme 
measures such as the Licensing Bill of 1908, offered excellent 
opportunities of electioneering attack. Moreover, the Liberal 
promises of economy had been largely falsified, the reductions 
in the navy estimates being dangerous in themselves, while the 
income tax still remained at practically the war level. For 
much of all this the prime minister's colleagues were primarily 
responsible; but he himself had given a lead to the anti-militarist 
section by prominently advocating international disarmament, 
and the marked rebuff to the British proposals at the Hague 
conference of 1907 exposed alike the futility of this Radical 
ideal and the general inadequacy of the prime minister's policy 
of pacificism. Sir Henry's rather petulant intolerance of Unionist 
opposition, shown at the opening of the 1906 session in his 
dismissal of a speech by Mr Balfour with the words " Enough 
of this foolery!" gradually gave way before the signs of Unionist 
reintegration. His resignation took place at a moment when 
the Liberal, Irish and Labour parties were growing restive 
under their obligations, government policy stood in need of con- 
centration against an Opposition no longer divided and making 
marked headway in the country, and the ministry had to 
be reconstituted under a successor, Mr Asquith, towards 
whom, so far, there was no such feeling of personal devotion as 
had been the chief factor in Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman's 
leadership. (H. Ch.) 

CAMPBELTOWN, a royal, municipal and police burgh, and 
seaport of Argyllshire, Scotland. Pop. (1901) 8286. It is 
situated on a fine bay, towards the S.E. extremity of the 
peninsula of Kintyre, n m. N.E. of the Mull and 83 m. 
S.W. of Glasgow by water. The seat of the Dalriad 
monarchy in the 6th or 7 th century, its importance declined 
when the capital was transferred to Forteviot. No memorial 
of its antiquity has survived, but the finely sculptured granite 
cross standing on a pedestal in the market-place belongs to the 
12 th century, and there are ruins of some venerable chapels and 
churches. Through the interest of the Campbells, who are still 
the overlords and from whom it takes its name, it became a 
royal burgh in 1700. It was the birthplace of the Rev. Dr 
Norman Macleod (181 2). The chief public buildings are the 
churches (one of which occupies the site of a castle of the 
Macdonalds), the town house, the Academy and the Athenaeum. 
The staple industry is whisky distilling, of which the annual 
output is 2,000,000 gallons, more than half for export. The 
port is the head of a fishery district and does a thriving trade. 
Shipbuilding, net and rope-making, and woollen manufacturing 
are other industries, and coal is mined in the vicinity. There are 
three piers and a safe and capacious harbour, the bay, called 
Campbeltown Loch, measuring 2 m. in length by 1 in breadth. 
At its entrance stands a lighthouse on the island of Davaar. 
On the Atlantic shore is the splendid golf-course of Machrihanish, 
5 m. distant. Machrihanish is connected with Campbeltown 
by a light railway. Near the village of Southend is Machrireoch, 
the duke of Argyll's shooting-lodge, an old structure modernized, 
commanding superb views of the Firth of Clyde and its islands, 
and of Ireland. On the rock of Dunaverty stood the castle of 
Macdonald of the Isles, who was dispossessed by the Campbells 
in the beginning of the 17th century. At this place in 1647 
General David Leslie is said to have ordered 300 of the 
Macdonalds to be slain after their surrender. Of the ancient 
church founded here by Columba, only the walls remain. 
Campbeltown unites with Ayr, Inveraray, Irvine and Oban in 
sending one member (for the " Ayr Burghs ") to parliament. 



!34 



CAMPE— CAMPER 



CAMPE, JOACHIM HEINRICH (1746-1818), German educa- 
tionist, was born at Deensen in Brunswick in 1746. He studied 
theology at the university of Halle, and after acting for some 
time as chaplain at Potsdam, he accepted a post as director of 
studies in the Philanthropin at Dessau (see Basedow). He 
soon after set up an educational establishment of his own at 
Trittow, near Hamburg, which he was obliged to give up to one 
of his assistants within a few years, in consequence of feeble 
health. In 1787 he proceeded to Brunswick as counsellor of 
education, and purchased the Schulbuchhandlung, which under 
his direction became a most prosperous business. He died in 
1818. His numerous educational works were widely used 
throughout Germany. Among the most popular were the 
Kleine Kinderbibliothek (nth ed., 1815); Robinson der Jilngere 
(59th ed., 1861), translated into English and into nearly every 
European language; and Sammtliche Kinder- undjugendschriften, 
37 vols. 

CAMPECHE (Campeachy), a southern state of Mexico, com- 
prising the western part of the peninsula of Yucatan, bounded 
N. and E. by Yucatan, S. by Guatemala, S.W. by Tabasco and 
N.W. by that part of the Gulf of Mexico designated on English 
maps as the Bay of Campeachy. Pop. (1895) 87,264; (1900) 
86,542, mostly Indians and mestizos. Area, 18,087 sq. m. 
The name of the state is derived from its principal forest product, 
palo de campeche (logwood). The surface, like that of Yucatan, 
consists of a vast sandy plain, broken by a group of low elevations 
in the north, heavily forested in the south, but with open tracts 
in the north adapted to grazing. The northern part is insuf- 
ficiently watered, the rains filtering quickly through the soil. 
In the south, however, there are some large rivers, and the 
forest region is very humid. The climate is hot and unhealthy. 
In the north-west angle of the state is the Laguna de Terminos, 
a large tide-water lake, which receives the drainage of the 
southern districts. Among the products and exports are log- 
wood, fustic, lignum-vitae, mahogany, cedar, hides, tortoise- 
shell and chicle, the last extracted from the zapote chico trees 
{Achras sapota, L.). Stock-raising engages some attention. 
One railway crosses the state from the capital, Campeche, to 
Merida, Yucatan, but there are no other means of transportation 
except the rivers and mule-paths. The port of Carmen (pop. in 
1900, about 6000), on a sand key between the Laguna de Terminos 
and the Gulf, has an active trade in dyewoods and other forest 
products, and owing to its inland water communications with 
the forest areas of the interior is the principal port of the state 
and of Tabasco. - 

CAMPECHE, or Campeche de Baranda, a fortified city and 
port of Mexico, and capital of a state of the same name, situated 
on the Bay of Campeche, 825 m. E. of the city of Mexico and 
90 m. S.W. of Merida, in lat. 20° 5' N., long. oo° 16' W. 
Pop. (1900) 17,109. Campeche was one of the three open ports 
of this coast under the Spanish regime, and its walls, general 
plan, fine public edifices, shady squares and comfortable stone 
residences are evidence of the wealth it once possessed. It is 
still one of the most attractive towns on the Gulf coast of Mexico. 
It had a monopoly of the Yucatan trade and enjoyed large 
profits from its logwood exports, both of which have been largely 
lost. It was formerly the principal port for the state and for a 
part of Yucatan, but the port of Carmen at the entrance to 
Laguna de Terminos is now the chief shipping port for logwood 
and other forest products, and a considerable part of the trade 
of Campeche has been transferred to Progreso, the port of 
Merida. The port of Campeche is a shallow roadstead defended 
by three forts and protected by a stone pier or wharf 160 ft. long, 
but vessels drawing more than 9 ft. are compelled to lie outside 
and discharge cargo into lighters. The exports include logwood, 
cotton, hides, wax, tobacco, salt and cigars of local manufacture. 
The principal public buildings are the old citadel, some old 
churches, the town hall, a handsome theatre, hospital and 
market. The streets are traversed by tramways, and a railway 
runs north-eastward to Merida. Campeche stands on the site 
of an old native town, of which there are interesting remains in 
the vicinity, and which was first visited by Hernandez de 



Cordoba in 1517. The Spanish town was founded in 1540, and 
was sacked by the British in 1659 and by buccaneers in 1678 
and 1685. During the revolution of 1842 Campeche was the 
scene of many engagements between the Mexicans and people 
of Yucatan. 

CAMPEGGIO, LORENZO (1464-1539), Italian cardinal, was 
born at Milan of a noble Bolognese family. At first he followed 
a legal career at Pavia and Bologna, and when in 1499 he took 
his doctorate he was esteemed the most learned canonist in 
Europe. In 1500 he married Francesca de' Gualtavillani, by 
whom he had five children, one of whom, Allessandro, born in 
1504, became cardinal in 1551, and another, Gianbaptista, 
became bishop of Minorca. His wife dying in 1510, he went 
into the church; on account of his services during the rebellion 
of Bologna, he was made by Julius II. auditor of the Rota in 
1511, and sent to Maximilian and to Vienna as nuncio. Raised 
to the see of Feltre in 151 2, he went on another embassy to 
Maximilian in 1513, and was created cardinal priest of San 
Tommaso in Pavione, 27th of June 1517. Leo X., needing a 
subsidy from the English clergy, sent Campeggio to England 
on the ostensible business of arranging a crusade against the 
Turks. Wolsey, then engaged in beginning his reform of the 
English church, procured that he himself should be joined to 
the legation as senior legate; thus the Italian, who arrived in 
England on the 23rd of July 1518, held a subordinate position 
and his special legatine faculties were suspended. Campeggio's 
mission failed in its immediate object; but he returned to Rome, 
where he was received in Consistory on the 28th of November 
1519, with the gift from the king of the palace of Cardinal Adriano 
Castellesi (q.v.), who had been deposed, and large gifts of money 
and furniture. He was made protector of England in the 
Roman curia; and in 1524 Henry VIII. gave him the rich see 
of Salisbury, and the pope the archbishopric of Bologna. After 
attending the diet of Regensburg, he shared the captivity of 
Clement VII. during the sack of Rome in 1527 and did much to 
restore peace. On the 1st of October 1528 he arrived in England 
as co-legate with Wolsey in the matter of Henry's divorce. He 
brought with him a secret document, the Decretal, which defined 
the law and left the legates to decide the question of fact; but 
this important letter was to be shown only to Henry and Wolsey. 
" Owing to recent events," that is, the loss of the temporal power, 
Clement was in no way inclined to offend the victorious Charles V., 
Catherine's nephew, and Campeggio had already received (16th 
of September 1528) distinct instructions " not to proceed to 
sentence under any pretext without express commission, but 
protract the matter as long as possible." After using all means 
of persuasion to restore peace between the king and queen, 
Campeggio had to resist the pressure brought upon him to give 
sentence. The legatine court opened at Blackfriars on the 18th 
of June 1520, but the final result was certain. Campeggio could 
not by the terms of his commission give sentence; so his only 
escape was to prorogue the court on the 23rd of July on the plea 
of the Roman vacation. Having failed to satisfy the king, he 
left England on the 26th of October 1529, after his baggage had 
been searched at Dover to find the Decretal, which, however, had 
been burnt. Returning to Bologna, the cardinal assisted at 
the coronation of Charles V. on the 24th of February 1530, and 
went with him to the diet of Augsburg. He was deprived by 
Henry of the English protectorate; and when sentence was 
finally given against the divorce, Campeggio was deprived of the 
see of Salisbury as a non-resident alien, by act of parliament 
(nth of March 1535); but his rich benefices in the Spanish 
dominions made ample amends. In 1537 he became cardinal 
bishop of Sabina, and died in Rome on the 25th of July 1539. 
His tomb is in the church of S. Maria in Trastevere. (E. Tn.) 

CAMPER, PETER (1722-1789), Dutch anatomist and natural- 
ist, was born at Leiden on the nth of May 1722. He was 
educated at the university there, and in 1746 graduated in 
philosophy and medicine. After the death of his father in 1748 
he spent more than a year in England, and then visited Paris, 
Lyons and Geneva, and returned to Franeker, where in 1750 he 
had been appointed to the professorship of philosophy, medicine 



CAMPHAUSEN— CAMPHORS 



135 



and surgery. He visited England a second time in 1752, and in 
1755 he was called to the chair of anatomy and surgery at the 
Athenaeum in Amsterdam. He resigned this post after six 
years, and retired to his country house near Franeker, in order 
uninterruptedly to carry on his-studies. In 1763, however, he 
accepted the professorship of medicine, surgery and anatomy at 
Groningen, and continued in the chair for ten years. He then 
returned to Franeker, and after the death of his wife in 1776 
spent some time in travelling. In 1762 he had been returned 
as one of the deputies in the assembly of the province of Fries- 
land, and the latter years of his life were much occupied with 
political affairs. In 1787 he was nominated to a seat in the 
council of state, and took up his residence at the Hague, where 
he died on the 7th of April 1789. 

Camper's works, mainly memoirs and detached papers, are very 
numerous; the most important of those bearing on comparative 
anatomy were published in 3 vols, at Paris in 1803, under the title 
(Euvres de P. Camper qui ont pour objet Vhistoire nalurelle, la 
physiologie, et I'anatomie comparee. His Dissertation physique sur 
les differences reelles que presentent les traits du visage chez les hommes 
de differents pays et de differents ages; sur le beau qui caracterise 
les statues antiques et les pieces gravees, &c., which was published in 
1781 both in Dutch and in French, contains an account of the facial 
angle which he used as a cranial characteristic. (See also Anatomy.) 

CAMPHAUSEN, OTTO VON (1812-1896), Prussian statesman, 
was born at Hunshoven in the Rhine Provinces on the 21st of 
October 1812. Having studied jurisprudence and political 
economy at the universities of Bonn, Heidelberg, Munich and 
Berlin, he entered the legal career at Cologne, and immediately 
devoted his attention to financial and commercial questions. 
Nominated assessor in 1837, he acted for five years in this 
capacity at Magdeburg and Coblenz, became in 1845 counsellor 
in the ministry of finance, and was in 1849 elected a member of 
the second chamber of the Prussian diet, joining the Moderate 
Liberal party. In 1869 he was appointed minister of finance. 
On taking office, he was confronted with a deficit in the revenue, 
which he successfully cleared off by effecting a conversion of a 
greater part of the state loans. The French war indemnity 
enabled him to redeem a considerable portion of the state debt 
and to remit certain taxes. He was, however, a too warm 
adherent of free trade principles to enjoy the confidence either 
of the Agrarian party or of Prince Bismarck, and his antagonism 
to the tobacco monopoly and the general economic policy of 
the latter brought about his retirement. Camphausen's great 
services to Prussia were recognized by his sovereign in the 
bestowal of the order of the Black Eagle in 1895, a dignity 
carrying with it a patent of nobility. He died at Berlin on the 
18th of May 1896. 

CAMPHAUSEN, WILHELM (1818-1885), German painter, 
was born at Diisseldorf, and studied under A. Rethel and F. W. 
von Schadow. As an historical and battle painter he rapidly 
became popular, and in 1859 was made professor of painting 
at the Diisseldorf academy, together with other later distinctions. 
His " Flight of Tilly " (1841), " Prince Eugene at the Battle of 
Belgrade " (1843 ; in the Cologne museum), " Flight of Charles II. 
after the Battle of Worcester" (Berlin National Gallery), 
" Cromwell's Cavalry " (Munich Pinakothek), are his principal 
earlier pictures; and his " Frederick the Great at Potsdam," 
" Frederick II. and the Bayreuth Dragoons at Hohenfriedburg," 
and pictures of the Schleswig-Holstein campaign and the war of 
1866 (notably " Lines of Diippel after the Battle," at the Berlin 
National Gallery), made him famous in Germany as a representa- 
tive of patriotic historical art. He also painted many portraits 
of German princes and celebrated soldiers and statesmen. He 
died at Diisseldorf on the 16th of June 1885. 

CAMPHORS, organic chemical compounds, the alcohols and 
ketones of the hydrocarbons known as terpenes, occurring 
associated with volatile oils in many plants. They are extracted 
together with volatile oils by distilling certain plants with steam, 
the volatile oils being subsequently separated by fractional 
distillation. The term " camphor " is generally applied to the 
solid products so obtained, and hence includes the " stear- 
optenes," or solid portions of the volatile oils. They are mostly 
white crystalline solids, possessing a characteristic odour; they 



are sparingly soluble in water, but readily dissolve in alcohol 
and ether. Chemically, the camphors may be divided into two 
main groups, according to the nature of the corresponding 
hydrocarbon or terpene. In this article only the camphors of 
commercial importance will be treated; details as to the chemical 
structure, syntheses and relations will be found in the article 
Terpenes. 

Menthol, mentha or peppermint camphor, Ci H l9 OH, 5-methyl- 
2-isopropyl hexahydrophenol, an oxyhexahydrocymene, occurs 
in the volatile oils of Mentha piperita and M. arvensis (var. 
piper ascens and glabrata), from which it is obtained by cooling 
and subsequently pressing the separated crystals; or by frac- 
tional distillation. It crystallizes in prisms, having the odour 
and taste of peppermint; it melts at 42 and boils at 212°. It is 
very slightly soluble in water, but readily dissolves in alcohol 
and ether. It is optically active, being laevo-rotatory. Menthol 
is used in medicine to relieve pain, as in rheumatism, neuralgia, 
throat affections and toothache. It acts also as a local anaes- 
thetic, vascular stimulant and disinfectant. 

Thymol, thyme camphor, Ci H 13 OH, 3-methyl-6-isopropyl 
phenol, an oxycymene, occurs in the volatile oil of Ajowan, 
Carum ajowan, garden thyme, Thymus vulgaris, wild thyme, 
T. Serpyllum and horse mint, Monarda punctata. Thymol 
crystallizes in large colourless plates which melt at 44° and boil 
at 230 . It has the odour of thyme, is sparingly soluble in water, 
but very soluble in alcohol, ether and in alkaline solutions. In 
medicine it is used as an antiseptic, being more active than 
phenol. Iodine and potash convert it into di-iodthymol, which 
has been introduced in surgery under the names aristol and 
annidalin, as a substitute for iodoform. 

Borneol, Borneo camphor or camphol, also known as Malayan, 
Barus or Dryobalanops camphor, CioH 17 OH, occurs in fissures in 
the wood of Dryobalanops aromatica, a majestic tree flourishing 
in the East Indies. This product is dextro-rotatory; the laevo 
and inactive modifications occur in the so-called baldrianic 
camphor. Borneol melts at 203 and boils at 21 2 . It is very 
similar to common or Japan camphor, but has a somewhat 
peppery odour. Sodium and alcohol reduce common camphor 
to a mixture of d- and /-borneol. 

Common camphor, Japan or Laurel camphor, Ci Hi 6 O, which 
constitutes the bulk of the camphor of commerce, is the product 
of the camphor laurel, Cinnamonum camphora, a tree flourishing 
in Japan, Formosa and central China. It also occurs in various 
volatile oils, e.g. lavender, rosemary, sage and spike. To ex- 
tract the camphor, chips of the tree are steamed, and the mixed 
vapours of camphor, volatile oils and water are conducted to a 
condensing plant, where most of the camphor separates out. 
This is filtered, and the remainder, about 20 % of the total, 
which is retained in solution, is extracted by fractional distilla- 
tion and cooling the distillate. The crude camphor so obtained 
is exported from Japan in two grades — Samuel A and Samuel B. 
It is purified by mixing with a little charcoal, sand, iron filings 
or quicklime and subliming, by steam distillation or by crystalliza- 
tion. Common camphor forms a translucent mass of hexagonal 
prisms, melting at 175 and boiling at 204°. It sublimes very 
readily. In alcoholic solution it is dextro-rotatory; the laevo 
form, Matricaria camphor, occurs in the oil of Matricaria parthe- 
nium and closely resembles the d form. Camphor is chiefly used 
in the celluloid industry. The so-called " artificial camphor " 
is pinene hydrochloride (see Terpenes). 

Externally applied it acts medicinally as a counter-irritant, 
and, in some degree, as a local anaesthetic, being also a definite 
antiseptic. It is, therefore, largely used in liniments for the 
relief of myalgia, sciatica, lumbago, etc. Combined with chloro- 
form, thymol or carbolic acid, it is a valuable local application 
for neuralgia and for toothache due to dental caries. Taken 
internally, camphor is a nerve stimulant, a diaphoretic and a 
feeble antipyretic. It is excreted by the kidneys as various 
substances, including campho-glycuric add (Schmiedeberg) . 
In large doses it causes marked nervous symptoms, exhilaration 
being followed by abdominal pain, violent epileptiform con- 
vulsions, coma and death. Its internal uses are in hysteria, and 



136 



GAMPHUYSEN^-CAMPIGN, E. 



in such conditions as diarrhoea, dysentery and cholera. It is 
a popular remedy for " cold in the head," but it is not to be 
relied upon as a prophylactic against infection either by an 
ordinary cold or true influenza. 

CAMPHUYSEN, DIRK RAFELSZ (1586-1627), Dutch 
painter, poet and theologian, was the son of a surgeon at Gorcum. 
As he manifested great artistic talent, his brother, in whose 
charge he was left on the death of his parents, placed him under 
the painter Govaerts. But at that time there was intense 
interest in theology; and Camphuysen, sharing in the prevailing 
enthusiasm, deserted the pursuit of art, to become first a private 
tutor and afterwards minister of Vleuten near Utrecht(i6i6). 
As; however, he had embraced the doctrines of Arininius with 
fervour, he was deprived of this post and driven into exile (161 9). 
His chief solace was poetry; and he has left a translation of the 
Psalms, and a number of short pieces, remarkable for their fresh- 
ness and depth of poetic feeling. He is also the author of several 
theological works of fair merit, among which is a Compendium 
Doctrinae Sociniorum; but his fame chiefly rests on his pictures, 
which, like his poems, are mostly small, but of great beauty; the 
colouring, though thin, is pure; the composition and pencilling 
are exquisite, and the perspective above criticism. The best of 
his works are his sunset and moonlight scenes and his views of 
the Rhine and other rivers. The close of his life Was spent at 
Dokkum. His nephew Raphael (b. 1598) is by some considered 
to have been the author of several of the works ascribed to him ; 
and his son Govaert (1624-1674), a follower or imitator of Paul 
Potter, is similarly credited. ■■'■■' 

CAMPI, GIULIO (1500-1572), the founder of a school of 
Italian painters, was born at Cremona. He was son of a painter, 
Galeazzo Campi (147 5-1 536), under whom he took his first 
lessons in art. He was then taught by Giulio Romano; and 
he made a special study of Titian, Correggio and Raphael. His 
works are remarkable for their correctness, vigour and loftiness 
of style. They are very numerous, and the church of St Margaret 
in his native town owes all its paintings to his hand. Among the 
earliest of his school are his brothers, Vincenzo and Antonio, the 
latter of whom was also of some mark as a sculptor and as 
historian of Cremona. 

Giulio's pupil, Bernardino Campi (1 522-1 592), in some 
respects superior to his master, began life as a goldsmith. After 
an education under Giulio Campi and Ippolito Corta, he attained 
such skill that when he added another to the eleven Caesars of 
Titian, it was impossible to say which was the master's and 
which the imitator's. He was also much influenced by Correggio 
and Raphael. His principal work is seen in the frescoes of the 
cupola at San Sigismondo, at Cremona. 

CAMPILLO, JOSlS DEL (1695-1743), Spanish statesman, was 
of very obscure origin. From his own account of his youth, 
written to Antonio de Mier in 1726, we only know that he was 
born in " a house equally poor and honest," that he studied 
Latin by his own wish, that he entered the service of Don 
Antonio Maldonado, prebendary of Cordoba, who wished 
apparently to train him as a priest, and that he declined to take 
orders. He left the service of Maldonado in 17 13, being then 
eighteen years of age. In 171 5 he became " page " to D. Fran- 
cisco de Ocio, superintendent general of customs, who doubtless 
employed him as a clerk. In 1717 he attracted the favourable 
notice of Patifio, the head of the newly-organized navy, and was 
by him transferred to the naval department. Under the pro- 
tection of Patifio, who became prime minister in 1726, Campillo 
was constantly employed on naval administrative work both at 
home and in America. It was Patino's policy to build up a navy 
quietly at home and in America, without attracting too much 
attention abroad, and particularly in England. Campille 
proved an industrious and honest subordinate. Part of his 
experience was to be present at a shipwreck in Central America 
in which he was credited with showing spirit and practical 
ability in saving the lives of the crew. In 1 7 26 he was denounced 
to' the Inquisition for the offence of reading forbidden books. 
The proceedings against him were not carried further, but the 
incident is an example of the vexatious tyranny exercised by the 



Holy Office, and the effect it must have had even in its decadence 
in damping all intellectual activity. It was not until in 1741, 
when Spain was entangled in a land war in Italy and a naval war 
with England, that Campillo was summoned by the king to take 
the place of prime minister. He had to find the means of carrying 
on a policy out of all proportion to the resources of Spain, with 
an empty treasury. His short tenure of power was chiefly 
notable for his vigorous attempt to sweep away the system of 
farming the taxes, which left the state at the mercy of contractors 
and financiers. Campillo's predecessors were constantly com- 
pelled to apply to capitalists to provide funds to meet the 
demands of the king for his buildings and his foreign policy. A 
whole year's revenue was frequently forestalled. Campillo 
persuaded the king to allow him to establish a system of direct 
collection, by which waste and pilfering would be avoided. 
Some progress was made towards putting the national finances 
on a sound footing, though Campillo could not prevent the king 
from disposing, without his' knowledge, of large sums of money 
needed for the public service. He died suddenly on the 1 ith of 
April 1743. Campillo was the author of a treatise on a New 
System of Government for America printed at Madrid 1789. He 
also left a MS. treatise with the curious title, What is superfluous 
and is wanting in Spain, in order that it may be what it ought to be, 
and not what it is. 

See D. Antonio Rodriquez Villa, Patifio y Campillo (Madrid, 1882). 

CAMPINAS,: an inland city of the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil; 
65 m. by rail N;W. of the city of Sao Paulo and 114 m. from the 
port of Santos, with which it is connected by the Paulista & Sao 
Paulo railway. Pop. (1890) of the city and municipality, 
33,921. Campinas is the commercial centre of one of the oldest 
coffee-producing districts of the state and the outlet for a rich 
and extensive ' agricultural region lying farther inland. The 
Mogyana railway starts from this point and extends north to 
Uberaba, Minas Geraes, while the Paulista lines extend north- 
west into new and very fertile regions. Coffee is the staple 
production, though Indian corn, mandioca and fruit are pro- 
duced largely for local Consumption. The city is built in a bowl- 
like depression of the great central plateau, and the drainage 
from the surrounding hillsides has produced a dangerously 
insanitary condition, from which one or two virulent fever 
epidemics have resulted. 

CAMPING-OUT. The sport of abandoning ordinary house-life, 
and living in tents, touring in vans, boats, &c, has been elabor- 
ately developed in modern times, and a considerable literature 
has been devoted to it, to which the curious may be referred. 

See, for Europe, A. A. Macdonell's Camping-out (1892) and Voyages 
on German Rivers (1890) ; G. R. Lowndes, Gipsy Tents (1890). 

For Australia and Africa, W. B. Lord, Shifts and . Expedients of 
Camp Life (1871); the articles by F. J. Jackson in the Big Game 
Shooting volume of the "Badminton Library"; the articles on 
" Camping out " in The Encyclopaedia of Sport; F. C. Selous, A 
Hunter's Wanderings in Africa (1881), and Travel and Adventure in 
South Africa (1893); A. W. Chanler, Through Jungle and Desert 
(1896); A. B. Rathbone, Camping and Tramping in Malaya (1898). 

For America, G..O. Shields, Camping and Camp Outfits (1890); 
W. W. Pascoe, Canoe and Camp Cookery (1893) ; Woodcraft, by 
" Nessmuk " (1895); W. S. Rainsford, Camping and Hunting in 
the Shoshone (1896); S. E. White, The Forest (1903), and The 
Mountains (1904) ; Suggestions as to Outfit for Tramping and Camp- 
ing (1904), published by "The Appalachian Mountain Club," 
Boston. Valuable information will be found in the sporting 
periodicals, and in the catalogues of outfitters and dealers in sporting 
goods. 

CAMPION, EDMUND (1 540-1 581), English Jesuit, was born in 
LOndott, received his early education at Christ's Hospital, and, as 
the best of the London scholars, was chosen in their name to make 
the complimentary speech when Queen Mary visited the city on 
the 3rd of August 1553. He went to Oxford and became fellow 
of St John's College in 1557, taking the oath of supremacy on the 
occasion of his degree in 1 564, in which year he was orator in the 
schools. He had already shown his talents as a speaker at the 
funeral of Amy Robsart in 1560; and when Sir Thomas White, 
the founder of the college, was buried in 1564, the Latin oration 
fell to the lot of Campion. Two years later he welcomed Queen 
Elizabeth to the university, and won a regard, which the queen 



CAMPION, Ti 



137 



preserved until the end. Religious difficulties now began to beset 
him; but at the persuasion of Edward Gheyney, bishop of 
Gloucester, although holding Catholic doctrines, he took deaconfs 
orders in the English Church. Inwardly " he took a remorse of 
conscience and detestation of mind." Rumours of his opinions 
began to spread and, giving up the office of proctor, he left Oxford 
in 1569 and went to Ireland to take part in a proposed restoration 
of the Dublin University. The suspicion of papistry followed 
him; and orders were given for his arrest. For some three 
months he eluded pursuit, hiding among friends and occupying 
himself by writing a history of Ireland (first published in Holin- 
shed's Chronicles), a superficial work of no real value. At last he 
escaped to Douai, where he joined William Allen (q.v.) and was 
reconciled to the Roman Church. After being ordained sub- 
deacon, he went to Rome and became a Jesuit in 1573, spending 
some years at Briinn, Vienna and Prague. In 1580 the Jesuit 
mission to England was begun, and he accompanied Robert 
Parsons (q.v.) who, as superior, was intended to counterbalance 
Campion's fervour and impetuous zeal. He entered England in 
the characteristic guise of a jewel merchant, arrived in London 
oil the 24th of June 1580, and at once began to preach. His 
presence became known to the authorities and an indiscreet 
declaration, " Campion Brag," made the position more difficult. 
The hue and cry was out against him; henceforth he led a hunted 
life, preaching and ministering to Catholics in Berkshire, Oxford- 
shire, Northamptonshire and Lancashire. During this time he 
was writing his Decern Rationes, a rhetorical display of reasons 
against the Anglican Church. The book was printed in a private 
press at Stonor Park, Henley, and 400 copies were found on the 
benchesof St Mary's, Oxford, at the Commencement, on the 27th 
of June 1581. The sensation was immense, and the pursuit 
became keener. On his way to Norfolk he stopped at Lyford in 
Berkshire, where he preached on the 14th of July and the follow- 
ing day, yielding to the foolish importunity of some pious women. 
Here he was captured by a spy and taken to London, bearing on 
his hat a paper with the inscription, " Campion, the Seditious 
Jesuit." Committed to the Tower, he was examined in the 
presence of Elizabeth, who asked him if he acknowledged her to 
be really queen of England, and on his replying straightly in the 
affirmative, she made him offers, not only of life but of wealth and 
dignities, on conditions which his conscience could not allow. He 
was kept a long time in prison, twice racked by order of the 
council, and every effort was made to shake his constancy. 
Despite the effect of a false rumour of retraction and a forged 
confession, his adversaries in despair summoned him to four 
public conferences (1st, 18th, 23rd and 27th of September), and 
althou'gh still suffering, and allowed neither time nor books for 
preparation, he bore himself so easily and readily that he won the 
admiration of most of the audience. Racked again on the 31st 
of October, he was indicted at Westminster that he with others 
had conspired at Rome and Reims to raise a sedition in the realm 
and dethrone the queen. On the 20th of November he was 
brought in guilty before Lord Chief Justice Wray; and in reply 
to him said: " If our religion do make traitors we are worthy to 
be condemned; but otherwise are and have been true subjects 
as ever the queen had." He received the sentence of the traitor's 
death with the Te Deum laudamus, and, after spending his last 
days in pious exercises, was led with two companions to Tyburn 
(1st of December 1581) and suffered the barbarous penalty. Of 
all the Jesuit missionaries who suffered for their allegiance to the 
ancient religion, Campion stands the highest. His life and his 
aspirations were pure, his zeal true and his loyalty unquestionable. 
He was beatified by Leo XIII. in 1886. , 

An admirable biography is to be found in Richard Simpson's 
Edmund Campion (1867); and a complete list of his- works in 
De Backer's Bibliotheaue de la compagnie de Jesus. (E. Tn.) 

CAMPION, THOMAS (1567-1620), English poet and musician, 
was born in London on the 12th of February 1567, and christened 
at St Andrew's, Holborn. He was the son of John Campion of 
the Middle Temple, who was by profession one of the cursitors of 
the chancery court, the clerks " of course," whose duties were to 
draft the various writs and legal instruments' in correct form. His 



mother was Lucy Searle, daughter of Laurence Se'arle, one of the 
queen's serjeants-at-arms. Upon the death of Campion's father 
in 1576, his mother married Augustine Steward and died herself 
soon after.. Steward acted for some years as guardian of the 
orphan, and sent him in 1581, together with Thomas Sisley, his 
stepson by his second wife Anne, relict of Clement Sisley,: to 
Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a gentleman pensioner. He studied 
at Cambridge for four years, and left the university, it would 
appear, without a degree, but strongly imbued with those tastes 
for classical literature which exercised such powerful influence 
upon his subsequent work. In April 1.587 he was admitted to 
Gray's Inn, possibly with the intention of adopting a legal 
profession, but he had little sympathy with legal studies and does 
not appear to have been called to the bar. His subsequent 
movements are not certain, but in 1501 he appears to have take!. 
part in the French expedition under Essex, sent for the assistance 
of Henry IV. against the League; and in 1606 he first appears 
with the degree of doctor of physic, though the absence of records 
does not permit us to ascertain where this was obtained. The 
rest of his life was probably spent in London, where he practised 
as a physician until his death on the 1st of March 1620, leaving 
behind him, it would appear, neither wife nor issue. He was 
buried the same day at St Dunstan's-in-the-West, Fleet Street. 

The body of his works is considerable, the earliest known being 
a group of five anonymous poems included in the Songs of Divers 
Noblemen and Gentlemen, appended to Newman's surreptitious 
edition of Sidney's Astrophel and Stella, which appeared in 1591. 
In 1595 appeared under his own name the Poemata, a collection 
of Latin panegyrics, elegies and epigrams, which evince much 
skill in handling, and won him considerable reputation. This was 
followed in 1601 by A Booke of Ayres, one of the song-books so 
fashionable in his day,the music of which was contributed in equal 
proportions by himself and Philip Rosseter, while the words were 
almost certainly all written by him. The following year he 
published his Observations in the Art of English Poesie, " against 
the vulgar and unartificial custom of riming," in favour of rhyme- 
less verse on the model of classical quantitative poetry. Its 
appearance at this stage was important as the final statement of 
the crazy prejudice by one of its sanest and best equipped 
champions, but the challenge thus thrown down was accepted by 
Daniel, who in his Defence of Ryme, published the same year, 
finally demolished the movement. 

In 1607 he wrote and published a masque for the occasion of 
the marriage of Lord Hayes, and in 1613 he issued a volume of 
Songs of Mourning (set' to music by Coperario or John Cooper) 
for the loss of Prince Henry, which was sincerely lamented by the 
whole English nation. The same year he wrote and arranged 
three masques, the Lords' Masque for the marriage of Princess 
Elizabeth, an entertainment for the amusement of Queen Anne 
at Caversham House, and a third for- the marriage of the earl of 
Somerset to the infamous Frances Howard, countess of Essex. 
If, moreover, as appears quite likely, his Two Bookes of Ayres 
(both words and music written by himself) belongs also to this 
year, it was indeed his annus mirabilis. 

Some time in or after 161 7 appeared his Third and Fourth 
Booke of Ayres; while to that year probably also belongs his 
New Way of making Foure Parts in Counter-point, a technical 
treatise which was for many years the standard text-book on 
the subject. It was included, with annotations by Christopher 
Sympson, in Playfair's Brief Introduction to the Skill of Mustek, 
and two editions appear to have been bought up by 1660. In 
1 61 8 appeared The Ayres that were sung and played at Brougham 
Castle on- the occasion of the king's entertainment there, the 
music by Mason and Earsden, while the words were almost 
certainly by Campion; and in 16 19 he published his Epigram- 
matum Libri II. Umbra Elegiarum liber tinus, a reprint of his 
1595 collection with considerable omissions, additions (in the 
form of another book of epigrams) and corrections. 

While Campion had attained a considerable reputation in 
his own day, in the years that followed his death his works sank 
into complete oblivion. No doubt this was due to the nature 
of the media in which he mainly worked, the masque and the 



i 3 8 



CAMPISTRON— CAMPOBASSO 



song-book. The masque was an amusement at any time too 
costly to be popular, and with the Rebellion it was practically 
extinguished. The vogue of the song-books was even more 
ephemeral, and, as in the case of the masque, the Puritan 
ascendancy, with its distaste for all secular music, effectively 
put an end to the madrigal. Its loss involved that of many 
hundreds of dainty lyrics, including those of Campion, and it 
is due to the enthusiastic efforts of Mr A. H. Bullen, who first 
published a collection of the poet's works in 1889, that his genius 
has been recognized and his place among the foremost rank of 
Elizabethan lyric poets restored to him. 

Campion set little store by his English lyrics; they were to 
him " the superfluous blossoms of his deeper studies," but we 
may thank the fates that his precepts of rhymeless versification 
so little affected his practice. His rhymeless experiments are 
certainly better conceived than many others, but they lack the 
spontaneous grace and freshness of his other poetry, while the 
whole scheme was, of course, unnatural. He must have possessed 
a very delicate musical ear, for not one of his songs is unmusical; 
moreover, the fact of his composing both words and music gave 
rise to a metrical fluidity which is one of his most characteristic 
features. Rarely indeed are his rhythms uniform, while they 
frequently shift from line to line. His range was very great both 
in feeling and expression, and whether he attempts an elaborate 
epithalamium or a simple country ditty, the result is always full 
of unstudied freshness and tuneful charm. In some of his sacred 
pieces he is particularly successful, combining real poetry with 
genuine religious fervour. 

Bibliography. — Works, &c, ed. A. H. Bullen (1889) excluding 
A New Way, &c. ; Songs and Masques, ed. A. H. Bullen (1903), with 
an introduction on Campion's music by Janet Dodge; Poems, &c. 
(in English), ed. P. Vivian (1907); Complete Works, ed. P. Vivian 
(Clarendon Press, 1908). The " Observations in the Art of English 
Poesie " are also published in Haslewood's Ancient Critical Essays 
and Gregory Smith's Elizabethan Critical Essays, vol. ii. (1903). 

(P. Vn.) 

CAMPISTRON, JEAN GALBERT DE (1656-1723), French 
dramatist, was born at Toulouse of noble family in 1656. At the 
age of seventeen he was wounded in a duel and sent to Paris. 
Here he became an ardent disciple of Racine. If he copied his 
master's methods of construction with some success, in the 
execution of his plans he never advanced beyond mediocrity, 
nor did he ever approach the secret of the musical lines of Athalie 
and Phedre. He secured the patronage of the influential duchesse 
de Bouillon by dedicating Arminius to her, and in 1685 he scored 
his first success with Andronic, which disguised under other 
names the tragic story of Don Carlos and Elizabeth of France. 
The piece made a great sensation, but Campistron's treatment 
is weak, and he failed to avail himself of the possibilities inherent 
in his subject. Racine was asked by Louis Joseph, due de 
Vend6me, to write the book of an opera to be performed at a 
fete given in honour of the Dauphin. He handed on the com- 
mission to Campistron, who produced A cis et Galathee for Lulli's 
music. Campistron had another success in Tiridate (1691), in 
which he treated, again under changed names, the biblical story 
of Amnon's passion for his sister Tamar. He wrote many other 
tragedies and two comedies, one of which, Le Jaloux disabuse, 
has been considered by some judges to be his best work. In 
1686 he had been made intendant to the due de Venddme and 
followed him to Italy and Spain, accompanying him on all his 
campaigns. If he was not a good poet he was an honest man 
under circumstances in which corruption was easy and usual. 
Many honours were conferred on him. The king of Spain 
bestowed on him the order of St James of the Sword; the duke 
of Mantua made him marquis of Penango in Montferrat; and 
in 1 701 he was received into the Academy. After thirty years 
of service with Vendome he retired to his native place, where 
he died on the nth of May 1723. 

CAMPOAMOR Y CAMPOOSORIO, RAMON DE (1817-1001), 
Spanish poet, was born at Navia (Asturias) on the 24th of 
September 181 7. Abandoning his first intention of entering the 
Jesuit order, he studied medicine at Madrid, found an opening in 
politics as a supporter of the Moderate party, and, after occupying 



several subordinate posts, became governor of Castellon de 1* 
Plana, of Alicante and of Valencia. His conservative tendencies 
grew more pronounced with time, and his Polemicas con la 
Democracia (1862) may be taken as the definitive expression of 
his political opinions. His first appearance as a poet dated from 
1840, when he published his Ternezas y flores, a collection of 
idyllic verses, remarkable for their technical excellence. His 
Ayes del Alma (1842) and his Fabulas morales y polUicas (1842) 
sustained his reputation, but showed no perceptible increase of 
power or skill. An epic poem in sixteen cantos, Coldn (1853), is 
no more successful than modern epics usually are. Campoamor's 
theatrical pieces, such as El Palacio de la Verdad (1871), Dies 
Irae (1873), El Honor (1874) and Glorias Humanas (1885), are 
interesting experiments; but they are totally lacking in dramatic 
spirit. He always showed a keen interest in metaphysical and 
philosophic questions, and defined his position in La Filosofia 
de las leyes (1846), El Personalismo (1855), Lo Absolute (1865) 
and El Ideismo (1883). These studies are chiefly valuable as 
embodying fragments of self-revelation, and as having led to 
the composition of those doloras, humoradas and pequenos 
poemas, which the poet's admirers consider as a new poetic 
species. The first collection of Doloras was printed in 1846, and 
from that date onwards new specimens were added to each 
succeeding edition. It is difficult to define a dolora. One critic 
has described it as a didactic, symbolic stanza which combines 
the lightness and grace of the epigram, the melancholy of the 
endecha, the concise narrative of the ballad, and the philosophic 
intention of the apologue. The poet himself declared that a 
dolora is a dramatic humorada, and that a pequeno poema is a 
dolora on a larger scale. These definitions. are unsatisfactory. 
The humoristic, philosophic epigram is an ancient poetic form 
to which Campoamor has given a new name; his invention goes 
no further. It cannot be denied that in the Doloras Campoamor's 
special gifts of irony, grace and pathos find their best expression. 
Taking a commonplace theme, he presents in four, eight or twelve 
lines a perfect miniature of condensed emotion. By his choice 
of a vehicle he has avoided the fatal facility and copiousness 
which have led many Spanish poets to destruction. It pleased 
him to affect a vein of melancholy, and this affectation has been 
reproduced by his followers. Hence he gives the impression of 
insincerity, of trifling with grave subjects and of using mysticism 
as a mask for frivolity. The genuine Campoamor is a poet of 
the sunniest humour who, under the pretence of teaching 
morality by satire, is really seeking to utter the gay scepticism 
of a genial, epicurean nature. His influence has not been alto- 
gether for good. His formula is too easily mastered, and to his 
example is due a plague of doloras and humoradas by poetasters 
who have caricatured their model. Campoamor, as he himself 
said, did not practise art for art's sake; he used art as the 
medium of ideas, and in ideas his imitators are poor. He died 
at Madrid on the 12th of February 1901. Of late years a deep 
silence had fallen upon him, and we are in a position to judge 
him with the impartiality of another generation. The over- 
whelming bulk of his work will perish; we may even say that 
it is already dead. His pretensions, or the pretensions put 
forward in his name, that he discovered a new poetic genre will 
be rejected later, as they are rejected now by all competent 
judges. The title of a philosophic poet will be denied to him. 
But he will certainly survive, at least in extract, as a distinguished 
humorist, an expert in epigrammatic and sententious aphorism, 
an artist of extremely finished execution. (J. F.-K.) 

CAMPOBASSO, a city of Molise, Italy, the capital of the 
province of Campobasso, 172 m. E.S.E. of Rome by rail, situated 
2132 ft. above sea-level. Pop. (1901) town 11,273; commune 
14,491. The town itself contains no buildings of antiquarian 
interest, but it has some fine modern edifices. Its chief industry 
is the manufacture of arms and cutlery. Above the town are 
the picturesque ruins of a castle of the 15th century. The date 
of the foundation of Campobasso is unknown. The town, with 
the territory surrounding it, was under the feudal rule of counts 
until 1739, when it passed to the Neapolitan crown, in considera- 
tion of a payment of 108,000 ducats. 



CAMPODEA— CAMUCCINI 



J 39 



CAMPODEA, a small whitish wingless insect with long flexible 
antennae and a pair of elongated caudal appendages. The best- 
known species (Campodea staphylinus) has a wide distribution 
and is equally at home in the warm valleys of south Europe, 
in the subarctic conditions of mountain tops, in caves and in 
woods and gardens in England. It lives in damp places under 
stones, fallen trees or in rotten wood and leaves. Although 
blind, it immediately crawls away on exposure to the light into 
the nearest crevice or other sheltered spot, feeling the way with 
its antennae. Its action is characteristically serpentine, recalling 
that of a centipede. Campodea is one of the bristle-tailed or 
thysanurous insects of the order Aptera (q.v.). 

CAMPOMANES, PEDRO RODRIGUEZ, Conde de (1723-1802), 
Spanish statesman and writer, was born at Santa Eulalia de 
Sorribia, in Asturias, on the istof July 1723. From 1788 to 1793 
he was president of the council of Castile; but on the accession 
of Charles IV. he was removed from his office, and retired from 
public life, regretted by the true friends of his country. His first 
literary work was Antiquidad maritima de la republica de 
Cartago, with an appendix containing a translation of the Voyage 
of Hanno the Carthaginian, with curious notes. This appeared 
in a quarto volume in 1756. His principal works are two admir- 
able essays, Discurso sobre el fomento de la industria popular, 
17 74, and Discurso sobre la educacion popular de los artesanos 
y su fomento, 1775. As a supplement to the last, he published 
four appendices, each considerably larger than the original essay. 
The first contains reflections on the origin of the decay of arts and 
manufactures in Spain during the last century. The second 
points out the steps necessary for improving or re-establishing 
the old manufactures, and contains a curious collection of royal 
ordinances and rescripts regarding the encouragement of arts 
and manufactures, and the introduction of foreign raw materials. 
The third treats of the gild laws of artisans, contrasted with 
the results of Spanish legislation and the municipal ordinances 
of towns. The fourth contains eight essays of Francisco Martinez 
de Mata on national commerce, with some observations adapted 
to present circumstances. These were all printed at Madrid in 
1774 and 1777, in five volumes. Count Campomanes died on the 
3rd of February 1802. 

Don A. Rodriguez Villa has placed a biographical notice of Campo- 
manes as an introduction to the first edition of his Cartas politico- 
economicas, published in 1878. 

CAMPOS, ARSENIO MARTINEZ DE (1831-1900), Spanish 
marshal, senator and knight of the Golden Fleece, was born at 
Segovia on the 14th of December 1831. He graduated as a 
lieutenant in 1852, and for some years was attached to the staff 
college as an assistant professor. He took part in the Morocco 
campaign of 1859-1860, and distinguished himself in sixteen 
actions, obtaining the cross of San Fernando, and the rank of 
lieutenant-colonel. He then returned to the staff college as a 
professor. Afterwards he joined the expedition to Mexico under 
Prim. In 1869 he was sent to Cuba, where he was promoted to 
the rank of general in 1872. On his return to the Peninsula, the 
Federal Republican government in 1873 confided to General 
Campos several high commands, in which he again distinguished 
himself against the Cantonal Republicans and the Carlists. 
About that time he began to conspire with a view to restore the 
son of Queen Isabella. Though Campos made no secret of his 
designs, Marshal Serrano, in 1874, appointed him to the command 
of a division which took part in the relief of Bilbao on the 2nd of 
May of that year, and in the queries around Estella in June.
On both occasions General Campos tried in vain to induce the 
other commanders to proclaim Alphonso XII. He then affected 
to hold aloof, and would have been arrested, had not the minister 
of war, Ceballos, answered for his good behaviour, and quartered 
him in Avila under surveillance. He managed to escape, and 
after hiding in Madrid, joined General Daban at Sagunto on the 
29th of December 1874, where he proclaimed Alphonso XII. king 
of Spain. From that date he never ceased to exercise great 
influence in the politics of the restoration. He was considered as 
a sort of supreme counsellor, being consulted by King Alphonso, 
and later by his widow, the queen-regent, in every important 



political crisis, and on every international or colonial question, 
especially when othei generals or the army itself became trouble- 
some. He took an important part in the military queries
against the Carlists, and in the negotiations with their leaders, 
which put an end to the civil war in 1876. In the same way he 
brought about the pacification of Cuba in 1878. On his return 
from that island he presided over a Conservative cabinet for a 
few months, but soon made way for Canovas, whom he ever 
afterwards treated as the leader of the Conservative party. In 
1 88 1, with other discontented generals, he assisted Sagasta in 
obtaining office. After the death of King Alphonso, Campos 
steadily supported the regency of Queen Christina, and held high 
commands, though declining to take office. In 1893 he was 
selected to command the Spanish army at Melilla, and went to 
the court of Morocco to make an advantageous treaty of peace, 
which averted a war. When the Cuban rising in 1895 assumed 
a serious aspect, he was sent out by the Conservative cabinet of 
Canovas to cope with the rebellion, but he failed in the field, as 
well as in his efforts to win over the Creoles, chiefly because he 
was not allowed to give them local self-government, as he wished. 
Subsequently he remained aloof from politics, and only spoke 
in the senate to defend his Cuban administration and on army 
questions. After the war with America, and the loss of the 
colonies in 1899, when Sefior Silvela formed a new Conservative 
party and cabinet, the old marshal accepted the presidency of 
the senate, though his health was failing fast. He held this post 
up to the time of his death. This took place in the summer 
recess of 1900 at Zarauz, a village on the coast of Guipuzcoa,, 
where he was buried. 

CAMPOS, an inland city of the state of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 
on the Parahyba river, 30 m. from the sea, and about 143 m. 
N.E. of the city of Rio de Janeiro. Pop. (1890) of the city, 
22,518; of the municipality, 78,036. The river is navigable for 
small steamers above and below the city, but is closed to coast- 
wise navigation by dangerous sandbars at its mouth. The 
shipping port for Campos is Imbetiba (near Macahe) , 60 m. south- 
west, with which it is connected by rail. There is also water 
communication between the two places by means of coastal lakes 
united by canals. Campos has indirect railway communication 
with Rio de Janeiro by way of Macahe, and is the starting point 
for several small independent lines. The elevation of the city is 
only 69 ft. above sea level, and it stands near the western margin 
of a highly fertile alluvial plain devoted to the production of 
sugar. The climate is hot and humid, and many kinds of tropical 
fruit are produced in abundance. 

CAMPULUNG (also written Campu Lung and Kimpulung), 
the capital of the department of Muscel, Rumania, and the seat 
of a suffragan bishop; situated among the outlying hills of the 
Carpathian Mountains, at the head of a long well-wooded glen 
traversed by the river Tirgului, a tributary of the Argesh. Pop. 
(1900) 13,033. Its pure air and fine scenery render Campulung 
a popular summer resort. In the town are more than twenty 
churches, besides a monastery and a cathedral, which both claim 
to have been founded, in the 13th century, by Radul Negru, first 
prince of Walachia. The Tirgului supplies water-power for 
several paper-mills; annual fairs are held on the 20th of July 
and the 24th of October; and there is a considerable traffic with 
Transylvania, over the Torzburg Pass, 15 m. north, and with the 
south by a branch railway to Ploesci. Near Campulung are the 
remains of a Roman camp; and, just beyond the gates, vestiges 
of a Roman colony, variously identified with Romula, Stepenium 
and Ulpia Traiana, but now called Gradistea or Jidovi. 

CAMUCCINI, VINCENZO (1773-1844), Italian historical 
painter, was born at Rome. He was educated by his brother 
Pietro, a picture-restorer, and Borubelli, an engraver, and, up to 
the age of thirty, attempted nothing higher than copies of the 
great masters, his especial study being Raphael. As an original 
painter, Camuccini belongs to the school of the French artist 
David. His works are rather the fruits of great cleverness and 
patient care than of fresh and original genius; and his style was 
essentially imitative. He enjoyed immense popularity, both 
personally, and as an artist, and received many honours and, 



X'4-o 



CAM-UL'ODUNUM^-GANAAN 



preferments from the papal and other Italian courts. He was 
appointed director of the Academy of San Luca and of the 
Neapolitan Academy at Rome, and conservator of the pictures 
of the Vatican. He was also made chevalier of nearly all the 
orders in Italy, and member of the Legion of Honour. His chief 
works are the classical paintings of the " Assassination of Caesar," 
the " Death of Virginia," the " Devotion of the Roman Women," 
" Young Romulus and Remus," " Horatius Codes," the " St 
Thomas," which was copied in mosaic for St Peter's, the " Pre- 
sentation of Christ in the Temple " and a number of excellent 
portraits. He became a rich man, and made a fine collection of 
pictures which in 1856 were sold, a number of them (including 
Raphael's " Madonna with the Pink ") being bought by the duke 
of Northumberland. 

CAMULODUNUM, also written Camalodunum (mod. Col- 
chester, q.v.), a British and Roman town. It was the capital of 
the British chief Cunobelin and is named on his coins: after his 
death and the Roman conquest of south Britain, the Romans 
established (about a.d. 48) a colonia or municipality peopled 
with discharged legionaries, and intended to serve both as an 
informal garrison and as a centre of Roman civilization. It was 
stormed and burnt a.d. 61 in the rising of Boadicea (q.v.), but 
soon recovered and became one of the chief towns in Roman 
Britain. Its walls and some other buildings still stand and 
abundant Roman remains enrich the local museum. The name 
denotes " the fortress of Camulos," the Celtic Mars. 

CAMUS, ARMAND GASTON (1740-1804), French revolu- 
tionist, was a successful advocate before the Revolution. In 
1789 he was elected by the third estate of Paris to the states 
general, and attracted attention by his speeches against social 
inequalities. Elected to the National Convention by the depart- 
ment of Haute-Loire, he was named member of the committee of 
general safety, and then sent as one of the commissioners charged 
with the surveillance of General C. F. Dumouriez. Delivered 
with his colleagues to the Austrians on the 3rd of April 1793, he 
was exchanged for the daughter of Louis XVI. in November 
1795. He played an inconspicuous r61e in the council of the Five 
Hundred. On the 14th of August 1 789 the Constituent Assembly 
made Camus its archivist, and in that capacity he organized the 
national archives, classified the papers of the different assemblies 
of the Revolution and drew up analytical tables of the proces- 
verbaux. He was restored to the office in 1796 and became 
absorbed in literary work. He remained an austere republican, 
refusing to take part in the Napoleonic regime. 

CAMUS, CHARLES ETIENNE LOUIS (1699-1768), French 
mathematician and mechanician, was born at Crecy-en-Brie, 
near Meaux, on the 25th of August 1699. He studied mathe- 
matics, civil and military architecture, and astronomy, and 
became associate of the Academie des Sciences, professor of 
geometry, secretary to the Academy of Architecture and fellow 
of the Royal Society of London. In 1736 he accompanied 
Pierre Louis Maupertuis and Alexis Claude Clairaut in the 
expedition to Lapland for the measurement of a degree of the 
meridian. He died on the 2nd of February 1768. He was the 
author of a Cours de mathematiques (Paris, 1766), and a number 
of essays on mathematical and mechanical subjects (see Poggen- 
dorff. Bio^.-lit. Handworterbuch). 

CAMUS', FRANCOIS JOSEPH DES (1672-1732), French 
mechanician, was born near St Mihiel, on the 14th of September 
1672. After studying for the church, he devoted himself to 
mechanical inventions, a number of which he described in his 
Train des forces mouvantes pour la pratique des arts et mf tiers, 
Paris, 1722. He died in England in 1732. 

CAMUS DE MiZIERES, NICOLAS LE (1721-1789), French 
architect, was born at Paris on the 26th of March 1721, and died 
at the same city on the 27th of July 1789. He published several 
works on architectural and related subjects. 

CANA, of Galilee, a village of Palestine remarkable as the 
home of Nathanael, and the scene of Christ's " beginning of 
miracles " (John ii. i-n, iv: 46-54). Its site is unknown, but it 
is evident from the biblical narrative that it was in the neighbour- 
hood of, and higher than, Capernaum. Opinion as to identifica- 



tion is fairly divided between Kefr Kenna and Kana'-el^Jelil. 
The : former, about 4 m. N.N.E. of Nazareth, contains a 
ruined church and a small Christian population; the latter 
is an uninhabited village about 9 m. N. of Nazareth, with no 
remains but a few cisterns. ■ ■ ■ 

CANAAN, CANAANITES. These geographical and ethnic 
terms have a shifting reference, which doubtless arises out of the 
migrations of the tribes to which the term " Canaanites " 
belongs. Thus in Josh. v. 1 the term seems to be applied to a 
population on the coast of the Mediterranean, and in Josh. xi. 3,: 
Num. xiii. 29 (cf. also Gen. xiii. 12) not only to these, but to a 
people in the Jordan Valley. In Isa. xxiii. 1 1 it seems to be used 
of Phoenicia, and in Zeph. ii. 5 (where, however, the text is 
disputed) of Philistia. Most often it is applied comprehensively 
to the population of the entire west Jordan land and its pre- 
Israelitish inhabitants. This usage is characteristic of the 
writer called the Yahwist (J); see e.g. Gen. xii. 5, xxxiii. 18; 
Ex. xv. 15; Num. xxxiii; 51; Josh. xxii. 9; Judg. iii. 1; Ps. cvi. 38, 
and elsewhere. It was also, as Augustine tells us, 1 a usage of the 
Phoenicians to call their land " Canaan." This is confirmed by 
coins of the city of Laodicea by the Lebanon, which bear the 
legend, " Of Laodicea, a metropolis in Canaan " ; these coins are 
da ted under Antiochus IV. ( 1 7 5-1 64B.C.) , and his successors, Greek 
writers, too, tell us a fact of much interest, viz. that the original 
name of Phoenicia was x"a-, i.e. Kena, a short, collateral form of 
Kena'an or Kan'an. The form Kan'an is favoured by the Egyptian 
usage. Seti I. is said to have conquered the Shasu, or Arabian 
nomads, from the fortress of Taru (Shur?) to " the Ka-n-'-na," 
and Rameses III. to have built a temple to the god Amen in " the 
Ka-n-'-na." By this geographical name is probably meant all 
western Syria and Palestine with Raphia — " the (first) city of the 
Ka-n-'-na " — for the south-west boundary towards the desert. 2 
In the letters sent by governors and princes of Palestine to their 
Egyptian overlord 3 — commonly known as the Tel-el- Amarna 
tablets — we find the two forms Kinahhi and Kinahna, corres- 
ponding to Kena' and Kena'an respectively, and standing, as 
Ed. Meyer has shown, for Syria in its widest extent. 

On the name " Canaan " Winckler remarks/ "There is at 
present no prospect of an etymological explanation." From the 
fact that Egyptian (though not Hebrew) scribes constantly 
prefix the article, we may suppose that it originally meant 
" the country of the Canaanites," just as the Hebrew phrase 
" the Lebanon " may originally have meant " the highlands of 
the Libnites"; and we are thus permitted to group the term 
"Canaan" with clan-names such as Achan, Akan, Jaakan, 
Anak (generally with the article prefixed), Kain, Kenan. Nor 
are scholars more unanimous with regard to the region where the 
terms " Canaanite " and " Canaan " arose. It may be true that 
the term Kinahhi in the Amarna letters corresponds to Syria and 
Palestine in their entirety. But this does not prove that the 
terms "Canaanite " and " Canaan " arose in that region, for 
they are presumably much older than the Amarna tablets. Let 
us refer at this point to a document in Genesis which is perhaps 
hardly estimated at its true value, the so-called Table of Peoples 
in Gen. x. Here we find " Canaan " included among the four 
sons of 5am. If Cush in v. 6 really means Ethiopia, and M-s-r-i-m 
Egypt, arid Put the Libyans, and if Ham is really a Hebraized 
form of the old Egyptian name for Egypt, Kam-t (black), 5 the 
passage is puzzling in the extreme. But if, as has recently been 
suggested, 6 Cush, M-s-r-i-m, and Put are in north Arabia, and 
Harri is the short for Yarham or Yerahme'el (see 1 Chr. ii. 25-27, 
42), a north Arabian name intimately associated with Caleb, all 
becomes clear, and Canaan in particular is shown to be an 
Arabian name. Now it is no mere hypothesis that beginning 

1 Enarratio in Psalm civ. 

2 W. M. Miiller, Asien und Europa, p. 205. 

3 The letters are written in the official and diplomatic language — 
Babylonian, though " Canaanitish " words and idioms are not 
wanting. 

4 Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament, p. 181. 

6 These explanations are endorsed by Driver (Genesis,on Gen. x.). 
6 See the relevant articles in Ency. Bib. and Cheyne's Genesis 
and Exodus. 



CANAAN 



H* 



from about 4000 B.C. 1 a wave of Semitic migration poured out of 
Arabia, and flooded Babylonia certainly, and possibly, more or 
less, Syria and Palestine also. Also that between 2800 and 2600 
B.C. a second wave from Arabia took the same course, covering 
not only Babylonia, but also Syria and Palestine and probably 
also Egypt (the Hyksos). It is soon after this that we meet with 
the great empire-builder and civilizer, Khammurabi (2267-2213), 
the first king of a united Babylonia. It is noteworthy that the 
first part of his name is identical with the name of the father of 
Canaan in Genesis (Ham or Kham), indicating his Arabian 
origin. 2 It was he, too, who restored the ancient supremacy of 
Babylonia over Syria and Palestine, and so prevented the 
Babylonizing of these countries from coming to an abrupt end. 

We now understand how the Phoenicians, whose ancestors 
arrived in the second Semitic migration, came to call their land 
" Canaan." They had in fact the best right to do so. The first of 
the Canaanite immigrants were driven seawards by the masses 
which followed them. They settled in Phoenicia, and in after 
times became so great in commerce that " Canaanite "became a 
common Hebrew term for " merchant " (e.g. Isa. xxiii. 8). It is 
a plausible theory that in the conventional language of their 
inscriptions they preserved a number of geographical and re- 
ligious phrases which, for them, had no clear meaning, and 
belonged properly to the land of their distant ancestors, Arabia. 3 
For their own traditions as to their origin see Phoenicia; we 
cannot venture to reject these altogether. The masses of immi- 
grants which followed them may have borne the name of 
Amorites. A few words on this designation must here be given. 
Both within and without Palestine the name was famous. 

First, as regards the Old Testament. We find " the Amorite " 
(a collective term) mentioned in the Table of Peoples (Gen. x. 
i6-i8a) among other tribal names, the exact original reference of 
which had probably been forgotten. No one in fact would 
gather from this and parallel passages how important a part was 
played by the Amorites in the early history of Palestine. In 
Gen. xiv. 7 f., Josh. x. 5 f., Deut. i. 19 ff., 27, 44 wefind them 
located in the southern mountain country, while in Num. xxi. 13, 
21 f., Josh.ii.io, ix.io, xxiv.8, 1 2,&c. we hear of two great Amorite 
kings, residing respectively at Heshbon and Asbtaroth on the 
east 6f the Jordan. Quite different/however, is the view taken in 
Gen. xv. 16, xlviii. 22, Josh.xxiv.i 5, Judg. i. 34, Am. ii.o, 10, &c, 
where the name of Amorite is synonymous with " Canaanite," 
except that " Amorite " is never used for the population on the 
ooast. Next, as to the extra-Biblical evidence. In the Egyptian 
inscriptions and in the Amarna tablets Amar and Amurru have a 
more limited meaning, being applied to the mountain-region 
east of Phoenicia, extending to the Orontes. Later on, Arnurru 
became the Assyrian term for the interior of south as well as 
north Palestine, and at a still more recent period the term " the 
•land of Hatti " (conventionally = Hittites) displaced " Amurru " 
so far as north Palestine is concerned (see Hittites). 

Thus the Phoenicians and the Amorites belong to the first 
stage of the second great Arabian migration. In the interval 
preceding the second stage Syria with Palestine became an 
■Egyptian dependency, though the links' with the sovereign 
power were not so strong as to prevent frequent local rebellions. 
Under Thothmes III. and Amen-hotep II. the pressure of a strong 
hand kept the Syrians and Canaanites sufficiently loyal to the 
Pharaohs. The reign of Amen-hotep III., however, was not 
cjuite so tranquil for the Asiatic province. Turbulent chiefs 
began to seek their opportunities, though as a rule they did not 
"find them because they could not obtain the help of a neighbour- 
ing king. 4 The boldest of the disaffected was Aziru, son of Abd- 

1 For the grounds of these dates see Winckler, Gesch. Isr. i. 12/f..; 
Paton, Early Hist, of Syria and Palestine (1902) , pp. 6-8, 25-28. 

2 It is true the Babylonians themselves interpreted the name 
differently (5 R. 44a b2i), kimta rapashtum, "wide family." That, 
however, is only a natural protest against what we may call Canaan- 
ism or Arabism. 

3 See Cheyne, Genesis and Exodus (on Gen. i. 26), and cf. G. A. 
Cooke, N. Sem. Inscriptions (e.g. pp. 30-40, on Eshmunazar's in- 
•scription). 

: 4 See Amat.na Letters, Winckler's edition, No. 7. 



ashirta, a prince of Amurru, who even before the death of Amen^ 
hotep III. endeavoured to extend his power into the plain of 
Damascus. Akizzi, governor of Katna (near Horns or Hamath), 
reported this to the Pharaoh who seems to have frustrated the 
attempt. In the next reign, however, both father and son caused 
infinite trouble to loyal servants: of Egypt like Rib-Addi, governor 
of Gubla (Gebal). 

It was, first, the advance of the Hatti (Hittites) into Syria, 
which began in the time of Amen-hotep III., but became far more 
threatening in that of his successor, and next, the resumption of 
the second Arabian migration, which most seriously undermined 
the Egyptian power in Asia. Of the former we cannot speak 
here (see Hittixes), except so far as to remark the Abd- Ashirta 
and his son Aziru, though at first afraid of the Hatti, was after- 
wards clever enough to make a treaty with their king, and, with 
other external powers, to attack the districts which remained 
loyal to Egypt. In vain did Rib-Addi send touching appeals 
for aid to the distant Pharaoh, who was far too much engaged in 
his religious innovations to attend to such messages. What most 
interests us is the mention of troublesomeinvaderscalledsome times 
sa-gas (a Babylonian ideogram meaning " rohber "), sometimes 
Habiri. Who are these IJabiri? Not, as was at first thought by 
some, specially the Israelites, but all those tribes of land-hungry 
nomads (" Hebrews ") who were attracted by the wealth and 
luxury of the settled regions, and sought to appropriate it for 
themselves. Among these we may include not only the Israelites 
or tribes which afterwards became Israelitish, but the Moabites, 
Ammonites and Edomites. We meet with the Habiri in north 
Syria. Itakkama writes thus to the Pharaoh, 5 " Behold, 
Namyawaza has surrendered all the cities of the king, my lord, 
to the Sa-gas in the land of Kadesh and in Ubi. But I will go, 
and if thy gods and thy sun go before me, I will bring back the 
cities to the king, my lord, from the Habiri, to show myself 
subject' to him; and I will expel the Sa-gas." Similarly Zimrida, 
king of Sidon, declares, " All my cities which the king has given 
into my hand, have come into the hand of the Habiri." 6 Nor 
had Palestine any immunity from the Arabian invaders. The 
king of Jerusalem, Abd-Hiba, the second part of whose name has 
been thought to represent the Hebrew Yahweh, 7 reports thus to 
the Pharaoh, " If (Egyptian) troops come this year, lands and 
princes will remain to the king, my lord; but if troops come no t; 
these lands and princes will not remain to the king, my lord. 8 
Abd-Hiba's chief trouble arose from persons called Milkili and 
the sons of Lapaya, who are said to have entered into a treason- 
able league with the Habiri. Apparently this restless warrior 
found his death at the siege of Gina. 9 All these princes, however, 
malign each other in their letters to the Pharaoh, and protest 
their own innocence of traitorous intentions. Namyawaza, for 
instance, whom Itakkama (see above) accuses of disloyalty, 
writes thus to the Pharaoh, " Behold, I and my warriors and my 
chariots, together with my brethren and my Sa-gas, and my Suti *■? 
areat the disposal of the(royal) troops,to go whithersoever the king, 
my lord, commands. " u This petty prince, therefore, sees no, harm 
in having a band of Arabians for his garrison, as indeed Hezekiah 
long afterwards had his Urbi to help him against Sennacherib. 
From the same period we have recently derived fresh .and 
important evidence as to pre-Israelitish Palestine. As soon as 
the material gathered is large enough to be thoroughly classified 
and critically examined,' a true history of early Palestine will be 
within measurable distance. At present, there are five places 
whence the new evidence has, been obtained: 1. Tell-el-Hasy, 
generally identified with the Lachish of the Old Testament. 
Excavations were made here in 1890-189 2 by Flinders Petrie 
and Bliss** 2. Gezer.pdausibly identified with the Gezer of 1 Kings 
ix. 16. 'Here R. A. Si MaCalister began excavating in 1902. 
3. Tell-es-Safy, possibly th? Gath of. the Old Testament, 6 m.from 
Eleutheropolis. Here F. J. Bliss and R. A. S. Macalister made 

6 Op. cit. No. 146. -* Op. cit. No. 147. 

7 Johns, Assyrian Deeds, iii. p. 16. 

8 Amarna Letters, No. 180 (xi. 20-24). 

9 Ibid. No. 164 (xi. 15-18). 10 Nomads of the Syrian desert. 
n Amarna Letters, No. 144 (xi. 24-32). 



142 



CANACHUS— CANADA 



some discoveries in 1899-1900. A complete examination of the 
site, however, was impossible. 4. Tell-el-Mutasellim, near 
Lejjun (Megiddo-Legio). Schumacher began working here in 
1903 for the German Palestine Society. 5. Taannek, on the 
south of the plain of Esdraelon. Here Prof. Ernst Sellin of 
Vienna was able to do much in a short time (1902-1904). It may 
be mentioned here that on the first of these sites a cuneiform 
tablet belonging to the Amarna series was discovered; at Gezer, 
a deed of sale; at Tell-el-Hasy the remains of a Babylonian 
stele, three seals, and three cylinders with Babylonian mytho- 
logical representations; at Tell-el-Mutasellim, a seal bearing a 
Babylonian legend, and at Taannek, twelve tablets and frag- 
ments of tablets were found near the fragments of the terra- 
cotta box in which they were stored. It is a remarkable fact 
that the kings or chiefs of the neighbourhood should have used 
Babylonian cuneiform in their own official correspondence. 
But much beside tablets has been found on these sites; primitive 
sanctuaries, for instance. The splendid alignment of monoliths 
at Gezer is described in detaii in P.E.F. Quart. Statement, 
January 1903, p. 23, and July 1903, p. 219. There is reason, 
as Macalister thinks, to believe that it is the result of a gradual 
development, beginning with two small pillars, and gradually 
enlarging by later additions. There is a smaller one at Tell-es- 
Safy. The Semitic cult of sacred standing stones is thus proved 
to be of great antiquity; Sellin's discoveries at Taannek and those 
of Bliss at Tell-e§-Safy fully confirm this. Rock-hewn altars 
have also been found, illustrating the prohibition in Ex. xx. 
25, 26, and numerous jars with the skeletons of infants. We 
cannot doubt that the sacrificing of children was practised on a 
large scale among the Canaanites. Their chief deity was Ashtart 
( Astarte) , the goddess of fertility. Numerous images of her have 
been found, but none of the god Baal. The types of the divine 
form vary in the different places. The other images which have 
been found represent Egyptian deities. We must not, however, 
infer that there was a large Egyptian element in the Canaanitish 
Pantheon. What the images do prove is the large amount of 
intercourse between Egypt and Canaan, and the presence of 
Egyptians in the subject country. 

See the 7 'ell-el- Amarna Letters, ed. by Winckler, with translation 
(1896) ; the reports of Macalister in the Pal. Expl. Fund Statements 
from 1903 onwards; Sellin's report of excavations at Tell Ta'annek; 
also H. W. Hogg, " Recent Assyriology," &c., in Inaugural Lectures 
ed. by Prof. A. S. Peake (Manchester University, 190,5). On Biblical 
questions, see Dillmann's commentaries and the Bible dictionaries. 
See further articles Palestine ; Jews. (T. K. C.) 

CANACHUS, a sculptor of Sicyon in Achaea, of the latter part 
of the 6th century B.C. He was especially noted as the author 
of two great statues of Apollo, one in bronze made for the temple 
at Miletus, and one in cedar wood made for Thebes. The coins 
of Miletus furnish us with copies of the former and show the god 
to have held a stag in, one hand and a bow in the other. The 
rigidity of these works naturally impressed later critics. 

CANADA. The Dominion of Canada comprises the northern 
half of the continent of North America and its adjacent islands, 
excepting Alaska, which belongs to the United States, and 
Newfoundland, still a separate colony of the British empire. 
Its boundary on the south is the parallel of latitude 49 , between 
the Pacific Ocean and Lake-of-the- Woods, then a chain of small 
lakes and rivers eastward to the mouth of Pigeon river on the 
north-west side of Lake Superior, and the Great Lakes with 
their connecting rivers to Cornwall, on the St Lawrence. From 
this eastward to the state of Maine the boundary is an artificial 
line nearly corresponding to lat. 45°; then an irregular line 
partly determined by watersheds and rivers divides Canada 
from Maine, coming out on the Bay of Fundy. The western 
boundary is the Pacific on the south, an irregular line a few miles 
inland from the coast along the " pan handle " of Alaska to 
Mount St Elias, and the meridian of 141° to the Arctic Ocean. 
A somewhat similar relationship cuts off Canada from the 
Atlantic on the east, the north-eastern coast of Labrador belong- 
ing to Newfoundland. 

Physical Geography. — In spite of these restrictions of its 
natural coast line on both the Atlantic and the PacifiQ. Canada 



is admirably provided with harbours on both oceans. The Gulf 
of St Lawrence with its much indented shores and the coast of 
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick supply endless harbours, the 
northern ones closed by ice in the winter, but the southern ones 
open all the year round; and on the Pacific British Columbia 
is deeply fringed with islands and fjords with well-sheltered 
harbours everywhere, in strong contrast with the unbroken 
shore of the United States to the south. The long stretches of 
sheltered navigation from the Straits of Belle Isle north of 
Newfoundland to Quebec, and for 600 m. on the British 
Columbian coast, are of great advantage for the coasting trade. 
The greatly varied Arctic coast line of Canada with its large 
islands, inlets and channels is too much clogged with ice to be of 
much practical use, but Hudson Bay, a mediterranean sea 850 m. 
long from north to south and 600 m. wide, with its outlet Hudson 
Strait, has long been navigated by trading ships and whalers, 
and may become a great outlet for the wheat of western Canada, 
though closed by ice except for four months in the summer. Of 
the nine provinces of Canada only three have no coast line on salt 
water, Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan, and the first may 
soon be extended to Hudson Bay. Ontario has a seaboard only 
on Hudson Bay's southern extension, James Bay, and there is 
no probability that the shallow harbours of the latter bay 
will ever be of much importance for shipping, though Churchill 
Harbour on the west side of Hudson Bay may become an im- 
portant grain port. What Ontario lacks in salt water navi- 
gation is, however, made up by the busy traffic of the Great 
Lakes. 

The physical features of Canada are comparatively simple, 
and drawn on a large scale, more than half of its surface sloping 
gently inwards towards the shallow basin of Hudson Bay, with 
higher margins to the south-east and south-west. In the main 
it is a broad trough, wider towards the north than towards the 
south, and unsymmetrical, Hudson Bay occupying much of its 
north-eastern part, while to the west broad plains rise gradually 
to the foot-hills of the Rocky Mountains, the eastern member 
of the Cordillera which follows the Pacific coast of America. 
The physical geography of Canada is so closely bound up with 
its geology that at least an outline of the geological factors 
involved in its history is necessary to understand the present 
physiography. The mountain structures originated in three 
great orogenic periods, the earliest in the Archean, the second at 
the end of the Palaeozoic and the third at the end of the Mesozoic. 

The Archean mountain chains, which enclosed the „ . __ 

r TT , _ ' , Geology. 

present region of Hudson Bay, were so ancient that 

they had already been worn down almost to a plain before the 
early Palaeozoic sediments were laid down. This ruling geological 
and physical feature of the North American continent has been 
named by E. Suess the " Canadian Shield." Round it the 
Palaeozoic sands and clays, largely derived from its own waste, 
were deposited as nearly horizontal beds, in many places still 
almost undisturbed. Later the sediments lying to the south-east 
of this " protaxis," or nucleus of the continent, were pushed 
against its edge and raised into the Appalachian chain of moun- 
tains, which, however, extends only a short distance into Canada. 
The Mesozoic sediments were almost entirely laid down to the 
west and south-west of the protaxis, upon the flat-lying Palaeo- 
zoic rocks, and in the prairie region they are still almost hori- 
zontal; but in the Cordillera they have been thrust up into the 
series of mountain chains characterizing the Pacific coast region. 
The youngest of these mountain chains is naturally the highest, 
and the oldest one in most places no longer rises to heights 
deserving the name of mountains. Owing to this unsymmetric 
development of North America the main structural watershed 
is towards its western side, on the south coinciding with the 
Rocky Mountains proper, but to the northward falling back to 
ranges situated further west in the same mountain region. The 
great central area of Canada is drained towards Hudson Bay, 
but its two largest rivers have separate watersheds, the Mackenzie 
flowing north-west to the Arctic Ocean and the St Lawrence 
north-east towards the Atlantic, the one to the south-west and 
the other to the south-east of the Archean protaxis. While 



GEOGRAPHY] 



CANADA 



h: 



these ancient events shaped the topography in a broad way, its 
final development was comparatively recent, during the glacial 
period, when the loose materials were scoured from some regions 
and spread out as boulder clay, or piled up as moraines in others; 
and the original water-ways were blocked in many places. The 
retreat of the ice left Canada much in its present condition 
except for certain post-glacial changes of level which seem to be 
still in progress. For this reason the region has a very youthful 
topography with innumerable lakes and waterfalls as evidence 
that the rivers have not long been at work. The uneven carving 
down of the older mountain systems, especially that of the 
Archean pro taxis, and the disorderly scattering of glacial material 
provide most of the lake basins so characteristic of Canada. 

Lakes and Rivers. — As a result of the geological causes just 
mentioned many parts of Canada are lavishly strewn with lakes 
of all sizes and shapes, from bodies of water hundreds of miles 
long and a thousand feet deep to ponds lost to sight in the forest. 
Thousands of these lakes have been mapped more or less carefully, 
and every new survey brings to light small lakes hitherto un- 
known to the white man. For numbers they can be compared 
only with those of Finland and Scandinavia in Europe, and for 
size with those of eastern Africa; but for the great extent of 
lake-filled country there is no comparison. From the map it 
will be noticed that the largest and most thickly strewn lakes 
occur within five hundred or a thousand miles of Hudson Bay, 
and belong to the Archean protaxis or project beyond its edges 
into the Palaeozoic sedimentary rocks which lean against it. 
The most famous of the lakes are those of the St Lawrence 
system, which form part of the southern boundary of Canada 
and are shared with the United States; but many others have 
the right to be called " Great Lakes " from their magnitude. 
There are nine others which have a length of more than ioo m., 
and thirty-five which are more than 50 m. long. Within the 
Archean protaxis they are of the most varied shapes, since they 
represent merely portions of the irregular surface inundated by 
some morainic dam at the lowest point. Comparatively few 
have simple outlines and an unbroken surface of water, the great 
majority running into long irregular bays and containing many 
islands, sometimes even thousands in number, as in Georgian 
Bay and Lake-of-the- Woods. In the Cordilleran region on the 
other hand the lakes are long, narrow and deep, in reality sections 
of mountain valleys occupied by fresh water, just as the fjords 
of the adjoining coast are valleys occupied by the sea. The lakes 
of the different regions present the same features as the nearest 
sea coasts but on a smaller scale. The majority of the lakes have 
rocky shores and islands and great variety of depth, many of the 
smaller ones, however, are rimmed with marshes and are slowly 
filling up with vegetable matter, ultimately becoming peat bogs, 
the muskegs of the Indian. Most of Canada is so well watered 
that the lakes have outlets and are kept fresh, but there are a few 
small lakes in southern Saskatchewan, e.g. the Quill and Old 
Wives lakes, in regions arid enough to require no outlets. In 
such cases the waters are alkaline, and contain various salts in 
solution which are deposited as a white rim round the basin 
towards the end of the summer when the amount of water has 
been greatly reduced by evaporation. It is interesting to find 
maritime plants, such as the samphire, growing on their shores 
a thousand miles from the sea and more than a thousand feet 
above it. In many cases the lakes of Canada simply spill over 
at the lowest point from one basin into the next below, making 
chains of lakes with no long or well-defined channels between, 
since in so young a country there has not yet been time for the 
rivers to have carved wide valleys. Thus canoe navigation may 
be carried on for hundreds of miles, with here and there a water- 
fall or a rapid requiring a portage of a few hundred yards or at 
most a mile or two. The river systems are therefore in many 
cases complex and tortuous, and very often the successive 
connecting links between the lakes receive different names. The 
best example of this is the familiar one of the St Lawrence, which 
may be said to begin as Nipigon river and to take the names St 
Mary's, St Clair, Detroit and Niagara, before finally flowing 
from Lake Ontario to the sea under its proper name. As these 



lakes are great reservoirs and settling basins, the rivers which 
empty them are unusually steady in level and contain beautifully 
clear water. The St Lawrence varies only a few feet in the year 
and always has pellucid bluish-green water, while the Mississippi, 
whose tributaries begin only a short distance south of the Great 
Lakes, varies 40 ft. or more between high- and low-water and is 
loaded with mud. The St Lawrence is far the most important 
Canadian river from the historic and economic points of view, 
since it provided the main artery of exploration in early days, and 
with its canals past rapids and between lakes still serves as a 
great highway of trade between the interior of the continent and 
the seaports of Montreal and Quebec. It is probable that 
politically Canada would have followed the course of the States 
to the south but for the planting of a French colony with widely 
extended trading posts along the easily ascended channel of the 
St Lawrence and the Great Lakes, so that this river was the 
ultimate bond of union between Canada and the empire. 

North of the divide between the St Lawrence system and 
Hudson Bay there are many large rivers converging on that 
inland sea, such as Whale river, Big river, East Main, Rupert 
and Nottaway rivers coming in from Ungava and northern 
Quebec; Moose and Albany rivers with important tributaries 
from northern Ontario; and Severn, Nelson and Churchill 
rivers from the south-west. All of these are rapid and shallow, 
affording navigation only for canoes; but the largest of them, 
Nelson river, drains the great Manitoban lakes, Winnipeg, 
Winnipegosis and Manitoba, which are frequented by steamers, 
and receive the waters of Lake-of-the- Woods, Lake Seul and 
many others emptying into Winnipeg river from Ontario; of 
Red river coming in from the United States to the south; and 
of the southern parts of the Rocky Mountains and the western 
prairie provinces drained by the g-reat Saskatchewan river. The 
parallel of 49 approximately separates the Saskatchewan waters 
from the streams going south to the Missouri, though a few 
small tributaries of the latter river begin on Canadian territory. 

The northern part of Alberta and Saskatchewan and much of 
northern British Columbia are drained through the Athabasca 
and Peace rivers, first north-eastwards towards Athabasca Lake, 
then north through Slave river to Great Slave Lake, and finally 
north-west through Mackenzie river to the Arctic Ocean. If 
measured to the head of Peace river the Mackenzie has a length 
of more than 2000 m., and it provides more than 1000 m. of 
navigation for stern-wheel steamers. Unfortunately, like other 
northward-flowing rivers, it does not lead down to a frequented 
sea, and so bears little traffic except for the northern fur-trading 
posts. The Mackenzie forms a large but little-known delta in 
lat. 69 , and in its flood season the head-waters pour down their 
torrents before the thick ice of the lower part with its severer 
climate has yet given way, piling up the ice in great barriers and 
giving rise to widespread floods along the lower reaches. Similar 
flooding takes place in several other important northward-flowing 
rivers in Canada, the St Lawrence at Montreal affording the 
best-known instance. Second among the great north-western 
rivers is the Yukon, which begins its course about 18 m. 
from tide-water on an arm of the Pacific, 2800 ft. above the sea 
and just within the Canadian border. It flows first to the north, 
then to the north-west, passing out of the Yukon territory into 
Alaska, and then south-west, ending in Bering Sea, the northward 
projection of the Pacific, 2000 m. from its head-waters. Of 
its course 1800 m. are continuously navigable for suitable 
steamers, so that most of the traffic connected with the rich 
Klondike gold-fields passes over its waters. The rest of the 
rivers flowing into the Pacific pass through British Columbia 
and are much shorter, though the two southern ones carry a 
great volume of water owing to the heavy precipitation of snow 
and rain in the Cordilleran region. The Columbia is the largest, 
but after flowing north-west and then south for about 400 m., 
it passes into the United States. With its expansions, the 
narrow and deep Arrow lakes, it is an important waterway in the 
Kootenay region. The Fraser, next in size but farther north, 
follows a similar course, entering the sea at Vancouver; while 
the Skeena and Stikine in northern British Columbia are much 



144 



CANADA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



shorter and smaller, owing to the encroachments of Peace and 
Liard rivers, tributaries of the Nelson, on the Cordilleran territory. 
All of these rivers are waterways of some importance in their 
lower course, and are navigated by powerful stern -wheel boats 
supplying the posts and mining camps of the interior with their 
requirements. In most cases they reach the coast through deep 
valleys or profound canyons, and the transcontinental railways 
find their way beside them, the Canadian Pacific following at 
first tributaries of the Columbia near its great bend, and after- 
wards Thompson river and the Fraser; while the Grand Trunk 
Pacific makes use of the valley of the Skeena and its tributaries. 
The divide between the rivers flowing west and those flowing 
east and north is very sharp in the southern Rocky Mountains, 
but there are two lakes, the Committee's Punch Bowl and 
Fortress Lake, right astride of it, sending their waters both east 
and west; and there is a mountain somewhat south of Fortress 
Lake whose melting snows drain in three directions into tribu- 
taries of the Columbia, the Saskatchewan and the Athabasca, 
so that they are distributed between the Pacific, the Atlantic 
(Hudson Bay) and the Arctic Oceans. The divide between the 
St Lawrence and Hudson Bay in eastern Canada also presents 
one or two lakes draining each way, but in a much less striking 
position, since the water-parting is flat and boggy instead of 
being a lofty range of mountains. The rivers of Canada, except 
the St Lawrence, are losing their importance as means of com- 
munication from year to year, as railways spread over the 
interior and cross the mountains to the Pacific; but from the 
point of view of the physical geographer there are few things 
more remarkable than the intricate and comprehensive way in 
which they drain the country. As most of the Canadian rivers 
have waterfalls on their course, they must become of more 
and more importance as sources of power. The St Lawrence 
system, for instance, generates many thousand horse-power at 
Sault Ste Marie, Niagara and the Lachine rapids. All the 
larger cities of Canada make use of water power in this way, and 
many new enterprises of the kind are projected in eastern 
Canada; but the thousands of feet of fall of the rivers in the 
Rocky Mountain region are still almost untouched, though they 
will some day find use in manufactures like those of Switzerland. 
The Archean Protaxis. — The broad geological and geographical 
relationships of the country have already been outlined, but the 
more important sub-divisions may now be taken up with more 
detail, and for that purpose five areas may be distinguished, 
much the largest being the Archean protaxis, covering about 
2,000,000 sq. m. It includes Labrador, Ungava and most of 
Quebec on the east, northern Ontario on the south; and the 
western boundary runs from Lake-of-the-Woods north-west to 
the Arctic Ocean near the mouth of Mackenzie river. The 
southern parts of the Arctic islands, especially Banksland, 
belong to it also. This vast area, shaped like a broad-limbed 
V or U, with Hudson Bay in the centre, is made up chiefly of 
monotonous and barren Laurentian gneiss and granite; but 
scattered through it are important stretches of Keewatin and 
Huronian rocks intricately folded as synclines in the gneiss, as 
suggested earlier, the bases of ancient mountain ranges. The 
Keewatin and Huronian, consisting of greenstones, schists and 
more or less metamorphosed sedimentary rocks, are of special 
interest for their ore deposits, which include most of the important 
metals, particularly iron, nickel, copper and silver. The southern 
portion of the protaxis is now being opened up by railways, but 
the far greater northern part is known only along the lakes and 
rivers which are navigable by canoe. Though once consisting 
of great mountain ranges there are now no lofty elevations 
in the region except along the Atlantic border in Labrador, 
where summits of the Nachvak Mountains are said to reach 
6000 ft. or more. In every other part the surface is hilly or 
mammilated, the harder rocks, such as granite or greenstone, 
rising as rounded knobs, or in the case of schists forming narrow 
ridges, while the softer parts form valleys generally floored with 
lakes. From the summit of any of the higher hills one sees that 
the region is really a somewhat dissected plain, for all the hills 
rise to about the same level with a uniform skyline at the horizon. 



The Archean protaxis is sometimes spoken of as a plateau, but 
probably half of it falls below 1000 ft. The lowland-part includes 
from 100 to 500 m. all round the shore of Hudson Bay, and 
extends south-west to the edge of the Palaeozoic rocks on Lake 
Winnipeg. Outwards from the bay the level rises slowly to an 
average of about 1500 ft., but seldom reaches 2000 ft. except at 
a few points near Lake Superior and on the eastern coast of 
Labrador. In most parts the Laurentian hills are bare roches 
moutonnees scoured by the glaciers of the Ice Age, but a broad 
band of clay land extends across northern Quebec and Ontario 
just north of the divide. The edges of the protaxis are in general 
its highest parts, and the rivers flowing outwards often have a 
descent of several hundred feet in a few miles towards the Great 
Lakes, the St Lawrence or the Atlantic, and in some cases they 
have cut back deep gorges or canyons into the tableland. The 
waterfalls are utilized at a few points to work up into wood pulp 
the forests of spruce which cover much of Labrador, Quebec and 
Ontario. Most of the pine that formerly grew on the Archean 
at the. northern fringe of the settlements has been cut, but the 
lumberman is still advancing northwards and approaching the 
northern limit of the famous Canadian white pine forests, beyond, 
which spruces, tamarack (larch) and poplar are the prevalent 
trees. As one advances northward the timber grows smaller and 
includes fewer species of trees, and finally the timber line is 
reached, near Churchill on the west coast of Hudson Bay and 
somewhat farther south on the Labrador side. Beyond this to 
the north are the " barren grounds " on which herds of caribou 
(reindeer) and musk ox pasture, migrating from north to south 
according to the season. There are no permanent ice sheets 
known on the mainland, of north-eastern Canada, but some of 
the larger islands to the north of Hudson Bay and Straits are 
partially covered with glaciers on. their higher points. Unless 
by its mineral resources, of which scarcely anything is known, 
the barren grounds can never support a white population and 
have little to tempt even the Indian or Eskimo, who visit it 
occasionally in summer to hunt the deer in their migrations. 

The Acadian Region. — The " maritime provinces " of eastern 
Canada, including Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Prince 
Edward Island, may be considered together; and to these 
provinces as politically bounded may be added, from a physical 
point of view, the analogous south-eastern part of Quebec— the, 
entire area being designated the Acadian region- Taken as a 
whole, this eastern part of Canada, with a very irregular and 
extended coast-line on the Gulf of St Lawrence and the Atlantic, 
may be regarded as a northern continuation of the Appalachian 
mountain system that runs parallel to the Atlantic coast of the 
United States. The rocks underlying it have been subjected 
to successive foldings and crumplings by forces acting chiefly 
from the direction of the Atlantic Ocean, with alternating pro- 
longed periods of waste and denudation. The main axis of 
disturbance and the highest remaining land runs through the 
south-eastern part of Quebec,forming the Notre Dame Mountains, 
and terminates in the Gaspe peninsula as the Shickshock 
Mountains. The first-named seldom exceed 1500 ft. in height, 
but the Shickshocks rise above 3000 ft. The province of New . 
Brunswick exhibits approximately parallel but subordinate 
ridges, with wide intervening areas of nearly flat Silurian and 
Carboniferous rocks. The peninsula of Nova Scotia, connected 
by a narrow neck with New Brunswick, is formed by still another 
and more definite system; of parallel ridges, deeply fretted on 
all sides by bays and harbours. A series of quartzites and slates 
referred to the Cambrian, and holding numerous and important 
veins of auriferous quartz, characterize its Atlantic or south- 
eastern side, while valuable coal-fields occur in Cape Breton and 
on parts of its shores on the Gulf of St Lawrence. In New 
Brunswick the Carboniferous rocks occupy a large area, but 
the coal seams so far developed are thin and unimportant. 
Metalliferous ores of various kinds occur both in Nova Scotia 
and in this province, but with the exception of the gold already 
mentioned, have not yet become the objects of important 
industries. Copper and asbestos are the principal mineral 
products of that part of Quebec included in the region now under 



GEOGRAPHY] 



CANADA 



i45 



description, although many other minerals are known and 
already worked to some extent. Extensive tracts of good arable 
land exist in many parts of the Acadian region. Its surface was 
originally almost entirely wooded, and the products of the 
forest continue to hold a prominent place. Prince Edward 
Island, the smallest province of # Canada, is low and undulating, 
based on Permo-Carboniferous and Triassic rocks affording 
a red and very fertile soil, much of which is under cultivation. 

The St Lawrence Plain. — As the St Lawrence invited the 
earliest settlers to Canada and gave the easiest communication 
with the Old World, it is not surprising to find the wealthiest 
and most populous part of the country on its shores and near the 
Great Lakes which it leads up to; and this early development 
was greatly helped by the flat and fertile plain which follows 
it inland for over 600 m. from the city of Quebec to Lake Huron. 
This affords the largest stretch of arable land in eastern Canada, 
including the southern parts of Ontario and Quebec with an 
area of some 38,000 sq. m. In Quebec the chief portion is south 
of the St Lawrence on the low plain extending from Montreal 
to the mountains of the " Eastern Townships," while in Ontario 
it extends from the Archean on the ,north to the St Lawrence 
and Lakes Ontario, Erie and Huron. The whole region is 
underlain by nearly horizontal and undisturbed rocks of the 
Palaeozoic from the Devonian downward. Superimposed on 
these rocks are Pleistocene boulder clay, and clay and sand 
deposited in post-glacial lakes or an extension of the Gulf of 
St Lawrence. Though petroleum and salt occur in the south- 
west peninsula of Ontario, metalliferous deposits are wanting, and 
the real wealth of this district lies in its soil and climate, which 
permit the growth of all the products of temperate regions. 
Georgian Bay and the northern part of Lake Huron with the 
whole northern margin of Lake Superior bathe the foot of the 
Laurentian plateau, which rises directly from these lakes; so 
that the older fertile lands of the country with their numerous 
cities and largely-developed manufactures are cut off by an 
elevated, rocky and mostly forest-covered tract of the Archean 
from the newer and far more extensive farm lands of the west. 
For many years this southern projection of the northern wilder- 
ness was spanned by only one railway, and offered a serious 
hindrance to the development of the regions beyond; but 
settlements are now spreading to the north and rapidly filling 
up the gap between east and west. 

The Interior Continental Plain. — Passing westward by rail 
from the forest-covered Archean with its rugged granite hills, 
the;flat prairie of Manitoba with its rich grasses and multitude of 
flowers comes as a very striking contrast, introducing the Interior 
Continental plain in its most typical development. This great 
plain runs north-westward between the border of the Archean 
prbtaxis and the line of the Rocky Mountains, including most 
of Manitoba, the southern part of Saskatchewan and most of 
Alberta. At the international boundary in lat. 49° it is 800 m. 
wide, but in lat. 56° it has narrowed to 400 m. in width, and to 
the north of lat. 6 2° it is still narrower and somewhat interrupted , 
but preserves its main physical features to the Arctic Ocean 
about the mouth of the Mackenzie. This interior plain of the 
continent represents the area of the ancient sea by which it was 
occupied in Mesozoic times, with a more ancient margin towards 
the north-west against the Archean, where undisturbed lime- 
stones and other rocks of the Silurian and Devonian rest upon 
the downward slope of the Laurentian Shield. Most of the plains 
are underlain by Cretaceous and early Tertiary shales and 
sandstones lying nearly unaltered and undisturbed where they 
were deposited, although now raised far above sea-level, par- 
ticularly along the border of the Rocky Mountains where they 
were thrust up into foot-hills when the range itself was raised. 
These strata have been subjected to great denudation, but owing 
to their comparatively soft character this has been, in the main, 
nearly uniform, and has produced no very bold features of 
relief, Coal and lignitic coal are the principal economic minerals 
met with in this central plain, though natural gas occurs and is 
put to use near Medicine Hat, and " tar sands " along the north- 
eastern edge of the Cretaceous indicate the presence of petroleum. 



Its chief value lies in its vast tracts of fertile soil, now rapidly 
filling up with settlers from all parts of the world, and the grassy 
uplands in the foot-hill region affording perennial pasturage for 
the cattle, horses and sheep of the rancher. Though the region 
is spoken of as a plain there are really great differences of level 
between the highest parts in south-western Alberta, 4500 ft. 
above the sea, and the lowest in the region of Lake Winnipeg, 
where the prairie is at an elevation of only 800 ft. The very 
flat and rich prairie near Winnipeg is the former bed of the glacial 
Lake Agassiz; but most of the prairie to the west is of a gently 
rolling character and there are two rather abrupt breaks in the 
plain, the most westerly one receiving the name of the Missouri 
Coteau. The first step represents a rise to 1600 ft., and the 
second to 3000 ft. on an average. In so flat a country any eleva- 
tion of a few hundred feet is remarkable and is called a mountain, 
so that Manitoba has its Duck and Riding mountains. More 
important than the hills are the narrow and often rather deep 
river valleys cut below the general level, exposing the soft rocks 
of the Cretaceous and in many places seams of lignite. When 
not too deep the river channels may be traced from afar across 
the prairie by the winding band of trees growing beside the water. 
The treeless part of the plains, the prairie proper, has a triangular 
shape with an area twice as large as that of Great Britain. North 
of the Saskatchewan river groves or " bluffs " of trees begin, 
and somewhat farther north the plains are generally wooded, 
because of the slightly more humid climate. It has been proved, 
however, that certain kinds of trees if protected will grow also 
on the prairie, as may be seen around many of the older farm- 
steads. In the central southern regions the climate is arid enough 
to permit of " alkaline " ponds and lakes, which may completely 
dry up in summer, and where a supply of drinking-water is often 
hard to obtain, though the land itself is fertile. 

The Cordilleran Belt. — The Rocky Mountain region as a whole ; 
best named the Cordillera or Cordilleran belt, includes several 
parallel ranges of mountains of different structures and ages, 
the eastern one constituting the Rocky Mountains proper. 
This band of mountains 400 m. wide covers towards the south 
almost all of British Columbia and a strip of Alberta east of the 
watershed, and towards the north forms the whole of the Yukon . 
Territory. While it is throughout essentially a mountainous 
country, very complicated in its orographic features and inter- 
locking river systems, two principal mountain axes form its 
ruling features — the Rocky Mountains proper, above referred 
to, and the Coast Ranges. Between them are many other 
ranges shorter and less regular in trend, such as the Selkirk 
Mountains, the Gold Ranges and the Caribou Mountains. 
There is also in the southern inland region an interior plateau, 
once probably a peneplain, but now elevated and greatly dissected 
by river valleys, which extends north-westward for 500 m. with a 
width of about 100 m. and affords the largest areas of arable 
and pasture land in British Columbia. Similar wide tracts of 
less broken country occur, after a mountainous interruption, in 
northern British Columbia and to some extent in the Yukon 
Territory, where wide valleys and rolling hills alternate with 
short mountain ranges of no great altitude. The Pacific border 
of the coast range of British Columbia is ragged with fjords and 
channels, where large steamers may go 50 or 100 m. inland 
between mountainous walls as on the coast of Norway; and 
there is also a bordering mountain system partly submerged 
forming Vancouver Island and the Queen Charlotte Islands. 
The highest mountains of the Cordillera in Canada are near the 
southern end of the boundary separating Alaska from the Yukon 
Territory, the meridian of 141°, and they include Mount Logan 
(19,540 ft.) and Mount St Elias (18,000 ft.), while the highest 
peak in North America, Mount McKinley (20,000 ft.), is not far 
to the north-west in Alaska. This knot of very lofty mountains, 
with Mount Fairweather and some others, all snowy and glacier- 
clad for almost their whole height, are quite isolated from the 
highest points of the Rocky Mountains proper, which are 1000 m. 
to the south-east. Near the height of land between British 
Columbia and Alberta there are many peaks which rise from 
10,000 to 12,000 ft. above sea-level, the highest which has been 



146 



CANADA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



carefully measured being Mount Robson (13,700 ft.). The next 
range to the east, the Selkirks, has several summits that reach 
10,000 ft. or over, while the Coast Ranges scarcely go beyond 
9000 ft. The snow line in the south is from 7500 to 9000 ft. 
above sea-level, being lower on the Pacific side where the heaviest 
snowfall comes in winter than on the drier north-eastern side. 
The snow line gradually sinks as one advances north-west, 
reaching only 2000 or 3000 ft. on the Alaskan coast. The 
Rockies and Selkirks support thousands of glaciers, mostly not 
very large, but having some 50 or 100 sq. m. of snowfield. All 
the glaciers are now in retreat, with old tree-covered moraines, 
hundreds or thousands of feet lower down the valley. The 
timber line is at about 7500 ft. in southern British Columbia and 
4000 ft. in the interior of the Yukon Territory. On the westward 
slopes, especially of the Selkirks and Coast Ranges, vegetation is 
almost tropical in its density and luxuriance, the giant cedar 
and the Douglas fir sometimes having diameters of 10 ft. or more 
and rising to the height of 150 ft. On the eastern flanks of the 
ranges the forest is much thinner, and on the interior plateau 
and in many of the valleys largely gives way to open grass land. 
The several ranges of the Cordillera show very different types of 
structure and were formed at different ages, the Selkirks with 
their core of pre-Cambrian granite, gneiss and schists coming 
first, then the Coast Ranges, which seem to have been elevated 
in Cretaceous times, formed mainly by a great upwelling of 
granite and diorite as batholiths along the margin of the continent 
and sedimentary rocks lying as remnants on their flanks; and 
finally the Rocky Mountains in the Laramie or early Eocene, 
after the close of the Cretaceous. This latest and also highest 
range was formed by tremendous thrusts from the Pacific side, 
crumpling and folding the ancient sedimentary rocks, which run 
from the Cambrian to the Cretaceous, and faulting them along 
overturned folds. The outer ranges in Alberta have usually 
the form of tilted blocks with a steep cliff towards the north-east 
and a gentler slope, corresponding to the dip of the beds, towards 
the south-west. Near the centre of the range there are broader 
foldings, carved into castle and cathedral shapes. The most 
easterly range has been shown to have been actually pushed 
. 7 m. out upon the prairies. In the Rocky Mountains proper no 
eruptive rocks have broken through, so that no ore deposits of 
importance are known from them, but in the Cretaceous syn- 
clines which they enclose valuable coal basins exist. Coal of a 
bituminous and also semi-anthracite kind is produced, the best 
mined on the Pacific slope of the continent, the coking coals of 
the Fernie region supplying the fuel of the great metal mining 
districts of the Kootenays in British Columbia, and of Montana 
and other states to the south. The Selkirks and Gold Ranges 
west of the Rockies, with their great areas of eruptive rocks, 
both ancient and modern, include most of the important mines 
of gold, silver, copper and lead which give British Columbia its 
leadership among the Canadian provinces as a producer of metals. 
In early days the placer gold mines of the Columbia, Fraser 
and Caribou attracted miners from everywhere, but these have 
declined, and lode mines supply most of the gold as well as the 
other metals. The Coast Ranges and islands also include many 
mines, especially of copper, but up to the present of less value 
than those inland. Most of the mining development is in 
southern British Columbia, where a network of railways and 
waterways gives easy access; but as means of communication 
improve to the north a similar development may be looked for 
there. The Atlin and White Horse regions in northern British 
Columbia and southern Yukon have attracted much attention, 
and the Klondike placers still farther north have furnished 
many millions of dollars' worth of gold. Summing up the 
economic features of the Cordilleran belt, it includes many of 
the best coal-mines and the most extensive deposits of gold, 
copper, lead and zinc of the Dominion, while in silver, nickel and 
iron Ontario takes the lead. When its vast area stretching from 
the international boundary to beyond the Arctic circle is opened 
up, it may be expected to prove the counterpart of the great 
mining region of the Cordillera in the United States to the 
south. 



Climate. — In a country like Canada ranging from lat. 42° 
to the Arctic regions and touching three oceans, there must 
be great variations of climate. If placed upon Europe it would 
extend from Rome to the North Cape, but latitude is of course 
only one of the factors influencing climate, the arrangement of 
the ocean currents and of the areas of high and low pressure 
making a very wide difference between the climates of the two 
sides of the Atlantic. In reality the Pacific coast of Canada, 
rather than the Atlantic coast, should be compared with western 
Europe, the south-west corner of British Columbia, in lat. 48° 
to 50 , having a climate very similar to the southern coast of 
England. In Canada the isotherms by no means follow parallels 
of latitude, especially in summer when in the western half of the 
country they run nearly north-west and south-east; so that the 
average temperature of 55° is found about on the Arctic circle 
in the Mackenzie river valley, in lat. 50° near the Lake-of-the- 
Woods, in lat. 55° at the northern end of James Bay, and in 
lat. 49 on Anticosti in the Gulf of St Lawrence. The proximity 
of the sea or of great lakes, the elevation and the direction of 
mountain chains, the usual path of storms and of prevalent 
winds, and the relative length of day and amount of sunshine in 
summer and winter all have their effect on different parts of 
Canada. One cannot even describe the climate of a single 
province, like Ontario or British Columbia, as a unit, as it varies 
so greatly in different parts. Details should therefore be sought 
in articles on the separate provinces. In eastern Canada Ungava 
and Labrador are very chill and inhospitable, owing largely 
to the iceberg-laden current sweeping down the coast from 
Davis Strait, bringing fogs and long snowy winters and a 
temperature for the year much below the freezing-point. South 
of the Gulf of St Lawrence, however, the maritime provinces 
have much more genial temperatures, averaging 40° F. for the 
year and over 60° for the summer months. The amount of rain 
is naturally high so near the sea, 40 to 56 in., but the snowfall 
is not usually excessive. In Quebec and northern Ontario the 
rainfall is diminished, ranging from 20 to 40 in., while the snows 
of winter are deep and generally cover the ground from the begin- 
ning of December to the end of March. The winters are brilliant 
but cold, and the summers average from 6o° to 65° F., with 
generally clear skies and a bracing atmosphere which makes 
these regions favourite summer resorts for the people of the 
cities to the south. The winter storms often sweep a little to 
the north of southern Ontario, so that what falls as snow in the 
north is rain in the south, giving a much more variable winter, 
often with too little snow for sleighing. The summers are warm, 
with an average temperature of 65 and an occasional rise to 90 . 
As one goes westward the precipitation diminishes to 17-34 in. 
in Manitoba and 13-35 for the other two prairie provinces, most 
of this, however, coming opportunely from May to August, the 
months when the growing grain most requires moisture. There 
is a much lighter snowfall in winter than in northern Ontario 
and Quebec, with somewhat lower temperatures. The snow 
and the frost in the ground are considered useful as furnishing 
moisture to start the wheat in spring. The precipitation in 
southern Saskatchewan and Alberta is much more variable than 
farther east and north, so that in some seasons crops have been 
a failure through drought, but large areas are now being brought 
under irrigation to avoid such losses. The prairie provinces 
have in most parts a distinctly continental climate with com- 
paratively short, warm summers and long, cold winters, but 
with much sunshine in both seasons. In southern Alberta, 
however, the winter cold is often interrupted by chinooks, 
westerly winds which have lost their moisture by crossing the 
mountains and become warmed by plunging down to the plains, 
where they blow strongly, licking up the snow and raising the 
temperature, sometimes in a few hours, from 20 to 40 F. 
In this region cattle and horses can generally winter on the grass 
of the ranges without being fed, though in hard seasons there 
may be heavy losses. Northwards chinooks become less frequent 
and the winter's cold increases, but the coming of spring is not 
much later, and the summer temperatures, with sunshine for 
twenty hours out of twenty-four in June, are almost the same 



FLQRA AND FAUNA] 



CANADA 



147 



as for hundreds of miles to the south, so that most kinds of grain 
and vegetables ripen far to the north in the Peace river valley. 
Though the climate of the plains is one of extremes and often 
of rather sudden changes, it is brisk and invigorating and of 
particular value for persons affected with lung troubles. 

The climate of the Cordilleran region presents even more 
variety than that of the other provinces because of the ranges 
of mountains which run parallel to the Pacific. Along the coast 
itself the climate is insular, with little frost in winter and mild 
heat in summer, and with a very heavy rainfall amounting to 
100 in. on the south-west side of Vancouver Island and near 
Port Simpson. Within 100 m. inland beyond the Coast Range 
the precipitation and general climate are, like those of Ontario, 
comparatively mild and with moderate snowfall towards the 
south, but with keen winters farther north. The interior 
plateau may be described as arid, so that irrigation is required 
if crops are to be raised. The Selkirk Mountains have a heavy 
rainfall and a tremendous snowfall on their western flanks, but 
very much less precipitation on their eastern side. The Rocky 
Mountains have the same relationships but the whole precipita- 
tion is much less than in the Selkirks. The temperature depends 
largely, of course, on altitude, so that one may quickly pass from 
perpetual snow above 8000 ft. in the mountains to the mild, moist 
climate of Vancouver or Victoria, which is like that of Devonshire, 
In the far north of the territories of Yukon, Mackenzie and 
Ungava the climate has been little studied, as the region is un- 
inhabited by white men except at a few fur-trading posts. 
North-west and north-east of Hudson Bay it becomes too severe 
for the growth of trees as seen on the " barren grounds," and 
there may be perpetual ice beneath the coating of moss which 
serves as a non-conducting covering for the " tundras." There 
is, however, so little precipitation that snow does not accumulate 
on the surface to form glaciers, the summer's sun having warmth 
enough to thaw what falls in the winter. Leaving out the mari- 
time provinces, southern Ontario, southern Alberta and the 
Pacific coast region on the one hand, and the Arctic north, 
particularly near Hudson Bay, on the other, Canada has snowy 
and severe winters, a very short spring with a sudden rise of 
temperature, short warm summers, and a delightful autumn 
with its " Indian summer." There is much sunshine, and the 
atmosphere is bracing and exhilarating. 

Flora. — The general flora of the Maritime Provinces, Quebec 
and Eastern Ontario is much the same, except that in Nova 
Scotia a number of species are found common also to Newfound- 
land that are not apparent inland. Professor Macoun gives 
us a few notable species — Calluna tulgaris, Salisb., Alchemilla 
vulgaris, L., Rhododendron maximum, L., Ilex glabia, Gray, 
Hudsonia ericoides, L., Gaylussacia dumosa, F. and G., and 
Schezaea pusilla, Pursh. In New Brunswick the western flora 
begins to appear as well as immigrants from the south, while 
in the next eastern province, Quebec, the flora varies consider- 
ably. In the lower St Lawrence country and about the Gulf 
many Arctic and sub-Arctic species are found. On the shores 
of the lower reaches Thalictrum alpinum, L., Vesicaria arctica, 
Richards, Arapis alpina, L., Saxifraga oppositifolia, L., Ceras- 
tium alpinum, L., Saxifraga cacspitosa, L. and S. have been 
gathered, and on the Shickshock Mountains of Eastern Canada 
Silene acaulis, L., Lychnis alpina, L., Cassiope hypnoides, Don., 
Rhododendron laponicum, Wahl, and many others. On the 
summit of these hills (4000 ft.) have been collected Aspidium 
aculeatum, Swartz var., Scopulinum, D. C. Eaton, Pellaea densa, 
Hook, Gallium kamtschaticum, Sletten. From the city of 
Quebec westwards there is a constantly increasing ratio of 
southern forms, and when the mountain (so called) at Montreal 
is reached the representative Ontario flora begins. In Ontario 
the flora of the northern part is much the same as that of the 
Gulf of St Lawrence, but from Montreal along the Ottawa and 
St Lawrence valleys the flora takes a more southern aspect, and 
trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants not found in the eastern 
parts of the Dominion become common. In the forest regions 
north of the lakes the vegetation on the shores of Lake Erie 
requires a high winter temperature, while the east and north 



shores of Lake Superior have a boreal vegetation that shows 
the summer temperature of this enormous water-stretch to be 
quite low. Beyond the forest country of Ontario come the 
prairies of Manitoba and the North-West Territories. In the 
ravines the eastern flora continues for some distance, and then 
disappearing gives place to that of the prairie, which is found 
everywhere between the Red river and the Rocky Mountains 
except in wooded and damp localities. Northwards, in the 
Saskatchewan country, the flora of the forest and that of the 
prairies intermingle. On the prairies and the foot-hills of the 
Rocky Mountains a great variety of grasses are found, several 
years' collection resulting in 42 genera and 156 species. Of 
the best hay and pasture grasses, Agropyrum Elymus, Stipa, 
Bromus, Agrostis, Calamagrostes and Poa, there are 59 species. 
Besides the grasses there are leguminous plants valuable for 
pasture — Astragalus, Vicia (wild vetch), Lathyrus (wild pea) of 
which there are many species. The rose family is represented 
by Prunus, Potentilla, Fragaria, Rosa, Rubus and Amelanchier. 

About the saline lakes and marshes of the prairie country are 
found Ruppia maritima, L., Heliotropium curassavicum, L., 
natives of the Atlantic coast, and numerous species of Cheno- 
podium, Atriplex and allied genera. The flora of the forest belt 
of the North-West Territories differs little from that of northern 
Ontario. At the beginning of the elevation of the Rocky Moun- 
tains there is a luxurious growth of herbaceous plants, including 
a number of rare umbellifers. At the higher levels the vegetation 
becomes more Arctic. Northwards the valleys of the Peace and 
other rivers differ little from those of Quebec and the northern 
prairies. On the western slope of the mountains, that is, the 
Selkirk and Coast ranges as distinguished from the eastern or 
Rocky Mountains range, the flora differs, the climate being damp 
instead of dry. In some of the valleys having an outlet to the 
south the flora is partly peculiar to the American desert, and 
such species as Purshia tridentata, D.C., and Artemisia tridentata, 
Nutt., and species of Gilia, Aster and Erigonum are found that 
are not met with elsewhere. Above Yale, in the drier part of the 
Fraser valley, the absence of rain results in the same character 
of flora, while in the rainy districts of the lower Fraser the 
vegetation is so luxuriant that it resembles that of the tropics. 
So in various parts of the mountainous country of British 
Columbia, the flora varies according to climatic conditions. 
Nearer the Pacific coast the woods and open spaces are filled 
with flowers and shrubs. Liliaceous flowers are abundant, 
including Erythoniums, Trilliums, Alliums, Brodeaeas, Fritil- 
larias, Siliums, Camassias and others. 

Fauna. — The larger animals of Canada are the musk ox and 
the caribou of the barren lands, both having their habitat in the 
far north; the caribou of the woods, found in all the provinces 
except in Prince Edward Island; the moose, with an equally 
wide range in the wooded country; the Virginia deer, in one or 
other of its varietal forms, common to all the southern parts; 
the black -tailed deer or mule deer and allied forms, on the western 
edge of the plains and in British Columbia; the pronghorn 
antelope on the plains, and a small remnant of the once plentiful 
bison found in northern Alberta and Mackenzie, now called 
" wood buffalo." The wapiti or American elk at one time 
abounded from Quebec to the Pacific, and as far north as the 
Peace river, but is now found only in small numbers from 
Manitoba westwards. In the mountains of the west are the 
grizzly bear, black bear and cinnamon bear. The black bear 
is also common to most other parts of Canada; the polar bear 
everywhere along the Arctic littoral. The large or timber wolf 
is found in the wooded districts of all the provinces, and on the 
plains there is also a smaller wolf called the coyote. In British 
Columbia the puma or cougar, sometimes called the panther 
and the American lion, still frequently occurs; and in all parts the 
common fox and the silver fox, the lynx, beaver, otter, marten, 
fisher, wolverene, mink, skunk and other fur-bearing animals. 
Mountain and plain and Arctic hares and rabbits are plentiful 
or scarce in localities, according to seasons or other circumstances. 
In the mountains of British Columbia are the bighorn or Rocky 
Mountain sheep and the Rocky Mountain goat, while the 



148 



CANADA 



[POPULATION 



saddleback and white mountain sheep have recently been dis- 
covered in the northern Cordillera. The birds of Canadaare mostly 
migratory, and are those common to the northern and central 
states of the United States. The wildfowl are, particularly in 
the west, in great numbers; their breeding-grounds extending 
from Manitoba and the western prairies up to Hudson Bay, the 
barren lands and Arctic coasts. The several kinds of geese- 
including the Canada goose, the Arctic goose or wavey, the 
laughing goose, the brant and others — all breed in the northern 
regions, but are found in great numbers throughout the several 
provinces, passing north in the spring and south in the autumn. 
There are several varieties of grouse, the largest of which is the 
grouse of British Columbia and the pennated grouse and the 
prairie chicken of Manitoba and the plains, besides the so-called 
partridge and willow partridge, both of which are grouse. While 
the pennated grouse (called the prairie chicken in Canada) has 
always been plentiful, the prairie hen (or chicken) proper is a 
more recent arrival from Minnesota and the Dakotas, to which 
it had come from Illinois and the south as settlement and accom- 
panying wheatfields extended north. In certain parts of Ontario 
• the wild turkey is occasionally found and the ordinary quail, but 
in British Columbia is found the California quail, and a larger bird 
much resembling it called the mountain partridge. The golden 
eagle, bald-headed eagle, osprey and a large variety of hawks 
are common in Canada, as are the snowy owl, the horned owl 
and others inhabiting northern climates. The raven frequently 
remains even in the colder parts throughout the winter; these, 
with the Canada jay, waxwing, grosbeak and snow bunting, 
being the principal birds seen in Manitoba and northern districts 
in that season. The rook is not found, but the common crow 
and one or two other kinds are there during the summer. Song- 
birds are plentiful, especially in wooded regions, and include the 
American robin, oriole, thrushes, the cat-bird and various 
sparrows; while the English sparrow, introduced years ago, 
has multiplied excessively and become a nuisance in the towns. 
The smallest of the birds, the ruby throat humming-bird, is 
found everywhere, even up to timber line in the mountains. 
The sea-birds include a great variety of gulls, guillemots, cor- 
morants, albatrosses (four species), fulmars and petrels, and in 
the Gulf of St Lawrence the gannet is very abundant. Nearly 
all the sea-birds of Great Britain are found in Canadian waters 
or are represented by closely allied species. (A. P. C.) 

A rea and Population. — The following table shows the division 
of the Dominion into provinces and districts, with the capital, 
population and estimated area of each. 









Area in sq.m. 


Population. 


Official Capital. 




1881. 


1901. 


Provinces — 
Ontario 
Quebec 
Nova Scotia 
New Brunswick 
Manitoba 
British Columbia 
Prince Edward I 
Saskatchewan 
Alberta 

Districts — 
Keewatin 
Yukon 
Mackenzie . 
Ungava 
Franklin 


;land 




260,862 

351.873 
21,428 

27-985 

73.732 

372,630 

2,184 

250,650 

253.540 

516,571 
196,976 
562,182 
354.961 
500,000 


1,926,922 

1.359.027 

440,572 

321,233 

62,260 

49.459 
108,891 ,., 

\ 25,515 

V 30,931 


2,182,947 
1,648,898 , 

-. 459,574 . 
331,120 
255,211! 

178,657 
103,259 
91,46c 1 
72,841 1 

8,800 

27,219 

5,216 

5,H3 


Toronto 

Quebec 

Halifax 

Fredericton 

Winnipeg 

Victoria 

Charlottetown 

Regina 

Etdroonton 

Dawson City 


The Dominion 


3.745,574 2 


4,324,810 


5,37i,3 I 5 


Ottawa 



1 The census is taken every ten years, save in these three provinces, 
where it is taken every five. Their population in 1906 was: — 
Manitoba, 360,000; Saskatchewan, 257,000; Alberta, 184,000. 

2 The areas assigned to Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick and British Columbia are exclusive of the territorial 
seas, that to Quebec is exclusive of the Gulf of St Lawrence (though 
including the islands lying within it), and that to Ontario is exclusive 
of the Canadian portion of the Great Lakes. About 500,000 sq. m. 
belong to the Arctic region and 125,755 sq. m. are water. 



In 1867 the Dominion was formed by the union of the provinces 
of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec (Lower Canada) and 
Ontario (Upper Canada). In 1869 the North-west Territories 
were purchased from the Hudson's Bay Company, from a corner 
of which Manitoba was carved in the next year. In 187 1 British 
Columbia and in 1873 Prince Edward Island joined the Dominion. 
The islands and other districts within the Arctic circle became 
a portion of the Dominion only in 1880, when all British posses- 
sions in North America, excepting Newfoundland, with its 
dependency, the Labrador coast, and the Bermuda islands, 
were annexed to Canada. West of the province of Ontario, then 
inaccurately defined, the provinces of Manitoba and British 
Columbia were the only organized divisions of the western 
territory, but in 1882 the provisional districts of Assiniboia, 
Athabasca, Alberta and Saskatchewan were formed, leaving 
the remainder of the north-west as unorganized territories, a 
certain portion of the north-east, called Keewatin, having 
previously been placed under the lieutenant-governor of Mani- 
toba. In 1905 these four districts were formed into the two 
provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan, and Keewatin was 
placed directly under the federal government. In 1898, owing 
to the influx of miners, the Yukon territory was constituted 
and granted a limited measure of self-government. The un- 
organized territories are sparsely inhabited by Indians, the 
people of the Hudson's Bay Company's posts and a few 
missionaries; 

Population. — The growth of population is shown by the 
following figures:— 1871, 3,485,761; 1881, 4,324,810; 1891, 
4,833,239; 1901, 5,371,315. Since 1901 the increase has been 
more rapid 1 , and in 1905 alone 144,621 emigrants entered Canada, 
of whom about two-fifths were from Great Britain and one- third 
from the United States. 

The density of population is greatest in Prince Edward Island, 
where it is> 51-6 to the sq. m.; in Nova Scotia it is 22-3; New 
Brunswick, n-8; Ontario, 9-9; Manitoba, 4^9; Quebec, 4-8; 
Saskatchewan, i-oi; Alberta, 0-72; British Columbia, 0-4; 
the Dominion, i-8. This is not an indication of the density in 
settled parts; as in Quebec, Ontario and the western provinces 
there are large unpopulated districts, the area of which enters 
into the calculation. The population is composed mainly of 
English- or French-speaking people, but there are German 
settlements of some extent in Ontario, and of late years there 
has been a large immigration into the western provinces and 
territories from other parts of Europe, including Russians, 
Galicians, Polish and Russian Jews, and Scandinavians. These 
foreign elements have been assimilated 
more slowly than in the United States, 
but the process is being hastened by 
the growth of a national consciousness. 
English, Irish and Scots and their 
descendants form the bulk of the popula- 
tion of Ontario, French- Canadians of 
Quebec, Scots of Nova Scotia, the Irish 
of a large proportion of New Brunswick. 
In the other provinces the latter race 
tends to confine itself to the cities. 
Manitoba is largely peopled from On- 
tario, together with a decreasing number 
of half-breeds — i.e. children of white 
fathers (chiefly French or Scottish) and 
Indian mothers — who originally formed 
the bulk of its inhabitants. Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, particularly the ranching 
districts, are chiefly peopled by English 
immigrants, though since 1900 there has 
also been a large influx from the United States. British 
Columbia contains a mixed population, of which in the 
mining districts a large proportion is American. Since 187 1 
a great change has taken place throughout the west, 
i.e. from Lake Superior to the Pacific. Then Manitoba was 
principally inhabited by English and French half-breeds (or 
Metis), descendants of Hudson's Bay Company's employes, or 



FINANCE] 



CANADA 



149 



adventurous pioneers from Quebec, together with Scottish-settlers, 
descendants of those brought out by Lord Selkirk {q.v.) : , some 
English army pensioners and others, ana the van of the immigra- 
tion that shortly followed from Ontario. Beyond Manitoba 
buffalo were still running on the plains, and British Columbia 
having lost its mining population of 1839 and i860 was largely 
inhabited by Indians, its white population which centred in ithe 
city of Victoria being principally English. 

French is the language of the province of Quebec, though 
English is much spoken in the cities; both languages are officially 
recognized in that province, and in the federal courts and parlia- 
ment. Elsewhere, English is exclusively used, save by the 
newly-arrived foreigners. The male sex is slightly the more 
numerous in all the provinces except Quebec, the greatest 
discrepancy existing in British Columbia. 

The birth-rate is high, especially in Quebec, where families 
of twelve to twenty are not infrequent, but is decreasing in 
Ontario. In spite of the growth of manufactures since 1878, 
there are few large cities, and the proportion of the urban 
population to the rural is small. Herein it differs noticeably 
from Australia. Between 1801 and 1001 the number of farmers 
in Ontario, Quebec and the Maritime provinces decreased, and 
there seemed a prospect of the Country being divided into a 
manufacturing east and an agricultural west, but latterly large 
tracts in northern Ontario and Quebec have proved suitable for 
cultivation and are being opened up. 

Religion. — There is no established church in Canada, but in 
the province of Quebec certain rights have been allowed to the 
Roman Catholic church ever since the British conquest. In that 
province about 87% of the population belongs to this church, 
which is strong in the others also, embracing over two-fifths of 
the population of the Dominion. The Protestant3 have shown 
a tendency to subdivision, and many curious' and ephemeral 
sects have sprung up; of late years, however, the various sections 
of Presbyterians, Methodists and Baptists have united, and a 
working alliance has been formed between Presbyterians, 
Methodists and Congregationalists. The Methodists are the 
strongest, and in Ontario form over 30% of the population. 
Next come the Presbyterians, the backbone of the maritime 
provinces. The Church of England is strong in the cities, 
especially Toronto. Save among the Indians, active disbelief 
in Christianity is practically non-existent, and even among them 
90% are nominally Christian. 

Indians. — The Indian population numbers over 100,000 and 
has slightly increased since 1881. Except in British Columbia 
and the unorganized territories, nearly all of these are on reserva- 
tions, where they are under government supervision, receiving 
an annuity in money and a certain amount v of provisions; and 
where, by means of industrial schools and other methods, 
civilized habits are slowly superseding their former mode of life: 
British Columbia has about 2s, 000 , most °f whom are along the 
coast, though one of the important tribes, the Shuswaps, is in 
the interior. An almost equal number are found in the three 
prairie provinces. Those of Ontario, numbering about 20,000, 
are more civilized than those of the west, many of them being 
good farmers. In all the provinces they are under the Control 
of the federal government which acts as their trustee, investing 
the money which they derive chiefly from the sale of lands and 
timber, and making a large annual appropriation for the pay- 
ment of their annuities, schools and other expenses. While 
unable to alienate their reservations, save to the federal govern- 
ment, they are not confined to them, but wander at pleasure. 
As they progress towards a settled mode of life, they are given 
the franchise; this process is especially far advanced in Ontario'. 
A certain number are found in all the provinces. They make 
incomparable guides for fishing, hunting and surveying parties, 
on which they. will cheerfully undergo the greatest hardships, 
though tending'to shrink from regular employment in cities or 
on farms. 

Orientals. — The Chinese and Japanese numbered in 1906 about 
^o.ooo, of whom, three-quarters were in British Columbia, though 
they were spreading through the other provinces, chiefly as 



laundrymen. They are as a rule frugal, industrious and law- 
abiding, and are feared rather for their virtues than for theiT 
vices. Since 1885 a tax has been imposed on all Chinese entering 
Canada, and in 1903 this was raised to £100 ($500). British 
Columbia endeavoured in 1905 to lay a similar restriction on the 
Japanese, but the act was disallowed by the federal legislature. 

Finance. — Since 1871 the decimal system of coinage, corre- 
sponding to that of the United States, has been the only one 
employed. One dollar is divided into one hundred cents 
(£i=$4-86f). The money in circulation consists of a limited 
number of notes issued by the federal government, and the 
notes of the chartered banks, together with gold, silver and 
Copper coin. Previous to 1906 this coin was minted in England, 
but in that year a branch of the royal mint was established at 
Ottawa. Though the whole financial system rests on the main- 
tenance of the gold standard, gold coin plays a much smaller 
part in daily business than in England, France or Germany. 
United States' notes and silver are usually received at par; those 
of other nations are subject to a varying rate of exchange. ' 

The banking system, which retains many features of the 
Scotch system, on which it was originally modelled, combines 
security for the note-holders and depositors with prompt increase 
and diminution of the circulation in accordance with the varying 
conditions of trade. This is especially important in a country 
where the large wheat crop renders an additional quantity of 
money necessary on very short notice during the autumn and 
winter. There has been no successful attempt to introduce the 
"wild cat " banking , which had such disastrous effects in the early 
days of the western states. Since federation no chartered bank 
has been compelled to liquidate without paying its note-holders 
in full. The larger banks are chartered by the federal govern- 
ment; in the smaller towns a number of private banks remain, 
but their importance is small, owing to the great facilities given 
to the chartered banks by the branch system. In 1906 there 
were 34 chartered banks, of which the branches had grown from 
619 in 1900 to 1565 in 1906, and the number since then has 
rapidly increased. The banks are required by law to furnish 
to the finance minister detailed monthly statements which are 
published in the official gazette. Once in every ten years the 
banking act is revised and weaknesses amended. Clearing- 
houses have been established in the chief commercial centres. 
In October 1906 the chartered banks had an aggregate paid-up 
capitalof over $94,000,000 with a note circulation of $83,000,000 
and deposits of over $553,000,000. 

There are four kinds of savings banks in Canada: — :(i) the 
post-office savings banks; (2) the government savings banks 
of the Maritime provinces taken over at federation and being 
gradually merged with the former; (3) two special savings banks 
in the cities bf Montreal and Quebec; (4) the savings bank 
departments of the chartered banks. The rate of interest 
allowed by the government is now 3%, and the chartered banks 
usually follow the government rate. The amount on deposit in 
the first three increased from $5,057,607 in 1868 to $89,781,546 
in October 1906. The returns from the chartered banks do not 
specify the deposits in these special accounts. 

The numerous loan and trust companies also possess certain 
banking privileges. 

The federal revenue is derived mainly from customs and 
excise duties, with subsidiary amounts from mining licences, 
timber dues, post-office, &c. Both the revenue and the expendi- 
ture have in recent years increased greatly, the revenue rising 
from$46,743,io3 in 1899 to $71,186,073 in 1905 and the expendi- 
ture keeping pace with it. The debt of the Dominion in 1873 
and in 1905 was:— 





1873. 


1905. 


Gross, debt . . 

Assets . , • 
Net debt . ' . 


$129,743,432 
30,894,970 
98,848,462 


fo77,678,58o 
111,454,413 
266,224,167 



While the debt had thus increased faster than the population, 
it weighed less heavily on the people, not only on account of the 



*5o 



CANADA 



[COMMERCE 



great increase in commercial prosperity, but of the much lower 
rate of interest paid, and of the increasing revenue derived from 
assets. Whereas in 1867 the rate of interest was over 4%, and 
interest was being paid on former provincial loans of over 6%, 
Canada could in 1906 borrow at 3%. 

The greater part of the debt arises from the assumption of die 
debts of the provinces as they entered federation, expenditure 
on canals and assistance given to railways. It does not include 
the debts incurred by certain provinces since federation, a 
matter which concerns themselves alone. A strong prejudice 
against direct taxation exists, and none is imposed by the 
federal government, though it has been tentatively introduced 
in the provinces, especially in Quebec, in the form of liquor 
hcences, succession duties, corporation taxes, &c. British 
Columbia has a direct tax on property and on income. The 
cities, towns and municipalities resort to it to supply their local 
needs, and there is a tendency, especially pronounced in Ontario 
on account of the excellence of her municipal system, to devolve 
the burden of educational payments, and others more properly 
provincial, upon the municipal authorities on the plea of 
decentralization. 

Commerce and Manufactures. — Since 1867 the opening up of 
the fertile lands in the north-west, the increase of population, 
the discovery of new mineral fields, the construction of railways 
and the great improvement of the canal system have changed 
the conditions, methods and channels of trade. The great 
extension during the same period of the use of water-power has 
been of immense importance to Canada, most of the provinces 
possessing numerous swift-flowing streams or waterfalls, capable 
of generating a practically unlimited supply of power. 

In 1878 the introduction of the so-called " National Policy " 
of protection furthered the growth of manufactures. Protection 
still remains the trade policy of Canada, though modified by a 
preference accorded to imports from Great Britain and from most 
of the British colonies. The tariff, though moderate as compared 
with that of the United States, amounted in 1907 to about 28% 
on dutiable imports and to about 16% on total imports. 
Tentative attempts at export duties have also been made. Inter- 
provincial commerce is free, and the home market is greatly 
increasing in importance. The power to make commercial 
treaties relating to Canada rests with the government of Great 
Britain, but in most cases the official consent of Canada is 
required, and for many years no treaty repugnant to her interests 
has been signed. The denunciation by the British government 
in 1897 of commercial treaties with Belgium and Germany, at 
the request of Canada, was a striking proof of her increasing 
importance, and attempts have at various times been made to 
obtain the full treaty-making power for the federal government. 
The great proportion of the foreign trade of the Dominion is 
with the United States and Great Britain. From the former 
come most of the manufactured goods imported and large 
quantities of raw materials; to the latter are sent food-stuffs. 
Farm products are the most important export, and with the 
extension of this industry in the north-west provinces and in 
northern Ontario will probably continue to be so. Gold, silver, 
copper and other minerals are largely exported, chiefly in an 
unrefined state and almost entirely to the United States. The 
exports of lumber are about equally divided between the two. 
Formerly, the logs were shipped as square timber, but now 
almost always in the form of deals, planks or laths; such square 
timber as is still shipped goes almost entirely to Great Britain. 
Wood pulp for the manufacture of paper is exported chiefly to 
the United States. To that country fresh fish is sent in large 
quantities, and there is an important trade in canned salmon 
between British Columbia and Great Britain. Few of the 
manufacturers do more than compete with the foreigner for an 
increasing share of the home market. In this they have won 
increased success, at least five-sixths of the manufactured goods 
used being produced within the country, but a desire for further 
protection is loudly expressed. Though the chief foreign 
commerce is with Great Britain and the United States, the 
Dominion has trade relations with all the chief countries of the 



world and maintains commercial agents among them. Her 
total foreign trade (import and export) was in 1906 over 
£100,000,000. 

Shipping. — The chief seaports from east to west are Halifax, 
N.S., Sydney, N.S., St John, N.B., Quebec and Montreal 
on the Atlantic; and Vancouver, Esquimalt and Victoria, B.C., 
on the Pacific. Halifax is the ocean terminus of the Intercolonial 
railway; St John, Halifax and Vancouver of the Canadian 
Pacific railway. Prince Rupert, the western terminus of the 
Grand Trunk Pacific railway, was in 1906 only an uninhabited 
harbour, but was being rapidly developed into a flourishing city. 
Though Halifax and St John are open in winter, much of the 
winter trade eastwards is done through American harbours, 
especially Portland, Maine, owing to the shorter railway journey. 
Esquimalt, Halifax, Kingston (Ont.) and Quebec have well- 
equipped graving-docks. The coast, both of the ocean and of 
the Great Lakes, is well lighted and protected. The decay of the 
wooden shipbuilding industry has lessened the comparative 
importance of the mercantile marine, but there has been a great 
increase in the tonnage employed in the coasting trade and upon 
inland waters. Numerous steamship lines ply between Canada 
and Great Britain; direct communication exists with France, 
and the steamers of the Canadian Pacific railway run regularly 
to Japan and to Australia. 

Internal Communications. — Her splendid lakes and rivers, 
the development of her canal system, and the growth of railways 
have made the interprovincial traffic of Canada far greater than 
her foreign; and the portfolio of railways and canals is one of 
the most important in the cabinet. There are, nominally, about 
200 railways, but about one-half of these, comprising five-sixths 
of the mileage, have been amalgamated into four great systems: 
the Grand Trunk, the Canadian Pacific, the Canadian Northern 
and the Intercolonial; most of the others have been more or less 
consolidated. With the first of the four large systems is connected 
the Grand Trunk Pacific. The Intercolonial, as also a line across 
Prince Edward Island, is owned and operated by the federal 
government. Originally built chiefly as a military road, and 
often the victim of political exigencies, it has not been a commer- 
cial success. With the completion of the Grand Trunk Pacific 
(planned for 191 1) and the Canadian Northern, the country 
would possess three trans-continental railways, and be free from 
the reproach, so long hurled at it, of possessing length without 
breadth. 

At numerous points along the frontier, connexion is made 
with the railways of the United States. Liberal aid is given 
by the federal, provincial and municipal governments to the 
construction of railways, amounting often to more than half 
the cost of the road. The government of Ontario has con- 
structed a line to open up the agricultural and mining districts 
of the north of the province, and is operating it by means of a 
commission. Practically all the cities 1 and large towns have 
electric tramways, and electricity is also used as a motive power 
on many lines uniting the larger cities with the surrounding 
towns and villages. Since 1903 the Dominion government 
has instituted a railway commission of three members with 
large powers of control over freight and passenger rates and 
other such matters. Telephone and express companies are also 
subject to its jurisdiction. From its decisions an appeal may 
be made to the governor-general in council, i.e. to the federal 
cabinet. It has exercised a beneficial check on the railways 
and has been cheerfully accepted by them. In Ontario a some- 
what similar commission, appointed by the local government, 
exercises extensive powers of control over railways solely 
within the province, especially over the electric lines. 

Despite the increase in railway facilities, the waterways remain 
important factors in the transportation of the country. Steamers 
ply on lakes and rivers in every province, and even in the far 
northern districts of Yukon and Mackenzie. Where necessary 
obstacles are surmounted by canals, on which over £22,000,000 
have been spent, chiefly since federation. The St Lawrence 

1 In Canada a city must have over 10,000 inhabitants, a town 
over 2000. 



EDUCATION, &c] 



CANADA 



151 



river canal system from Lake Superior to tide water overcomes 
a difference of about 600 ft., and carries large quantities of 
grain from the west to Montreal, the head of summer navigation 
on the Atlantic. These canals have a minimum depth of 14 ft. 
on the sills, and are open to Canadian and American vessels 
on equal terms; the equipment is in every respect of the most 
modern character. So great, however, is the desire to shorten 
the time and distance necessary for the transportation of grain 
from Lake Superior to Montreal that an increasing quantity 
is taken by water as far as the Lake Huron and Georgian Bay 
ports, and thence by rail to Montreal. Numerous smaller canals 
bring Ottawa into connexion with Lake Champlain and the 
Hudson river via Montreal; by this route the logs and sawn 
lumber of Ontario, Quebec and New Brunswick find their 
destination. It has long been a Canadian ideal to shorten the 
distance from Lake Superior to the sea. With this object 
in view, the Trent Valley system of canals has been built, 
connecting Lake Ontario with the Georgian Bay (an arm of 
Lake Huron) via Lake Simcoe. In 1899 and subsequently 
surveys were made with a view to connecting the Georgian 
Bay through the intervening water stretches, with the Ottawa 
river system, and thence to Montreal. In 1903 all tolls were 
taken off the Canadian canals, greatly to the benefit of trade. 

Mining. — The mineral districts occur from Cape Breton 
to the islands in the Pacific and the Yukon district. Nova 
Scotia, British Columbia and the Yukon are still the most 
productive, but the northern parts of Ontario are proving 
rich in the precious metals. Coal, chiefly bituminous, occurs 
in large quantities in Nova Scotia, British Columbia and in 
various parts of the north-west (lignite), though most of the 
anthracite is imported from the United States, as is the greater 
part of the bituminous coal used in Ontario. Under the stimulus 
of federal bounties, the production of pig iron and of steel, 
chiefly from imported ore, is rapidly increasing. Bounties on 
certain minerals and metals are also given by some of the 
provinces. The goldfields of the Yukon, though still valuable, 
show a lessening production. Sudbury, in Ontario, is the centre 
of the nickel production of the world, the mines being chiefly 
in American hands, and the product exported to the United 
States. Of the less important minerals, Canada is the world's 
chief producer of asbestos and corundum. Copper, lead, silver 
and all the important metals are mined in the Rocky Mountain 
district. From Quebec westwards, vast regions are still partly, 
or completely, unexplored. 

Lumber. — In spite of great improvidence, and of loss by 
fire, the forest wealth of Canada is still the greatest in the 
world. Measures have been taken, both by the provincial and 
the federal governments, for its preservation, and for re-foresta- 
tion of depleted areas. Certain provinces prohibit the exporta- 
tion of logs to the United States, in order to promote the growth 
of saw-mills and manufactures of wooden-ware within the 
country, and the latter have of late years developed with great 
rapidity. The lumber trade of British Columbia has suffered 
from lack of an adequate market, but is increasing with the 
greater demand from the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
A great development has also taken place in Ontario and the 
eastern provinces, through the use of spruce and other trees, 
long considered comparatively useless, in the manufacture of 
wood-pulp for paper-making. 

Crown Lands. — Large areas of unoccupied land remain in 
all the provinces (except Prince Edward Island). In Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, the so-called railway belt of British 
Columbia and the territories, these crown lands are chiefly 
owned by the federal parliament; in the other provinces, by 
the local legislatures. So great is their extent that, in spite 
of the immigration of recent years, the Dominion government 
gives a freehold of 160 acres to every bona fide settler, subject 
to certain conditions of residence and the erection of buildings 
during the first three years. Mining and timber lands are sold 
or leased at moderate rates. All crown lands controlled by 
the provinces must be paid for, save in certain districts of 
Ontario, where free grants are given, but the price charged is 



low. The Canadian Pacific railway controls large land areas 
in the two new provinces; and large tracts in these provinces 
are owned by land companies. Both the Dominion and the 
provincial governments have set apart certain areas to be 
preserved, largely in their wild state, as national parks. Of 
these the most extensive are the Rocky Mountains Park at Banff, 
Alberta, owned by the Dominion government, and the "Algon- 
quin National Park," north-east of Lake Simcoe, the property 
of Ontario. 

Fisheries. — The principal fisheries are those on the Atlantic 
coast, carried on by the inhabitants of Nova Scotia, New Bruns- 
wick, Prince Edward Island, and the eastern section of Quebec. 
Cod, herring, mackerel and lobsters are the fish chiefly caught, 
though halibut, salmon, anchovies and so-called sardines are 
also exported. Bounties to encourage deep-sea fishing have 
been given by the federal government since 1882. In British 
Columbian waters the main catch is of salmon, in addition to 
which are halibut, oolachan, herring, sturgeon, cod and shell- 
fish. The lakes of Ontario and Manitoba produce white fish, 
sturgeon and other fresh-water fish. About 80,000 persons find 
more or less permanent employment in the fishing industry, 
including the majority of the Indians of British Columbia. 

The business of fur-seal catching is carried on to some extent 
in the North Pacific and in Bering Sea by sealers from Victoria, 
but the returns show it to be a decreasing industry, as well as 
one causing friction with the United States. Indeed, no depart- 
ment of national life has caused more continual trouble between 
the two peoples than the fisheries, owing to different laws 
regarding fish protection, and the constant invasion by each 
of the territorial waters of the other. 

Education.— The British North America Act imposes on the 
provincial legislatures the duty of legislating on educational 
matters, the privileges of the denominational and separate 
schools in Ontario and Quebec being specially safeguarded. In 
1871, the New Brunswick legislature abolished the separate 
school system, and a contest arose which was finally settled by 
the authority of the legislature being sustained, though certain 
concessions were made to the Roman Catholic dissentients, 
Subsequently a similar difficulty arose in Manitoba, where the 
legislature in 1890 abolished the system of separate schools 
which had been established in 1871. After years of bittei 
controversy, in which a federal ministry was overthrown, a 
compromise was arranged in 1897, in which the Roman Catholic 
leaders have never fully acquiesced. In the provinces of Alberta 
and Saskatchewan, formed in 1905, certain educational privileges, 
(though not amounting to a separate school system) were 
granted to the Roman Catholics. 

All the provinces have made sacrifices to insure the spread of 
education. In 1901, 76% of the total population could read 
and write, and 86% of those over five years of age. These 
percentages have gradually risen ever since federation, especially 
in the province of Quebec, which was long in a backward state. 
The school systems of all the provinces are, in spite of certain 
imperfections, efficient and well-equipped, that of Ontario 
being especially celebrated. A fuller account of their special 
features will be found under the articles on the different 
provinces. 

Numerous residential schools exist and are increasing in 
number with the growth of the country in wealth and culture. 
In Quebec are a number of so-called classical colleges, most of 
them affiliated with Laval University. 

Higher education was originally organized by the various 
religious bodies, each of which retains at least one university 
in more or less integral connexion with itself. New Brunswick, 
Ontario and Manitoba support provincial universities at 
Fredericton, Toronto and Winnipeg. Those of most importance 1 
are: — Dalhousie University, Halifax, N.S. (1818); the Univer- 
sity of New Brunswick, Fredericton, N.B. (1800); McGill 
University, Montreal, Que. (1821); Laval University, Quebec, 
and Montreal, Que. (1852); Queen's University, Kingston, Ont. 
(1841); the University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont. (1827); 
1 The date of foundation is given in brackets. 



152 



CANADA 



[AGRICULTURE 



Trinity University, Toronto, Ont. (1852); Victoria Uni- 
versity, Toronto, Ont. (1836); the University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, Ont. (1848); the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Man. (1877). 

Of these McGill (see Montreal) is especially noted for the 
excellence of its training in practical and applied science. Many 
of the students, especially in the departments of medicine and 
theology, complete their education in the United States, Britain 
or Europe. 

Most of the larger towns and cities contain public libraries, 
that of Toronto being especially well-equipped. 

Of the numerous learned and scientific societies, the chief is 
the Royal Society of Canada, founded in 188 1. 

Defence. — The command in chief of all naval and military 
forces is vested in the king, but their control rests with the 
federal parliament. The naval forces, consisting of a fisheries 
protection service, are under the minister of marine and fisheries, 
the land forces under the minister of militia and defence. Prior 
to 1903, command of the latter was vested in a British officer, 
but since then has been entrusted to a militia council, of which 
the minister is president. The fortified harbours of Halifax 
(N.S.) and Esquimalt (B.C.) were till 1005 maintained and 
garrisoned by the imperial government, but have since been 
taken over by Canada. This has entailed the increase of the 
permanent force to about 5000 men. Previously, it had num- 
bered about 1000 (artillery, dragoons, infantry) quartered in 
various schools, chiefly to aid in the training of the militia. In 
this all able-bodied citizens between the ages of 18 and 6b are 
nominally enrolled, but the active militia consists of about 
45,000 men of all ranks, in a varying state of efficiency. These 
cannot be compelled to serve outside the Dominion, though 
special corps may be enlisted for this purpose, as was done 
during the war in South Africa (1899-1902). At Quebec is a 
Dominion arsenal, rifle and ammunition factories. Cadet corps 
flourish in most of the city schools. At Kingston (Ont.) is the 
Royal Military College, to the successful graduates of which a 
certain number of commissions in the British service is annually 
awarded. 

Justice and Crime. — Justice is well administered throughout 
the country, and even in the remotest mining camps there has 
been little of the lawlessness seen in similar districts of Australia 
and the United States. For this great credit is due to the 
" North-west mounted police," the " Riders of the Plains," 
a highly efficient body of about seven hundred men, Under the 
control of the federal government. Judges are appointed for 
life by the Dominion parliament, and cannot be removed save by 
impeachment before that body, an elaborate process never 
attempted since federation, though more than once threatened. 
From the decisions of the supreme court of Canada appeal may be 
made to the judicial committee of the imperial privy council. 

Authorities. — The Canadian Geological Survey has published 
(Ottawa, since 1845) a series of reports covering a great number 
of subjects. Several provinces have bureaus or departments of 
mines, also issuing reports. The various departments of the federal 
and the provincial governments publish annual reports and frequent 
special reports, such as the decennial report on the cefisus, from 
which a vast quantity of information may be obtained. Most of this is 
summed up in the annual Statistical Year Book of Canada and in the 
Official Handbook of the Dominion of Canada, issued at frequent 
intervals by the Department of the Interior. See also J. W. White 
(the Dominion geographer), Atlas of Canada (1906); J. Castell 
Hopkins, Canada: an Encyclopaedia (6 vols., 1898-1900); The 
Canadian Annual Review (yearly since 1902), replacing H. J. 
Morgan's Canadian Annual Register (1878-1886) ; Sir J. W. Dawson, 
Handbook of Canadian Geology (1889); George Johnson, Alphabet 
of First Things in Canada (3rd ed., 1898); A. G. Bradley, Canada 
in the Twentieth Century (1903) ; Transactions of the Royal Society 
of Canada (yearly since 1883) ; R. C. Breckenridge, The Canadian 
Banking System (1895); A. Shortt, History of Canadian Banking 
(1902-1906); Sir S. Fleming, The Intercolonial (1876); John 
Davidson, "Financial Relations of Canada and the Provinces" 
(Economic Journal, June 1905) ; Transactions of the Royal Society 
of Canada, passim, for valuable papers by H. M. Ami, A. P. Coleman, 
G. M. Dawson, W. F. Ganong, B. J. Harrington and others; also 
articles in Canadian Economics and in the Handbook of Canada, 
published on the occasion of visits of the British Association. 

(W. L. G.) 



' , Agriculture 

Canada is pre-eminently an agricultural country. Of the 
total population (estimated in 1907 at 6,440,000) over 50% are 
directly engaged in practical agriculture. In addition large 
numbers are engaged in industries arising out of agriculture; 
among these are manufacturers of agricultural implements, 
millers of flour and oatmeal, curers and packers of meat, makers 
of cheese and butter, and persons occupied in the transportation 
and commerce of grain, hay, live stock, meats, butter, cheese, 
milk, eggs, fruit and various other products. The country is 
splendidly formed for the production of food. Across the 
continent there is a zone about 3500 m. long and as wide as or 
wider than France, with (over a large part of this area) a climate 
adapted to the production of foods of superior quality. Since 
the opening of the 20th century, great progress has been made 
in the settlement and agricultural development of the western 
territories between the provinces of Manitoba and British 
Columbia. The three " North- West Provinces " (Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, Alberta) have a total area of 369,869,898 acres, 
of which 12,853,120 acres are water. In 1906 their population 
was 808,863, nearly double what it was in 1901. The land in 
this vast area varies in virginal fertility, but the best soils are 
very rich in the constituents of plant food. Chemical analyses 
made by Mr F. T. Shutt have proved that soils from the North- 
West Provinces contain an average of 18,000 ib of nitrogen, 
15,580 lb of potash and 6,700 lb of phosphoric acid per acre, 
these important elements of plant food being therefore present 
in much greater abundance than, they are in ordinary cultivated 
Europea,n soils of good quality. The prairie lands of Manitoba 
and Saskatchewan produce wheat of the finest quality. Horse 
and cattle ranching is practised in Alberta, where the milder 
winters allow of the outdoor wintering of live stock to a greater 
degree than is possible in the colder parts of Canada. The 
freezing of the soil in winter, which at first sight seems a drawback, 
retains the soluble nitrates which might otherwise be drained out. 
The copious snowfall protects vegetation, supplies moisture, and 
contributes nitrogen to the soil. The geographical position of 
Canada, its railway systems and steamship service for freight 
across the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, are favourable to the 
extension of the export trade in farm products to European and 
oriental countries. Great progress has been made in the develop- 
ment of the railway systems of Canada, and the new trans- 
continental line from the Atlantic to the Pacific, passing through 
Saskatchewan via Saskatoon, and Alberta via Edmonton, 
renders possible of settlement large areas of fertile wheat-growing 
soil. The canal system of Canada, linking together the great 
natural waterways, is also of much present and prospective 
importance in cheapening the transportation of agricultural 
produce. 

Of wheat many varieties are grown. The methods of cultiva- 
tion do not involve the application of so much hand labour per 
acre as in Europe. The average yield of wheat for the crops. 
whole of Canada is nearly 20 bushels per acre. In 
1901 the total production of wheat in Canada was 55! million 
bushels; In 1906 the estimated total production was 136 
million bushels. The total wheat acreage, which at the census 
of 1901 was 4,224,000, was over 6,200,000 in 1906, an increase of 
nearly two million acres in five years. 

Up to the close of the 19th century, Ontario was the largest 
wheatrgrowing province in Canada. In 1900 the wheat acreage 
in Ontario was 1,487,633, producing 28,418,907 bushels, an 
average yield of 19-10 bushels per acre. Over three-quarters of 
this production was of fall or winter wheat, the average yield 
of which in Ontario over a series of years since 1883 had been 
about 20 bushels per acre. But the predominance in wheat- 
growing has now shifted to the new prairie regions of the west. 
A census taken in 1906 shows that the total, acreage of wheat in 
the North- West Provinces was 5,062,493, yielding 110,586,824 
bushels, an average in a fairly normal season of 21-84 bushels 
per acre. Of this total wheat acreage, 2,721,079 acres were in 
Manitoba, 2,117,484 acres in Saskatchewan, and 223,930 acres 



AGRICULTURE] 



■CANADA 



J 53 



in Alberta, with average yields per acre at the rates of 20-02 
bushels in Manitoba, 23-70 in Saskatchewan and 26-49 m Alberta. 
In these provinces spring wheat is almost universally sown, 
except in Alberta where fall or winter wheat is also sown to a 
considerable extent. Summer fallowing for wheat is a practice 
that has gained ground in the North-West Provinces. Land 
ploughed and otherwise tilled, but left unseeded during the 
summer, is sown with wheat in the succeeding autumn or spring. 
Whep,t on summer fallow land yielded, according to the North- 
West census of 1006, from 2 to 8 bushels per acre more than that 
sown on other land. Summer fallowing is, however, subject to 
One drawback: the strong growth which it induces is apt to 
retard the ripening of the grain. Canada is clearly destined to 
rank as one of the most important grain-producing countries of 
the world. The northern limits of the wheat-growing areas have 
not been definitely ascertained; but samples of good wheat 
were grown in 1907 at Fort Vermilion on the Peace river, nearly 
600 m. north of Winnipeg in lat. 58-34 and at Fort Simpson on 
the Mackenzie river in lat. 61-52, more than 800 m. north of 
Winnipeg and about 1000 m. north of the United States 
boundary. As a rule the weather during the harvesting period 
permits the grain to be gathered safely without damage from 
sprouting. Occasionally in certain localities in the north-west 
the grain is liable to injury from frost in late summer; but as 
the proportion of land under cultivation increases the climate 
becomes modified and the danger from frost is appreciably less. 
The loss from this cause is also less than formerly, because 
any grain unfit for export is now readily purchased for the 
feeding of animals in Ontario and other parts of eastern 
Canada. 

Suitable machinery for cleaning the grain is everywhere in 
general use, so that weed seeds are removed before the wheat 
is ground. This gives Canadian wheat excellent milling pro- 
perties, and enables the millers to turn out flour uniform in 
quality and of high grade as to keeping properties. Canadian 
flour has a high reputation in European markets. It is known 
as flour from which bakers can make the best quality of bread, 
and also the largest quantity per barrel, the quantity of albumi- 
noids being greater in Canadian flour than in the best brands of 
European. Owing to its possession of this characteristic of what 
millers term " strength," i.e. the relative capacity of flour to 
make large loaves of good quality, Canadian flour is largely in 
demand for blending with the flour of the softer English wheats. 
For this reason some of the strong Canadian wheats have com- 
manded in the home market 5s. and 6s. a quarter more than 
English-grown wheat. At the general census of 1901 the number 
of flouring and grist mill establishments, each employing five 
persons and over, was returned at 400, the number of employes 
being 4251 and the value of products $31,835,873. A special 
census of manufactures in 1906 shows that these figures had 
grown in 1905 to 832 establishments, 5619 employes and 
$56,703,269 value of the products. There is room for a great 
extension in the cultivation of wheat and the manufacture and 
exportation of flour. 

In the twelve months of 1907 Canada exported 37,503,057 
bushels of wheat of the value of $34,132,759 and 1,858,485 
barrels of flour of the value of $7,626,408. The corresponding 
figures in 1 900 were — wheat,i6,844,65obushels,value, $11,995,488, 
and flour, 768,162 bushels, value, $2,791,885. 

Oats of fine quality are grown in large crops from Prince 
Edward Island on the Atlantic coast to Vancouver Island on the 
Pacific coast. Over large areas the Canadian soil and climate 
are admirably adapted' for producing oats of heavy weight per 
bushel. In all the provinces of eastern Canada the acreage under 
o.ats greatly exceeds that under wheat. The annual average 
oat crop in all Canada is estimated at about 248 million bushels. 
As the total annual export of oats is now less than three million 
bushels the home consumption is large, and this is an advantage 
in maintaining the fertility of the soil. In 1907 the area under 
oats in Ontario was 2,932,509 acres and yielded 83,524,301 
bushels, the area being almost as large as that of the acreage 
under hay and larger than the combined total of the other 



principal cereals grown in the province. Canadian oatmeal is 
equal in, quality to the best. It is prepared in different forms, 
and in various degrees of fineness. 

Barley was formerly grown for export to the United States 
for malting purposes. After the raising of the duty on barley 
under the McKinley and Dingley tariffs that trade was practically 
destroyed and Canadian farmers were obliged to find other uses 
for this crop. Owing to the development of the trade with the 
mother-country in dairying and meat products, barley as a home 
feeding material has become more indispensable than ever. 
Before the adoption of the McKinley tariff about nine million 
bushels of barley were exported annually, involving the loss of 
immense stores of plant food. In 1907, with an annual produc- 
tion of nearly fifty million bushels, only a trifling percentage was 
exported, the rest being fed at home and exported in the form of 
produce without loss from impoverishment of the soil. The 
preparation Of pearl or pot barley is an incidental industry. 

Rye is cultivated successfully, but is seldom used for human 
food. Flour from wheat, meal from oats, and meal from Indian 
corn are preferred. 

Buckwheat flour is used in considerable quantities in some 
districts for the making of buckwheat cakes, eaten with maple 
syrup. These two make an excellent breakfast dish, character- 
istic of Canada and some of the New England states. There are 
also numerous forms of preparations from cereals, sold as break- 
fast foods, which, owing to the high quality of the grains grown 
in Canada and the care exercised in their manufacture, compare 
favourably with similar products in other countries. 

Peas in large areas are grown free from serious trouble with 
insect pests. Split peas for soup, green peas as vegetables and 
sweet peas for canning are obtained of good quality. 

Vegetables are grown everywhere, and form a large part of 
the diet of the people. There is a comparatively small export, 
except in the case of turnips and potatoes and of vegetables 
which have been canned or dried. Besides potatoes, which 
thrive well and yield large quantities of excellent quality, there 
are turnips, carrots, parsnips and beets. The cultivation of 
sugar beets for the manufacture of sugar has been established 
in Ontario and in southern Alberta, where in 1906 an acreage 
under this crop of 3344 yielded 27,211 tons, an average of 
8-13 tons per acre. Among the common vegetables used in the 
green state are peas, beans, cabbage, cauliflowers, asparagus, 
Indian corn, onions, leeks, tomatoes, lettuce, radish, celery, 
parsley, cucumbers, pumpkins, squash and rhubarb. Hay, of 
good quality of timothy (Phleum pratense), and also of timothy 
and clover, is grown over extensive areas. For export it is put 
up in bales of about 150 lb each. Since 1899 a new form of 
pressing has been employed, whereby the hay is compressed to 
stow in about 70 cub. ft. per ton. This has been a means of 
reducing the ocean freight per ton. The compact condition 
permits the hay to be kept with less deterioration of quality 
than under the old system of more loose baling. Austrian brome 
grass (Bromus inermis) and western rye grass (Agropyrum 
tenerum) are both extensively grown for hay in the North- West 
Provinces. 

The almost universal adoption of electrical traction in towns 
has not led to the abandonment of the breeding of horses to 
the extent that was at one time anticipated. Heavy 
draught horses are reared in Ontario, and to a less stock. 

but increasing extent in the North-West Provinces, 
the breeds being mainly the Clydesdale and the Shire. 
Percherons are also bred in different parts of Canada, and a 
few Belgian draught horses have been introduced. Good 
horses suitable for general work on farms and for cabs, omni- 
buses, and grocery and delivery wagons, are plentiful for local 
markets and for export. Thoroughbred and pure bred hackney 
stallions are maintained in private studs and by agricultural 
associations throughout the Dominion, and animals for cavalry 
and mounted infantry remounts are produced in all the provinces 
including those of the North-West. Useful carriage horses 
and saddle horses are bred in many localities. Horse ranching 
is practised largely in Alberta. There are no government 



i54 



CANADA 



[AGRICULTURE 



stud farms. The total number of horses in the Dominion was 
estimated on the basis of census returns at 2,019,824 for the 
year 1907, an increase of 609,309 since 1901. 

Cattle, sheep, swine and poultry are reared in abundance. 
The bracing weather of Canadian winters is followed by the 
warmth and humidity of genial summers, under which crops 
grow in almost tropical luxuriance, while the cool evenings and 
nights give the plants a robustness of quality which is not 
to be found in tropical regions, and also make life for the various 
domestic animals wholesome and comfortable. In the North- 
West Provinces there are vast areas of prairie land, over which 
cattle pasture, and from which thousands of fat bullocks 
are shipped annually. Throughout other parts bullocks are 
fed on pasture land, and also in stables on nourishing and 
succulent feed such as hay, Indian corn fodder, Indian corn 
silage, turnips, carrots, mangels, ground oats, barley, peas, 
Indian corn, rye, bran and linseed oil cake. The breeding 
of cattle, adapted for the production of prime beef and of 
dairy cows for the production of milk, butter and cheese, 
has received much attention. There is government control of 
the spaces on the steamships in which the cattle are carried, 
and veterinary inspection prevents the exportation of diseased 
animals. 

A considerable trade has been established in the exportation 
of dressed beef in cold storage, and also in the exportation 
of meat and other foods in hermetically sealed receptacles. 
By the Meat and Canned Foods Act of 1907 of the Dominion 
parliament and regulations thereunder, the trade is carried 
on under the strictest government supervision, and no canned 
articles of food may be exported unless passed as absolutely 
wholesome and officially marked as such by government 
inspectors. There is a considerable trade in " lunch tongues." 

The cattle breeds are principally those of British origin. 
For beef, shorthorns, Herefords, Galloways and Aberdeen- 
Angus cattle are bred largely, whilst for dairying purposes, 
shorthorns, Ayrshires, Jerseys, Guernseys and Holstein-Friesians 
prevail. The French-Canadian cattle are highly esteemed in 
eastern Canada, especially by the farmers of the French provinces. 
They are a distinct breed of Jersey and Brittany type, and 
are stated to be descended from animals imported from France 
by the early settlers. The estimated number of cattle in Canada 
in 1907 was 7,439,051, an increase of 2,066,547 over the figures 
of the census of 1901. 

All parts of the Dominion are well adapted for sheep; but 
various causes, amongst which must be reckoned the prosperity 
of other branches of agriculture, including wheat-growing and 
dairying, have in several of the provinces contributed to prevent 
that attention to this branch which its importance deserves, 
though there are large areas of rolling, rugged yet nutritious 
pastures well suited to sheep-farming. In the maritime provinces 
and in Prince Edward Island sheep and lambs are reared in large 
numbers. In Ontario sheep breeding has reached a high degree 
of perfection, and other parts of the American continent draw 
their supplies of pure bred stock largely from this province. 
All the leading British varieties are reared, the Shropshire, 
Oxford Down, Leicester and Cotswold breeds being most 
numerous. There are also excellent flocks of Lincolns and South- 
downs. The number of sheep and lambs in Canada was estimated 
for the year 1907 at 2,830,785, as compared with 2,465,565 
in 1901. 

Pigs, mostly of the Yorkshire, Berkshire and Tamworth 
breeds, are reared and fattened in large numbers, and there 
is a valuable export trade in bacon. Canadian hogs are fed, 
as a rule, on feeds suited for the production of what are known 
as " fleshy sides." Bacon with an excess of fat is not wanted, 
except in the lumber camps; consequently the farmers of 
Canada have cultivated a class of swine for bacon having 
plenty of lean and firm flesh. The great extension of the dairy 
business has fitted in with the rearing of large numbers of 
swine. Experimental work has shown that swine fattened with 
a ration partly of skim-milk were lustier and of a more healthy 
appearance than swine fattened wholly on grains. Slaughtering 



and curing are carried on chiefly at large packing houses. The 
use of mechanical refrigerating plants for chilling the pork 
has made it practicable to cure the bacon with the use of a 
small percentage of salt, leaving it mild in flavour when delivered 
in European markets. Regular supplies are exported during 
every week of the year. Large quantities of lard, brawn and 
pigs' feet are exported. In 1907 the number of pigs in Canada 
was estimated at 3,530,060, an increase of 1,237,385 over the 
census record of 1901. Turkeys thrive well, grow to a fine 
size and have flesh of tender quality. Chickens are raised 
in large numbers, and poultry-keeping has developed greatly 
since the opening of the 20th century. Canadian eggs are 
usually packed in cases containing thirty dozens each. Card- 
board fillers are used which provide a separate compartment 
for each egg. There are cold storage warehouses at various 
points in Canada, at which the eggs are collected, sorted and 
packed before shipment. These permit the eggs to be landed 
in Europe in a practically fresh condition as to flavour, with 
the shells quite full. 

Canada has been called the land of milk and honey. Milk 
is plentiful, and enters largely into the diet of the people. With 
a climate which produces healthy, vigorous animals, 
notably free from epizootic diseases, with a fertile products. 
soil for the growth of fodder crops and pasture, with 
abundance of pure air and water, and with a plentiful supply 
of ice, the conditions in Canada are ideal for the dairying 
industry. Large quantities of condensed milk, put up in her- 
metically sealed tins, are sold for use in mining camps and 
on board steamships. The cheese is chiefly of the variety known 
as " Canadian Cheddar." It is essentially a food cheese rather 
than a mere condiment, and 1 lb cf it will furnish as much 
nourishing material as 2j lb cf the best beefsteak. The industry 
is largely carried on by co-operative associations of farmers. 
The dairy factory system was introduced into Canada in 1864, 
and from that time the production and exportation of cheese 
grew rapidly. Legislation was passed to protect Canadian 
dairy produce from dishonest manipulation, and soon Canadian 
cheese obtained a deservedly high reputation in the British 
markets. In 1891 cheese factories and creameries numbered 
1733, and in 1899 there were 3649. In 1908 there were 4355 
of these factories, of which 1284 were in Ontario, 2806 in 
Quebec, and 265 in the remaining seven provinces of Canada. 
Those in Ontario are the largest in size. Amongst the British 
imports of cheese the Canadian product ranks first in quality, 
whilst in quantity it represents about 72% of the total value 
of the cheese imports, and 84 % of the total value of the imports 
of that kind of cheese which is classed as Cheddar. In 1906 
the total exports of cheese to all countries from Canada reached 
215,834,543 R> °f the value of $24,433,169. 

Butter for export is made in creameries, where the milk, 
cream and butter are handled by skilled makers. The creameries 
are provided with special cold storage rooms, into which the 
butter is placed on the same day in which it is made. From 
them it is carried in refrigerator railway cars and in cold storage 
chambers on steamships to its ultimate destination. For the 
export trade it is packed in square boxes made of spruce or 
some other odourless wood. These are lined with parchment 
paper, and contain each 56 lb net of butter. The total export of 
butter from Canada in 1906 was 34,031,525 lb, of the value 
of $7,075,539. According to a census of manufactures taken 
in 1906, the total value of factory cheese and butter made in 
Canada during that year was $32,402,265. 

There are large districts lying eastward of the Great Lakes 
and westward of the Rocky Mountains, where apples of fine 
quality can be grown; and there are other smaller pruits. 
areas in which pears, peaches and grapes are grown 
in quantities in the open air. The climate is favourable to the 
growth of plums, cherries, strawberries, raspberries, currants, 
gooseberries, etc. There are many localities in which cran- 
berries are successfully grown, and in which blueberries also 
grow wild in great profusion. 

Apples and pears are the chief sorts of fruit exported. The 



AGRICULTURE] 



CANADA 



1 SS 



high flavour, the crisp, juicy flesh and the long-keeping qualities 
of the Canadian apples are their chief merits. Apples are 
exported in barrels and also in boxes containing about one 
bushel each. Large quantities are also evaporated and exported. 
Establishments for evaporating fruit are now found in most 
of the larger apple-growing districts, and canning factories and 
jam factories have been established in many parts of Canada, and 
are conducted with advantage and profit. 

The chief fruit-growing districts have long been in southern 
and western Ontario and in Nova Scotia; but recently much 
attention has been devoted to fruit-growing in British Columbia, 
where large areas of suitable land are available for the cultivation 
of apples, pears and other fruits. In some parts of the semi- 
arid districts in the interior of the province irrigation is being 
successfully practised for the purpose of bringing land under 
profitable cultivation for fruit. Collections of fruit grown in 
British Columbia have received premier honours at the com- 
petitive exhibitions of the Royal Horticultural Society in London, 
where their high quality and fine colour have been greatly 
appreciated. 

Wine is made in considerable quantities in the principal 
vine-growing districts, and in several localities large vineyards 
have been planted for this purpose. An abundance of cider 
is also made in all the large apple-growing districts. 

Honey is one of the minor food-products of Canada, and 
in many localities bees have abundance of pasturage. Canadian 
honey for colour, flavour and substance is unsurpassed. Maple 
sugar and syrup are made in those areas of the country where 
the sugar-maple tree flourishes. The syrup is used chiefly 
as a substitute for jam or preserved fruits, and the sugar is 
used in country homes for sweetening, for cooking purposes 
and for the making of confectionery. The processes of manu- 
facture have been improved by the introduction of specially 
constructed evaporators, and quantities of maple sugar and 
syrup are annually exported. 

Tobacco is a new crop which has been grown in Canada 
since 1904. Its cultivation promises to be successful in parts 
of Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia. 

The department of agriculture of the Dominion government 
renders aid to agriculture in many ways, maintaining the 
state aid experimental farms and various effective organiza- 
tions for assisting the live-stock, dairying and fruit- 
growing industries, for testing the germination and purity of 
agricultural seeds, and for developing the export trade in 
agricultural and dairy produce. The health of animals branch, 
through which are administered the laws relating to the 
contagious diseases of animals, and the control of quarantine 
and inspection stations for imported animals, undertakes also 
valuable experiments on the diseases of farm live-stock, including 
glanders in horses, tuberculosis in cattle, &c. The policy of 
slaughtering horses reacting to the mallein test has been success- 
fully initiated by Canada, the returns for 1908 from all parts 
of the country indicating a considerable decrease from the 
previous year in the number of horses destroyed and the amount 
of compensation paid. A disease of cattle in Nova Scotia, 
known as the Pictou cattle disease, long treated as contagious, 
has now been demonstrated by the veterinary officers of the 
department to be due to the ingestion of a weed, the ragwort, 
Senecio Jacobea. Hog cholera or swine fever has been almost 
eradicated. A laboratory is maintained for bacteriological and 
pathological researches and for the preparation of preventive 
vaccines. Canada is entirely free from rinderpest, pleuro- 
pneumonia and foot-and-mouth disease. 

The work of the live-stock branch is directed towards the 
improvement of the stock-raising industry, and is carried on 
through the agencies of expert teachers and stock judges, the 
systematic distribution of pure-bred breeding stock, the yearly 
testing of pure-bred dairy herds, the supervision of the accuracy 
of the registration of pure-bred animals and the nationalization 
of live-stock records. The last two objects are secured by act 
of the Dominion parliament passed in 1905. Under this act 
a, record committee, appointed annually by the pedigree stud, 



herd and flock book associations of Canada, perform the duties 
of accepting the entries of pure-bred animals for the respective 
pedigree registers, and are provided with an office and with 
stationery and franking privileges by the government. Pedigree 
certificates are certified as correct by an officer of the department 
of agriculture, so that in Canada there exist national registration 
and government authority for the accuracy of pedigree live- 
stock certificates. The government promotes the extension 
of markets for farm products; it maintains officers in the 
United Kingdom who make reports from time to time on the 
condition in which Canadian goods are delivered from the steam- 
ships, and also on what they can learn from importing and 
distributing merchants regarding the preferences of the market 
for different qualities of farm goods and differen t sorts of packages. 
Through this branch of the public service a complete chain of 
cold-storage accommodation between various points in Canada 
and markets in Europe, particularly in Great Britain, has been 
arranged. The government offered a bonus to those owners of 
creameries who would provide cold-storage accommodation at 
them and keep the room in use for a period of three years. It also 
arranged with the various railway companies to run refrigerator 
cars weekly on the main lines leading to Montreal and other 
export points. The food-products from any shippers are received 
into these cars at the various railway stations at the usual 
rates, without extra charge for icing or cold-storage service. 
The government offered subventions to those who would provide 
cold-storage warehouses at various points where these were 
necessary, and also arranged with the owners of ocean steam- 
ships to provide cold-storage chambers on them by means of 
mechanical refrigerators. The policy of encouraging the provision 
of ample cold-storage accommodation has been developed 
still further by the Cold Storage Act of the Dominion parliament 
passed in 1907, under which subsidies are granted in part pay- 
ment of the cost of erecting and equipping cold-storage ware- 
houses in Canada for the preservation of perishable food- 
products. 

Besides furnishing technical and general information as to 
the carrying on of dairying queries, the government has
established and maintained illustration cheese factories and 
creameries in different places for the purpose of introducing the 
best methods of co-operative dairying in both the manufacturing 
and shipping of butter and cheese. Inspectors are employed 
to give information regarding the packing of fruit, and also to 
see to the enforcement of the Fruit Marks Acts, which prohibit 
the marking of fruit with wrong brands and packing in any 
fraudulent manner. 

The seed branch qf the department of agriculture was estab- 
lished in 1900 for the purpose of encouraging the production and 
use of seeds of superior quality, thereby improving all kinds of 
field and garden crops grown in Canada. Seeds are tested in 
the laboratory for purity and germination on behalf of farmers 
and seed merchants, and scientific investigations relating to 
seeds are conducted and reported upon. In the year 1 906-1 907 
6676 samples of seeds were tested. Encouragement to seed- 
growing is given by the holding of seed fairs, and bulletins are 
issued on weeds, the methods of treating seed-wheat against 
smut and on other subjects. Collections of weed seeds are 
issued to merchants and others to enable them readily to identify 
noxious weed seeds. The Seed Control Act of 1905 brings under 
strict regulations the trade in agricultural seeds, prohibiting 
the sale for seeding of cereals, grasses, clovers or forage plants 
unless free from weeds specified, and imposing severe penalties 
for infringements. 

The census and statistics office, reorganized as a branch of the 
department of agriculture in 1905, undertakes a complete census 
of population, of agriculture, of manufactures and of all the 
natural products of the Dominion every ten years, a census of 
the population and agriculture of the three North- West Provinces 
every five years, and various supplemental statistical inquiries 
at shorter intervals. 

Experimental farms were established in 1887 in different parts 
of the Dominion, and were so located as to render efficient help 



i 5 6 



CANADA 



[HISTORY 



to the farmers in the more thickly settled districts, and at the 
same time to cover the varied climatic and other conditions 
which influence agriculture in Canada. The central experimental 
farm is situated at Ottawa, near the boundary line 
Expert- between Quebec and Ontario, where it serves as an aid 
farms. to agriculture in these two important provinces. One 
of the four branch farms then established is at Napp'an, 
Nova Scotia, near the boundary between that province and New 
Brunswick, where it serves the farmers of the three maritime 
provinces. A second branch experimental farm is at Brandon 
in Manitoba, a third is at Indian Head in Saskatchewan and 
the fourth is at Agassiz in the coast climate of British Columbia. 
In 1906-1907 two new branch farms were established. One is 
situated at Lethbridge, southern Alberta, where problems will 
be investigated concerning agriculture upon irrigated land and 
dry farming under conditions of a scanty rainfall. The other 
is at Lacombe, northern Alberta, about 70 m. south of Edmonton, 
in the centre of a good agricultural district on the Canadian 
Pacific railway. Additional branch farms in different parts of 
the Dominion are in process of establishment. At all these 
farms experiments are conducted to gain information as to the 
best methods of preparing the land for crop and of maintaining 
its fertility, the most useful and profitable crops to grow, and 
how the various crops grown can be disposed of to the greatest 
advantage. To this end experiments are conducted in the 
feeding of cattle, sheep and swine for flesh, the feeding of cows 
for the production of milk, and Of poultry both for flesh and eggs. 
Experiments are also conducted to test the merits of new or 
untried varieties of cereals and other field crops, of grasses, forage 
plants, fruits, vegetables, plants and trees; and samples, 
particularly of the most promising cereals, are distributed 
freely among farmers for trial, so that those which promise to 
be most profitable may be rapidly brought into general cultiva- 
tion. Annual reports and occasional bulletins are published 
and widely distributed, giving the results of this work. Farmers 
are invited to visit these experimental farms, and a large corre- 
spondence is conducted with those interested in agriculture in 
all parts of the Dominion, who are encouraged to ask advice and 
information from the officers of the farms. 

The governments of the several provinces each have a depart- 
ment of agriculture. Among other provincial agencies for 
A . imparting information there are farmers' institutes, 

cultural travelling dairies, live-stock associations, farmers', 
organiza- dairymen's, seed-growers', and fruit-growers' associa- 
tions, and agricultural and horticultural societies. 
These are all maintained or assisted by the several 
provinces. Parts of the proceedings and many of the ad- 
dresses and papers presented at the more important meetings of 
these associations are published by the provincial governments, 
and distributed free to farmers who desire to have them. There 
are also annual agricultural exhibitions of a highly important 
character, where improvements in connexion with agricultural 
and horticultural products, live-stock, implements, &C, are 
shown in competition. The Dominion government makes in 
turn to one of the chief local agricultural exhibition societies a 
grant of $50,000 for the purposes of the national representation 
of agriculture and live-stock. The exhibition receiving the grant 
loses its local character, and thus becomes the Dominion exhibi- 
tion or fair for that year. 

There are several important agricultural colleges for the 
practical education of young men in farming, foremost amongst 
them being the Ontario Agricultural College at Guelph. Agri- 
cultural colleges are also maintained at Truro, Nova Scotia, 
and Winnipeg, Manitoba. In most of the provinces are dairy 
schools where practical instruction and training are given. 
Since the beginning of the 20th century agricultural education 
and rural training in Canada have been greatly stimulated by 
the munificence of Sir William C. Macdonald of Montreal. A 
donation by him of $10,000, distributed to boys and girls on 
Canadian farms for prizes in a competition for the selection of 
seed grain, as recommended by Professor J. W. Robertson, led 
to the Macdonald-Robertson Seed Growers' Association. This 



tlons and 
education. 



soon assumed national proportions in the Canadian Seed Growers' 
Association, which, with the seed branch of the department of 
agriculture mentioned above, has done much to raise to a 
uniform standard of excellence the grain grown over large areas 
of' the Canadian wheat-fields. The Macdonald Institute at 
Guelph, Ontario, the buildings and equipment of which Sir 
William provided at a cost of $182,500, and the Macdonald 
College at Ste Anne de Bellevue, 20 m. west of Montreal, have 
been established to promote the cause of rural education upor. 
the lines of nature study, with school gardens, manual training, 
doiriestic science, &c, which on both sides of the Atlantic are 
now being found so effective in the hands of properly trained 
and enthusiastic teachers. The property of the Macdonald 
College at Ste Anne de Bellevue comprises 561 acres, of which 
74 acres are devoted to campus and field-research plots, 100 acres 
to a petite culture farm and 387 acres to a live-stock and 
grain farm. The college includes a sehoolfbr teachers, a school 
of theoretical and practical agriculture and a school of household 
science for the training of young women. The land, buildings 
and equipment of the college, which cost over $2,500,000, were 
presented by Sir William Macdonald; who in addition has pro- 
vided for the future maintenance of the work by a trust fund of 
over $2 ,000,000. In connexion with the public elementary schools 
throughout Canada; "where the principles of agriculture are taught 
to some extent, manual training centres, provided out of funds 
supplied by the same public-spirited donor, are now maintained 
by local and provincial public school authorities. (E. H. G.) 

History 

About a.d. 1000 Leif Ericsson, a Norseman, led an expedition 
from Greenland to the shores probably of what is now Canada, 
but the first effective: contact of Europeans with Canada „. 
was not until the end of the 15th century. John 
Cabot {q.v.), sailing from Bristol, reached the shores of Canada 
in 1497. Soon after fishermen from Europe began to go in 
considerable numbers to the Newfoundland banks, and in time 
to the coasts of the mainland of America. In 1534 a French 
expedition under Jacques Cartier, a seaman of St Malo, sent' 
out by Francis I., entered the Gulf of St Lawrence: In the 
following year Cartier sailed up the river as far as the Lachine 
Rapids, to the spot where Montreal now stands. During the 
next sixty years -the fisheries and the fur trade received some 
attention, but no colonization was undertaken. 

At the beginning of the 17th century we find the first great* 
name in Canadian history. Samuel de Champlain (q.v.), who 
had seen service under Henry IV. of France, was 
employed in the interests of successive fur-trading colony. 
monopolies and sailed up the St Lawrence in 1603. 
In the next year he was on the Bay of Fundy and had a share 
in-founding the first permanent French colony in North America 
-^•that of Port Royal, now Annapolis, Nova Scotia. In 1608 
he began the settlement which was named Quebec. From 1608 
to his death in 1635 Champlain worked unceasingly to develop 
Canada as a colony, to promote the fur trade and to explore 
the interior. He passed southward from the St Lawrence to 
the beautiful lake which still bears his name and also westward, 
up the St Lawrence- and the Ottawa, in the dim hope of reaching 
the shores of China. He reached Lake Huron and Lake Ontario, 
but not the great lakes stretching still farther west. 

The era was that of the Thirty Years' War (1618-48), and 
during that great upheaval England was sometimes fighting 
France. Already, in 1613, the English from Virginia had 
almost completely wiped out the French settlement at Port 
Royal, and when in 1629 a small English fleet appeared at 
Quebec, Champlain was forced to surrender But in 1632 
Canada was restored to France by the treaty of St Germain-en- 
Laye. . Just at this time was formed under the aegis of Cardinal 
Richelieu the " Company of New France," known popularly 
as "The Company of One Hundred Associates." With 120 
members' it was granted the whole St Lawrence valley; for 
fifteen years from 1629 it was to have a complete monopoly 
of trade; and products from its territory were to enter France 



HISTORY] 



CANADA 



^57 



free of duty. In return the company was to take to New 
France ' 300 colonists a year; only French Catholics might 
go; and for each settlement the company was to provide 
three priests. ■ Until 1663 this company controlled New 
France. 

It was an era of missionary zeal in the Roman Catholic church, 
and Canada became the favourite mission. The Society of 
Jesus was only one of several orders — Franciscans (Recollets), 
Sulpicians, Ursulines, &c. — who worked in New France. The 
Jesuits have attracted chief attention^ not 'merely on account 
of their superior zeal and numbers, but also because of the 
tragic fate of some of their missionaries in Canada. In the 
voluminous Relations of their doings the story has beeh preserved. 
Among the Huron Indians, whose settlements bordered on the 
lake of that name, they secured a great influence. But there was 
relentless war between the Hurons and the Iroquois occupying 
the southern shore of Lake Ontario, and when in 1649 the 
Iroquois ruined and almost completely destroyed the Hurons, 
the Jesuit missionaries also fell victims to the conquerors' 
rage. Missionaries to the Iroquois themselves met with a similar 
fate and the missions failed. Commercial life also languished. 
The company planned by Richelieu was not a success. It did 
little to colonize New France, and in 1660, after more than thirty 
years of its monopoly, there were not more than 2000 French 
in the whole country. In 1663 the charter of the company 
was revoked. No longer was a trading Company to discharge 
the duties of a sovereign. New France now became a royal 
province, with governor, intendant, &c, on the model of the 
provinces of France. 

In 1664 a new " Company of the West Indies " (Compagnie 
des Indes Occidentales) was organized to control French trade 
and colonization not only in Canada but also in West Africa, 
South America and the West Indies. At first it promised well. 
In 1665 some 2000 emigrants were sent to Canada; the 
European population was soon doubled, and Louis XIV. began 
to take a personal interest in the colony. But once more, 
in contrast with English experience, the great trading company 
proved a failure in French hands as a colonizing agent, and in 
1674 its charter was summarily revoked by Louis XIV. Hence- 
forth in name, if not in fact, monopoly is ended in Canada. 
■ By this time French explorers were pressing forward to 
unravel the mystery of the interior. By 1659 two Frenchmen, 
Radisson and Groseillers, had penetrated beyond the great 
lakes to the prairies of the far West; they were probably the 
first Europeans to see the Mississippi. By 1666 a French 
mission was established on the shores of Lake Superior, and 
in 1673 Joliet and Marquette, explorers from Canada, reached 
and for some distance descended the Mississippi. Five years 
later Cavelier de la Salle was making his toilsome way westward 
from Quebec to discover the true character of the great river 
and to perform the feat, perilous in view of the probable hostility 
of the natives, of descending it to the sea. In 1682 he accom- 
plished his task, took possession of the valley of the Mississippi 
in the name of Louis XIV. and called' it Louisiana. Thus 
from Canada as her basis was France reaching out to grasp 
a continent. 

There was a keen rivalry between church and state for 
dominance in this new empire. In 1659 arrived at Quebec 
a young prelate of noble birth, Francois Xavier de Laval- 
Montmorency, who had come to rule the church in Canada, 
An ascetic, who practised the whole cycle of medieval austerities, 
he was determined that Canada should be ruled by the church, 
and he desired for New France a Puritanism as strict as that 
of New England. His especial zeal was directed towards the 
welfare of the Indians. These people showed, to their own 
ruin, a reckless liking for the brandy of the white man. Laval 
insisted that the traders should not supply brandy to the natives. 
He declared excommunicate any one who did so and for a 
time he triumphed. More than once he drove from Canada 
governors who tried to thwart him. In 1663 he was actually 
invited to choose a governor after his own mind and did so, 
but with no cessation of the old disputes. In 1672 Louis de 



Buade, eomte de Frontenac (g.v.), was named governor of New 
France, and in him the church found her match. Yet not 
at once; for, after a bitter struggle, he was recalled in 1682. 
But Canada needed him. He knew how to control the ferocious 
Iroquois, who had cut off France from access to Lake Ontario; 
to check them he had built a fort where now stands the city 
of Kingston. With Frontenac gone, these savages almost 
strangled the colony. On a stormy August 1 night in 1689 
1500 Iroquois burst in on the village of Lachine near Montreal, 
butchered 200 of its people, and carried off more than 100 to 
be tortured to death at their leisure. Then the strong man 
Frontenac was recalled to face the crisis. 

It was a critical era. James II. had fallen in England, and 
William III. was organizing Europe ftgainst French aggression. 
France's plan for a great empire in America was 
now taking shape and there, as in Europe, a deadly wjtj^** 
struggle with England was inevitable. Frontenac England. 
planned attacks upon New England and encouraged 
a ruthless border warfare that involved many horrors. Him, 
in return, the English attacked. Sir William Phips sailed from 
Boston in 1690, conquered Acadia, now Nova Scotia, and then 
hazarded the greater task of leading a fleet up the St Lawrence 
against Quebec. On the 16th of October 1690 thirty-four 
English ships, some of them only fishing craft, appeared in 
its basin and demanded the surrender of the town. When 
Frontenac answered defiantly, Phips attacked the place; but 
he was repulsed and in the end sailed away unsuccessful. 

Each side had now begun to see that the vital point was 
control of the interior, which time was to prove the most 
extensive fertile area in the world. La Salle's expedition had 
aroused the French to the importance of the Mississippi," and 
they Soon had a bold plan to occupy it, to close in from the 
rear on the English on the Atlantic coast, seize their colonies 
and even deport the colonists. The plan was audacious, for 
the English in America outnumbered the French by twenty 
to one. But their colonies were democracies, disunited because 
each was pursuing its own special interests, while the French 
were united under despotic leadership. Frontenac attacked 
the Iroquois mercilessly in 1696 and forced these proud savages 
to sue for peace. But in the next year was made the treaty 
of Ryswick, which brought a pause in the conflict, and in 1698 
Frontenac died. 

After Frontenac the Iroquois, though still hostile to France, 
are formidable no more, and the struggle for the continent is 
frankly between the English and the French. The peace of 
Ryswick proved but a truce, and when in 1701, on the death of 
the exiled James II., Louis XIV. flouted the claims of William III. 
to the throne of England by proclaiming as king James's son, 
renewed war was inevitable. In Europe it saw the brilliant 
victories of Marlborough; in America it was less decisive, but 
France lost heavily. Though the English, led by Sir Hovenden 
Walker, made in 1711 an effort to take Quebec which proved 
abortive, they seized Nova Scotia; and when the treaty of 
Utrecht was made in 17 13, France admitted defeat in America 
by yielding to Britain her claims to Hudson Bay, Newfoundland 
and Nova Scotia. • But she still held the shores of the St Lawrence, 
and she retained, too, the island of Cape Breton to command its 
mouth. There she built speedily the fortress of Louisbourg, and 
prepared once more to challenge British supremacy in America. 
With a sound instinct that looked to future greatness, France 
still aimed, more and more, at the control of the interior of the 
Continent. The danger from the Iroquois on Lake Ontario had 
long cut her off from the most direct access to the West, and from 
the occupation of the Ohio valley leading to the Mississippi, but 
now free from this savage scourge she could go where she would. 
In 1701 she founded Detroit, commanding the route from Lake 
Erie to Lake Huron. Her missionaries and leaders were already 
at Sault Ste Marie commanding the approach to Lake Superior, 
and at Michilimackinac commanding that to Lake Michigan. 
They had also penetrated to what is now the Canadian West, and 
it was a French Canadian, La Verendrye, who, by the route 
leading past the point where now stands the city of Winnipeg, 



i 5 8 



CANADA 



HISTORY 



pressed on into the far West until in 1743, first recorded of 
white men, he came in sight of the Rocky Mountains. In the 
south of the continent France also crowned La Salle's work by 
founding early in the 18th century New Orleans at the mouth of 
the Mississippi. It was a far cry from New Orleans to Quebec. 
If France could link them by a chain of settlements and shut in 
the English to their narrow strip of Atlantic seaboard there was 
good promise that North America would be hers. 

The project was far-reaching, but France could do little to 
make it effective. Louis XV. allowed her navy to decline and 
her people showed little inclination for emigration to the colonies. 
In 1 744, when the war of the Austrian Succession broke out, the 
New England colonies planned and in 1745 effected the capture 
of Louisbourg, the stronghold of France in Cape Breton Island, 
which menaced their commerce. But to their disgust, when the 
peace of Aix-la-Chapelle was made in 1748, this conquest was 
handed back to France. She continued her work of building a 
line of forts on the great lakes — on the river Niagara, on the Ohio, 
on the Mississippi; and the English colonies, with the enemy 
thus in their rear, grew ever more restive. In 1753 Virginia 
warned the French on the Ohio that they were encroaching on 
British territory. The next year, in circumstances curiously 
like those which were repeated when the French expedition under 
Marchand menaced Britain in Egypt by seeking to establish a 
post on the Upper Nile, George Washington, a young Virginian 
officer, was sent to drive the French from their Fort Duquesne 
on the Ohio river, where now stands Pittsburgh. The result was 
sharp fighting between English and French in a time of nominal 
peace. In 1755 the British took the stern step of deporting the 
Acadian French from Nova Scotia. Though this province had 
been ceded to Great Britain in 17 13 many of the Acadians had 
refused to accept British sovereignty. In 1749 the British 
founded Halifax, began to colonize Nova Scotia, and, with war 
imminent, deemed it prudent to disperse the Acadians, chiefly 
along the Atlantic seaboard (see Nova Scotia: History). In 
1756 the Seven Years' War definitely began. France had no 
resources to cope with those of Britain in America, and the 
British command of the sea proved decisive. On the 13th of 
September 1759 Wolfe won his great victory before Quebec, 
which involved the fall of that place, and a year later at 
Montreal the French army in Canada surrendered. By the 
peace of Paris, 1763, the whole of New France was finally ceded 
to Great Britain. 

With only about 60,000 French in Canada at the time of the 
conquest it might have seemed as if this population would soon 
be absorbed by the incoming British. Some thought 
English^ that, under a Protestant sovereign, the Canadian 
s/oa. eS " Catholics would be rapidly converted to Protestantism. 
But the French type proved stubbornly persistent 
and to this day dominates the older Canada. The first English 
settlers in the conquered country were chiefly petty traders, not 
of a character to lead in social or public affairs. The result was 
that the government of the time co-operated rather with the 
leaders among the French. 

After peace was concluded in 1763, Canada was governed 
under the authority of a royal proclamation, but sooner or later 
a constitution specially adapted to the needs of the country was 
inevitable. In 1774 this was provided by the Quebec Act passed 
by the Imperial parliament. Under this act the western territory 
which France had claimed, extending as far as the Mississippi 
and south to the Ohio, was included with Canada in what was 
called the Province of Quebec. This vast territory was to be 
governed despotically from Quebec; the Roman Catholic church 
was given its old privileges in Canada; and the French civil law 
was established permanently side by side with the English 
criminal law. The act linked the land-owning class in Canada 
and the church by ties of self-interest to the British cause. The 
habitant, placed again under their authority, had less reason to be 
content. 

In 1775 began the American Revolution. Its leaders tried to 
make the revolt continental, and invaded Canada, hoping that 
the French would join them. They took Montreal and besieged 



Quebec during the winter of 1775-1776; but the prudent leader- 
ship of Sir Guy" Carleton, afterwards Lord Dorchester, saved 
Quebec and in 1776 the revolutionary army withdrew unsuccess- 
ful from Canada. Since that time any prospect of Canada's 
union to the United States has been very remote. 

But the American Revolution profoundly influenced the life 
of Canada. The country became the refuge of thousands of 
American loyalists who would not desert Great Britain. To 
Nova Scotia, to what are now New Brunswick (q.v.) and Ontario 
(q.v.) they fled in numbers not easily estimated, but probably 
reaching about 40,000. Until this time the present New Bruns- 
wick and Ontario had contained few European settlers; now 
they developed, largely under the influence of the loyalists of the 
Revolution. This meant that the American type of colonial life 
would be reproduced in Canada; but it meant also bitter 
hostility on the part of these colonists to the United States, which 
refused in any way to compensate the loyalists for their con- 
fiscated property. Great Britain did something; the loyalists 
received liberal grants of land and cash compensation amounting 
to nearly £4,000,000. 

A prevailingly French type of government was now no longer 
adequate in Canada, and in 1791 was passed by the British 
parliament the" Constitutional Act, separating Canada at the 
Ottawa river into two parts, each with its own government; 
Lower Canada, chiefly French, retaining the old system of laws, 
with representative institutions now added, and Upper Canada, 
on the purely British model. (For the history of Lower and 
Upper Canada, now Quebec and Ontario, the separate articles 
must be consulted.) Each province had special problems; the 
French in Lower Canada aimed at securing political power for 
their own race, while in Upper Canada there was no race problem, 
and the great struggle was for independence of official control 
and in all essential matters for government by the people. It 
may be doubted whether at this time it would have been safe to 
give these small communities complete self-government. But 
this a clamorous radical element demanded insistently, and the 
issue was the chief one in Canada for half a century. 

But before this issue matured war broke out between Great 
Britain and the United States in 181 2 from causes due chiefly to 
Napoleon's continental policy. The war seemed to furnish a 
renewed opportunity to annex Canada to the American Union, 
and Canada became the chief theatre of conflict. The struggle 
was most vigorous on the Niagara frontier. But in the end the 
American invasion failed and the treaty made at Ghent in 1814 
left the previous status unaltered. 

In 1837 a few French Canadians in Lower Canada, led by Louis 
Joseph Papineau (q.v.), took up arms with the wild idea of 
establishing a French republic on the St Lawrence. In the same 
year William Lyon Mackenzie (q.v.) led a similar armed revolt in 
Upper Canada against the domination of the ruling officialdom 
called, with little reason, the " Family Compact." Happening, 
as these revolts did, just at the time of Queen Victoria's accession, 
they attracted wide attention, and in 1838 the earl of 
Durham (q.v.) was sent to govern Canada and report on Durham. 
the affairs of B ritish North America. Clothed as he was 
with large powers, he undertook in the interests of leniency and 
reconciliation to banish, without trial, some leaders of the 
rebellion in Lower Canada. For this reason he was censured at 
home and he promptly resigned, after spending only five months 
in the country. But his Report, published in the following year, 
is a masterly survey of the situation and included recommenda- 
tions that profoundly influenced the later history of Canada. He 
recommended the union of the two Canadian provinces at once, 
the ultimate union of all British North America and the granting 
to this large state of full self-government. The French element 
he thought a menace to Canada's future, and partly for this 
reason he desired all the provinces to unite so that the British 
element should be dominant. 

To carry out Lord Durham's policy the British government 
passed in 1840 an Act of Union joining Upper and Lower 
Canada, and sent out as governor Charles Poulett Thompson, 
who was made Baron Sydenham and Toronto:. In the single 



HISTORY] 



CANADA 



J 59 



parliament each province was equally represented. By this 
time there was more than a million people in Canada, and the 
country was becoming important. Lord Sydenham died in 
1841 before his work was completed, and he left Canada stiH 
in a troubled condition. The French were suspicious of the 
Union, aimed avowedly at checking their influence, and the 
complete self-government for which the " Reformers " in 
English-speaking Canada had clamoured was not yet conceded 
by the colonial office. But rapidly it became obvious that 
the provinces united had become too important to be held 
in leading strings. The issue was finally settled in 1849 when 
the earl of Elgin was governor and the Canadian legislature, 
sitting at Montreal, passed by a large majority the Rebellion 
Losses Bill, compensating citizens, some of them French, in 
Lower Canada, for losses incurred at the hands of the loyal 
party during the rebellion a decade earlier. The cry was easily 
raised by the Conservative minority that this was to vote 
reward for rebellion. They appealed to London for inter- 
vention. The mob in Montreal burned the parliament buildings 
and stoned Lord Elgin himself because he gave the royal assent 
to the bill. He did so in the face of this fierce opposition, on 
the ground that, in Canadian domestic affairs, the Canadian 
parliament must be supreme. 

The union of the two provinces did not work well. Each 
was jealous of the other and deadlocks frequently occurred. 
Commercially, after 1849, Canada was prosperous. In 1854 
Lord Elgin negotiated a reciprocity treaty with the United 
States which gave Canadian natural products free entrance 
to the American market. The outbreak of the Civil War in 
the United States in 1861 increased the demand for such products, 
and Canada enjoyed an extensive trade with her neighbour. 
But, owing largely to the unfriendly attitude of Great Britain 
to the northern side during the war, the United States cancelled 
the treaty, when its first term of ten years ended in 1865, and 
it has never been renewed. 

Under the party system in Canada cabinets changed as 
often as, until recently, they did in France, and the union of 
the two provinces did not give political stability. The French 
and English were sufficiently equal in strength to make the 
task of government well nigh impossible. In 1864 came the 
opportunity for change, when New Brunswick, Nova Scotia 
and Prince Edward Island were considering a federal union. 
Canada suggested a wider plan to include herself and, in October 
1864, a conference was held at Quebec. The conference out- 
lined a plan of federation which subsequently, with slight 
modifications, passed th2 imperial parliament as " The British 
North America Act," and on the 1st of July 1867, the Dominion 
of Canada came into existence. It was born during the era 
of the American Civil War, and was planned to correct defects 
which time had revealed in the American federation. The 
provinces in Canada were conceded less power than have the 
states in the American union; the federal government retaining 
the residuum of power not conceded. (G.M.W.) 

When federation was accomplished in 1867 the Dominion 
of Canada comprised only the four provinces of Ontario, Quebec, 
Canada New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Lord Monck was 
since appointed the first governor-general, and at his 

federa- request the Hon. John Alexander Macdonald under- 
took the formation of an administration. A coalition 
cabinet was formed, including the foremost Liberals and Con- 
servatives drawn from the different provinces. Under a 
proclamation issued from Windsor Castle by Queen Victoria on 
the 22nd of May the new constitution came into effect on the 
1st of July. This birthday of the Dominion has been fixed 
by statute as a public holiday, and is annually observed under 
the name of " Dominion Day." Seventy- two senators — half 
Conservatives and half Liberals — were appointed, and lieutenant- 
governors were named for the four provinces. The prime 
minister was created a K.C.B., and minor honours were con- 
ferred on other ministers in recognition of their services in 
bringing about the union. 



The first general election for the Dominion House of Commons 
was held during the month of August, and except in the province 
of Nova Scotia was favourable to the administration, 
which entered upon its parliamentary work with a Scotia 
majority of thirty-two. The first session of parliament question. 
was opened on the 8th of November, but adjourned 
on the 21st of December till the 12th of March 1868, chiefly 
on account of the fact that members of the Dominion parliament 
were allowed, in Ontario and Quebec, to hold seats in the local 
legislatures, so that it was difficult for the different bodies 
to be in session simultaneously. It was not till 1873 that an 
act was passed making members of the local legislatures ineligible 
for seats in the House of Commons. Immediately after the 
completion of federation a serious agitation for repeal of the 
union arose in Nova Scotia, which had been brought into the 
federal system by a vote of the existing legislature, without 
any direct preliminary appeal to the people. Headed by Joseph 
Howe (q.v.), the advocates of repeal swept the province at the 
Dominion election. Out of 19 members then elected 18 were 
pledged to repeal, Dr Tupper, the minister responsible for 
carrying the Act of Union, alone among the supporters of 
federation securing a seat. The local assembly, in which 36 
out of 38 members were committed to repeal, passed an address 
to Her Majesty praying her not to " reduce this free, happy 
and hitherto self-governed province to the degraded condition 
of a servile dependency of Canada," and sent Howe with a 
delegation to London to lay the petition at the foot of the 
throne. Howe enlisted the support of John Bright and other 
members of parliament, but the imperial government was 
firm, and the duke of Buckingham, as colonial secretary, soon 
informed the governor-general in a despatch that consent could 
not be given for the withdrawal of Nova Scotia from the 
Dominion. Meanwhile Howe, convinced of the impossibility 
of effecting separation, and fearing disloyal tendencies which 
had manifested themselves in some of its advocates, entered 
into negotiations with Dr Tupper in London, and later with 
the Dominion government, for better financial terms than those 
originally arranged for Nova Scotia in the federal system. 
The estimated amount of provincial debt assumed by the general 
government was increased by $1,186,756, and a special annual 
subsidy of $82,698 was granted for a period of ten years. These 
terms having been agreed to, Howe, as a pledge of his approval 
and support, accepted a seat as secretary of state in the Dominion 
cabinet. By taking this course he sacrificed much of his remark- 
able popularity in his native province, but confirmed the work 
of consolidating the Dominion. It was many years before 
the bitterness of feeling aroused by the repeal agitation entirely 
subsided in Nova Scotia. 

A gloom was cast over the first parliament of the Dominion 
by the assassination in 1868 of one of the most brilliant figures 
in the politics of the time, D'Arcy McGee (q.v.). His murderer, 
a Fenian acting under the instructions of the secret society to 
which he belonged, was discovered, and executed in 1869. 

The reorganization of the various departments of state, 
in view of the wider interests with which they had to deal, 
occupied much of the attention of the first parliament of the 
Dominion. In 1867 the postal rates were reduced and unified. 
In 1868 a militia system for the whole Dominion was organized, 
the tariff altered and systematized, and a Civil Service Act 
passed. The banking system of the country was put on a sound 
footing by a series of acts culminating in 187 1, and in the same 
year a uniform system of decimal currency was established for 
the whole Dominion. While the new machinery of state was 
thus being put in operation other large questions presented 
themselves. 

The construction of the Inter-Colonial railway as a connecting 
link between the provinces on the seaboard and those along 
the St Lawrence and the Great Lakes was a part 
of the federation compact, a clause of the British Colonial 
North America Act providing that it should be begun railway. 
within six months after the date of union. The 
guarantee of the imperial government made easy the provision 



i6o 



CANADA 



[HI 



terri- 
tories. 



of the necessary capital, but as this was coupled with a voice 
in the decision of the route, it complicated the latter question, 
about which a keen contest arose. The most direct and therefore 
commercially most promising line of construction passed near 
the boundary of the United States. Recent friction with that 
country made this route objected to by the imperial and many 
Canadian authorities. Ultimately the longer, more expensive, 
but more isolated route along the shores of the Gulf of 
St Lawrence was adopted. The work was taken in hand at once, 
and pressed steadily forward to completion. It has since been 
supplemented by other lines built for more distinctly com- 
mercial ends. Though not for many years a financial success, 
the Inter-Colonial railway, which Was opened in 1876, has 
in a marked way fulfilled its object by binding together socially 
and industrially widely separated portions of the Dominion. 

Within a 'month of the meeting of the first parliament of the 
Dominion a question of vast importance to the future of the 
Hudson's count ry was brought forward by the Hon.W.McDougall 
Bay Com- in a series of resolutions which were adopted, and on 
pany which was based an address to the queen praying that 

Her Majesty would unite Rupert's Land and the North- 
West Territories to Canada. A delegation consisting 
of Sir G. E. Cartier and the Hon. W. McDougall was in 1868 sent 
to England to negotiate with the Hudson's Bay Company (q.v.) 
for the extinction of its claims, and to arrange with the imperial 
government for the transfer of the territory. After' prolonged 
discussions the company agreed to surrender to the crown, in 
consideration of a payment of £300,006, the rights arid interests 
in the north-west guaranteed by its charter, with the exception 
of a reservation of one-twentieth part of the fertile belt, arid 
45,000 acres of land adjacent to the trading posts of the company. 
For the purposes of this agreement the " fertile belt " was to be 
bounded as follows: — "On the south by the U.S. boundary^ 
on the west by the Rocky Mountains, on the north by the 
northern branch of the Saskatchewan river, on the east by 
Lake Winnipeg, the Lake of the Woods, and the waters connect- 
ing them." An act authorizing the change of control was passed 
by the imperial parliament in July 1868; the arrangement made 
with the Hudson's Bay Company was accepted by the Canadian 
parliament in June 1869; and the deed of "surrender from the 
Hudson's Bay Company to Her Majesty is dated November 10th, 
1869. In anticipation of the formal transfer to the Dominion 
an act was passed by the Canadian parliament in the same month 
providing for the temporary government of Rupert's Land and 
the North- West Territories. On the 28th of September the Hon. 
W. McDougall was appointed the first governor, and left at once 
to assume control on the 1st of December, when it had been 
understood that the formal change of possession Would'take place. 
Meanwhile a serious condition of affairs was developing in the 
Red river settlement, the most considerable centre of population 
in the newly acquired territory. The half-breeds 
rebellion, regarded with suspicion a transfer of control concerning 
which they had not been consulted. They resented the 
presence of the Canadian surveyors sent to lay out roads 
and townships, and the tactless way in which 'some of these 
did their work increased the suspicion that long-established 
rights to the soil would not be respected. A population largely 
Roman Catholic in creed, and partly French in origin and 
language, feared that an influx of new settlers would overthrow 
cherished traditions. Some were afraid of increased taxation. 
A group of immigrants from the United States fomented disturb- 
ance in the hope that it would lead to annexation. Louis Riel, 
a fanatical half-breed, placed himself at the head of the move- 
ment. His followers established what they called a " provisional 
government " of which he was chosen president, and When the 
newly appointed governor reached the boundary line he was 
prevented from entering the territory. Several of the white 
settlers who resisted this rebellious movement were arrested and 
kept in confinement. One of these, a young man named Thomas 
Scott, having treated Riel with defiance, was court-martialled 
for treason to the provisional government, condemned, and on 
the 4th of March 1870, shot in cold blood under the walls of Fort 



Garry. This crime aroused intense excitement througl 
country, and the Orange body, particularly, to whic 
belonged, demanded the immediate punishment of his n 
and the suppression of the rebellion. An armed force, cc 
partly of British regulars and partly of Canadian vol 
was made ready and placed under the command of 
Garnet Wolseley, afterwards Lord Wolseley. As a 
force could not pass through the United States, the ex 
Was compelled to take the route up Lake Superior, and i 
head of that lake through 500 m. of unbroken and 
wilderness. In August 1870, the force reached Fort 
to find the rebels scattered and their leader, Riel, a fu. 
the neighbouring states. Meanwhile, during the progre 
expedition, an act had been passed creating Manitoba a p 
with full powers of self-government, and the arriva 
military was closely followed by that of the first g 
Mr (later Sir) Adams G. Archibald, who succeeded in 
ing the administration on a satisfactory basis. For 
became Winnipeg, and there were soon indications 
was destined to be a great city, and the commerci 
way : to the vast prairies that lay beyond. Meanw 
adequate means of transportation were provided, it 1 
that city and prairie alike must wait for any large i 
population. 

■ •■ Provision was made in the British- North Americ; 
receive new provinces into the Dominion. Manitoba 
first to be constituted; in 1871 British Columbia, 
which had hitherto held aloof, determined, under the 
persuasion of a sympathetic governor, Mr (later Sir) 
Antony Musgrave, to throw in its lot with the D 
Popular feeling in British Columbia itself was not sti 
favour of union, and the terms under which the new 
was to be received were the subject of much negotiation 
provincial authorities, and were keenly debated in p; 
before the bill in which they were embodied was finalb 
The clause on which there was the widest divergence 
Was one providing that a trans-continental railway, a 
the Pacific province with the eastern part of the E 
should be begun within tWo, and completed within t 
To a province which at the time contained a populatio 
36,000, and but half of this white, the inducement thus 
was immense. The Opposition in parliament claimed 
contract was one impossible for the Dominion to fu 
government of Sir John Macdonald felt, however, 
future of the Dominion depended upon linking tog 
Atlantic and the Pacific, and in view of the vast ui 
spaces lying between the Great Lakes and the Rocky M 
open to immigration from the United States, their ai 
undertaking the work was doubtless justified. The coi 
of the Canadian Pacific railway, thus inaugurated, h 
several years the chief subject of political contentior 
opposing parties. 

Anticipating the order of chronology slightly, ii 
mentioned here that in 1873 Prince Edward Island (q. 
had in 1865 decisively rejected proposals of the Quebec c 
and had in the following year repeated its rejection of 
by a resolution of the legislature affirming that no tern 
could offer would be acceptable, now decided to thnrv 
with the Dominion. The island had become involvec 
railway expenditure, and financial necessities led the 
take a broader view of the question. In the end t 
government assumed the railway debt, arrangem 
made for extinguishing certain proprietary rights i 
long been a source of discontent, and on the 1st of 
the Dominion was rounded off by the accession o 
province. 

Finally in 1878, in order to remove all doubts 
occupied territory, an imperial order in council v, 
in response to an address of the Canadian parliame 
ing to the Dominion all British possessions in Nortl 
except Newfoundland. That small colony, which ha 
presented at the Quebec conference, also rejected the 



HISTORY] 



CANADA 



of 1865, and, in spite pf various efforts to arrange satisfac- 
tory terms, has steadily held aloof, and so has proved the only 
obstacle to the complete political unification of British North 
America. 

A signal proof was soon furnished of the new standing in 
the empire which federation had given to the Canadian provinces. 
fi mm A heritage of differences and difficulties had been 
iiiities left to be settled between England, Canada and the 
witb the American Union as the result of the Civil War. . In 
United retaliation for the supposed sympathy of Canadians 
with the South in this struggle the victorious North 
took steps to abrogate in 1866 the reciprocity treaty of 
1854, which had conferred such great advantages on both 
countries. It followed that the citizens of the United States 
lost the right which they had received under the treaty to 
share in the fisheries of Canada. American fishermen, how- 
ever, showed so little inclination to give up what they had 
enjoyed so long, that it was found necessary to take vigorous 
steps to protect Canadian fishing rights ,, and frequent causes 
of friction consequently arose. During the progress of the 
Civil War American feeling had been greatly exasperated by 
the losses inflicted on commerce by the cruiser "Alabama," 
which, it was claimed, was allowed to leave a British port in 
violation of international law. On the other hand, Canadian 
feeling had been equally exasperated by the Fenian raids, 
organized on American soil, which had cost Canada much 
expenditure of money and some loss of life. In addition to 
these causes of difference there was an unsettled boundary 
dispute in British Columbia, and questions about the navigation 
of rivers common to the United States and Canada, In 1869 
the government of Canada sent a deputation to England to 
press upon the imperial government the necessity of asserting 
Canada's position in regard to the fisheries, and the desirability 
of settling other questions in dispute with the republic. The 
outcome of this application was the appointment of a commission 
to consider and if possible settle outstanding differences between 
the three countries. The prime minister of the Dominion, 
Sir John Macdonald, was asked to act as one of the imperial 
commissioners in carrying on these negotiations. This was 
tbe first time that a colonist had been called upon to assist 
in the settlement of international disputes. , The commission 
assembled at the , American capital in February 1871; and 
after discussions extending over several weeks signed what 
is known as the treaty of Washington. By the terms of this 
treaty the " Alabama " claims and the San Juan boundary 
were referred to arbitration; the free navigation of the 1 St. 
Lawrence was granted to the United States in return for the, 
free use of Lake Michigan and certain Alaskan rivers; and 
it was settled that a further commission should decide the 
excess of value of the Canadian fisheries thrown open to the 
United States over and above the reciprocal, concessions made 
to Canada. Much to the annoyance of the people, of the 
Dominion the claims for the Fenian raids were withdrawn 
at the request of the British government, which undertook to 
make good to Canada any losses she had suffered. To some of 
these terms the representative of Canada made a strenuous 
opposition, and in finally signing the treaty stated that he 
did so chiefly for imperial interests, although in these he 
believed Canadian interests to be involved; The clauses relating 
to the fisheries and the San Juan boundary were reserved for 
the approval of the Canadian parliament, which, in spite of 
much violent opposition, ratified them by a large majority. 
Under the "Alabama" arbitration • Great Britain ,paid to 
the United States damages to the amount of $15,500,000, 
while the German Emperor decided the San Juan boundary 
in favour of the United States. The Fishery Commission, on 
the other hand, which sat in Halifax, awarded Canada $5,500,000 
as the excess value of its fisheries for twelve years, and after 
much hesitation this sum was paid by the United States into 
the Canadian treasury. An imperial guarantee of a loan for 
the construction of railways was the only compensation Canada 
received for the Fenian raids,: 

v. 6 



The second general election for the. Dominion took place 
in 1872. It was marked by the complete defeat of the Anti- 
Unionist party in Nova Scotia, only one member of Canadian 
which secured his election, thus exactly reversing the pacific 
vote of 1867. While Sir John Macdonald's adminis- ™"™y 
tration was supported in Nova Scotia, it was weakened *"' s on ' 
in Ontario on account of the clemency shown to Riel, and in 
Quebec by the refusal to grant a general amnesty to all who had 
taken part in the rebellion. Two important members of the 
cabinet, Sir G. Carrier and. Sir F. Hincks, were defeated. 
Opposition to the Washington treaty and drea,d of the bold 
railway policy of the government also contributed to weaken 
its position. . But a grayer blow, ending in the complete over- 
throw of the administration, was soon to fall as the result of 
the election, : In 1872 two companies had been formed and 
received charters to build the Canadian Pacific railway. Sir 
Hugh Ailan of Montreal was at the head of the one, and the 
Hon. David Macpherson of Toronto was president of the other. 
The government endeavoured to bring about an amalgamation 
of these rival companies, believing that the united energies 
and financial ability of the whole country were required for 
sq vast an undertaking. While negotiations to this end were 
still proceeding the election of r872 came on with the result 
already mentioned. Soon after the meeting of parliament) 
a Liberal member of the House, Mr L. S. Huntingdon, formally 
charged certain members pf the cabinet with having received 
large sums of money, for use in the election, from Sir Hugh Allan, 
on condition, as it was claimed, that the Canadian Pacific 
contract should be given to the new company, of which he 
became the head on the failure of the plan for amalgamation. 
These charges were investigated by a royal commission, which 
was appointed after it had been decided that the parliamentary 
committee named for that purpose could not legally take 
evidence under oath. Parliament met in October 1873, to receive 
thereport of the commission. While members of the government 
were exonerated by the report from the charge of personal 
corruption, the payment of large sums of money by Sir Hugh 
Ailan was fully established, and public feeling on the matter 
was so strong that Sir J. Macdonald, while asserting his own 
innocence, felt compelled to resign without waiting for the 
vote of parliament. Lord Dufferin, who had succeeded Lord 
Lisgar as governor-general in 1872, at once sent for the 
leader of the Opposition, Mr Alexander Mackenzie (?.».), 
who succeeded in forming a Liberal administration which, 
on appealing to the constituencies, was supported by an over- 
whelming majority, and held power for the five following years. 

On the accession to power of the Liberal party, a new policy 
was adopted for the construction of the trans-continental 
railway. It was proposed to lessen the cost of construction by 
utilizing the water stretches along the route, while, on the ground 
that the contract made was impossible of fulfilment, the period 
of completion : was postponed indefinitely. Meanwhile the 
surveys and constructipn were carried forward not by a company, 
but. as .a government work. Under this arrangement British 
Columbia became exceedingly restive, holding the Dominion 
to the engagement by which it had been induced to enter the 
union. A representative of the government, Mr (later Sir 
James) Edgar, sent out to conciliate the province by some 
new agreement, failed to apcomplish his object, and all the 
influence of the governor-general, Lord Dufferin, who paid 
a visit at this time to the Pacific coast, was required to quiet 
the public excitement, which had shown itself in a resolution 
passed by the legislature for separation from the Dominioif 
unless the terms of union were fulfilled. 

Meanwhile a policy destined to affect profoundly the future 
of the. Dominion had, along with that of the construction 
of the Canadian Pacific railway, become a subject 
of burning political discussion and party division. ^^tiTnai 
During the period of Mr Mackenzie's administration policy." 
a profound business depression affected the whole 
continent of America. , The Dominion revenue showed a series 
of; deficits for several years in succession. The factories of 



l62 



CANADA 



[HISTORY 



the United States, unduly developed by an extreme system 
of protection, sought in Canada a slaughter market for their 
surplus products, to the detriment or destruction of Canadian 
industries. Meanwhile the republic, which had for many 
years drained Canada of hundreds of thousands of artisans to 
work, its factories, steadily declined to consider any suggestion 
for improving trade relations between the two countries. In 
these circumstances Sir J. Macdonald brought forward a proposal 
to adopt what was called a " national policy," or, in other 
words, a system of protection for Canadian industries. Mr 
Mackenzie and his chief followers, whose inclinations were 
towards free trade, pinned their political fortunes to the main- 
tenance of a tariff for revenue only. After some years of fierce 
discussion in parliament and throughout the country the question 
was brought to an issue in 1878, when, with a large majority 
of followers pledged to carry out protection, Sir John Macdonald 
was restored to power. The new system was laid before parlia- 
ment in 1879 by the finance minister, Sir Leonard Tilley; 
and the tariff then agreed upon, although it received considerable 
modification from time to time, remained, under both Con- 
servative and Liberal administrations, the basis of Canadian 
finance, and, as Canadians generally believed, the bulwark of 
their industry. It had almost immediately the effect of lessening 
the exodus of artisans to the United States, and of improving 
the revenue and so restoring the national credit. 

In October 1878 Lord Dufferin's term of office expired, and 
his place as governor-general was taken by the marquess of Lome, 
whose welcome to the Dominion was accentuated by the fact 
that he was the son-in-law of the queen, and that his viceroyalty 
was shared by the princess Louise. The election of 1878 marked 
the beginning of a long period of Conservative rule — the premier- 
ship of Sir J. Macdonald continuing from that time without a 
break until his death in 1891, while his party remained in power 
till 1896, This long-continued Conservative supremacy was 
apparently due to the policy of bold and rapid development 
which it had adopted, and which appealed to a young and 
ambitious country more strongly than the more cautious pro- 
posals of the Liberal leaders. As soon as the government had 
redeemed its pledge to establish a system of protection a vigorous 
_ _ railway policy was inaugurated. A contract was made 
Hon of the with a new company to complete the Canadian Pacific 
Canadian railway within ten years, on condition of receiving a 
Pacific grant of $25,000,000 and 25,000,000 acres of land, 
r way. together with those parts of the line already finished 
under government direction. After fierce debate in parliament 
these terms were ratified in the session of 1881. The financial 
difficulties encountered by the company in carrying out their 
gigantic task were very great, and in 1884 they were compelled 
to obtain from the Dominion government a loan of $20,000,000 
secured on the company's property. This loan was repaid by 
1887. Meanwhile the work was carried forward with so much 
energy that, five years before the stipulated period of completion, 
an the 7th of November 1886, the last spike was driven by Mr 
Donald A. Smith (Lord Strathcona), whose fortune had been 
largely pledged to the undertaking, along with those of other 
prominent Canadian business men, especially Mr George Stephen 
(Lord Mountstephen), Mr Duncan Mclntyre, and Mr R. B. 
Angus. Under the energetic management of Mr (later Sir) 
W. C. Van Home, who was appointed president of the company 
in 1888, the new railway soon became the most prominent 
feature in the development of the country; lines of steamships 
were established on the great lakes and the Pacific; a stream of 
immigration began to flow into the prairie region; and the 
increasing prosperity of the railway had a powerful influence in 
improving the public credit. 

Even before the Canadian Pacific railway was fully completed, 
it proved of great service in a national emergency which suddenly 
arose in the north-west. With the organization of Manitoba 
and the opening of improved communication immigrants began 
to move rapidly westward, and government surveyors were soon 
busy laying off lands in the Saskatchewan valley. The numbers 
of the half -breed settlers of this district had been increased by 



the migration of many of those who had taken part in the first 
uprising at Fort Garry. Influenced by somewhat similar motives, 
fearing from the advance of civilization the destruction 
of the buffalo, on which they chiefly depended for food, rebellion. 
with some real grievances and others imaginary, the 
discontented population sent for Riel, who had been living, 
since his flight from Fort Garry, in the United States. He 
returned to put himself at the head of a second rebellion. At 
first he seemed inclined to act with moderation and on lines of 
constitutional agitation, but soon, carried away by fanaticism, 
ambition and vanity, he turned to armed organization against 
the government. To half-breed rebellion was added the imminent 
danger of an Indian uprising, to which Riel looked for support. 
The authorities at Ottawa were at first careless or sceptical in 
regard to the danger, the reality of which was only brought home 
to them when a body of mounted police, advancing to regain a 
small post at Duck Lake, of which the rebels had taken possession, 
was attacked and twelve of their number killed. Volunteers 
and militia were at once called out in all the old provinces of 
Canada, and were quickly conveyed by the newly constructed 
line of railway to the neighbourhood of the point of disturbance. 
Major-general Middleton, of th« imperial army, who was then in 
command of the Canadian militia, led the expedition. Several 
minor engagements with half-breeds or Indians preceded the 
final struggle at Batoche, where Gabriel Dumont, Riel's military 
lieutenant, had skilfully entrenched his forces. After a cautious 
advance the eagerness of the troops finally overcame the hesita- 
tion of the commander in exposing his men, the rifle pits were 
carried with a rush, and the rebellion crushed at a single stroke. 
Dumont succeeded in escaping across the United States boundary; 
Riel was captured, imprisoned, and in due course tried for 
treason. This second rebellion carried on under his leadership 
had lasted about three months, had cost the country many 
valuable lives, and in money about five millions of dollars. Clear 
as was his guilt, Riel's trial, condemnation and execution on the 
16th of November 1885, provoked a violent political storm which 
at one time threatened to overthrow the Conservative govern- 
ment. The balance of power between parties in parliament was 
held by the province of Quebec, and there racial and religious 
feeling evoked no slight sympathy for Riel. But while a section 
of Quebec was eager to secure the rebel's pardon, Ontario was 
equally bent on the execution of justice, so that in the final vote 
on the question in parliament the defection of French Conserva- 
tives was compensated for by the support of Ontario Liberals. 
In the end 25 out of 53 French members voted in justification 
of Riel's punishment. With him were executed several Indian 
chiefs who had been concerned in a massacre of whites. Painful 
as were the circumstances connected with this rebellion, it is 
certain that the united action of the different provinces in 
suppressing it tended to consolidate Canadian sentiment, and 
the short military campaign had the effect of fixing public 
attention upon the immense fertile territory then being opened 
up. 

The general election of 1882 turned chiefly upon endorsement 
of the national policy of protection; in that of 1887 the electoral 
test was again applied to the same issue, while Sir John Macdon- 
Macdonald also asked for approval of the government's aid's 
action in exacting from Riel the full penalty of his f' scal 
guilt. On both issues the Conservative policy was po cy ' 
upheld by the electors, and Macdonald was continued in power 
with a large parliamentary majority. From the election of 1887 
the Riel agitation ceased to seriously influence politics, but the 
fiscal controversy continued under new forms. Between 1887 
and 1 89 1 a vigorous agitation was kept up under Liberal auspices 
in favour of closer trade relations with the United States, at 
first under the name of Commercial Union and later under that 
of Unrestricted Reciprocity. The object in both cases was to 
break down tariff barriers between the United States and Canada, 
even though that should be at the expense of discrimination 
agairist Great Britain. The Conservative party took the position 
that commercial union, involving as it would a common protec- 
tive tariff against all other countries, including the motherland, 



HISTORY] 



CANADA 



163 



would inevitably lead to political unification with the United 
States. The question after long and vehement discussion was 
brought to a final issue in the election of 1891, and Sir John 
Macdonald's government was again sustained. From that time 
protection became the- settled policy of the country. On their 
accession to power in 1896 it was adopted by the Liberals, who 
joined to it a preference for the products of the mother country. 
Under the protective policy thus repeatedly confirmed, Canada 
gradually became more independent of the American market 
than in earlier times, and enjoyed great commercial prosperity. 
Soon after the election of 1891 Sir John Macdonald (q.v.) died, 
after an active political career of more than forty years. Under 
his direction the great lines of policy which have governed the 
development of Canada as a confederated state within the 
empire were inaugurated and carried forward with great success, 
so that his name has become indissolubly connected with the 
history of the Dominion at its most critical stage. 

During the years which succeeded the death of Sir John 
Macdonald a succession of losses weakened the position of 

the Conservative party which had held power so long. 
aWsZc- The Hon - J- C - C - Abbott, leader of the party in the 
cessors. Senate, became prime minister on Macdonald's death in 

1891, but in 1892 was compelled by ill-health to resign, 
and in 1893 he died. His successor, Sir John Thompson, after 
a successful leadership of about two years, died suddenly of 
heart disease at Windsor Castle, immediately after being sworn 
of the imperial privy council. Charges of corruption in the 
administration of the department of public works, which led 
to the expulsion of one member of parliament, involved also 
the resignation from the cabinet of Sir Hector Langevin, leader 
of the French Conservatives, against whom carelessness at least 
in administration had been established. The brief premiership 
of Sir Mackenzie Bowell, between 1894 and 1896, was marked 
by much dissension in the Conservative ranks, ending finally 
in a reconstruction of the government in 1896 under Sir Charles 
Tupper. Breaks had been made in the Liberal ranks also by the 
death in 1892 of the Hon. Alexander Mackenzie and the with- 
drawal of the Hon. Edward Blake from Canadian politics to 
accept a seat in the British parliament as a member of the 
Home Rule party. But the appeal made to the electors in 
1896 resulted in a decisive victory for the Liberal party, and 
marked the beginning of a long period of Liberal rule. 

Sir Wilfrid Laurier (q.v.) became prime minister, and 
strengthened the cabinet which he formed by drawing into 
, , it from provincial politics the premiers of Ontario, 

New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The administration 
thus established underwent many changes, but after winning 
three general elections it was still in power in 1909. The period 
of Sir Wilfrid Laurier's rule was one of striking progress in 
material growth, and a marked development of national feeling. 
While the federation of the provinces favoured the growth 
of a strong sentiment of Canadian individuality, the result 
of unification had been to strengthen decidedly the ties that 
bind the country to the empire. This was as true under Liberal 
as under Conservative auspices — as Canadians understood the 
meaning of these party names. The outbreak of the South 
African war in 1899 furnished an occasion for a practical display 
of Canadian loyalty to imperial interests. Three contingents 
of troops were despatched to the seat of war and took an active 
part in the events which finally secured the triumph of the 
British arms. These forces were supplemented by a regiment 
of Canadian horse raised and equipped at the sole expense 
of Lord Strathcona, the high commissioner of the Dominion 
in London. The same spirit was illustrated in other ways. In 
bringing about a system of penny postage throughout the empire; 
in forwarding the construction of the Pacific cable to secure close 
and safe imperial telegraphic connexion; in creating rapid and 
efficient lines of steamship communication with the motherland 
and all the colonies; in granting tariff preference to British 
goods and in striving for preferential treatment of inter-imperial 
trade; in assuming responsibility for imperial defence at the two 
important stations of Halifax and Esquimalt,— Canada, under the 



guidance of Sir Wilfrid Laurier and his party, took a leading 
part and showed a truly national spirit. 

The opening years of the 20th century were marked by a 
prolonged period of great prosperity. A steady stream of 
emigrants from Europe and the United States, some- 
times rising in number to 300,000 in a single year, Spans/on. 
began to occupy the vast western prairies. So 
considerable was the growth of this section of the Dominion 
that in 1905 it was found necessary to form two new provinces, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, from the North-West Territories, 
the area of each being 275,000 sq. m. Each province has a 
lieutenant-governor and a single legislative chamber, with a 
representation of four members in the Senate and five in the 
House of Commons of the Dominion parliament. The control of 
the public lands is retained by the general government on the 
ground that it has been responsible for the development of the 
country by railway construction and emigration. With the 
rapid increase of population, production in Canada also greatly 
increased; exports, imports and revenue constantly expanded, 
and capital, finding abundant and profitable employment, 
began to flow freely into the country for further industrial 
development. New and great railway undertakings were a 
marked feature of this period. The Canadian Pacific system 
was extended until it included 12,000 m. of line. The Canadian 
Northern railway, already constructed from the Great Lakes 
westward to the neighbourhood of the Rockies, and with water 
arid rail connexions reaching eastward to Quebec, began to 
transform itself into a complete transcontinental system, with 
an extension to the Hudson Bay. That this line owed its 
inception and construction chiefly to the joint enterprise of 
two private individuals, Messrs Mackenzie and Mann, was a 
striking proof of the industrial capacities of the country. To 
a still more ambitious line, the Grand Trunk Pacific, extending 
from the Atlantic to the Pacific, aiming at extensive steamship 
connexion on both oceans, and closely associated with the 
Grand Trunk system of Ontario and Quebec, the government 
of Canada gave liberal support as a national undertaking. 
The eastern section of 1875 m., extending from Winnipeg to 
Moncton, where connexion is secured with the winter ports 
of Halifax and St John, was, under the act of incorporation, 
to be built by the government, and then leased for fifty years, 
under certain conditions, to the Grand Trunk Pacific Company. 
The western portion, of 1480 m., from Winnipeg to the Pacific, 
was to be built, owned and operated by the company itself, 
the government guaranteeing bonds to the extent of 7.5 % 
of the whole cost of construction. The discovery of large 
deposits of nickel at Sudbury; of extremely rich gold mines 
on the head-waters of the Yukon, in a region previously con- 
sidered well-nigh worthless for human habitation; of extensive 
areas of gold, copper and silver ores in the mountain regions of 
British Columbia; of immense coal deposits in the Crow's 
Nest Pass of the same province and on the prairies; of veins 
of silver and cobalt of extraordinary richness in northern Ontario 
— -all deeply affected the industrial condition of the country 
and illustrated the vastness of its undeveloped resources. The 
use of wood-pulp in the manufacture of paper gave a greatly 
enhanced value to many millions of acres of northern forest 
country. The application of electricity to purposes of manu- 
facture and transportation made the waterfalls and rapids 
in which the country abounds the source of an almost unlimited 
supply of energy capable of easy distribution for industrial 
purposes over wide areas. 

Since confederation a series of attempts has been made with 
varying degrees of success to settle the questions in dispute 
between the Dominion and the United States, naturally Relations 
arising from the fact that they divide between them with the 
the control of nearly the whole of a large continent and ^n'ted 
its adjoining waters. Considering the vastness of the 
interests involved, there is much cause for satisfaction in the fact 
that these differences have been settled by peaceful arbitrament 
rather than by that recourse to force which has so often marked 
the delimitation of rights and territory on other continents 



1 64 



CANADA 



[HISTORY 



The Washington Treaty of 1871 has already been referred to. 
Its clauses dealing with the fisheries and trade lasted for fourteen 
years, and were then abrogated by the action of the United 
States. Various proposals on the part of Canada for a renewal 
of the reciprocity were not entertained. After 1883 Canada was 
therefore compelled to fall back upon the treaty of 18 18 as the 
guarantee of her fishing rights. It became necessary to enforce 
the terms of that convention, under which the fishermen of the 
United States could not pursue their avocations within the three 
miles' limit, tranship cargoes of fish in Canadian ports, or enter 
them except for shelter, water, wood or repairs'. On account of 
infractions of the treaty many vessels were seized and some were 
condemned. In 1887 a special commission was appointed to 
deal with the question. On this commission Mr Joseph Chamber- 
lain, Sir Sackville West and Sir Charles Tupper represented 
British and Canadian interests; Secretary T. F. Bayard, Mr 
W. le B. Putnam and Mr James B. Angell acted for the United 
States. The commission succeeded in agreeing to the terms of 
a treaty, which was recommended to Congress by President 
Cleveland as supplying " a satisfactory, practical and final 
adjustment, upon a basis honourable and just to both parties, 
of the difficult and vexed questions to which it relates." This 
agreement, known as the Chamberlain-Bayard treaty, was 
rejected by the Senate, and as a consequence it became necessary 
to carry on the fisheries under a modus vivendi renewed annually. 

In 1886 a difference about international rights on the high seas 
arose on the Pacific coast in connexion with the seal fisheries 
of Bering Sea. In that year several schooners, fitted out in 
British Columbia for the capture of seals in the North Pacific, 
were seized by a United States cutter at a distance of 60 m. 
from the nearest land, the officers were imprisoned and fined, 
and the vessels themselves subjected to forfeiture. The British 
government at once protested against this infraction of inter- 
national right, and through long and troublesome negotiations 
firmly upheld Canada's claims in the matter. The dispute was 
finally referred to a court of arbitration, on which Sir John 
Thompson, premier of the Dominion, sat as one of the British 
arbitrators. It was decided that the United States had no 
jurisdiction in the Bering Sea beyond the three miles' limit, but 
the court also made regulations to prevent the wholesale slaughter 
of fur-bearing seals. The sum of $463,454 was finally awarded 
as compensation to the Canadian sealers who had been unlawfully 
seized and punished. This sum was paid by the United States 
in 1898. 

As the result of communications during 1897 between Sir 
Wilfrid Laurier and Secretary Sherman, the governments of 
Great Britain and the United States agreed to the appointment 
of a joint high commission, with a view of settling all outstanding 
differences between the United States and Canada. The com- 
mission, which included three members of the Canadian cabinet 
and a representative of Newfoundland, and of which Lord 
Herschell was appointed chairman, met at Quebec on the 23rd 
of August 1898. The sessions continued in Quebec at intervals 
until the 10th of October, when the commission adjourned to 
meet in Washington on the 1st of November, where the discussions 
were renewed for some weeks. Mr Nelson Dingley, an American 
member of the commission, died during the month of January, 
as did the chairman, Lord Herschell, in March, as the result of 
an accident, soon after the close of the sittings of the commission. 
The Alaskan boundary, the Atlantic and inland fisheries, the 
alien labour law, the bonding privilege, the seal fishery in the 
Bering Sea and reciprocity of trade in certain products were 
among the subjects considered by the commission. On several 
of these points much progress was made towards a settlement, 
but a divergence of opinion as to the methods by which the 
Alaskan boundary should be determined put an end for the time 
to the negotiations. 

In 1903 an agreement was reached by which the question of 
this boundary, which depended on the interpretation put upon 
the treaty of 1825 between Russia and England, should be 
submitted to a commission consisting of " six impartial jurists 
of repute," three British and three American. The British 



commissioners appointed were: Lord Alverstone, lord chief 
justice of England; Sir Louis Jette, K.C., of Quebec; and A.B. 
Aylesworth, K.C., of Toronto. On the American side were 
appointed: the Hon. Henry C. Lodge, senator for Massachusetts; 
the Hon. Elihu Root, secretary of war for the United States 
government; and Senator George Turner. Canadians could not 
be persuaded that the American members fulfilled the condition 
of being " impartial jurists," and protest was made, but, though 
the imperial government also expressed surprise, no change 
in the appointments was effected. The commission met in 
London, and announced its decision in October. This was 
distinctly unfavourable to Canada's claims, since it excluded 
Canadians from all ocean inlets as far south as the Portland 
Channel, and in that channel gave to Canada only two of the 
four islands claimed. A statement made by the Canadian 
commissioners, who refused to sign the report, of an unexplained 
change of opinion on the part of Lord Alverstone, produced a 
widespread impression for a time that his decision in favour 
of American claims was diplomatic rather than judicial. Later 
Canadian opinion, however, came to regard the decision of the 
commission as a reasonable compromise. The irritation caused 
by the decision gradually subsided, but at the moment it led 
to strong expressions on the part of Sir Wilfrid Laurier and 
others in favour of securing for Canada a fuller power of making 
her own treaties. While the power of making treaties must 
rest ultimately in the hands that can enforce them, the tendency 
to give the colonies chiefly interested a larger voice in inter- 
national arrangements had become inevitable. The mission 
of a Canadian cabinet minister, the Hon. R. Lemieux, to Japan 
in 1907, to settle Canadian difficulties with that country, illus- 
trated the change of diplomatic system in progress. 

Under the British North American Act the control of education 
was reserved for the provincial governments, with a stipulation 
that all. rights enjoyed by denominational schools at ^ucatloa. 
the time of confederation should be respected. Pro- 
vincial control has caused some diversity of management; the 
interpretation of the denominational agreement has led to acute 
differences of opinion which have invaded the field of politics. 
In all the provinces elementary, and in some cases secondary, 
education is free, the funds for its support being derived from 
local taxation and from government grants. The highly organized 
school system of Ontario is directed by a minister of education, 
who is a member of the provincial cabinet. The other provinces 
have boards of education, and superintendents who act under 
the direction of the provincial legislatures. In Quebec the 
Roman Catholic schools, which constitute the majority, are 
chiefly controlled by the local clergy of that church. The 
Protestant schools are managed by a separate board. In 
Ontario as well as in Quebec separate schools are allowed to 
Roman Catholics. In Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince 
Edward Island, Manitoba and British Columbia the public 
schools are strictly undenominational. This position was only 
established in New Brunswick and Manitoba after violent 
political struggles, and frequent appeals to the highest courts of 
the empire for decisions on questions of federal or provincial juris- 
diction. The right of having separate schools has been extended 
to the newly constituted provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

Secondary education is provided for by high schools and 
collegiate institutes in all towns and cities, and by large resi- 
dential institutions at various centres, conducted on the principle 
of the English public schools. The largest of these is Upper 
Canada College at Toronto. Each province has a number of 
normal and model schools for the training of teachers. For 
higher education there are also abundant facilities. M'Gill 
University at Montreal has been enlarged and splendidly en- 
dowed by the munificence of a few private individuals; Toronto 
University by the provincial legislature of Ontario; Queen's 
University at Kingston largely by the support of its own graduates 
and friends. University work in the maritime provinces, instead 
of being concentrated, as it might well be, in one powerful 
institution, is distributed among five small, but within their 
range efficient universities. The agricultural college at Guelph and 



HISTORY] 



CANADA 



165 



the experimental farms maintained by the federal government 
give excellent training and scientific assistance to farmers. 
Sir William Macdonald in 1908 built and endowed, at an ex- 
penditure of at least £700,000, an agricultural college and normal 
school at St Anne's, near Montreal. While the older universities 
have increased greatly in influence and efficiency, the following 
new foundations have been made since confederation: — Uni- 
versity of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 1877; Presbyterian College, 
Winnipeg, 1870; Methodist College, Winnipeg, 1888; Wesleyan 
College, Montreal, 1873; Presbyterian College, Montreal, 1868; 
School of Practical Science, Toronto, 1877; Royal Military 
College, Kingston, 1875; M'Master University, Toronto, 1888. 
All the larger universities have schools of medicine in affiliation, 
and have the power of conferring medical degrees. Since 1877 
Canadian degrees have been recognized by the Medical Council 
of Great Britain. 

In her treatment of the aboriginal inhabitants of the country 
(numbering 93,318 in 1901) Canada has met with conspicuous 

success. Since the advance of civilization and indis- 
Mbes criminate slaughter have deprived them of the bison, 

so long their natural means of subsistence, the north- 
west tribes have been maintained chiefly at the expense of 
the country. As a result of the great care now used in watching 
over them there has been a small but steady increase in their 
numbers. Industrial and boarding schools, established in 
several of the provinces, by separating the children from the 
degrading influences of their home life, have proved more 
effectual than day schools for training them in the habits and 
ideas of a higher civilization. (See Indians, North American.) 
The constitution of the Dominion embodies the first attempt 
made to adapt British principles and methods of government 

to a federal system. The chief executive authority 
Coastitu- j s veSteK j j n t jj e sovereign, as is the supreme command 

of the military and naval forces. The governor- 
general represents, and fulfils the functions of, the crown, 
which appoints him. He holds office for five years, and his 
powers are strictly limited, as in the case of the sovereign, 
all executive acts being done on the advice of his cabinet, the 
members of which hold office only so long as they retain the 
confidence of the people as expressed by their representatives 
in parliament. The governor-general has, however, the inde- 
pendent right to withhold his assent to any bill which he considers 
in conflict with imperial interests. The following governors- 
general have represented the crown since the federation of the 
provinces, with the year of their appointment : Viscount Monck, 
1867; Sir John Young (afterwards Baron Lisgar), 1868; the 
earl of Dufferin, 1872; the marquess of Lome (afterwards duke 
of Argyll), 1878; the marquess of Lansdowne, 1883; Lord 
Stanley of Preston (afterwards earl of Derby), 1888; the earl 
of Aberdeen, 1893; the earl of Minto, 1898; Earl Grey, 1904. 
The upper house, or Senate, is composed of members who hold 
office for life and are nominated by the governor-general in 
council. It originally consisted of 72 members, 24 from Quebec, 
24 from Ontario, and 24 from the maritime provinces, but this 
number has been from time to time slightly increased as new 
provinces have been added. The House of Commons consists 
of representatives elected directly by the people. The number 
of. members, originally 196, is subject to change after each 
decennial census. The basis adopted in the British North 
America Act is that Quebec shall always have 65 representatives, 
and each of the other provinces such a number as will give 
the same proportion of members to its population as the number 
65 bears to the population of Quebec at each census. In 1908 
the number of members was 218. 

Members of the Senate and of the House of Commons receive 
an annual indemnity of $2500, with a travelling allowance. 
Legislation brought forward in 1906 introduced an innovation 
in assigning a salary of $7000 to the recognized leader of the 
Opposition, and pensions amounting to half their official income 
to ex-cabinet ministers who have occupied their posts fo? 
five consecutive years. This pension clause has since been 
repealed. One principal object of the framers of the Canadian 



constitution -was to establish a strong central government. An 
opposite plan was therefore adopted to that employed in the 
system of the United States, where the federal government 
enjoys only the powers granted to it by the sovereign states. 
The British North America Act assigns to the different provinces, 
as to the central parliament, their spheres of control, but all 
residuary powers are given to the general government. Within 
these limitations the provincial assemblies have a wide range of 
legislative power. In Nova Scotia and Quebec the bicameral 
system of an upper and lower house is retained; in the other 
provinces legislation is left to a single representative assembly. 
For purely local matters municipal institutions are organized 
to cover counties and townships, cities and towns, all based 
on an exceedingly democratic franchise. 

The creation of a supreme court engaged the attention of 
Sir John Macdonald in the early years after federation, but 
was only finally accomplished in 1876, during the premiership 
of Alexander Mackenzie. This court is presided over by a chief 
justice, with five puisne judges, and has appellate civil and 
criminal jurisdiction for the Dominion. By an act passed in 
1 89 1 the government has power to refer to the supreme court 
any important question of law affecting the public interest. 
The right of appeal from the supreme court, thus constituted, 
to the judicial committee of the privy council marks, in questions 
judicial, Canada's place as a part of the British empire. 

The appointment, first made in 1897, of the chief justice 
of Canada, along with the chief justices of Cape Colony and 
South Australia, as colonial members of the judicial committee 
still further established the position of that body as the final 
court of appeal for the British people. The grave questions 
of respective jurisdiction which have from time to time arisen 
between the federal and provincial governments have for the 
most part been settled by appeal to one or both of these judicial 
bodies. Some of these questions have played a considerable 
part in Canadian politics, but are of too complicated a nature 
to be dealt with in the present brief sketch. They have 
generally consisted in the assertion of provincial rights against 
federal authority. The decision of the courts has always been 
accepted as authoritative and final. 

An excellent bibliography of Canadian history will be found in the 
volume Literature of American History, published by the American 
Library Association. The annual Review of Historical Publications 
Relating to Canada, published by the University of Toronto, gives 
a critical survey of the works on Canadian topics appearing from 
year to year. (G. R. P.) 

Literature 
: 1. English-Canadian Literature is marked by the weaknesses 
as well as the merits of colonial life. The struggle for existence, 
the conquering of the wilderness, has left scant room for broad 
culture or scholarship, and the very fact that Canada is a colony, 
however free to control her own affairs, has stood in the way 
of the creation of anything like a national literature. And yet, 
while Canada's intellectual product is essentially an offshoot 
of the parent literature of England, it is not entirely devoid of 
originality, either in manner or matter. There is in much of 
it a spirit of freedom and youthful vigour characteristic of the 
country. It is marked by the wholesomeness of Canadian life 
and Canadian ideals, and the optimism of a land of limitless 
potentialities. 

The first few decades of the period of British rule were lean 
years indeed so far as native literature is concerned. This 
period of unrest gave birth to little beyond a flood of political 
pamphlets, of no present value save as material for the historian. 
We may perhaps except the able though thoroughly partisan 
writings of Sir John Beverley Robinson and Bishop Strachan 
on the one side, and Robert Fleming Gourlay and William 
Lyon Mackenzie on the other. In the far West, however, a 
little group of adventurous fur-traders, of whom Sir Alexander 
Mackenzie, David Thompson, Alexander Henry and Daniel 
Williams Harmon may be taken as conspicuous types, were 
unfolding the vast expanse of the future dominion. They were 
men of action, not of words, and had no thought of literary 



i66 



GANADA 



[LITERATURE 



fame, but their absorbingly interesting journals are none the 
less an essential part of the literature of the country. ■ 

Barring the work of Francis Parkman, who was not a Canadian, 
no history of the first rank has yet been written in or of- Canada. 
Canadian historians have not merely lacked so far the genius 
for really great historical work, but they have lacked the point 
of view; they have stood too close to their subject to get the 
true perspective. At the same time they have brought together 
invaluable material for the great historian of the future. Robert 
Christie's History of Lower Canada (1848-18 54) was the first 
serious attempt to deal with the period of British rule. William 
Kingsford's (18 19-1898) ambitious work, in ten volumes, comes 
down like Christie's to the Union of 1841, but goes back to the 
very beginnings of Canadian history. In the main it is impartial 
and accurate, but the style is heavy and sometimes slovenly. 
J. C. Dent's (1841-1888) Last Forty Years (1880) is practically 
a continuation of Kingsford. Dent also wrote an interesting 
though one-sided account of the rebellion of 1837. Histories 
of the maritime provinces have been written by Thomas Chandler 
Haliburton, Beamish Murdoch and James Hannay. Hali- 
burton's is much the best of the three. The brief but stirring 
history of western Canada has been told by Alexander Begg 
(1840-1898); and George Bryce (b. 1844) and Beckles Willson 
(b. 1869) have written the story of the Hudson's Bay Company. 
Much scholarship and research have been devoted to local and 
special historical subjects, a notable example of which is Arthur 
Doughty's exhaustive work on the siege of Quebec. J. McMullen 
(b. 1820), Charles Roberts (b. i860) and Sir. John Bourinot 
(1837-1902) have written brief and popular histories, covering 
the whole field of Canadian history more or less adequately. 
Alpheus Todd's (1821-1884) Parliamentary Government in 
England (1867-1869) and Parliamentary Government in the 
British Colonies (1880) are standard works, as is also Bourinot's 
Parliamentary Procedure and Practice (1884). 

Biography has been devoted mainly to political subjects. 
The best of these are Joseph Pope's Memoirs of Sir John Mac- 
donald (1894), W. D. le Sueur's Frontendc (1906), Sir John 
Bourinot's Lord Elgin (1905), Jean Mcllwraith's Sir Frederick 
Haldimand (1904), D. C. Scott's John Graves Simcoe (1905), 
A. D. de Celles' Papineau and Cartier (1904), Charles Lindsey's 
William Lyon Mackenzie (1862), J. W. Longley's Joseph Howe 
(1905) and J. S. Willison's Sir Wilfrid Laurier (1903). 

In belles lettres very little has been accomplished, unless we 
may count Goldwin Smith (q.v.) as a Canadian. As a scholar, 
a thinker, and a master of pure English he has exerted a marked 
influence upon Canadian literature and Canadian life. 

While mediocrity is the prevailing characteristic of most 
of what passes for poetry in Canada, a few writers have risen 
to a higher level. The conditions of Canadian life have not been 
favourable to the birth of great poets, but within the limits 
of their song such men as Archibald Lampman (1861-1891), 
William Wilfred Campbell (b. 1861), Charles Roberts, Bliss 
Carman (b. 1861) and George Frederick Cameron have written 
lines that are well worth remembering. Lampman's poetry is 
the most finished and musical. He fell short of being a truly 
great poet, inasmuch as great poetry must, which his does not, 
touch life at many points, but his verses are marked by the 
qualities that belonged to the man — sincerity, purity, seriousness. 
Campbell's poetry, in spite of a certain lack of compression, is 
full of dramatic vigour: Roberts has put some of his best work 
into sonnets and short lyrics, while Carman has been very 
successful with the ballad, the untrammelled swing and sweep 
of which he has finely caught; the simplicity and severity of 
Cameron's style won the commendation of even so exacting a 
critic as Matthew Arnold. One remarkable drama — Charles 
Heavysege's (1816-1876) Saul (1857) — belongs to Canadian 
literature. Though unequal in execution, it contains passages 
of exceptional beauty and power. The sweetness and maturity 
of Isabella Valency Crawford's (1851-1887) verse are also very 
worthy of remembrance. The habitant poems of Dr W. H. 
Drummond (1854-1907) stand in a class by themselves, 
between English and French Canadian literature, presenting 



the simple life of the habitant with unique humour and 
pieturesqueness. 

The first distinctively Canadian novel was John Richardson's 
(1796-1852) Wacousta (1832), a stirring tale of the war of 1812. 
Richardson afterwards wrote half a dozen other romances, 
dealing chiefly with incidents in Canadian history. Susanna 
Moodie (1803-1885) and Katharine Parr Traill (1802-1899), 
sisters of Agnes Strickland, contributed novels and tales to one 
of the earliest and best of Canadian magazines, the Literary 
Garland (1838-1847). The Golden Dog, William Kirby's (1817- 
1906) fascinating romance of old Quebec, appeared in 1877, 
in a pirated edition. Twenty years later the first authorized 
edition was published. James de Mille (1833-1880) was the 
author of some thirty novels, the best of which is Helena's 
Household (1868), a story of Rome in the 1st century. The 
Dodge Club (1869), a humorous book of travel, appeared, curiously 
enough, a few months before Innocents Abroad. De Mille's 
posthumous novel, A Strange Manuscript found in a Copper 
Cylinder (1888), describes a singular race whose cardinal doctrine 
is that poverty is honourable and wealth the reverse. Sir Gilbert 
Parker (b. 1862) stands first among contemporary Canadian 
novelists. He has made admirable use in many of his novels 
of the inexhaustible stores of romantic and dramatic material 
that lie buried in forgotten pages of Canadian history. Of 
later Canadian novelists mention may be made of Sara Jeannette 
Duncan (Mrs Everard Cotes, b. 1862), Ralph Connor (Charles 
W. Gordon, b. 1866), Agnes C. Laut (b. 1872), W. A. Fraser 
(b. 1859) and Ernest Thompson Seton (b. i860). Thomas 
Chandler Haliburton (q.v.) stands in a class by himself. In many 
respects his is the most striking figure in Canadian literature. 
He is best known as a humorist, and as a humorist he ranks 
with the creators of "My Uncle Toby " and " Pickwick." But 
there is more than humour in Haliburton's books. He lacked, 
in fact, but one thing to make him a great novelist: he had no 
conception of how to construct a plot. But he knew human 
nature, and knew it intimately in all its phases; he could 
construct a character and endow it with life; his people talk 
naturally and to the point; and many of his descriptive 
passages are admirable. Those who read Haliburton's books 
only for the sake of the humour will miss much of their value. 
His inimitable Clockmaker (1837), as well as the later books, 
The Old Judge (1849), The Attache (1843), Wise Saws and 
Modern Instances (1853) and Nature and Human Nature (1855), 
are mirrors of colonial life and character. 

For general treatment of English-Canadian literature, reference 
may be made. to Sir John Bourinot's Intellectual Development of the 
Canadian People (1881); G. Mercer Adam's Outline History of 
Canadian Literature (1887); "Native Thought and Literature," 
in J. E. Colliris's Life of Sir John A. Macdonald (1883) ; " Canadian 
Literature," by J. M. Oxley, in the Encyclopaedia Americana, vol. ix. 
(1904) ; A. MacMurchy's Handbook of Canadian Literature (1906) ; 
and articles by J. Oastell Hopkins, John Reade, A. B. de Mille and 
Thomas O'Hagan, in vol. v. of Canada : an Encyclopaedia of the 
Country (1898-1900) ; also to Henry J. Morgan's Bibliotheca Cana- 
densis (1867) and Canadian Men and Women of the Time (1898) ; 
W. D. Lighthall, Songs of the Great Dominion; Theodore Rand's 
Treasury of Canadian Verse (1900) ; C. C. James's Bibliography of 
Canadian Verse (1898) ; L< E. Homing's and L. J. Burpee's Biblio- 
graphy of Canadian Fiction (1904) ; S. E. Dawson's Prose Writers of 
Canada (1901) ; "Canadian Poetry," by J. A. Cooper, in The 
National, 29, p. 364; " Recent Canadian Fiction," by L. J. Burpee, 
in The Forum, August 1899. For individual authors, see Hali- 
burton's A Centenary Chaplet (1897), with a bibliography; " Hali- 
burton," by F. Blake Crofton, in Canada: an Encyclopaedia of the 
Country; C. H. Farnham's Life of Francis Parkman and H. D. 
Sedgwick's Francis Parkman (1901); and articles on " Parkman," 
by E. L. Godkin, in The Nation, 71,- p. 441; by Justin Winsor in 
The Atlantic, 73, p. 660; by W. D. Howells, The Atlantic, 34, p. 602 ; 
by John Fiske, The Atlantic, 73, p. 664; by J. B. Gilder in The 
Critic, 23, p. 322; " Goldwin Smith as a Critic," by H. Spencer, 
Contemp. Review, '41, p. 519; " Goldwin Smith's Historical Works," 
by C. E. Norton, North -American Review, 99, p. 523; "Poetry of 
Charles Heavysege," by Bayard Taylor, Atlantic, 16, p. 412; 
" Charles Heavysege," by L. J. Burpee, in Trans. Royal Society of 
Canada, 1961 ; " Archibald Lampman," by W. D. Howells, Literature 
(N.Y.), 4, p. 217; "Archibald Lampman," by L. J. Burpee, in 
North American Notes and Queries (Quebec), August and September 
1900; "Poetry of Bliss Carman," by J. P. Mowbray, Critic, 41, 



LITERATURE] 



CANADA 



167 



p. 308 ; " Isabella Valency Crawford," in Poet-Lore (Boston), xiii. No. 
4; Roberts and the Influences of Ms Time (1906), by James Cappon; 
" William Wilfred Campbell," Sewanee Review, October 1900; 
" Kingsford's History of Canada," by G. M. Wrong, N. A. Review, 
L P- 55°; "Books of Gilbert Parker," by C. A. Pratt, Critic, 33, 
p. 271. (L. J. B.) 

2. French-Canadian Literature at the opening of the 20th 
century might be described as entirely the work of two genera- 
tion's, and it was separated from the old regime by three more 
generations whose racial sentiment only found expression in 
the traditional songs and tales which their forefathers of the 
17th century had brought over from the mere patrie. Folk-lore 
has always been the most essentially French of all imaginative 
influences in Canadian life; and the songs are the quintessence 
of the lore. Not that the folk-songs have no local variants. 
Indian words, like moccasin and toboggan, are often introduced. 
French forms are freely turned into pure Canadianisms, like 
cageux, raftsman, boucane, brushwood smoke, portage, &c. 
New characters, which appeal more directly to the local audience, 
sometimes supplant old ones, like the quatre vieux sauvages 
who have ousted the time-honoured quatre-z-officiers from the 
Canadian version of Malbrouk. There are even a few entire 
songs of transatlantic origin. But all these variants together 
are mere stray curios among the crowding souvenirs of the 
old home over sea. No other bridge can rival le Pont d' Avignon. 
" let " in C'est le bon vin qui danse id can be nowhere else but 
in old France— le bon vin alone proves this. And the Canadian 
folk-singer, though in a land of myriad springs, still goes a la 
claire fontaine of his ancestral fancy; while the lullabies his 
mother sang him, like the love-songs with which he serenades 
his blonde, were nearly all sung throughout the Normandy of 
le Grand Monarque. The habitant was separated from old- 
world changes two centuries ago by difference of place and 
circumstances, while he has hitherto been safeguarded from 
many new- world changes by the segregative influences of race, 
religion, language and custom; and so his folk-lore still remains 
the intimate alter et idem of what it was in the days of the great 
pioneers. It is no longer a living spirit among the people at 
large; but in secluded villages and " back concessions " one 
can still hear some charming melodies as old and pure as the 
verses to which they are sung, and even a few quaint survivals 
of Gregorian tunes. The best collection, more particularly 
from the musical point of view, is Les Chansons populaires 
du Canada, started by Ernest Gagnon (1st cd. 1865). 

Race-patriotism is the distinguishing characteristic of French- 
Canadian literature, which is so deeply rooted in national 
politics that L. J. Papineau, the most insistent demagogue 
of 1837, must certainly be named among the founders, for 
the sake of speeches which came before written works both 
in point of time and popular esteem. Only 360 volumes had 
been published during 80 years, when, in 1845, the first famous 
book appeared — Francois Xavier Garneau's (1 809-1 866) Histoire 
du Canada. It had immense success in Canada, was favourably 
noticed in France, and has influenced all succeeding men of 
letters. Unfortunately, the imperfect data on which it is based, 
and the too exclusively patriotic spirit in which it is written, 
prevent it from being an authoritative history: the author 
himself declares " Votis vcrrez si la defaite de nos ancelres ne 
vaut pas toutes les victoires." But it is of far-reaching importance 
as the first great literary stimulus to racial self-respect. " Le 
Canada jrancais avail perdu ses lettres de noblesse; Garneau 
les lui a r endues." F. X. Garneau is also remembered for his 
poems, and he was followed by his son Alfred Garneau (1836- 

1904)- 

A. Gerin-Lajoie was a mere lad when the exile of some com- 
patriots inspired Le Canadien errant, which immediately became 
a universal folk-song. Many years later he wrote discrimin- 
atingly about those Dix ans au Canada (1888) that saw the 
establishment of responsible government. But his fame rests 
on Jean Rivard (1874), the prose bucolic of the habitant. The 
hero, left at the head of a fatherless family of twelve when 
nearly through college, turns from the glut of graduates swarming 
round the prospects of professional city-bred careers, steadfastly 



wrests a home from the wilderness, helps his brothers and 
sisters, marries a habitante fit for the wife of a pioneer, brings 
up a large family, and founds a settlement which grows into 
several parishes and finally becomes the centre of the electoral 
district of " Rivardville," which returns him to parliament. 
These simple and earnest Scenes de la vie reelle are an appealing 
revelation of that eternal secret of the soil which every people 
wishing to have a country of its own must early lay to heart; 
and Jean Rivard, le defricheur, will always remain the eponym 
of the new colons of the 19th century. 

Philippe de Gaspe's historical novel, Les Anciens Canadiens 
(1863); is the complement of Garneau and Gerin-Lajoie. Every-; 
thing about the author's life helped him to write this book. 
Born in 1784, and brought up among reminiscent eye-witnesses 
of the old regime, he was an eager listener, with a wonderful 
memory and whole-hearted pride in the glories of his race and 
family, a kindly seigneur, who loved and was loved by all his 
censitaires, a keen observer of many changing systems, down 
to the final Confederation of 1867, and a man who had felt 
both extremes of fortune (Memoir es, 1866). The story rambles 
rather far from its well-worn plot. But these very digressions 
give the book its intimate and abiding charm; for they keep 
the reader in close personal touch with every side of Canadian 
life, with songs and tales and homely forms of speech, with 
the best features of seigniorial times and the strong guidance 
of an ardent church, with voyageurs, coureurs de bois, Indians, 
soldiers, sailors and all the strenuous adventurers of a wild, 
new, giant world. The poet of this little band of authors was 
Octave Cremazie, a Quebec bookseller, who failed in business 
and spent his last years as a penniless exile in France. He 
is usually rather too derivative, he lacks the saving grace of 
style, and even his best Canadian poems hardly rise above 
fervent occasional verse. Yet he became a national poet, 
because he was the first to celebrate occasions of deeply felt 
popular emotion in acceptable rhyme, and he will always remain 
one because each occasion touched some lasting aspiration 
of his race. He sings what Garneau recounts— the love of 
mother country, mother church and Canada. The Guerre de 
Crimee, Guerre d'ltalie, even Castel-fidardo, are duly chronicled. 
An ode on Mgr. de Montmorency-Laval, first bishop of Quebec, 
brings him nearer to his proper themes, which are found in full 
perfection in the Chant du vieux soldat canadien, composed in 
1856 to honour the first French man-of-war that visited British 
Quebec, and Le Drapeau de Carillon (1858), a centennial paean 
for Montcalm's Canadians at Ticonderoga. Much of the mature 
work of this first generation, and of the juvenilia of the second, 
appeared in Les Soirees canadiennes and Le Foyer canadien, 
founded in 1862 and 1863 respectively. The abbe Ferland was 
an enthusiastic editor and historian, and Etienne Parent should 
be remembered as the first Canadian philosopher. 

At Confederation many eager followers began to take up the 
work which the founders were laying down. The abbe Casgrain 
devoted a life-time to making the French-Canadians appear as 
the chosen people of new- world history; but, though an able 
advocate, he spoilt a really good case by trying to prove too 
much. His Pclerinage au pays d' Evangeline (1888) is a splendid 
defence of the unfortunate Acadians; and all his books attract 
the reader by their charm of style and personality. But his 
Montcalm et Levis (1891) and other works on the conquest, are 
all warped by a strong bias against both Wolfe and Montcalm, 
and in favour of Vandreuil, the Canadian-born governor; while 
they show an inadequate grasp of military problems, and 
practically ignore the vast determining factor of sea-power 
altogether. Benjamin Suite's comprehensive Histoire des 
Canadiens-francais (1882) is a well-written, many-sided work. 
Thomas Chapais' monographs are as firmly grounded as they 
are finely expressed; his Jean Talon (1904) is of prime im- 
portance; and his Montcalm (1901) is the generous amende 
honorable paid by French-Canadian literature to a much mis- 
represented, but admirably wrought, career. A. Gerin-Lajoie's 
cry of " back to the land " was successfully adapted to modern 
developments in Le Saguenay (1896) and L'Outaouais supirieur 



i68 



CANAL. 



(1889) by Arthur Buies, who showed what immense inland 
breadths of country lay open to suitable " Jean Rivards " from 
the older settlements along the St Lawrence. In oratory, 
which most. French-Canadians admire beyond all other forms 
of verbal art, Sir Wilfrid Laurier has greatly surpassed L. J. 
Papineau, by dealing with more complex questions, taking a 
higher point of view, and expressing himself with a much apter 
flexibility of style. 

Among later poets may be mentioned Pierre Chauveau (1820- 
1890), Louis Fiset, (b. 1827), and Adolphe Poisson (b. 1849). 
Louis Frechette (183 9-1 908) has,however, long been the only poet 
with a reputation outside of Canada. In 1879 Les Fleurs bor^ales 
won the Prix Monthyon from the French Academy. In 1887 
La Ligende d'un peuple became the acknowledged epic of a race. 
He occasionally nods; is rather strident in the patriotic vein; 
and too often answers the untoward call of rhetoric when his 
subject is about to soar into the heights of poetry. But a rich 
vocabulary, a mastery of verse-forms quite beyond the range 
of Cr6mazie, real originality of conception, individual distinction 
of style, deep insight into the soul of his people, and, still more, 
the glow of warm-blooded life pulsing through the whole poem, 
all combine to give him the greatest place at home and an im- 
portant one in the world at large. Les Vengeances (1875), 
by Leon Pamphile Le May, and Les Aspirations (1904), by W. 
Chapman, worthily represent the older and younger contem- 
poraries. Dr Neree Beauchemin keeps within somewhat narrow 
limits in Les Floraisons matutinales (1897); but within them 
he shows true poetic genius, a fine sense of rhythm, rhyme and 
verbal melody, a curiosa felicitas of epithet and phrase, and 
so sure an eye for local colour that a stranger could choose no 
better guide to the imaginative life of Canada. 

A Canadian drama hardly exists; among its best works are 
the pleasantly epigrammatic plays of F. G. Marchand. Novels 
are not yet much in vogue; though Madame Conan's L'Oublie 
(1902) has been crowned by the Academy; while Dr Choquette's 
Les Ribaud (1898) is a good dramatic story, and his Claude 
Paysan (1899) is an admirably simple idyllic tale of the hopeless 
love of a soil-bound habitant, told with intense natural feeling 
and fine artistic reserve. Chief- Justice Routhier, a most accom- 
plished occasional writer, is very French-Canadian when arraign- 
ing Les Grands Drames of the classics (1889) before his ecclesi- 
astical court and finding them guilty of Paganism. 

The best bibliographies are Phileas Gagnon's Essai de biblio- 
graphie canadienne (1895), and Dr N. E. Dionne's list of publications 
from the earliest times in the Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Canada for 1905. (W. Wo.) 

CANAL (from Lat. canalis, " channel " and " kennel " being 
doublets of the word), an artificial water course used for the 
drainage of low lands, for irrigation (q.v.), or more especially 
for the purpose of navigation by boats, barges or ships. Probably 
the first canals were made for irrigation, but in very early times 
they came also to be used for navigation, as in Assyria and Egypt. 
The Romans constructed various works of the kind, and Charle- 
magne projected a system of waterways connecting the Main 
and the Rhine with the Danube, while in China the Grand Canal, 
joining the Pei-ho and Yang-tse-Kiang and constructed in the 
13th century, formed an important artery of commerce, serving 
also for irrigation. But although it appears from Marco Polo 
that inclines were used on the Grand Canal, these early waterways 
suffered in general from the defect that no method being known 
of conveniently transferring boats from one level to another 
they were only practicable between points that lay on nearly 
the same level; and inland navigation could not become 
generally useful and applicable until this defect had been remedied 
by the employment of locks. Great doubts exist as to the person, 
and even the nation, that first introduced locks. Some writers 
attribute their invention to the Dutch, holding that nearly a 
century earlier than in Italy locks were used in Holland where 
canals are very numerous, owing to the favourable physical 
conditions. On the other hand, the contrivance has been claimed 
for engineers of the Italian school, and it is said that two brothers 
Domenico of Viterbo constructed a lock-chamber enclosed by 



a pair of gates in 1481, and that in 1487 Leonardo da Vinci 
completed six locks uniting the canals of Milan. Be that as it 
may, however, the introduction of locks in the 14th or 15th 
century gave a new character to inland navigation and laid the 
basis of its successful extension. 

The Languedoc Canal (Canal du Midi) may be regarded as 
the pioneer of the canals of modern Europe. Joining the Bay 
of Biscay and the Mediterranean it is 148 m. long and rises 
620 ft. above sea-level with 119 locks, its depth being about 
6§ ft. It was designed by Baron Paul Riquet de Bonrepos 
(1604-1680) and was finished in 1681. With it and the still 
earlier Briare canal (1605-1642) France began that policy of 
canal construction which has provided her with over 3000 m. 
of canals, in addition to over 4600 m. of navigable rivers. In 
Russia Peter the Great undertook the construction of a systenj 
of canals about the beginning of the 18th century, and in Sweden 
a canal with locks, connecting Eskilstuna with Lake Malar, 
was finished in 1606. In England the oldest artificial canal 
is the Foss Dyke, a relic of the Roman occupation. It extends 
from Lincoln to the river Trent near Torksey (n m.), and 
formed a continuation of the Caer Dyke, also of Roman origin 
but now filled up, which ran from Lincoln to Peterborough 
(40 m.). Camden in his Britannia says that the Foss Dyke was 
deepened and to some extent rendered navigable in 1 1 2 1 . Little, 
however, was done in making canals in Great Britain until the 
middle of the 18th century, though before that date some pro- 
gress had been made in rendering some of the larger rivers 
navigable. In 1759 the duke of Bridgewater obtained powers 
to construct a canal between Manchester and his collieries at 
Worsley, and this work, of which James Brindley was the 
engineer, and which was opened for traffic in 1 76 1 ,was followed by 
a period of great activity in canal construction, which, however, 
came to an end with the introduction of railways. According 
to evidence given before the royal commission on canals in 1906 
the total mileage of existing canals in the United Kingdom was 
3901. In the United States the first canal was made in 1792- 
1796 at South Hadley, Massachusetts, and the canal-system, 
though its expansion was checked by the growth of railways, has 
attained a length of 4200 m., most of the mileage being in New 
York, Ohio, and Pennsylvania. The splendid inland navigation 
system of Canada mainly consists of natural lakes and rivers, 
and the artificial waterways are largely " lateral " canals, cut 
in order to enable vessels to avoid rapids in the rivers. (See 
the articles on the various countries for accounts of the canal- 
systems they possess.) 

The canals that were made in the early days of canal-construc- 
tion were mostly of the class known as barge or boat canals, 
and owing to their limited depth and breadth were only available 
for vessels of small size. But with the growth of commerce 
the advantage was seen of cutting canals of such dimensions 
as to enable them to accommodate sea-going ships. Such 
ship-canals, which from an engineering point of view chiefly 
differ from barge-canals in the magnitude of the works they 
involve, have mostly been constructed either to shorten the 
voyage between two seas by cutting through an intervening 
isthmus, or to convert important inland places into sea-ports. 
An early example of the first class is afforded by the Caledonian 
Canal (q.v.), while among later ones may be mentioned the 
Suez Canal (q.v.), the Kaiser Wilhelm, Nord-Ostsee or Kiel 
Canal, connecting Brunsbiittel at the mouth of the Elbe with 
Kiel, (q.v.) on the Baltic, and the various canals that have 
been proposed across the isthmus that joins North and South 
America (see Panama Canal). Examples of the second class 
are the Manchester Ship Canal and the canal that runs from 
Zeebrugge on the North Sea to. Bruges (q.v.). 

Construction. — In laying out a line of canal the engineer is 
more restricted than in forming the route of a road or a railway, 
Since water runs downhill, gradients are inadmissible, and the 
canal must either be made on one uniform level or must be 
adapted to the general rise or fall of the country through which 
it passes by being constructed in a series of level reaches at 
varying heights above a chosen datum line, each closed by a 



CANAL 



169 



lock or some equivalent device to enable vessels to be transferred 
from one to another. To avoid unduly heavy earthwork, the 
reaches must closely follow the bases of hills and the windings 
of valleys, but from time to time it will become necessary to 
cross a sudden depression by the aid of an embankment or 
aqueduct, while a piece of rising ground or a hill may involve 
a cutting or a tunnel. Brindley took the Bridgewater canal 
over the Irwell at Barton by means of an aqueduct of three 
stone arches, the centre one having a span of 63 ft., and T. 
Telford arranged that the Ellesmere canal should cross the Dee 
valley at Pont-y-Cysyllte partly by embankment and partly 
by aqueduct. The embankment was continued till it was 75 ft. 
above the ground, when it was succeeded by an aqueduct, 1000 ft. 
long and 127 ft. above the river, consisting of a cast iron trough 
supported on iron arches with stone piers. Occasionally when 
a navigable stream has to be crossed, a swing viaduct is necessary 
to allow shipping to pass. The first was that built by Sir E. 
Leader Williams to replace Brindley's aqueduct at Barton, 
which was only high enough to give room for barges (see Man- 
chester Ship Canal). One of the earliest canal tunnels was 
made in 1766-1777 by Brindley at Harecastle on the Trent and 
Mersey canal; it is 2880 yds. long, 12 ft. high and 9 ft. wide, 
and has no tow-path, the boats being propelled by men lying 
on their backs and pushing with their feet against the tunnel 
walls (" leggers ")• A-second tunnel, parallel to this but 16 ft. 
high and 14 ft. wide, with a tow-path, was finished by Telford in 
1827. Standedge tunnel, on the Huddersfield canal, is over 3 m. 
long, and is also worked by leggers. 

The dimensions of a canal, apart from considerations of water- 
supply, are regulated by the size of the vessels which are to be 
used on it. According to J. M. Rankine, the depth of 
sioas. ' water and sectional area of waterway should be such 
as not to cause any material increase of the resistance 
to the motion of the boats beyond what would be encountered 
in open water, and he gives the following rules as fulfilling these 
conditions: — 

Least breadth of bottom = 2 X greatest breadth of boat. 

Least depth of water =ij ft.-)- greatest draught of boat. 

Least area of waterway =6Xgreatest midship section of boat. 

The ordinary inland canal is commonly from 25 to 30 ft. wide 
at the bottom, which is flat, and from 40 to 50 ft. at the water 
level, with a depth of 4 or 5 ft., the angle of slope of the sides 
varying with the nature of the soil. To retain the water in porous 
ground, and especially on embankments, a strong watertight 
lining of puddle or tempered clay must be provided on the bed 
and sides of the channel. Puddle is made of clay which has been 
finely chopped up with narrow spades, water being supplied 
until it is in a semi-plastic state. It is used in thin layers, each 
of which is worked so as to be firmly united with the lower 
stratum. The full thickness varies from 2 to 3 ft. To prevent 
the erosion of the sides at the water-line by the wash from the 
boats, it may be necessary to pitch them with stones or face 
them with brushwood. In some of the old canals the slopes 
have been cut away and vertical walls built to retain the towing- 
paths, with the result of adding materially to the sectional area 
of the waterway. 

A canal cannot be properly worked without a supply of 
water calculated to last over the driest season of the year: If 

there be no natural lake available in the district for 
supply. storage and supply, or if the engineer cannot draw . upon 

some stream of sufficient size, he must form artificial 
reservoirs in suitable situations, and the conditions which must 
be attended to in selecting the positions of these and in con- 
structing them are the same as those for drinking-water supply, 
except that the purity of the water is not a matter of moment. 
They must be situated at such an elevation that the water from 
them may flow to the summit-level of the canal, and if the 
expense of pumping is to be avoided, they must command a 
sufficient catchment area to supply the loss of water from the 
canal by evaporation from the surface, percolation through the 
bed, and lockage. If the supply be inadequate, the draught of 
the boats plying on the canal may have to be reduced in a dry 



season, and the consequent decrease in the size of their cargoes 
will both lessen the carrying capacity of the canal and increase 
the working expenses in relation to the tonnage handled. Again, 
since the consumption of water in lockage increases both with 
the size of the locks and the frequency with which they are used, 
the difficulty of finding a sufficient water supply may put a 
limit to the density of traffic possible on a canal or may prohibit 
its locks from being enlarged so as to accommodate boats of the 
size necessary for the economical handling of the traffic under 
modern conditions. It may be pointed out that the up con- 
sumes more water than the down traffic. An ascending boat 
on entering a lock displaces a volume of water equal to its 
submerged capacity. The water so displaced flows into the lower 
reach of the canal, and as the boat passes through the lock is 
replaced by water flowing from the upper reach. A descending 
boat in the same way displaces a volume of water equal to its 
submerged capacity, but in this case the water flows back into 
the higher reach where it is retained when the gates are 
closed. 

An essential adjunct to a canal is a sufficient number of 
waste-weirs to discharge surplus water accumulating during 
floods, which, if not provided with an exit, may waste- 
overflow the.tow-path, and cause a breach in the banks, weirs and 
stoppage of the traffic, and damage to adjoining stop ~ 
lands. The number and positions of these waste-weirs ga es ' 
must depend on the nature of the country through which the 
canal passes. Wherever the canal crosses a stream a waste- 
weir should be formed in the aqueduct; but independently 
of this the engineer must consider at what points large influxes 
of water may be apprehended, and must at such places form 
not only waste-weirs of sufficient size to carry off the surplus, but 
also artificial courses for its discharge into the nearest streams. 
These waste-weirs are placed at the top water-level of the 
canal, so that when a flood occurs the water flows over them 
and thus relieves the banks. 

Stop-gates are necessary at short intervals of a few miles 
for the purpose of dividing the canal into isolated reaches, 
so that in the event of a breach the gates may be shut, and 
the discharge of water confined to the small reach intercepted 
between two of them, instead of extending throughout the 
whole line of canal. In broad canals these stop-gates may be 
formed like the gates of locks, two pairs of gates being made 
to shut in opposite directions. In small works they may be 
made of thick planks slipped into grooves formed at the narrow 
points of the canal under road bridges, or at contractions made 
at intermediate points to receive them. Self-acting stop-gates 
have been tried, but have not proved trustworthy. When 
repairs have to be made stop-gates allow of the water being 
run off by " off-lets " from a short reach, and afterwards restored 
with but little interruption of the traffic. These off -lets are pipes 
placed at the level of the bottom of the canal and provided 
with valves which can be opened when required. They are 
generally formed at aqueducts or bridges crossing rivers, where 
the contents of the canal between the stop-gates can be run 
off into the stream. 

Locks are chambers, constructed of wood, brickwork, masonry 
or concrete, and provided with gates at each end, by the aid 
of which vessels are transferred from one reach of Locks 
the canal to another. To enable a boat to ascend, 
the upper gates and the sluices which command the flow of 
water from the upper reach are closed. The sluices at the lower 
end of the lock are then opened, and when the level of the water 
in the lock has fallen to that of the lower reach, the boat passes 
in to the lock. The lower gates and sluices being then closed, 
the upper sluices are opened, and when the water rising in 
the lock has floated the boat up the level of the upper reach 
the upper gates are opened and it passes out. For a descending 
boat the procedure is reversed. The sluices by which the lock is 
filled or emptied are carried through the walls in large locks, 
or consist of openings in the gates in small ones. The gates 
are generally of oak, fitting into recesses of the walls when 
open, and closing against sills in the lock bottom when shut. 



170 



CANAL 



In small narrow locks single gates only are necessary; in large 
locks pairs of gates are required, fitting together at the head 
or " mitre-post " when closed. The vertical timber at the 
end of the gate is known as the " heel-post," and at its foot is 
a casting that admits an iron pivot which is fixed in the" lock 
bottom, and on which the gate turns. Iron straps round the 
head of the heel-post are let into the lock-coping to support 
the gate. The gates are opened and closed by balance beams 
projecting over the lock side, by gearing or in cases where 
they are very large and heavy by the direct action of a hydraulic 
ram. In order to economize water canal locks are made only 
a few inches wider than the vessels they have to accommodate. 
The English canal boat is about 70 or 75 ft. long and 7 or 8 ft. 
in beam; canal barges are the same length but 14 or 15 ft. 
in width, so that locks which will hold one of them will admit 
two of the narrower canal boats side by side. In general canal 
locks are just long enough to accommodate the longest vessels 
using the navigation. In some cases, however, provision is 
made for admitting a train of barges; such long locks have 
sometimes intermediate gates by which the effective length 
is reduced when a single vessel is passing. The lift of canal 
locks, that is, the difference between the level of adjoining 
reaches, is in general about 8 or 10 ft., but sometimes is as 
little as 1 5 ft. On the Canal du Centre (Belgium) there are locks 
with a lift of 17 ft., and on the St Denis canal near La Villette 
basins in Paris there is one with a lift of 32 J ft. In cases where 
a considerable difference of level has to be surmounted the 
locks are placed close together in a series or " flight," so that 
the lower gates of one serve also as the upper gates of the next 
below. To save water, expecially where the lift is considerable, 
side ponds are sometimes employed; they are reservoirs into 
which a portion of the water in a lock-chamber is run, instead 
of being discharged into the lower reach, and is afterwards 
used for partially filling the chamber again. Double locks, 
that is, two locks placed side by side and communicating by 
a passage which can be opened or closed at will, also tend to 
save water, since each serves as a side pond to the other. The 
same advantage is gained with double flights of locks, and time 
also is saved since vessels can pass up and down simultaneously. 
A still greater economy of water can be effected by the use 
of inclined planes or vertical lifts in place of locks. In China 
Inclines ruc ' e i ac 'i ne s appear to have been used at an early 
date, vessels being carried down a sloping plane of 
stonework by the aid of a flush of water or hauled up it by 
capstans. On the Bude canal (England) this plan was adopted 
in an improved form, the small flat-bottomed boats employed 
being fitted with wheels to facilitate their course over the 
inclines. Another variant, often adopted as an adjunct to 
locks where many small pleasure .boats have to be dealt with, 
is to fit the incline itself with rollers, upon which the boats 
travel. In some cases the boats are conveyed on a wheeled 
trolley or cradle running on rails; this plan was adopted on 
the Morris canal, built in 1825-1831,^1 the case of 23 inclines 
having gradients of about 1 in 10, the rise of each varying 
from 44 to 100 ft. Between the Ourcq canal and the Marne, 
near Meaux, the difference of level is about 40 ft., and barges 
weighing about 76 tons are taken from the one to the other on 
a wheeled cradle weighing 35 tons by a wire rope over an incline 
nearly 500 yards long. But heavy barges are apt to be strained 
by being supported on cradles in this way, and to avoid this 
objection they are sometimes drawn up the inclines floating 
in a tank or caisson filled with water and running on wheels. 
This arrangement was utilized about 1840 on the Chard canal 
(England), and 10 years later it was adapted at Blackhill on 
the Monkland canal (Scotland) to replace a double flight of 
locks, in consequence of the traffic having been interrupted 
by insufficiency of water. There the height to be overcome 
was 96 ft. Two pairs of rails, of 7 ft. gauge, were laid down 
on a gradient of 1 in 10, and on these ran two carriages having 
wrought iron, water-tight caissons with lifting gates at each 
end, in which the barges floated partially but not wholly sup- 
ported by water. The carriages, with the barge and water, 



weighed about 80 tons each, and were arranged to counte*. 
balance each other, one going up as the other was going down. 
The power required was provided by two high pressure steam 
engines of 25 h.p., driving two large drums round which was 
coiled, in opposite directions, the 2-inch wire rope that hauled 
the caissons. An incline constructed on the Union canal at 
Foxton (England) to replace 10 locks giving a total rise of 
75 ft., accommodates barges of 70 tons, or two canal boats 
of 33 tons. It is in some respects like the Monkland canal 
incline, but the movable caissons work on four pairs of rails 
on an incline of 1 in 14, broadside on, and the boats are entirely 
waterborne. Steam power is employed, with an hydraulic 
accumulator which enables hydraulic power to be used in 
keeping the caisson in position at the top of the incline while 
the boats are being moved in or out, a water-tight joint being . 
maintained with the final portion of the canal during the 
operation. The gates in the caisson and canal are also worked 
by hydraulic power. The incline is capable of passing 200 canal 
boats in 1 2 hours, and the whole plant is worked by three men. 

Vertical lifts can only be used instead of locks with advantage, 
at places where the difference in level occurs in a short length 
of canal, since otherwise long embankments or Lifts. 

aqueducts would be necessary to obtain sites for 
their construction. An early example was built in 1809 at 
Tardebigge on the Worcester and Birmingham canal. It 
consisted of a timber caisson, weighing 64 tons when full of 
water, counterpoised by heavy weights carried on timber 
platforms. The lift of 1 2 ft. was effected in about three minutes 
by two men working winches. Seven lifts, erected on the Grand 
Western canal between Wellington and Tiverton about 1835, 
consisted of two chambers with a masonry pier between them. 
In each chamber there worked a timber caisson, suspended 
at either end of a chain hung over large pulleys above. As 
one caisson descended the other rose, and the apparatus was 
worked by putting about a ton more water in the descending 
caisson than in the ascending one. At Anderton a lift was 
erected in 1875 to connect the Weaver navigation with the 
Trent and Mersey canal, which at that point is 50 ft. higher than 
the river. The lift is a double one, and can deal with barges 
up to 100 tons. The change is made while the vessels are 
floating in 5 ft. of water contained in a wrought iron caisson, 
75 ft. long and 155 ft. wide. An hydraulic ram 3 ft. in diameter 
supports each caisson, the bottom of which is strengthened 
so as to transfer the weight to the side girders. The descending 
caisson falls owing to being filled with 6 in. greater depth 
of water than the ascending one, the weight on the rams (240 
tons) being otherwise constant, since the barge displaces its 
own weight of water; an hydraulic accumulator is used to over- 
come the loss of weight in the descending caisson when it begins 
to be immersed in the lower level of the river. The two presses 
in which the rams work are connected by a 5-in. pipe, so that 
the descent of one caisson effects the raising of the other. A 
similar lift, completed in 1888 at Fontinettes on the Neuffosse 
canal in France, can accommodate vessels of 250 tons, a total 
weight of 785 tons being lifted 43 ft.; and a still larger example 
on the Canal du Centre at La Louviere in Belgium has a rise 
of 50 ft., with caissons that will admit vessels up to 400 tons, 
the total weight lifted amounting to over 1000 tons. This lift, 
with three others of the same character, overcomes the rise 
of 217 ft., which occurs in this canal in the course of 4! m. 

Haulage. — The horse or mule walking along a tow-path 
and drawing or " tracking " a boat or barge by means of a 
towing rope, still remains the typical method of 
conducting traffic on the smaller canals; on ship- 
canals vessels proceed under their own steam or are 
aided by tugs. Horse traction is very slow. The maximum 
speed on a narrow canal is about 35 m. an hour, and the 
average speed, which, of course, depends largely on the number 
of locks to be passed through, very much less. It has been 
calculated that in England on the average one horse hauls 
one narrow canal boat about 2 m. an hour loaded or 3 m. 
empty, or two narrow canal boats 15 m. loaded and 25m. 



Animal 
power. 



CANAL DOVER— CANALE 



1 7 



Mechani- 
cal power. 



empty. Efforts have accordingly been made not only to quicken 
the rate of transit, but also to move heavier loads, thus increasing 
the carrying capacity of the waterways. But at speeds exceeding 
about 35 m. an hour the " wash " of the boat begins to cause 
erosion of the banks, and thus necessitates the employment 
of special protective measures, such as building side walls 
of masonry or concrete. For a canal of given depth there is 
a particular speed at which a boat can be hauled with a smaller 
expenditure of energy than at a higher or a lower speed, this 
maximum being the speed of free propagation of the primary 
wave raised by the motion of the boat (see Wave). About 
1830 when, in the absence of railways, canals could still aspire 
to act as carriers of passengers, advantage was taken of this 
fact on the Glasgow and Ardrossan canal, and subsequently 
on some others, to run fast passenger boats, made lightly of 
wrought iron and measuring 60 ft. in length by about 6 ft. 
in breadth. Provided with two horses they started at a low speed 
behind the wave, and then on a given signal were jerked on the 
top of the wave, when their speed was maintained at 7 or 8 m. 
an hour, the depth of the canal being 3 or 4 ft. This method, 
however, is obviously inapplicable to heavy barges, and in their 
case improved conditions of transport had to be sought in other 
directions. 

Steam towage was first employed on the Forth and Clyde 
canal in 1802, when a tug-boat fitted with steam engines by 
W. Symington drew two barges for a distance of 
19! m. in 6 hours in the teeth of a strong headwind. 
As a result of this successful experiment it was proposed 
to employ steam tugs on the Bridgewater canal; but the 
project fell through owing to the death of the duke of Bridge- 
water, and the directors of the Forth and Clyde canal also 
decided against this method because they feared damage to 
the banks. Steam tugs are only practicable on navigations on 
which there are either no locks or they are large enough to admit 
the tug and its train of barges simultaneously; otherwise the 
advantages are more than counterbalanced by the delays at 
locks. On the Bridgewater canal, which has an average width 
of 50 ft. with a depth of 55 ft., is provided with vertical stone 
walls in place of sloping banks, and has no locks for its entire 
length of 40 m. except at Runcorn, where it joins the Mersey, 
tugs of 50 i.h.p., with a draught of 4 ft., tow four barges, each 
weighing 60 tons, at a rate of nearly 3 m. an hour. On the 
Aire and Calder navigation, where the locks have a minimum 
length of 215 ft., a large coal traffic is carried in trains of boat- 
compartments on a system designed by W. H. Bartholomew. 
The boats are nearly square in shape, except the leading one 
which has an ordinary bow; they are coupled together by 
knuckle-joints fitted into hollow stern-posts, so that they can 
move both laterally and vertically, and a wire rope in tension 
on each side enables the train to be steered. No boat crews are 
required, the crew of the steamer regulating the train. If the 
number of boats does not exceed n they can be pushed, but 
beyond that number they are towed. Each compartment 
carries 35 tons, and the total weight in a train varies from 
700 to goo tons. On the arrival of a train at Goole the boats 
are detached and are taken over submerged cradles under 
hydraulic hoists which lift the boat with the cradle sufficiently 
high to enable it to be turned over and discharge the whole 
cargo at once into a shoot and thence into sea-going steamers. 
Another method of utilizing steam-power, which was also first 
tried on the Forth and Clyde canal by Symington in 1789, 
is to provide each vessel with a separate steam engine, and 
many barges are now running fitted in this way. Experiments 
have also been made with internal combustion engines in place 
of steam engines. In some cases, chiefly on rivers having a 
strong current, recourse has been had to a submerged chain 
passed round a drum on a tug: this drum is rotated by steam 
power and thus the tug is hauled up against the current. To 
obviate the inconvenience of passing several turns of the chain 
round the drum in order to get sufficient grip, the plan was 
introduced on the Seine and Oise in 1893 of passing the chain 
round a pulley which could be magnetized at will, the necessary 



adhesion being thus ■■ obtained by the magnetic attraction 
exercised on the iron chain; and it was also adopted about 
the same time in combination with electrical haulage on a small 
portion of the Bourgogne canal, electricity being employed 
to drive the motor that worked the pulley. Small locomotives 
running on rails along the towpath were tried on the Shropshire 
Union canal, where they were abandoned on account of practical 
difficulties in working, and also on certain canals in France 
and Germany, where, however, the financial results were not 
satisfactory. On portions of the Teltow canal, joining the 
Havel and the Spree, electrical tractors run on rails along 
both banks, taking their power from an overhead wire; they 
attain a speed of 25 m. an hour when hauling two 600-ton 
barges. The electrical supply is also utilized for working the 
lock gates and for various other purposes along the route of 
the canal. In the Mont-de-Rilly tunnel, at the summit level of the 
Aisne-Marne canal, a system of cable-traction was established 
in 1894, the boats being taken through by being attached to 
an endless travelling wire rope supported by pulleys en the 
towpath. 

When railways were being carried out in England some canal 
companies were alarmed for their future, and sold their canals to 
the railway companies, who in 1906 owned 1138 m. of canals out 
of a total length in the United Kingdom of 3901 m. As some of these 
canals are links in the chain of internal water communication com- 
plaints have frequently arisen on the question of through traffic 
and tolls. The great improvements carried out in America and on 
the continent of Europe by state 'aid enable manufacturers to get 
the raw material they use and goods they export to and from their 
ports at much cheaper rates than those charged on British canals. 
The association of chambers of commerce and other bodies having 
taken up the matter, a royal commission was appointed in 1906 to 
report on the canals and water-ways of the kingdom, with a view to 
considering how they could be more profitably used for national 
purposes. Its Report was published in December 1909. 

Authorities.— L. F. Vernon-Harcourt, Rivers and Canals (2nd 
ed., 1896); Chapman, Canal Navigation; Firisi, On Canals; R. 
Fulton, Canal Navigation; Tatham, Economy of Inland Navigation; 
Valancy, Treatise on Inland Navigation; D. Stevenson, Canal and 
River Engineering; John Phillips, History of Inland Navigation; 
J. Priestley, History of Navigable Rivers, Canals, &c. in Great 
Britain (1831); T. Telford, Life (1838); John Smeaton, Reports 
(1837); Reports of the International Congresses on Interior 'Naviga- 
tion; Report and Evidence of the Royal Commission on Canals {Great 
Britain), 1906-9. (jr. l_ \\m , 

CANAL DOVER, a city of Tuscarawas county, Ohio, U.S.A., 
on the Tuscarawas river, about 70 m. S. by E. of Cleveland. 
Pop. (1890) 3470; (1900) 5422 (939 foreign-born); (1910) 6621. 
It is served by the Baltimore & Ohio and the Pennsylvania 
railways, and by the Ohio canal, and is connected with Cleveland 
by an inter-urban electric line. It lies on a plateau about 880 ft. 
above sea-level and commands pleasant views of diversified 
scenery. Coal and iron ore abound in the vicinity, and the city 
manufactures iron, steel, tin plate, electrical and telephone 
supplies, shovels, boilers, leather, flour, brick and tile, salt, 
furniture and several kinds of vehicles. The municipality owns 
and operates its water-works. Canal Dover was laid' out as a 
town in 1807, and was incorporated as a village in 1842, but its 
charter was soon allowed to lapse and was not revived until 1867. 
Canal Dover became a city under the Ohio municipal code of 
1903. 

CANALE (or Canaletto), ANTONIO (1697-1768), Venetian 
painter, born on the 18th of October 1697, was educated under 
his father Bernard, a scene-painter of Venice, and for . some 
time followed his father's line of art. In 17 19 he went to Rome, 
where he employed himself chiefly in delineating ancient ruins, 
and particularly studied effects of light and shade, in which he 
became an adept. He was the first painter who made practical 
use of the camera lucida. On returning home he devoted his 
powers to views in his native city, which he painter! with a clear 
and firm touch and the most facile mastery of colour in a deep 
tone, introducing groups of figures with much effect. In his 
latter days he resided some time in England. His pictures, in 
their particular range, still remain unrivalled for their magnificent 
perspective. The National Gallery, London, has five pictures 
by him, notably the " View on the Grand Canal, Venice," and 



172 



CANALIS— CANARY ISLANDS 



the " Regatta on the Grand Canal." He died on the 20th of 
August 1768. Bellotto (commonly named Bernardo), who is 
also sometimes called Canaletto (1724-1780), was his nephew 
and pupil, and painted with deceptive resemblance to the style 
of the more celebrated master. 

CANALIS (also "canal" and "channel"; from the Latin), 
in architecture, the sinking between the fillets of the volute of 
the Ionic capital: in the earliest examples, though sunk below 
the fillets, it is slightly convex in section. 

CANANDAIGUA, a village and the county-seat of Ontario 
county, New York, U.S.A., 30 m. S.E. of Rochester. Pop. 
(1890) 5868; (1900) 6151; (1910) 7217. It is served 
by the New York Central and Hudson River, and the North- 
ern Central (Pennsylvania system) railways, and is con- 
nected with Rochester by an inter-urban electric line. Among 
the manufactures are pressed bricks, tile, beer, ploughs, flour, 
agate and tin- ware. The village, picturesquely situated at the 
north end of Canandaigua Lake, a beautiful sheet of water about 
15 m. long with a breadth varying from a mile to a mile and a 
half, is a summer resort. It has a county court house; the 
Canandaigua hospital of physicians and surgeons; the Frederick 
Ferris Thompson memorial hospital, with a bacteriological 
laboratory supported by the county; the Clark Manor House 
(a county home for the aged), given by Mrs Frederick Ferris 
Thompson in memory of her mother and of her father, Myron 
Holley Clark (1806-1892), president of the village of Canandaigua 
in 1850-1851 and governor of New York in 1855-1857; the 
Ontario Orphan Asylum; Canandaigua Academy; Granger Place 
school for girls; Brigham Hall (a private sanatorium for nervous 
and mental diseases); Young Men's Christian Association 
building (1905); and two libraries, the Wood (public) library 
and the Union School library, founded in 1795. There is a 
public playground in the village with free instruction by a 
physical director; and a swimming school, endowed by Mrs 
F. F. Thompson, gives free lessons in swimming. The village 
owns its water-supply system. A village of the Seneca Indians, 
near the present Canandaigua, bearing the same name, which 
means " a settlement was formerly there " (not, as Lewis 
Morgan thought, " chosen spot "), was destroyed by Gen. John 
Sullivan in 1779. There are boulder memorials of Sullivan's 
expedition and of the treaty signed here on the 1 ith of November 
1 794 by Timothy Pickering, on behalf of the United States with 
the Six Nations — a treaty never ratified by the Senate. Canan- 
daigua was settled in 1789 and was first incorporated in 
1812. 

CANARD (the Fr. for " duck "), a sensational or extravagant 
story, a hoax or false report, especially one circulated by news- 
papers. This use of the word in France dates from the 17th 
century, and is supposed by Littre to have originated in the 
old expression, " vendre un canard a moitiS " (to half -sell a duck) ; 
as it is impossible to " half-sell a duck," the phrase came to 
signify to take in, or to cheat. 

CANARY (Serinus canarius), a well-known species of passerine 
bird, belonging to the family Fringillidae or finches (see Finch) . 
It is a native of the Canary Islands and Madeira, where it occurs 
abundantly in the wild state, and is of a greyish-brown colour, 
slightly varied with brighter hues, although never attaining 
the beautiful plumage of the domestic bird. It was first domesti- 
cated in Italy during the 16th century, and soon spread over 
Europe, where it is now the most common of cage-birds. During 
the years of its domestication, the canary has been the subject 
of careful artificial selection, the result being the production 
of a bird differing widely in the colour of its plumage, and in a 
few of its varieties even in size and form, from the original wild 
species. The prevailing colour of the most admired varieties 
of the canary is yellow, approaching in some cases to orange, 
and in others to white; while the most robust birds are those 
which, in the dusky green of the upper surface of their plumage, 
show a distinct approach to the wild forms. The least prized 
are those in which the plumage is irregularly spotted and speckled. 
In one of the most esteemed varieties, the wing and tail feathers 
are at first black— a peculiarity, however, which disappears 



after the first moulting. Size and form have also been modified 
by domestication, the wild canary being not more than 5! in. 
in length, while a well-known Belgian variety usually measures 
8 in. There are also hooped or bowed canaries, feather-footed 
forms and top-knots, the latter having a distinct crest on the 
head; but the offspring of two such top-knotted canaries, 
instead of showing an increased development of crest, as might 
be expected, are apt to be bald on 'the crown. Most of the 
varieties, however, of which no fewer than twenty-seven were 
recognized by French breeders so early as the beginning of the 
1 8th century, differ merely in the colour and the markings of 
the plumage. Hybrids are also common, the canary breeding 
freely with the siskin, goldfinch, citril, greenfinch and linnet. 
The hybrids thus produced are almost invariably sterile. It is 
the female canary which is almost invariably employed in 
crossing, as it is difficult to get the females of the allied species 
to sit on the artificial nest used by breeders. In a state of 
nature canaries pair, but under domestication the male bird 
has been rendered polygamous, being often put with four or 
five females; still he is said to show a distinct preference for the 
female with which he was first mated. It is from the others, 
however, that the best birds are usually obtained. The canary 
is very prolific, producing eggs, not exceeding six in number* 
three or four times a year; and in a state of nature it is said to 
breed still oftener. The work of building the nest, and of in- 
cubation, falls chiefly on the female, while the duty of feeding 
the young rests mainly with the cock bird. The natural song 
of the canary is loud and clear; and in their native groves the 
males, especially during the pairing season, pour forth their 
song with such ardour as sometimes to burst the delicate vessels 
of the throat. The males appear to compete with each other 
in the brilliancy of their melody, in order to attract the 
females, which, according to the German naturalist Johann 
Matthaus Bechstein (1757-1822) always select the best singers 
for their mates. The canary readily imitates the notes of 
other birds, and in Germany and especially Tirol, where the 
breeding of canaries gives employment to a large number of 
people, they are usually placed for this purpose beside the 
nightingale. (A. N.) 

CANARY ISLANDS (Canarias), a Spanish archipelago in the 
Atlantic Ocean; about 60 m. W. of the African coast, between 
27 40' and 29 30' N., and between 13 20' and 18° 10' W. Pop. 
(1900) 358,564; area 2807 sq. m. The Canary Islands resemble 
a roughly-drawn semicircle, with its convex side facing south- 
wards, and with the island of Hierro detached on the south-west. 
More precisely, they may be considered as two groups, one of 
which, including Teneriffe, Grand Canary, Palma, Hierro and 




Gomera, consists of mountain peaks, isolated and rising directly 
from an ocean of great depth; while the other, comprising 
Lanzarote, Fuerteventura and six uninhabited islets, is based 
on a single submarine plateau, of far less depth. Teneriffe and 
Gomera, the only members of the principal group which have 
a common base, may be regarded as the twin peaks of one great 
volcanic mass. Ever since the researches of Leopold von Buch 
the Canary Islands have been classical ground to the student of 
volcanic action. Buch considered them to be representative 
of his " craters of elevation." In common with the other West 



CANARY ISLANDS 



*7S 



African islands they are of volcanic origin. The lavas consist 
chiefly of trachytes and basalts. 

Climate. — From April to October a north or north-east wind 
blows upon the islands, beginning about 10 a.m. and continuing 
until 5 or 6 p.m. In summer this wind produces a dense stratum 
of sea-cloud (cumuloni), 500 ft. thick, whose lower surface is 
about 2 500 ft. above the sea at Teneriffe. This does not reach up 
to the mountains, which have on every side a stratum of their 
own, about 1000 ft. thick, the lower surface being about 3500 ft. 
above the level of the sea. Between these two distinct strata 
there is a gap, through which persons on a vessel near the island 
may obtain a glimpse of the peak. The sea-cloud conceals from 
view the other islands, except those whose mountains pierce 
through it. On the south-west coasts there is no regular sea or 
land breeze. In winter they are occasionally visited by a hot 
south-east wind from Africa, which is called the Levante, and 
produces various disagreeable consequences on the exposed 
parts of the person, besides injuring the vegetation, especially 
on the higher grounds. Locusts have sometimes been brought 
by this wind. In 181 2 it is said that locusts covered some 
fields in Fuerteventura to the derkh of 4 ft. Hurricanes, accom- 
panied by waterspouts, sometimes cause much devastation; 
but, on the whole, the islands are singularly free from such 
visitations. The climate generally is mild, dry and healthy. 
On the lower grounds the temperature is equable, the daily 
range seldom exceeding 6° Fahr. At Santa Cruz the mean for 
the year is about 71 . The rainy season occurs at the same 
period as in southern Europe. The dry season is at the time of 
the trade-winds, which extend a few degrees farther north than 
this latitude. 

Fauna. — The indigenous mammals of the Canary Islands 
are very few in number. The dog, swine, goat and sheep were 
alone found upon the island by the Spanish conquerors: The 
race of large dogs which is supposed to have given a name to the 
islands has been long extinct. A single skeleton has been found, 
which is deposited in one of the museums at Paris. The ferret, 
rabbit, cat, rat, mouse and two kinds of bat have become 
naturalized. The ornithology is more interesting, on account 
at once of the birds native to the islands, and the stragglers 
from the African coast, which are chiefly brought over in winter, 
when the wind has blown for some time from the east. Among 
the indigenous birds are some birds of prey, as the African 
vulture, the falcon, the buzzard, the sparrow-hawk and the kite. 
There are also two species of owl, three species of sea-mew, the 
stockdove, quail, raven, magpie, chaffinch, goldfinch, blackcap, 
canary, titmouse, blackbird, house-swallow, &c. As to the 
insects, mention may be made of a species of gnat or mosquito 
which is sometimes troublesome, especially to strangers. The 
list of reptiles is limited to three varieties of lizard and one 
species of frog. The only fresh-water fish is the eel. Marine 
fishes are not numerous, the reason perhaps being that the 
steepness of the coast does not allow seaweed to grow in sufficient 
quantity to support the lower forms of marine animal life. 
Whales and seals are occasionally seen. The cuttle-fish is 
abundant, and is sought for as an article of food. 

Flora. — The position of mountainous islands like the Canaries, 
in the subtropical division of the temperate zone, is highly 
favourable to the development, within a small space, of plants 
characteristic of both warm and cold climates. Von Buch 
refers to five regions of vegetation in Teneriffe:— (1) From the 
sea to the height of 1300 ft. This he styles the African region. 
The climate in the hottest parts is similar to that of Egypt. 
Here grow, among the introduced plants, the coffee tree, the 
date-palm, the sugar-cane, the banana, the orange tree, the 
American agave and two species of cactus; and among in- 
digenous plants, the dragon tree on the north-west of Teneriffe. 
A leafless and fantastic euphorbia, E. canariensis, and a shrubby 
composite plant, Cacalia kleinia, give a character to the land- 
scape about Santa Cruz. (2) Between 1300 ft. and 2800 ft. This 
is the region of south European vegetation, the climate answering 
to that of southern France and central Italy. Here flourish 
vines and cereals. (3) The region of indigenous trees, including 



various species of laurel, an Ardisia, Ilex, Rhamnus, Oka, Myrica, 
and other trees found wild also at Madeira. The clouds rest on 
this region during the day, and by their humidity support a 
vegetation amongst the trees, partly of shrubs, and partly of 
ferns. It extends to the height of 4000 ft. (4) The region of the 
beautiful Pinus canariensis, extending to the height of 6400 ft. ; 
here the broad-leaved trees have ceased to grow, but arborescent 
heaths are found throughout its whole extent, and specimens of 
Juniperus oxycedrus may be met with. (5) The region of Retama 
(Cytisus nubigenus), a species of white-flowering and sweet- 
scented broom, which is found as high as 1 1 ,000 ft. At the upper 
edge of this region a lilac-coloured violet clings to the soil, and 
above there is nothing but a little lichen. The number of wild 
flowering plants may be estimated at 900, upwards of 270 of 
which are peculiar to the Canaries. The forms of vegetation 
must in the main be considered North African. The character 
of the vegetation in Lanzarote and Fuerteventura, islands com- 
posed of extensive plains and low hills, with few springs, is 
different from that of the other islands, which are more elevated 
and have many springs. The wood is less abundant, and the 
vegetation less luxuriant. 

Inhabitants. — The Guanches (q.v.) , who occupied the Canaries 
at the time of the Spanish invasion, no longer exist as a separate 
race, for the majority were exterminated, and the remainder 
intermarried with their conquerors. The present inhabitants are 
slightly darker than the people of Spain, but in other respects 
are scarcely distinguishable from them. The men are of middle 
height, well-made and strong; the women are not striking 
in respect of beauty,' but they have good eyes and hair. Spanish 
is the only language in use. The birth-rate is uniformly high 
and the death-rate low; and, despite the emigration of many 
families to South America and the United States, the census of 
1900 showed that the population had increased by over 75,000 
since 1877. The excess of females over males, which in 1900 
amounted to upwards of 22,000, is partly explained by the fact 
that few Women emigrate. Fully 80 % of the inhabitants could 
neither read nor write in 1900; but education progresses more 
rapidly than in many other Spanish provinces. Good schools 
are numerous, and the return of emigrants and their children 
who have been educated in the United States, tends to raise 
the standard of civilization. The sustenance of the poorer 
classes is chiefly composed of fish, potatoes and gofio, which is 
merely Indian corn or wheat roasted, ground and kneaded 
with water or milk. The land is, in great part, strictly 
entailed. 

Government. — The archipelago forms one Spanish province, 
of which the capital is Santa Cruz de Tenerife, the residence 
of the civil governor, who has under his command one of the 
two districts into which the archipelago is divided, this first 
district comprising Teneriffe, Palma, Gomera and Hierro. 
The other district includes Grand Canary, Lanzarote, Fuerte- 
ventura, and has at its head a sub-governor, residing in Las 
Palmas, on Grand Canary, who is independent of the governor 
except in regard to elections and municipal administration. 
The chief finance office is at Santa Cruz de Tenerife. The 
court of appeal, created in 1526, is in Las Palmas. The captain- 
general and second commandant of the archipelago reside in 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife, and there is a brigadier-governor of 
Grand Canary, residing in Las Palmas, besides eight inferior 
military commandants. The province furnishes no men for 
the Spanish peninsular army, but its annual conscription provides 
men for the local territorial militia, composed of regiments of 
infantry, squadrons of mounted rifles and companies of garrison 
artillery — about 5000 men all told. The archipelago is divided 
into two naval districts, commanded by royal navy captains. 
Roman Catholicism is the official religion, and ecclesiastical 
law is the same as in other Spanish provinces. The convents 
have been suppressed, and in many cases converted to secular 
uses. Laguna and Las Palmas are episcopal sees, in the arch- 
bishopric of Seville. 

Industry and Commerce. — Owing to the richness of the volcanic 
soil, agriculture in the Canaries is usually very profitable. 



174 



CANCALE— CANCEL 



Land varies in value according to the amount of water available, 
but as a rule commands an extraordinarily high price. In the 
Terrenos de secano, or non-irrigable districts, the average price 
of an acre ranges from £7 to £17; in the Terrenos de riego, 
or irrigable land, it ranges from £100 to £250. Until 1853 
wine was the staple product, and although even the finest brand 
(known as Vidonia) never equalled the best Madeira vintages, 
it was largely consumed abroad, especially in England. The 
annual value of the wine exported often, exceeded £500,000. 
In 1853, however, the grape disease attacked the vineyards; 
and thenceforward the production of cochineal, which had 
been introduced in 1825, took the place of viticulture so com- 
pletely that, twenty years later, the exports of cochineal were 
worth £556,000. France and England were the chief purchasers. 
This industry declined in the later years of the 19th century, 
and was supplanted by the cultivation of sugar-cane, and 
afterwards of bananas, tomatoes, potatoes and onions. Bananas 
are the most important crop. Other fruits grown in 
smaller quantities include oranges, figs, dates, pineapples, 
guavas, custard-apples and prickly pears. Tobacco-planting 
is encouraged by the Spanish government, and the sugar trade 
is maintained, despite severe competition. The grain harvest 
does not supply the needs of the islanders. Pigs and sheep of a 
small, coarse-woolled breed, are numerous; and large herds 
of goats wander in an almost wild state over the higher hills. 
Fishing is a very important industry, employing over 10,000 
hands. The fleet of about 2200 boats operates along some 
600 m. of the African coast, between Cape Cantin and the 
Arguin Bank. Shipbuilding is carried on at Las Palmas; 
and the minor industries include the manufacture of cloth, 
drawn-linen (calado) work, silk, baskets, hats, &c. A group 
of Indian merchants, who employ coolie labour, produce silken, 
jute and cotton goods, Oriental embroideries, wrought silver, 
brass-ware, porcelain, carved sandal-wood, &c. The United 
Kingdom heads the import trade in coal, textiles, hardware, 
iron, soap, candles and colonial products. Timber comes chiefly 
from North America and Scandinavia, alcohol from Cuba and 
the United States, wheat and flour from various British 
possessions, maize from Morocco and Argentina. Large 
quantities of miscellaneous imports are sent by Germany, 
Spain, France and Italy. Bananas, tomatoes, potatoes, sugar 
and wine are exported. The total value of the foreign trade 
fluctuates very greatly, and the difficulty of forming an estimate 
is enhanced in many years by the absence of official statistics; 
but imports and exports together probably amount in a normal 
year to about £1,000,000. The chief ports are Las Palmas 
and Santa Cruz, which annually accommodate about 7000 
vessels of over 8,000,000 tons. In 1854 all the ports of the 
Canaries were practically declared free; but on the 1st of 
November 1904 a royal order prohibited foreign vessels from 
trading between one island and another. This decree deprived 
the outlying islands of their usual means of communication, and, 
in answer to a protest by the inhabitants, its operation was 
postponed. 

History. — There is ground for supposing that the Phoenicians 
were not ignorant of the Canaries. The Romans learned of 
their existence through Juba, king of Mauretania, whose account 
of an expedition to the islands, made about 40 B.C., was preserved 
by the elder Pliny. He mentions " Canaria, so called from 
the multitude of dogs of great size," and " Nivaria, taking 
its name from perpetual snow, and covered with clouds," 
doubtless Teneriffe. Canaria was said to abound in palms 
and pine trees. Both Plutarch and Ptolemy speak of the 
Fortunate Islands, but from their description it is not clear 
whether the Canaries or one of the other island groups in the 
western Atlantic are meant; see Isles of the Blest. In 
the 1 2th century the Canaries were visited by Arab navigators, 
and in 1334 they were rediscovered by a French vessel driven 
among them by a gale. A Portuguese expedition, undertaken 
about the same time, failed to find the archipelago, and want 
of means frustrated the project of conquest entertained by a 
grandson of Alphonso X. of Castile, named Juan de la Cerda, 



who had obtained a grant of the islands and had been crowned 
king of them at Avignon, by Pope Clement VI. Two or possibly 
more Spanish expeditions followed, and a monastic mission 
was established, but at the close of the 14th century the Guanches 
remained unconquered and unconverted. In 1402, however, 
Gadifer de la Salle and Jean de Bethencourt (q.v.) sailed with 
two vessels from Rochelle, and landed early in July on Lanzarote. 
The relations between these two leaders, and their respective 
shares in the work of conquest and exploration, have been 
the subject of much controversy. Between 1402 and 1404 
La Salle conquered Lanzarote and part of Fuerteventura, 
besides exploring other islands; Bethencourt meanwhile sailed 
to Cadiz for reinforcements. He returned in 1404 with the 
title of king, which he had secured from Henry III. of Castile. 
La Salle, thus placed in a position of inferiority, left the islands 
and appealed unsuccessfully for redress at the court of Castile. 
In 1405 Bethencourt visited Normandy, and returned with fresh 
colonists who conquered Hierro. In December 1406 he left the 
Canaries, entrusting their government to his nephew Maciot 
de Bethencourt, and reserving for himself a share in any profits 
obtained, and the royal title. 'Eight years of misrule followed 
before Queen Catherine of Castile intervened. Maciot there- 
upon sold his office to her envoy, Pedro Barba de Campos; 
sailed to Lisbon and resold it to Prince Henry the Navigator; 
and a few years afterwards resold it once more to Enrique de 
Guzman, count of Niebla. Jean de Bethencourt, who died 
in 1422, bequeathed the islands to his brother Reynaud; Guzman 
sold them to another Spaniard named Paraza, who was forced 
to re-sell to Ferdinand and Isabella of Castile in 1476; and 
Prince Henry twice endeavoured to enforce his own claims. 
Meanwhile the Guanches remained unconquered throughout 
the greater part of the archipelago. In 1479 the sovereignty 
of Ferdinand and Isabella over the Canaries was established 
by the treaty of Alcafova, between Portugal and Castile. After 
much bloodshed, and with reinforcements from the mother 
country, the Spaniards, under Pedro de Vera, became masters 
of Grand Canary in 1483. Palma was conquered in 1491, and 
Teneriffe in 1495, by Alonzo de Lugo. The archipelago was 
included for administrative purposes in the captaincy-general 
of Andalusia until 1833, when it was made a separate province. 
In 1902 a movement in favour of local autonomy was repressed 
by Spanish troops. 

Bibliography. — For a general description of the islands, see Les 
ties Canaries, by J. Pitard and L. Proust (Paris, 1909) ; Madeira and 
the Canary Islands, by A. Samler Brown, a guide for travellers and 
invalids, with coloured maps and plates (London, 1901) ; A Guide 
to the Canary Islands, by J. H. T. Ellerbeck (London, 1892); The 
Canary Islands as a Winter Resort, by J. Whitford (London, 1890, 
with maps and illustrations) ;. De la Tierra Canaria, by L. and A. 
Millares Cubas (Madrid, 1894) ; and Physikalische Beschreibung der 
kanarischen Inseln, by L. von Buch (Berlin, 1825). Besides the inter- 
esting folio atlas of von Buch (Paris, 1836), good modern maps have 
been published by E. Stanford (London, 1891, 125 English m. to 
1 in.), and M. Perez y Rodriquez (Madrid, 1896-1898, 4 sheets). See 
also Histoire naturelle des lies Canaries, by P. Barker- Webb and S. 
Berthelot (Paris, 1835-1849) ; and " Les lies Canaries et les parages 
de p6che canariens," by Dr. A. Taquin, in the B.S.R. Beige G. 26 
(1902), and 27 (1903) ; and, for history and antiquities, the Historia 
general de las islas Canarias, by A. Millares Cubas, in 10 vols. (Las 
Palmas, 1893— 1895), and Historia de la Inquisicion en las islas Canarias, 
by the same author (Las Palmas, 1874); Antiquites canariennes , 
by S. Berthelot (Paris, 1879). 

CANCALE, a fishing port of north-western France in the depart- 
ment of Ille-et-Vilaine on the Bay of Cancale, 9 m. E.N.E. of 
St Malo by road. Pop. (1906) town 3827, commune 7061. 
It exports oysters, which are found in its bay in large numbers 
and of excellent quality, and equips a fleet for the Newfoundland 
cod-fisheries. The harbour is protected by the rocks known 
as the Rochers de Cancale. In 1758 an English army under 
the duke of Marlborough landed here for the purpose of attacking 
St Malo and pillaged the town. It was again bombarded by the 
English in 1779. 

CANCEL (from the Lat. cancelli, a plural diminutive of cancer.. 
a grating or lattice, from which are also derived " chancel " 
and " chancellor "), a word meaning to cross out, from the 



CANCELLI— CANCER 



175 



crossed latticed lines drawn across a legal document to annul it, 
hence to delete or destroy. 

CANCELLI (plural of Lat. cancellus, dim. of cancer, a crossing 
bar), in architecture, the term given to barriers which correspond 
to the modern balustrade or railing, especially the screen divid- 
ing the body of a church from the part occupied by the ministers; 
hence " chancel " (q.v.). By the Romans cancelli were similarly 
employed to divide off portions of the courts of law (cf . the 
English " bar "). 

CANCER, LUIS ( d. 1549), Spanish missionary to Central 
America, was born at Barbastro near Saragossa. After working 
for some time in Dominica and Haiti, he crossed to the mainland, 
where he had great success in pacifying the Indians whom more 
violent methods had failed to subdue. He upheld the cause 
of the natives at an ecclesiastical assembly held in Mexico in 
1546, and three years later, on the 26th of June, met his death 
at their hands on the west coast of Florida. 

CANCER (" The Crab "), in astronomy, the fourth sign of the 
zodiac, denoted by the symbol ^ . Its name may be possibly 
derived from the fact that when the sun arrives at this part of 
the ecliptic it apparently retraces its path, resembling in some 
manner the sidelong motion of a crab. It is also a constellation, 
mentioned by Eudoxus (4th century b.c.) and Aratus (3rd 
century B.C.); Ftolemy catalogued 13 stars in it, Tycho Brahe 
15 and Hevelius 29. Its most interesting objects are: a large 
loose cluster of stars, known as Praesepe or the Beehive, visible 
as a nebulous patch to the naked eye, and f Cancri, a remarkable 
multiple star, composed of two stars, of magnitudes 5 and 5-7, 
revolving about each other in 60 years, and a third star of magni- 
tude 5-5 which revolves about these two in an opposite direction 
in a period of 175 years; from irregularities in the motion of this 
star, it is supposed to be a satellite of an invisible body which 
itself revolves about the two stars previously mentioned, in a 
period of 600 to 700 years. 

CANCER, or Carcinoma (from Lat. cancer, Gr. Kapdvcafia, 
an eating ulcer), the name given to a class of morbid growths 
or tumours which occur in man, and also in most or all vertebrate 
animals. The term " malignant disease " is commonly used 
as synonymous with " cancer." For the general pathology, &c, 
of tumours see Tumour. 

Cancer exists in various forms, which, although differing from 
each other in many points, have yet certain common characters 
to which they owe their special significance. 

1. In structure such growths are composed of nucleated cells 
and free nuclei together with a milky fluid called cancer juice, 
all contained within a more or less dense fibrous stroma or 
framework. 

2. They have no well-defined limits, and they involve all 
textures in their vicinity, while they also tend to spread by the 
lymphatics and veins, and to cause similar growths in distant 
parts or organs called " secondary cancerous growths." 

3. They are undergoing constant increase, and their progress 
is usually rapid. 

4. Pain is a frequent symptom. When present it is generally 
of a severe and agonizing character, and together with the local 
effects of the disease and the resulting condition of ill health or 
" cachexia," hastens the fatal termination to which all cancerous 
growths tend. 

5. When such growths are removed by the surgeon they are 
apt to return either at the same or at some other part. 

The chief varieties of cancer are Scirrhus or hard cancer, 
Encephaloid or soft cancer and Epithelial cancer. 

Scirrhus is remarkable for its hardness, which is due to the 
large amount of its fibrous, and relatively small proportion of 
its cell elements. It is of comparatively slow growth, but it 
tends to spread and to ulcerate. Its most common seat by far 
is the female breast, though it sometimes affects internal organs. 

Encephaloid is in structure the reverse of the last, its softness 
depending on the preponderance of its cell over its fibrous ele- 
ments. Its appearance and consistence resemble brain substance 
(hence its name) , and it is of such rapid growth as to have given 
rise to its beine occasionally termed acute cancer. Its most 



frequent seats are internal organs or the limbs. Ulceration and 
haemorrhage are common accompaniments of this form of cancer. 

Epithelial cancer, is largely composed of cells resembling the 
natural epithelium of the body. It occurs most frequently 
in those parts provided with epithelium, such as the skin and 
mucous membranes, or where those adjoin, as in the lips. This 
form of cancer does not spread so rapidly nor produce secondary 
growths in other organs to the same extent as the two other 
varieties, but it tends equally with them to involve the neigh 
bouring lymphatic glands, and to recur after removal. 

Cancer affects all parts of the body, but is much more frequent 
in some, tissues than. in others. According to recent statistics 
prepared by the registrar-general for England and Wales (sixty- 
seventh annual report) the most frequent seats are, in numerical 
order, as follows :~r-males — stomach, liver, rectum, intestines, 
aesophagus, tongue; females — uterus, breast, stomach, liver, 
intestines, rectum. Other statistics give similar, though not 
identical results. It may be said, broadly, that the most frequent 
seats are the female sexual organs and after them the digestive 
tract in both sexes. In children, in whom cancer is rare, the 
most frequent seats appear to be— under five, the kidneys 
and supra-renal bodies; five to ten, the brain; ten to twenty, 
the arm and leg bones. 

Cancer tends to advance steadily to a fatal termination, 
but its duration varies in different cases according to the part 
affected and according to the variety of the disease. Soft 
cancer affecting important organs of the body often proves 
fatal in a few months, while, on the other hand, cases of hard 
or epithelial cancer may sometimes last for several years; 
but no precise limit can be assigned for any form of the disease. 
In some rare instances growths exhibiting all the signs of cancer 
may exist for a great length of time without making any progress, 
and may even dwindle and disappear altogether. This is called 
" spontaneous cure." 

. Cancer has been the subject of observation from time 
immemorial, and of the most elaborate investigation by innumer- 
able workers in recent years; but the problems of its _ 
origin and character have hitherto baffled inquiry. researe /, # 
Modern scientific study of them may be said to have 
begun with J. Muller's microscopic work in the structure of 
cancerous tissue early in the 19th century. A great impetus 
to this line of investigation was given by the cellular theory 
of R. Virchow and the pathological researches of Sir J. Paget, 
and general attention was directed to the microscopic examina- 
tion of the cells of which cancer is composed. This led to a 
classification, on which much reliance was once placed, of 
different kinds of cancer, based on the character of the cells, 
and particularly to a distinction between carcinoma, in which the 
cells are of the epithelial type, and sarcoma, in which they are 
of the connective tissue type. The distinction, though still 
maintained, has proved barren; it never had any real signifi- 
cance, either clinical or pathological, and the tendency in 
recent research is to ignore it. The increased knowledge gained 
in numerous other branches of biological science has also been 
brought to bear on the problem of cancer and has led to a number 
of theories; and at the same time the apparently increasing 
prevalence of the disease recorded by the vital statistics of 
many countries has drawn more and more public attention 
to it. Two results have followed. One is the establishment 
of special endowed institutions devoted to cancer research; 
the other is the publication and discussion of innumerable 
theories and proposed methods of treatment. Popular interest 
has been constantly fanned by the announcement of some 
pretended discovery or cure, in which the public is invited to 
place its trust. Such announcements have no scientific value 
whatever. In the rare cases in which they are not pure quackery, 
they are always premature and based on inadequate data. 

Organized cancer research stands on a different footing. 
It may be regarded as the revival at the end of the 19th century 
of what was unsuccessfully attempted at the beginning. As 
early as 1792, at the suggestion of Mr. John Howard, surgeon, 
a ward was opened at the Middlesex hospital in London for 



176 



CANCER 



the special benefit of persons suffering from cancer. It was 
fitted up and endowed anonymously by Mr. Samuel Whitbread, 
M.P. for Bedford, and according to the terms of the benefaction 
at least six patients were to be continually maintained in it 
until relieved by art or released by death. The purpose was 
both philanthropic and scientific, as Mr. Howard explained' in 
bringing forward the suggestion. Two principal objects, he 
said, presented themselves to his mind, " namely, the relief of 
persons suffering under this disease and the investigation of 
a complaint which, although extremely common, is both with 
regard to its natural history and cure but imperfectly known." 
This benefaction was the origin of one of the most complete 
institutions for the scientific study of cancer that exists to-day. 
In 1804 a Society for Investigating the Nature of Cancer 
was formed by a number of medical men in London, Edinburgh 
and other towns at the instigation of John Hunter. The aim 
was collective investigation, and an attempt was made to carry 
it out by issuing forms of inquiry; but the imperfect means 
of communication then existing caused the scheme to be aban- 
doned in a short time. Subsequent attempts at collective 
investigation also failed until recently. About 1 900 a movement, 
which had been for some time gathering force, began to take 
visible shape simultaneously in different countries. The cancer 
ward at. the Middlesex hospital had then developed into a 
cancer wing, and to it were added special laboratories for the 
investigation of cancer, which were opened oh the 1st of March 
1900. In this establishment the fully equipped means of clinical 
and laboratory research were united under one roof and manned 
by a staff of investigators under the direction of Br W. S. 
Lazarus Barlow. In the same year the Deutsche Comiti ftir 
Krebsforschung was organized in Berlin, receiving an annual 
subsidy of 5000 marks (£250) from the imperial exchequer. 
This body devoted its energies to making a census of cancer 
patients in Germany on a definite date. A special ward for 
cancer was also set apart at the Charite hospital in Berlin,- 
with a state endowment of S3; 000 marks (£2560) per annum, 
and a laboratory for cancer research was attached to the first 
medical clinique under Professor Ernst von Leyden at the 
same hospital. A third institution in Germany is a special cancer 
department at the Royal Prussian Institute for Experimental 
Therapeutics at Frankfort-on-Main, which has been supported, 
like the Imperial Cancer Research Fund in England, by private 
contributions on a generous scale. The fund just mentioned 
was initiated in October 1901, and its queries took definite
shape a year later, when Dr. E. F. Bashford was appointed 
general superintendent of research. The patron of the founda- 
tion was King Edward VII., and the president was the prince of 
Wales. It had in 1908 a capital endowment of about £120,000, 
subscribed by private munificence and producing an income 
of about £7000 a year. The central laboratory is situated 
in the examination building of the Royal Colleges of Physicians 
and Surgeons in London, and the work is conducted under the 
superintendence of an executive committee formed by repre- 
sentatives of those bodies. In the United States a cancer 
laboratory, which had been established in Buffalo in 1899 
under Dr Roswell Park, was formally placed under the control 
of New York state in June 1901, and is supported by an annual 
grant of $15,000 (£3000). There are other provisions in the 
United States connected with Harvard and Cornell universities. 
At the former the " Caroline Brewer Croft Fund for Cancer 
Research " started special investigations in the surgical depart- 
ment of the Harvard Medical School in 1900 or the previous 
year, and in connexion with the Cornell University Medical 
School there is a small endowment called the " Huntingdon 
Cancer Research Fund." There appear to be institutions of 
a similar character in other countries, in addition to innumerable 
investigators at universities and other ordinary seats of scientific 
research. 

Some attempt has been made to co-ordinate the work thus 
carried on in different countries. An international cancer 
congress was held at Heidelberg and Frankfort in 1906, and 
a proposal was put forward by German representatives that a 



permanent international -conference on cancer should be estab- 
lished, with headquarters in Berlin. The committee of the 
Imperial Cancer Research Fund did not fall in with the proposal, 
being of opinion that more was to be gained in the existing 
stage of knowledge by individual intercourse and exchange 
of material between actual laboratory workers. 

In spite of the immense concentration of effort indicated 
by the simultaneous establishment of so many centres of endowed 
research, and in spite of the light thrown upon 
the problem from many sides by modern biological Jf**ocer 
science, our knowledge of the- origin of cancer is 
still in such a tentative state that a detailed account of 
the theories put forward is not called for; it will suffice to 
indicate their general drift. The actual pathological process 
of cancer is extremely simple. Certain cells, which are apparently 
of a normal character and have previously performed normal 
functions, begin to grow and multiply in an abnormal way 
in some part of the body. They continue this process so per- 
sistently that they first invade arid then destroy the surrounding 
tissues; nothing can withstand their march. They are moreover 
carried to other parts of the body, where they establish them- 
selves and grow in the same way. Their activity is carried on 
with relentless determination, though at a varying pace, until 
the patient dies, unless they are bodily removed. Hence the 
Word " malignant." The problem is— what are these cells, 
or why do they behave in this way? The principal answers 
put forward may be summarized:- — (1) they are epithelial cells 
which grow without ceasing because the connective tissue has 
lost the capacity to hold their proliferative powers in check 
(H. Freund, following K. Thiersch and W. Waldeyer); (2) they 
are embryonic cells accidentally shut off (J. F. Cohnheim) 

(3) they are epithelial cells With a latent power of unlimited 
proliferation which becomes active on their being dislocated 
from the normal association (M. W. H. Ribbert and Borrmann); 

(4) they are stimulated to unlimited growth by the presence 
of a parasite (Plimmer, Sanfelice, Roncali and others); (5) they 
are fragments of reproductive tissue (G. T. Beatson); (6) they 
are cells which have lost their differentiated character and 
assumed elementary properties (von Hausemann, O. Hertwig). 
The very number and variety of hypotheses show that none 
is established. Most of theni attempt to explain the growth 
but not the origin of the disease. The hypothesis of a parasitic 
origin, suggested by recent discoveries in relation to other 
diseases, has attracted much attention; but the observed 
phenomena of cancerous growths are not in keeping with those 
of all known parasitic diseases, and the theory is now somewhat 
discredited. A more recent theory that cancer is due to failure 
of the normal secretions of the pancreas has not met with 
much acceptance. 

Some generalizations bearing on the problem have been 
drawn from the work done in the laboratories of the Imperial 
Cancer Research Fund, They may be summarily stated thus. 
Cancer has been shown to be an identical process in all vertebrates 
(including fishes), and to develop at a time which conforms in 
a striking manner to the limits imposed by the long or short 
compass of life in different animals. Cancerous tissue can be 
artificially propagated in the short-lived mouse by actual 
transference to another individual, but only to one of the same 
species. Cancerous tissue thus propagated presents all the 
characteristic features of the malignant growth of sporadic 
tumours; it infiltrates and produces extensive secondary 
growths. Under suitable experimental conditions the aggregate 
growth of a cancer is undefined, of enormous and, so far as we 
can judge, of limitless amount. This extraordinary growth is due 
to the continued proliferation of cancerous cells when trans- 
planted. The processes by which growing cancer cells are trans- 
ferred to a new individual are easily distinguishable and funda- 
mentally different from all known processes of infection. The 
artificial propagation of cancer causes no specific symptoms of 
illness in the animal in which it proceeds. Under artificial 
propagation cancer maintains all the characters of the original 
tumours of the primary hosts. Carcinoma and sarcoma agree 



CANCRIN-r-GANDIA 



i 77 



in possessing all the pathological and cellular features of malig- 
nant new growths. 

Simultaneously with the active pursuit of laboratory research 
much statistical work has been devoted to establishing the broad 

facts of the prevalence and incidence of cancer on a 
o/cancer. nrm basis. The point of most general interest is the 

apparently steady increase of the disease in all countries 
possessing fairly trustworthy records. It will be sufficient to 
give the figures for England and Wales as an example. 

Annual Death-rates from Cancer to a Million living. 
England and Wales. 



1871-1875. 


1876-1880. 


1881-1885. 


i886-i8qo. 


1891-1895. 


T896-I9OO. 


I90 1 -1 9O4. 


445 


493 


547 


631 


711 


800 


[861 



In forty years the recorded rate had risen from 403 to 861. 
The question how far these and similar statistics represent a 
real increase cannot be satisfactorily resolved, because it is 
impossible to ascertain how much of the apparent increase is 
due to more accurate diagnosis and improved registration. 
Some of it is certainly due to those causes, so that the recorded 
figures cannot be taken to represent the facts as they stand. 
At the same time it is certain that some increase has taken place 
in consequence of the increased average length of life; a larger 
proportion of persons now reach the ages at which cancer is 
most frequent. Increase due to this fact, though it is a real 
increase, does not indicate that the cause of cancer is more rife 
or more potent; it only means that the condition of the popula- 
tion in regard to age is more favourable to its activity. On the 
whole it seems probable that, when allowance has been made 
for this factor and for errors due to improved registration, a real 
increase due to other causes has taken place, though it is not so 
great as the recorded statistics would indicate. 

The long-established conclusions concerning the incidence of 
the disease in regard to age and sex have been confirmed and 
rendered more precise by modern statistics. Cancer is a disease 
of old age; the incidence at the ages of sixty-five to seventy-five 
is ten times greater than at the ages thirty -five to forty-five. 
This fact is the source of frequent fallacies when different countries 
or districts and different periods are compared with each other, 
unless account is taken of the differences in age and constitution. 
With regard to sex females are far more liable than males; the 
respective death-rates per million living for England and Wales 
in 1904 were — males 740; females 1006. But the two rates 
show a tendency to approximate; the increase shown over 
a series of years has been considerably more rapid among males 
than among females. One result of more careful examination 
of statistics has been to discredit, though perhaps somewhat 
hastily, certain observations regarding the prevalence of cancer 
in special districts and special houses. On the other hand the 
fuller statistics now available concerning the relative frequency 
of cancer in the several organs and parts of the body, of which 
some account is given above, go to confirm the old observation 
that cancer commonly begins at the seat of some local irritation. 
By far the most frequent seats of disease are the uterus and 
breast in women and the digestive tract in both sexes, and these 
are all particularly subject to such irritation. With regard to 
the influence of heredity the trend of modern research is to 
minimize or deny its importance in cancer, as in phthisis, and 
to explain family histories by other considerations. At most 
heredity is only thought to confer a predisposition. 

The only " cure " for cancer remains removal by operation; 
but improved methods of diagnosis enable this to be done in 
many cases at an earlier stage of the disease than 
formerly; and modern methods of surgery permit not 
only of operation in parts of the body formerly inacces- 
sible, but also more complete removal of the affected tissues. 
Numerous forms of treatment by modern therapeutic means, 
both internal and external, have been advocated and tried; 
but they are all of an experimental nature and have failed to 
meet with general acceptance. One of the most recent is treat- 
ment by trypsin, a pancreatic ferment. This has been suggested 



Treat- 
ment 



by Dr John Beard of Edinburgh in conformity with the theory, 
mentioned above, that failure of the pancreatic secretions is 
the cause of cancer. It has been claimed that the drug exercises 
a favourable influence in conjunction with operation and even 
without it. The experience of different observers with regard 
to results is contradictory; but clinical investigations conducted 
at Middlesex hospital in a number of cases of undoubted cancer 
in strict accordance with Dr Beard's directions, and summarized 
by Dr Walter Ball and Dr Fairfield Thomas in the Sixth Report 
from the Cancer Research Laboratories {Archives of Middlesex 
Hospital, vol. ix.) in May 1907, resulted in the conclusion " that 
the course of cancer, considered both as a disease and as a 
morbid process, is unaltered by the administration of trypsin 
and amylopsin." The same conclusion has been reached after 
similar trials at the cancer hospital. Another experimental 
method of treatment which has attracted much attention 
is application of the X-rays. The results vary in a capricious 
and inexplicable manner; in some cases marked benefit has 
followed, in others the disease has been as markedly aggravated. 
Until more is known both of cancer and of X-rays, their use must 
be considered not only experimental but risky. (A. Sl.) 

CANCRIN, FRANZ LUDWIG VON (1738-1812), German 
mineralogist and metallurgist, was born on the 21st of February 
1738, at Breitenbach, Hesse-Darmstadt. In 1764 he entered 
the service of the landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt at Hanau, be- 
coming professor of mathematics at the military academy, head 
of the civil engineering department of the state, director of the 
theatre and (1774) of the mint. A work on the copper mines of 
Hesse (1767) earned him a European reputation, and in 1783 he 
accepted from Catherine II. of Russia the directorship of the 
famous Staraya salt-works, living thenceforth in Russia. In 
1798 he became a councillor of state at St Petersburg. He pub- 
lished many works on mineralogy and metallurgy, of which the 
most important, the Grundzilge der Berg- wnd Salzwerkskunde 
(13 vols., Frankfort, 1773-1791), has been translated into several 
languages; His son, Count Georg von Cancrin, or Kankrin 
(1774-1845), was the eminent Russian minister of finance. 

CANDELABRUM (from Lat. candela, a taper or candle), 
the stand on which ancient lamps were placed. The most ancient 
example is the bronze candelabrum made by Callimachus for the 
Erechtheum at Athens, to carry the lamp sacred to Minerva. 
In this case it is probable the lamp was suspended, as in the 
example from Pompeii, now in the Naples museum; this con- 
sisted of a stalk or reed, the upper part moulded with projecting 
feature to carry the lamps, and a base resting on three lions' or 
griffins' feet; sometimes there was a disk at the top to carry 
a lamp, and sometimes there was a hollow cup, in which resinous 
woods were burnt. The origin of the term suggests that on the 
top of the disk was a spike to carry a wax or tallow candle (candela 
or furialia). Besides these bronze candelabra, of which there are 
many varieties in museums, the Romans used more ponderous 
supports in stone or marble, of which many examples were found 
in the Thermae. These consisted of a base, often triangular, 
and of similar design to the small sacrificial altars, and a shaft 
either richly moulded or carved with the acanthus plant and 
crowned with a large cup or basin. There is a fine example of 
the latter in the Vatican. The Roman examples seem to have 
served as models for many of the candelabra in the churches in 
Italy. The word " candelabrum " is also now used to describe 
many different forms of lighting with multiple points, and is 
often applied to hanging lights as well as to those which rise from 
a stand. 

CANDIA, formerly the capital and still the most populous city 
of Crete (?.».), to which it has given its name. It is situated on 
the northern shore somewhat nearer the eastern than the western 
end.of the island, in 35 20' N. lat. and 25 9' E. long. It is still 
surrounded by its extensive Venetian fortifications; but they 
have fallen into disrepair, and a good part of the town is in a 
dilapidated condition, mainly from the effects of earthquakes. 
The principal buildings are the Venetian loggia (barbarously 
mutilated by; the new regime), the Konak (now Prefecture), 
the mosques, which are fourteen in number, the new cathedral, 



178 



CANDIDATE—CANDLE 



the two Greek churches, the Armenian church, the Capuchin 
monastery, the bazaars and the baths. There are also some 
beautiful Venetian fountains. The town is the seat of a Greek 
archbishop. A highly interesting museum has been formed 
here containing the antiquities found during the recent excava- 
tions. The chief trade is in oil and soap, both of which are of 
excellent quality. The coasting trade, which is of considerable 
importance, is mainly carried on in Turkish vessels. The manu- 
facture of leather for home consumption is an extensive industry, 
and wine of good quality is produced in the neighbourhood. 
The harbour, which had grown almost inaccessible, was deepened 
by Mustapha Pasha between 1820 and 1840. It is formed for 
the most part by the ancient moles, and was never deep enough 
to admit the larger vessels even of the Venetians, which were 
accustomed to anchor in the port of the neighbouring island 
of Standia. A short distance from St George's Gate there was 
a small village exclusively inhabited by lepers, who numbered 
about seventy families, but they have now been transported to 
Spinalonga. The population of the town is estimated at from 
15,000 to 18,000, about half being Mahommedan Greeks. The 
site of Candia, or, as it was till lately locally known, Megalo 
castro (the Great Fortress), has been supposed to correspond 
with that of the ancient Heracleion, the seaport of Cnossus, 
and this appellation has now been officially revived by its Greek 
inhabitants. The ruins of Cnossus are situated at the distance 
of about 3 m. to the south-east at the village of Makryteichos 
or Long Wall. Founded by the Saracens in the oth century, 
Candia was fortified by the Genoese in the 1 2th, and was greatly 
extended and strengthened by the Venetians in the 13th, 14th 
and 15th centuries. It was besieged by the Turks under the 
vizier Achmet in 1667; and, in spite of a most heroic defence, 
in which the Venetians lost 30,000 in killed and wounded, it 
was forced to surrender in 1669. (See also Crete.) 

CANDIDATE, one who offers himself or is selected by others 
for an office or place, particularly one who puts up for election 
to parliament or to any public body. The word is derived 
from the Latin candidatus, clad in white (candid-us) . In Rome, 
candidates for election to the higher magistracies appeared in 
the Campus Martius, the Forum and other public places, during 
their canvass, in togas with the white of the natural wool 
brightened by chalk. 

CANDLE (Lat. candela, from candere, to glow), a cylindrical 
rod of solid fatty or waxy matter, enclosing a central fibrous 
wick, and designed to be burnt for giving light. The oldest 
materials employed for making candles are beeswax and tallow, 
while among those of more recent introduction are spermaceti, 
stearine and paraffin wax. Waxlights (cereus, sc. funis) were 
known to the Romans. In the midlde ages wax candles were 
little used, owing to their expense, except for the ceremonies 
of the church and other religious purposes (see Lights, Cere- 
monial Use of), but in the 15th century, with the cheapening of 
wax, they began to find wider employment. The tallow candle, 
mentioned by Apuleius as sebaceus, was long an article of domestic 
manufacture. The tallow was melted and strained, and then 
lengths of cotton or flax fibre, or rushes from which most of the 
external skin had been stripped, only sufficient being left to 
support the pith ("rushlights"), were dipped into it, the opera- 
tion being repeated until the desired thickness had been attained. 
In Paris, in the 13th century, there was a gild of candlemakers 
who went from house to house to make tallow candles, the 
manufacture of wax candles being in the hands of another gild. 
This separation of the two branches of the trade is also exempli- 
fied by the existence of two distinct livery companies in the 
city of London — the Waxchandlers and the Tallowchandlers; 
the French chandelle properly means tallow candle, candles made 
of materials less fusible than tallow being called bougies, a term 
said to be derived from the town of Bougie in Algeria, either 
because wax was produced there or because the Venetians 
imported wax candles thence into Europe. The old, /tallow 
"dips" gave a poor light, and tallow itself is now used only 
to a limited extent, except as a source of "stearine." This is 
the trade name for a mixture of solid fatty acids—mainly 



stearic and palmitic — manufactured not only from tallow and 
other animal fats, but also from such vegetable fats as palm-oil. 
Paraffin wax, a mixture of solid hydrocarbons obtained from 
crude North American and Rangoon petroleum, and also yielded 
in large quantities by the Scotch shale oil industry, is, at least 
in Great Britain, a still more important material of candle- 
manufacture, which came into use about 1854. Spermaceti, 
a crystalline fatty substance obtained from the sperm whale 
(Physeter macrocephalus) , was introduced as a material for 
candles about a century earlier. In practice the candlemaker 
mostly uses mixtures of these materials. For instance, 5-10% 
of stearine, which is used alone for candles that have to be burnt 
in hot climates, is mixed with paraffin wax, to counteract the 
tendency to bend with heat exhibited by the latter substance. 
Again, the brittleness of spermaceti is corrected by the addition 
of beeswax, stearine, paraffin wax or ceresin (obtained from the 
mineral wax ozocerite) . In some " composite " candles stearine 
is mixed with the hard fat (" cocoa-nut stearine ") expressed from 
cocoa-nut oil by hydraulic pressure; and this cocoa-nut stearine 
is also used for night-lights, which are short thick candles with 
a thin wick, calculated to burn from six to ten hours . 

The stearine or stearic acid industry originated in the discovery 
made by M. E. Ghevreul about 1815, that fats are glycerides 
or compounds of glycerin with fatty acids, mostly palmitic, 
stearic and oleic. The object of the candlemaker is to remove 
this glycerin, not only because it is a valuable product in itself, 
but also because it is an objectionable constituent of a candle; 
the vapours of acrolein formed by its decomposition in the 
flame are the cause of the unpleasant odours produced by 
tallow " dips." He also removes the oleic acid, which is liquid 
at ordinary temperatures, from the palmitic and stearic acids, 
mixtures of which solidify at temperatures varying from about 
130 to 155° F., according to the percentage of each present. 
Several methods are in use for the decomposition of the fats. 
In the autoclave process the fat, whether tallow, palm-oil or a 
mixture of the two, mixed with 25 or 30% of water and about 
3 % of lime, is subjected in an autoclave to steam at a pressure 
of about 120 lb per square inch for eight or ten hours, when 
nearly all of it is saponified. On standing the product separates 
into two layers — " sweet water " containing glycerin below, 
ajid the fatty acids with a certain amount of lime soap above. 
The upper layer is then boiled and treated with enough sulphuric 
acid to decompose the lime soap, the calcium sulphate formed 
is allowed to subside, and the fatty acids are run off into shallow 
boxes to be crystallized or " seeded " prior to the separation 
of the oleic acid, which is effected by pressing the solid blocks 
from the boxes, first cold and then hot, by hydraulic machinery. 
In another process saponification is effected by means of con- 
centrated sulphuric acid. The fat is mixed with 4-6% of the 
acid and treated with steam in boiling water till the hydrolysis 
is complete,when on standing the glycerin and sulphuric acid 
sink to the bottom and the fatty acids rise to the top. Owing 
to the darkness of their colour, when this process is employed, 
the latter usually have to be distilled before being crystallized. 
The autoclave process yields about 45% of stearine, one-third 
of which is recovered from the expressed oleic acid, but with 
sulphuric acid saponification the amount of stearine is higher — 
over 60% — and that of oleic acid less, part of it being converted 
into solid material by the action of the acid. The yield of 
glycerin is also less. In a combination of the two processes the 
fat may first be treated by the autoclave process, so as to obtain 
a full yield (about 10%) of glycerin, and the resulting fatty 
acids then subjected to acid saponification, so as to get the higher 
amount of stearine. At the best, however, some 30% of oleic 
acid remains, and though often sought, no satisfactory method 
of converting this residue into solid has been discovered. It 
constitutes " red oil," and is used in soap-making and in woollen 
manufacture. In the process patented by Ernst Twitcheh 
in 1898, decomposition is effected by boiling the fat with half 
its bulk of water in presence of a reagent obtained by the action 
of sulphuric acid on oleic acid and an aromatic hydrocarbon such 
as benzene. 



CANDLEMAS— CANDLESTICK 



179 



The wick is a most important part of a candle, and unless 
it is of proper size and texture either too much or too little 
fuel will be supplied to the flame, and the candle will gutter 
or be otherwise unsatisfactory. The material generally employed 
is cotton yarn, plaited or " braided " by machinery, and treated 
or " pickled " with a solution of boracic acid, ammonium or 
potassium nitrate, or other salt. The tightness of the plaiting 
varies with the material used for the candle, wicks for stearine 
being looser than for paraffin, but tighter than for wax or 
spermaceti. The plaited wick is flat and curls over as the 
candle burns, and thus the end is kept projecting into the 
outer part of the flame where it is consumed, complete com- 
bustion being aided by the pickling process it has undergone. 
In the old tallow dips the strands of cotton were merely twisted 
together, instead of being plaited; wicks made in this way 
had no determinate bias towards the outside of the flame, 
and thus were not wholly consumed, the result being that there 
was apt to be an accumulation of charred matter, which choked 
the flame unless removed by periodical " snuffing." 

Four ways of making candles may be distinguished — dipping, 
pouring, drawing and moulding, the last being that most com- 
monly employed. Dipping is essentially the same as the domestic 
process already described, but the rate of production is increased 
by mounting a number of wicks in a series of frames, each of 
which in turn is brought over the tallow bath so that its wicks 
can be dipped. Pouring, used in the case of wax, which cannot 
well be moulded because it contracts in cooling- and also has 
a tendency to stick to the moulds,, consists in ladling molten 
wax upon the wicks suspended from an iron ring. When of 
the desired thickness the candles are rolled under a plate on 
a marble slab. • In drawing, used for small tapers, the wick, 
rolled on a drum, is passed through the molten wax or paraffin, 
drawn through a circular hole and slowly wound on a second 
drum; it is then passed again through the molten material 
and through a somewhat larger hole, and reeled back on the 
first drum, this process being repeated with larger and larger 
holes until the coating is of the required thickness. In moulding, 
a number of slightly conical moulds are fixed by the larger 
extremity to a kind of trough, with their tapered ends projecting 
downwards and with wicks arranged down their centres. The 
molten material is poured into the trough and fills the moulds, 
from which the candles are withdrawn when solidified. Modern 
candle-moulding machines are continuous in their operation; 
long lengths of wick are coiled on bobbins, one for each mould, 
and the act of removing one set of candles from their moulds 
draws in a fresh set of wicks. " Self-fitting ends," which were 
invented by J. L. Field in 1864, and being shaped like a trun- 
cated cone enable the candles to be fixed in candlesticks of any 
diameter, are formed by means of an attachment to the tops 
of the moulds; spirally twisted candles are, as it were, unscrewed 
from their moulds. It is necessary to be able to regulate the 
temperature of the moulds accurately, else the candles will 
not come out freely and will not be of good appearance. For 
stearine candles the moulds are immersed in tepid water and 
the cooling must be slow, else the material will crystallize, 
though if it be too slow cracking will occur. For paraffin, on 
the other hand, the moulds must be rather hotter than the molten 
material (about 200 F.), and must be quickly cooled to prevent 
the candles from sticking. 

A candle-power, as a unit of light in photometry, was defined 
by the (London) Metropolis Gas Act of i860 as the light given 
by a sperm candle, of which six weighed 1 lb and each burned 
120 grains an hour. 

See W. Lant Carpenter, Soaps and Candles (London, 1895); C. E. 
Groves and W. Thorp, Chemical Technology, vol. ii. " Lighting " 
(London, 1895); L. L. Lamborn, Soaps, Candles and Glycerine (New 
York, 1906); J. Lewkowitsch, Oils, Fats, and Waxes (London, 1909). 

CANDLEMAS (Lat. festum candelarum sive luminum), the 
name for the ancient church festival, celebrated annually on 
the 2nd of February, in commemoration of the presentation 
of Christ in the Temple. In the Greek Church it is known as 
TTraTrajTTj rov Kvpiov (" the meeting of the Lord," i.e. with 



Simeon and Anna), in the West as the Purification of the Blessed 
Virgin. It is the most ancient of all the festivals in honour of the 
Virgin Mary. A description is given of its celebration at Jeru- 
salem in the Peregrinalio of Etheria (Silvia), in the second half 
of the 4th century. It was then kept on the 14th of February, 
forty days after Epiphany, the celebration of the Nativity 
(Christmas) not having been as yet introduced; the Armenians 
still keep it on this day, as " the Coming of the Son of God into 
the Temple." The celebration gradually spread to other parts 
of th^ church, being moved to the 2nd of February, forty days 
after the newly established feast of Christmas. In 542 it was 
established throughout the entire East Roman empire by 
Justinian. Its introduction in the West is somewhat obscure. 
The 8th-century Gelasian Sacramentary, which embodies a 
much older tradition, mentions it under the title of Purification 
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, which has led some to suppose that 
it was ordained by Pope Gelasius I. in 492 x as a counter-attraction 
to the heathen Lupercalia; but for this there is no warrant. 
The procession on this day was introduced by Pope Sergius I. 
(687-701). The custom of blessing the candles for the whole 
year on this day, whence the name Candlemas is derived, did not 
come into common use until the nth century. 

In the Quadragesimae de Epiphania as described by Etheria 
there is, as Monsignor Duchesne points out {Christian Worship, p. 
272), no indication of a special association with the Blessed 
Virgin; and the distinction between the festival as celebrated in 
the East and West is that in the former it is a festival of Christ, 
in the latter a festival pre-eminently of the Virgin Mother. 

See L. Duchesne, Christian Worship (Eng. trans., London, 1904); 
art. s.v. by F. G. Holweck in the Catholic Encyclopaedia. 

CANDLESTICK, the receptacle for holding a candle, now- 
adays made in various art-forms. The word was formerly 
used for any form of support on which lights, whether candles 
or lamps, were fixed; thus a candelabrum (q.v.) is sometimes 
spoken of from tradition as a candlestick, e.g. as when Moses 
was commanded to make a candlestick for the tabernacle, of 
hammered gold, a talent in weight, and consisting of a base 
with a shaft rising out of it and six arms, and with seven lamps 
supported on the summits of the six arms and central shaft. 
When Solomon built the temple, he placed in it ten golden 
candlesticks, five on the north and five on the south side of the 
Holy Place; but after the Babylonish captivity the golden 
candlestick was again placed in the temple, as it had been 
before in the tabernacle by Moses. On the destruction of 
Jerusalem by Titus, it was carried with other spoils to Rome. 
Representations of the seven-branched candlestick, as it is called, 
occur on the arch of Titus at Rome, and on antiquities found 
in the Catacombs at Rome. The primitive form of candlestick 
was a torch made of slips of bark, vine tendrils or wood dipped 
in wax or tallow, tied together and held in the hand by the 
lower end, such as are frequently figured on ancient painted 
vases. The next step was to attach to them a cup (discus) 
to catch the dripping wax or tallow. 

A candlestick may be either " flat " or " tall." The former 
has a short stem, rising from a dish, and is usually furnished 
with an extinguisher fitting into a socket; the latter has a pillar 
which may be only a few inches in height or may rise to several 
feet, and rarely has an extinguisher. The flat variety is some- 
times called a " bedroom candlestick." The beginnings of this 
interesting and often beautiful appliance are not exactly known, 
but it dates certainly as far back as the 14th century and is 
probably older. It is most usually of metal, earthenware or 
china, but originally it was made of some hard wood and had 
no socketed pillar, the candle fitting upon a metal spike, in the 
fashion still familiar in the case of many church candlesticks. 
It has been constantly influenced by mobiliary and architectural 
fashions, and has varied, as it still varies, from the severest 
simplicity of form and material to the most elaborate artistic 
treatment and the costliest materials — gold and silver, crystal, 
marble and enamel. Previous to the 17th century, iron, latten, 
bronze and copper were chiefly used, but thenceforward the 
1 So Baronius, Ann. ad ann. 544. 



i8o 



CANDLISH— CANDOLLE 



most elegant examples Were chiefly of silver, though in more 
modem periods Sheffield plate, silver plate and china became 
exceedingly popular. Sometimes the base and sconce are of one 
material and the pillar of another, as when the former are of 
silver and the pillar of marble or china. The choice and com- 
bination of materials are, indeed, infinite. The golden age of the 
candlestick lasted, roughly speaking, from the third quarter 
of the 17 th century to the end of the 18th. The later Jacobean, 
Queen Anne and early Georgian forms were often extremely 
elegant, with broad bases, round, oval or square and swelling 
stems. Fine examples of these periods, especially when of silver, 
are much sought after and command constantly augmenting 
prices. As with most domestic appliances the history of the 
candlestick is an unceasing tendency towards simplicity, the 
most elaborate and fantastic forms, animals and reptiles, the 
monstrous creatures of mythology, lions and men-at-arms, angels 
and cupids, having gradually given place to architectural motives 
such as the baluster stem and to the classic grace of the Adam 
style. The candlestick in its modern form is, indeed, artistically 
among the least unsatisfactory of household plenishings. 

CANDLISH, ROBERT SMITH (1806-1873), Scottish divine, 
was born at Edinburgh on the 23rd of March 1806, and spent 
his early years in Glasgow, where he graduated in 1823. During 
the years 1823-1826 he went through the prescribed course 
at the divinity hall, then presided over by Dr Stevenson MacGill, 
and on leaving, accompanied a pupil as private tutor to Eton, 
where he stayed two years. In 1829 he entered upon his life's 
work, having been licensed to preach during the summer 
vacation of the previous year. After short assistant pastorates at 
St Andrew's, Glasgow, and Bonhill, Dumbartonshire, he obtained 
a settled charge as minister of the important parish of St George's, 
Edinburgh. Here he at once took the place he so long held 
as one of the ablest preachers in Scotland. Destitute of natural 
oratorical gifts and somewhat ungainly in his manner, he 
attracted and even riveted the attention of his audience by 
a rare combination of intellectual keenness, emotional fervour, 
spiritual insight and power of dramatic representation of 
character and life. His theology was that of the Scottish 
Calvinistic school, but his sympathetic character combined 
with strong conviction gathered round him one of the largest 
and most intelligent congregations in the city. 

From the very commencement of his ministry in Edinburgh, 
Candlish took the deepest interest in ecclesiastical questions, 
and he soon became involved as one of the chief actors in the 
struggle which was then agitating the Scottish church. His 
first Assembly speech, delivered in 1839, placed him at once 
among the leaders of the party that afterwards formed the 
Free Church, and his influence in bringing about the Disruption 
of 1843 was inferior only to that of Thomas Chalmers. Great 
as was his popularity as a preacher, it was in the arena of 
ecclesiastical debate that his ability chiefly showed itself, and 
probably no other single man had from first to last so large a 
share in shaping the constitution and guiding the policy of 
the Free Church. He took his stand on two principles: the 
right of the people to choose their ministers, and the independence 
of the church in things spiritual. On his advice Hugh Miller 
was appointed editor of the Witness, the powerful Free Church 
organ. He was actively engaged at one time or other in nearly 
all the various schemes of the church, but special mention 
should be made of his services on the education committee, 
of which he was convener from 1846 to 1863, and in the un- 
successful negotiations for union among the non-established 
Presbyterian denominations of Scotland, which were carried 
on during the years 1863-1873. In the Assembly of 1861 he 
filled the moderator's chair. 

As a theologian the position of Candlish was perhaps inferior 
to that which he held as a preacher and ecclesiastic, but it was 
not inconsiderable. So early as 1841 his reputation in this 
department was sufficient to secure for him the government 
nomination to the newly founded chair of Biblical criticism 
in the university of Edinburgh. Owing to the opposition of 
Lord Aberdeen, however, the presentation was cancelled. In 



1847 Candlish, who had received the degree of D.D. from Prince- 
ton, New Jersey, in 1841, was chosen by the Assembly of the 
Free Church to succeed Chalmers in the chair of divinity in the 
New College, Edinburgh. After partially fulfilling the duties 
of the office for one session, he was led to resume the charge 
of St George's, the clergyman who bad been chosen by the 
congregation as his successor having died before entering on 
his work. In 1862 he succeeded William Cunningham as principal 
of New College with the understanding that he should still 
retain his position as minister of St George's. He died on the 
19th of October 1873. 

Though his greatest power was not displayed through the 
press, Candlish made a number of contributions to theological 
literature. In 1842 he published the first volume of his Con- 
tributions towards the Exposition of the Book of Genesis, a work 
which was completed in three volumes several years later. 
In 1854 he delivered, in Exeter Hall, London, a lecture on 
the Theological Essays of the Rev. F. D. Maurice, which he after- 
wards published, along with a fuller examination of the doctrine 
of the essays. In this he defended the forensic aspect of the 
gospel. A treatise entitled The Atonement; its Reality, Com- 
pleteness and Extent (1861) was based upon a smaller work 
which first appeared in 1845. In 1864 he delivered the first 
series of Cunningham lectures, taking for his subject The Father- 
hood of God. Published immediately afterwards, the lectures 
excited considerable discussion on account of the peculiar views 
they represented. Further illustrations of these views were 
given in two works published about the same time as the 
lectures, one a treatise On the Sonship and Brotherhood of 
Believers, and the other an exposition of the first epistle of 
St John. 

See William Wilson, Memorials of R. S. Candlish, D.D., with a 
chapter on his position as a theologian by Robert Rainy. 

CANDOLLE, AUGUSTIN PYRAME DE (1778-1841), Swiss 
botanist, was born at Geneva on the 4th of February 1778. He 
was descended from one of the ancient families of Provence, 
whence his ancestors had been expatriated for their religion 
in the middle of the 16th century. Though a weakly boy he 
showed great aptitude for study, and distinguished himself 
at school by his rapid attainments in classical and general 
literature, and specially by a faculty for writing elegant verse. 
He began his scientific studies at the college of Geneva, where 
the teaching of J. P. E. Vaucher first inspired him with the 
determination to make botanical science the chief pursuit of 
his life. In 1796 he removed to Paris. His first productions, 
Historia Plantarum Succulentarum{\ vols., i799)and Astragalogia 
(1802), introduced him to the notice of Cuvier, for whom he acted 
as deputy at the College de France in 1802, and to j . B. Lamarck, 
who afterwards confided to him the publication of the third 
edition of the Flore francaise (1803-1815). The Principes 
SISmentaires de bolanique, printed as the introduction to this 
work, contained the first exposition of his principle of classifica- 
tion according to the natural as opposed to the Linnean or 
artificial method. In 1804 he was granted the degree of doctor 
of medicine by the medical faculty of Paris, and published his 
Essai sur les propriitis midicales des plantes comparies avec leurs 
formes extirieures et leur classification naturelle, and soon after, 
in 1806, his Synopsis plantarum in flora Gallica descriptarum. 
At the desire of the French government he spent the summers 
of the following six years in making a botanical and agricultural 
survey of the whole kingdom, the results of which were published 
in 181 3. In 1807 he was appointed professor of botany in the 
medical faculty of the university of Montpellier, and in 1810 
he was transferred to the newly founded chair of botany of the 
faculty of sciences in the same university. From Montpellier, 
where he published his Theorie iUmentaire de la botanique (181 3), 
he removed to Geneva in 1816, and in the following year was 
invited by the now independent republic to fill the newly created 
chair of natural history. The rest of his life was spent in an 
attempt to elaborate and complete his " natural " system of 
botanical classification. The results of his labours in this 
department are to be found in his Regni vegetabilis systema 



CANDON— CANE-FENCING 



181 



naturale, of which two volumes only were completed (1821) 
when he found that it would be impossible for him to execute 
the whole work on so extensive a scale. Accordingly in 1824 
he began a less extensive work of the same kind — his Prodromus 
systematis regni vegetabilis — but even of this he was able to finish 
only seven volumes, or two-thirds of the whole. He had been 
for several years in delicate health when he died on the 9th of 
September 1841 at Geneva. 

His son, Alphonse Louis Pierre Pyrame de Candolle, 
born at Paris on the 28th of October 1806, at first devoted 
himself to the study of law, but gradually drifted to botany 
and finally succeeded to his father's chair. He published a 
number of botanical works, including continuations of the 
Prodromus in collaboration with his son, Anne Casimir 
Pyrame de Candolle. He died at Geneva on the 4th of April 
1893. 

CANDON, a town of South Ilocos province, Luzon, Philippine 
Islands, on the W. coast, about 200 m. N. by W. of Manila. 
Pop. (1903) 18,828. Its climate is hot, though healthy. Candon 
is surrounded by an extensive and fertile plain, and is defended by 
a small fort. Its inhabitants are noted for their honesty and 
industry, as well as for their regard for law and order. They carry 
on an extensive traffic with the wild tribes of the neighbouring 
mountains. Indigo is grown in considerable quantity, as are 
rice and tobacco. The weaving of blankets, handkerchiefs, and 
cotton and silk cloths constitutes quite an important industry. 
The language is Ilocanc , 

CANDYTUFT {Iberis amara, so called from Iberia, i.e. Spain, 
where many species of the genus are native, and amara, bitter, 
i.e. in taste), a small annual herb (natural order Cruciferae) with 
white or purplish flowers, the outer petals of which are longer 
than the rest. It is a native of western Europe and found wild 
on dry soil in cultivated ground in the centre and east of England. 
This and several other species of the genus are known as garden 
plants, and are of easy culture in ordinary garden soil if well 
exposed to sun and air. The common candytuft of gardens is 
I. umbellata, a hardy annual, native of southern Europe, and 
known in a number of varieties differing in colour of flowers. 
/. coronaria (rocket candytuft) has long dense heads of white 
flowers and is also an annual. Some species have a shrubby 
growth and are evergreen perennials; the best-known is I. 
sempervirens, a native of southern Europe, a much-branched 
plant about a foot high with long racemes of white flowers. 
/. gibraltarica is a showy, handsome half hardy evergreen. 

CANE, a name applied to many plants which have long, 
slender, reed-like stalks or stems, as, for example, the sugar-cane, 
the bamboo-cane or the reed-cane. From the use as walking- 
sticks to which many of these plants have been applied, the 
name " cane " is improperly given to sticks, irrespective of the 
source from which they are derived. Properly it should be re- 
stricted to a peculiar class of palms, known as rattans, included 
under the two closely allied genera Calamus and Daemonorops, of 
which there are a large number of species. The plants are found 
widely extended throughout the islands of the Indian Archi- 
pelago, the Malay Peninsula, China, India and Ceylon; and also 
in Australia and Africa. They were described by Georg Eberhard 
Rumpf or Rumphius (1627-1702), governor of Amboyna, and 
author of the Herbarium Amboynense (6 vols, folio, Amsterdam, 
.1741-1755), under the name of Palmijunci, as inhabitants of 
dense forests into which the rays of the sun scarce can penetrate, 
where they form spiny bushes, obstructing the passage through 
the jungle. The slender stems rarely exceed an inch in diameter 
and are generally much smaller. They creep or trail to an 
enormous length, often reaching 500 or 600 ft., and support 
themselves on trees or bushes by recurved spines borne on the 
stalk or back of the midrib of the leaf, or by stiff hooks replacing 
the upper leaflets. In some cases the midrib is elongated beyond 
the leaflets to form a long whip-like structure, bearing recurved 
hooks at intervals. The natives, in preparing the canes for the 
market, strip off the leaves by pulling the cut plant through a 
notch made in a tree. The canes always present distinct rings 
at the junction of the sheathing leaves with the stem. They 



assume a yellow colour as they dry; and those imported from 
Calcutta have a glossy surface, while the produce of the Eastern 
Archipelago presents a dull exterior. 

Canes, on account of their lightness, length, strength and 
flexibility, are used for a great variety of purposes by the inhabit- 
ants of the countries in which they grow. Split into thin strips 
they are twisted to form ropes and ships' cables, an application 
mentioned by Captain Dampier in his Voyages. A more im- 
portant application, however, is for basket-work, and for making 
chairs, couches, pillows, &c, as the great strength and durability 
of thin and easily prepared strips admit of such articles being 
made at once airy, strong and flexible. Much of the beautiful 
and elaborate basket-work of the Chinese and Japanese is made 
from thin strips of cane, which are also used by the Chinese for 
larger works, such as door-mats, houses and sheds. 

A very large trade with Western countries and the United 
States is carried on in canes and rattans, the principal centres 
of the trade being Batavia, Sarawak, Singapore, Penang and 
Calcutta. In addition to the varieties used for walking-sticks, 
whip and umbrella handles, &c, the common rattans are in 
extensive demand for basket-making, the seats and backs of 
chairs, the ribs of cheap umbrellas, saddles and other harness- 
work; and generally for purposes where their strength and 
flexibility make them efficient substitutes for whalebone. The 
walking-stick " canes " of commerce include a great many 
varieties, some of which, however, are not the produce of trailing 
palms. The well-known Malacca canes are obtained from 
Calamus Scipionum, the stems of which are much stouter than 
is the case with the average species of Calamus. 

CANEA, or Khania, the principal seaport and since 1841 
the capital of Crete, finely situated on the northern coast of 
the island, about 25 m. from its western extremity, on the 
isthmus of the Akrotiri peninsula, which lies between the Bay 
of Canea and the Bay of Suda (latitude 35° 31' N., longitude 
24° 1' E.). Surrounded by a massive Venetian wall, it forms 
a closely built, irregular and overcrowded town, though of late 
years a few of its streets have been widened. The ordinary 
houses are of wood; but the more important buildings are of 
more solid materials. The Turks have a number of mosques; 
there are Greek churches and a Jewish synagogue; an old 
Venetian structure serves as a military hospital; and the 
prison is of substantial construction. The town is now the 
principal seat of government; the seat of a Greek bishop, who 
is suffragan to the metropolitan at Candia, and the official 
residence of the European consuls. The harbour, formed by 
an ancient transverse mole nearly 1 200 ft. long,/ and protected 
by a lighthouse and a fort, would admit vessels of considerable 
tonnage; but it has been allowed to silt up until it shoals off 
from 24 ft. to 10 or even 8, so that large vessels have to anchor 
about 4 or 5 m. out. The principal articles of tr^de are oil and 
soap, and there is a pretty extensive manufacture of leather. 
The fosse is laid out in vegetable gardens; public gardens have 
been constructed outside the walls; and artesian wells have 
been bored by the government. To the east of the town a 
large Arab village had grown up, inhabited for the most part 
by natives of Egypt and Cyrenaica, who acted as boatmen, 
porters and servants, but since the fall of the Turkish govern- 
ment most of these have quitted the island; while about a 
mile off on the rising ground is the village of Khalepa, where 
the consuls and merchants reside. The population of the town 
is estimated at 20,000. Canea probably occupies the site of 
the ancient Cydonia, a city of very early foundation and no small 
importance. During the Venetian rule it was one of the strongest 
cities in the island, but it fell into the hands of the Turks in 
1646, several years before the capture of Candia. . In 1856 it 
suffered from an earthquake. The neighbouring plain is famous 
for its fruitfulness, and the quince is said to derive its name 
Cydonia from the town. (See also Crete.) 

CANE-FENCING (the Fr. canne), the art of defending oneself 
with a walking-stick. It may be considered to be single-stick 
fencing without a guard for the hand, with the important 
difference that in cane-fencing the thrust is as important as 



182 



CANEPHORAE— CANIS MAJOR 



the cut, and thus canne approaches nearer to sabre-play. 
The cuts are practically identical with those of the single-stick 
(q.v.), but they are generally given after one or more rapid 
preliminary flourishes (tnoulinets, circles) which the lightness 
of the stick facilitates, and which serve to perplex and disconcert 
an assailant. The thrusts are similar to those in foil-play, but 
are often carried out with both hands grasping the stick, giving 
greater force and enabling it to be used at very close quarters. 
The canes used in French fencing schools are made of several 
kinds of tough wood and are about 3 ft. long, tapering towards 
the point. As very severe blows are exchanged, masks, gloves, 
padded vests and shin-guards, similar to those used in football, 
are worn. 

See Georges d'Amoric, French Method. of the Noble Art of Self- 
Defence (London, 1898); J. Charlemont, L 'Art de la Boxe francaise 
el de la Canne (Paris, 1899). 

CANEPHORAE (Gr. Kaveov, a basket, and 4>kptiv, to carry), 
" basket-bearers," the title given of old to Athenian maidens of 
noble family, annually chosen to carry on their heads baskets 
with sacrificial implements and apparatus at the Panathenaic 
and other festivals. The term (also in the form Canephori) is 
applied in architecture to figures of either sex carrying on 
their heads baskets, containing edibles or material for sacrifices. 
The term might well be applied to the Caryatide figures of the 
Erechtheum. Those represented in the Panathenaic frieze of 
the Parthenon carry vases on their shoulders. 

CANES VENATICI (" The Hounds," or " the Greyhounds "), 
in astronomy, a constellation of the northern hemisphere named 
by Hevelius in 1690, who compiled it from the stars between 
the older asterisms Ursa Major, Bootes and Coma Berenices. 
Interesting objects in this portion of the heavens are: the famous 
spiral nebula first described by Lord Rosse; a-Canum Venati- 
corum, a double star, of magnitudes 3 and 6: this star was 
named Cor Caroli, or The Heart of Charles II., by Edmund 
Halley,on the suggestion of Sir Charles Scarborough (1616-1694), 
the court physician; a cluster of stars of the nth magnitude 
and fainter, extremely rich in variables, of the 900 stars examined 
no less than 132 being regularly variable. 

CANGA-ARGUELLES, JOSfi (1770-1843), Spanish statesman, 
was born in 1770. He took an active part in the Spanish resist- 
ance to Napoleon in a civil capacity and was an energetic 
member of the cortes of 181 2. On the return of the Bourbon 
line in 1814, Canga-Arguelles was sent into exile in the province 
of Valencia. On the restoration in 1820 of the constitution of 
181 2, he was appointed minister of finance. He continued at 
this post till the spring of 1821, distinguishing himself by the 
zeal and ability with which he sought to reform the finances 
pf Spain. It was high time; for the annual deficit was greater 
than the entire revenue itself, and landed and other property 
was, to an unheard-of extent, monopolized by the priests. 
The measures he proposed had been only partially enforced, 
when the action of the king with regard to the ministry, of 
which he was a member, obliged him to resign. Thereafter, 
as a member of the Moderate Liberal party, Canga-Arguelles 
advocated constitutional government and financial reform, till 
the overthrow of the constitution in 1823, when he fled to 
England. He did not return to Spain till 1829, and did not 
again appear in public life, being appointed keeper of the archives 
at Simancas. He died in 1843. Canga-Arguelles is the author 
of three works: Elementos de la Ciencia de Hacienda (Elements 
of the Science of Finance), London, 1825; Diccionario de 
Hacienda (Dictionary of Finance), London, 1827; and Obser- 
vaciones sobre la guerra de la Peninsula (Observations on the 
Peninsular War), in which he endeavoured to show that his 
countrymen had taken a far more effective part in the national 
struggle against the French than English historians were willing 
to admit. 

CANGAS DE ONfS, or Cangas, a town of northern Spain, in 
the province of Oviedo; situated on the right. bank Of the river 
Sella, in a fertile, well-watered, partly wooded, undulating 
region. Pop. (1000) 8537. The trade of Cangas de Onis is chiefly 
in live-stock and coal from the neighbouring mines. A Latin 



inscription on the town-hall records the fact that this place 
was the residence of the first Spanish kings after the spread of 
the Moors over the Peninsula. Here early in the 8th century 
lived King Pelayo, who started the Christian reconquest of 
Spain. His historic cave of Covadonga is only 8 m. distant 
(see Asturias). The church of the Assumption, rebuilt in the 
19th century, is on the model and site of an older church of the 
middle ages. Near Cangas are ruins and bridges of the Roman 
period. 

CANGAS DE TINEO, a town of northern Spain, in the province 
of Oviedo, and on the river Narcea. Pop. (1900) 22,742: There 
is no railway and the river is not navigable, but a good road 
runs through Tineo, Grado and the adjacent coal-fields, to the 
ports of Cudillero and Aviles. The inhabitants have thus an 
easily accessible market for the farm produce of the fertile hills 
round Cangas de Tineo, and for the cloth, leather, pottery, &c, 
manufactured in the town. 

CANGUE, or Cang, the European name for the Chinese Kia 
or Kea, & portable pillory, carried by offenders convicted of 
petty offences. It consists of a square wooden collar weighing 
from 20 to 60 lb, through a hole in which the victim's head 
is thrust. It fits tight to the neck and must be worn day and 
night for the period ordered. The offender is left exposed in 
the street. Over the parts by which it fastens slips of paper 
bearing the mandarin's seal are pasted so that no one can liberate 
the condemned. The length of the punishment is usually from 
a fortnight to a month. As the cangue is 3 to 4 ft. across the 
convict is unable to feed himself or to lie down, and thus, unless 
fed by friends or passers-by, often starves to death. As in the 
English pillory, the name of the man and the nature of his 
offence are inscribed on the cangue. 

CANINA, LUIGI (1795-1856), Italian archaeologist and 
architect, was born at Casale in Piedmont. He became professor 
of architecture at Turin, and his most important works were 
the excavation of Tusculum in 1829 and of the Appian Way in 
1848, the results of which he embodied in a number of works 
published in a costly form by his patroness, the queen of 
Sardinia. 

CANINI, GIOVANNI AGNOLO (1617-1666), Italian designer 
and engraver, was born at Rome. He was a pupil of Domenichino 
and afterwards of Antonio Barbalonga. He painted some 
altar-pieces at Rome, including two admired pictures for the 
church of San Martino a' Monti, representing the martyrdom 
of St Stephen and of St Bartholomew. Having accompanied 
Cardinal Chigi to France, he was encouraged by the minister 
Colbert to carry into execution his project of designing from 
medals, antique gems and similar sources a series of portraits 
of the most illustrious characters of antiquity, accompanied 
with memoirs; but shortly after the commencement of the 
undertaking Canini died at Rome. The work, however, was 
prosecuted by his brother Marcantonio, who, with the assistance 
of Picard and Valet, completed and published it in 1699, under 
the title of Iconografia di Gio. Ag. Canini. It contains 150 
engravings. A reprint in Italian and French appeared at Amster- 
dam in 1731. 

CANIS MAJOR (" Great Dog "), in astronomy, a constellation 
placed south of the Zodiac, just below and behind the heels of 
Orion. Cards minor, the " little dog," is another constellation, 
also following Orion and separated from Canis major by the 
Milky Way. Both these constellations, or at least their principal 
stars, Sirius in the Great Dog and Procyon in the Little Dog, 
were named in very remote times, being referred to as the " dogs 
of Orion " or in equivalent terms. Sirius is the brightest star 
in the heavens; and the name is connected with the adjectives 
crapos and ctlpios, scorching. It may possibly be related to 
the Arabic Siraj, thus meaning the " glittering one." Hommel 
has shown that Sirius and Procyon were " the two Si'ray " 
or glitterers. It is doubtful whether Sirius is referred to in the 
Old Testament. By some it has been identified with the Hebrew 
mazzaroth, the Lucifer of the Vulgate; by others with mazzaloth, 
the duodceim signa of the Vulgate; while Professor M. A. Stern 
identifies it with the Hebrew kimah, which is rendered variously 



CANITZ 



183 



in the Vulgate as Arcturus, Hyades and Pleiades. 1 The in- 
habitants of the Euphrates valley included^ both constellations 
in their stellar system; but considerable difficulty is encountered 
in the allocation of the Babylonian names to the dominant 
stars. The name kak-ban, which occurs on many tablets, has 
oeen determined by Epping and Strassmaier, and also by 
Jensen and Hommel, as equivalent to Sirius; etymologically 
tliis word means " dog-star " (or, according to R. Brown, 
Primitive Constellations, " bow-star "). On the other hand, 
K.aksidi or Kak-si-sa, meaning the " leader," has been identified 
by Sayce and others with Sirius, while Hommel regards it as 
Procyon. The question is mainly philological, and the arguments 
seem inconclusive. We may notice, however, that connexions 
were made between Kaksidi and the weather, which have 
strong affinities with the ideas expressed at a later date by the 
Greeks. For example, its appearance in the morning with the 
sun heralded the " north winds," the j3opeeu kn)<ria.i. or 
aquilones etesiae, the strong and dangerous north-westerly winds 
of Greece which blow for forty days from the rising of the star; 
again, when Sirius appeared misty the " locusts devour." 
Sirius also appears in the cosmogony of Zoroaster, for Plutarch 
records that Ormuzd appointed this star to be a guard and 
overseer in the heavens, and in the Avesta we find that Tistrya 
(Sirius) is " the brightand happystar, that gives happy dwelling." 
With the Egyptians Sirius assumed great importance. Appearing 
with the sun when the Nile was rising, Sirius was regarded as a 
herald of the waters which would overspread the land, renewing 
its fertility and promising good harvests for the coming season. 
Hephaestion records that from its aspect the rise of the water 
was foretold, and the Roman historian Florus adds that the 
weather was predicted also. Its rising marked the commence- 
ment of their new year, the annus canarius and annus cynicus 
of the Romans. It was the star of Sept or Sothis, and, according 
to one myth, was identified with the goddess Hathor — the 
Aphrodite of the Greeks. It was the " second sun " of the 
heavens, and according to Maspero {Dawn of Civilization, 1894) 
" Sahu and Sopdlt, Orion and Sirius, were the rulers of this 
mysterious world of night and stars." 

The Greeks, borrowing most of their astronomical knowledge 
from the Babylonians, held similar myths and ideas as to the 
constellations and stars. Sirius was named Seiptos, Kvuv 
(the dog) and to aarpov, the star; and its heliacal rising was 
associated with the coming of the dry, hot and sultry season. 
Hesiod tells us that " Sirius parches head and knees"; Homer 
speaks similarly, calling it KaKov cfjua, the evil star, and the 
star of late summer (oTrwpo), the rainy and stormy season. 
Procyon (Upoicvwv) was so named because it rose before Kvwv. 
The Euphratean myth of the dogs has its parallel in Greece, 
Sirius being the hound of the hunter Orion, and as recorded by 
Aratus always chasing the Hare; Pindar refers to the chase 
of Pleione, the mother of the Pleiads, by Orion and his dogs. 
•Similarly Procyon became Maera, the dog of Icarius, when 
Bootes became Icarius, and Virgo his daughter Erigone. 

The Romans adopted the Greek ideas. They named the 
constellation Canis, and Sirius was known as Canis also, and 
as Canicula. Procyon became Antecanem and Antecanis, but 
these names did not come into general use. They named the 
hottest part of the year associated with the heliacal rising of 
Sirius the Dies caniculares, a phrase which has survived in the 
modern expression "dog-days"; and the pestilences which 
then prevailed occasioned the offering of sacrifices to placate 
this inimical star. Festus narrates, in this connexion, the sacri- 
ficing of red dogs at the feast of Floralia, and Ovid of a dog 
on the Robigalia. The experience of the ancient Greeks that 
Sirius rose with the sun as the latter entered Leo, i.e. the hottest 
part of the year, was accepted by the Romans with an entire 
disregard of the intervening time and a different latitude. To 
quote Sir Edward Sherburne {Sphere of Manilius, 1675), 
" The greater part of the Antients assign the Dog Star rising 
to the time of the Sun's first entering into Leo, or, as Pliny 
writes, 23 days after the summer solstice, as Varro 29, as 
1 See G. Schiaparelli, Astronomy in the Old Testament (1905). 



Columella 30. 2 ... At this day with us, according to 
Vulgar computation, the rising and setting of the said Star 
is in a manner coincident with the P'easts of St Margaret 
(which is about the 13th of our July) and St Lawrence (which 
falls on the 10th of our August)." 

Sirius is the most conspicuous star in the sky; it sends to 
the earth eleven times as much light as Aldebaran, the unit 
standard adopted in the revised Harvard Photometry; numeric- 
ally its magnitude is-i-6. At the present time its colour is 
white with a tinge of blue, but historical records show that this 
colour has not always prevailed. Aratus designated it xot/ciXos, 
many coloured; the Alexandrian Ptolemy classified it with 
Aldebaran, Antares and Betelgeuse as wrouppos, .fiery red; 
Seneca describes it as "redder than Mars"; while, in the 
10th century, the Arabian Biruni termed it " shining red." 
On the other hand Sufi, who also flourished in the 10th century, 
pointedly omits it from his list of coloured stars. The question 
has been thoroughly discussed by T. J. J. See, who shows 
that Sirius has shone white for the last 1000 to 1200 years. 3 
The parallax has been determined by Sir David Gill and W. L. 
Elkin to be 0-37"; it is therefore distant from the earth over 
5X10 13 miles, and its light takes 8-6 years to traverse the inter- 
vening space. If the sun were at the same distance Sirius would 
outshine it 30 times, the sun appearing as a star of the second 
magnitude. It has a large proper motion, which shows recurrent 
undulations having a 50-year period. From this Bessel surmised 
the existence of a satellite or companion, for which C. A. F. 
Peters and A. Auwers computed the elements. T. H. Safford 
determined its position for September 1861; and on the 31st 
of January 1862, Alvan G. Clark, of Cambridgeport, Mass., 
telescopically observed it as a barely visible, dull yellow star 
of the 9th to 10th magnitude. The mean distance apart is 
about 20 astronomical units; the total mass of the pair is 3-7 
times the mass of the sun, Sirius itself being twice as massive 
as its companion, and, marvellously enough, forty thousand 
times as bright. The spectrum of Sirius is characterized by 
prominent absorption lines due to hydrogen, the metallic lines 
being weak; other stars having the same spectra are said 
to be of the " Sirian type." Such stars are the most highly 
heated (see Star). | 

Procyon, or a Canis minoris, is a star of the 2nd magnitude, 
one-fifth as bright as Sirius, or numerically 0-47 when compared 
with Aldebaran. It is more distant than Sirius, its parallax 
being 0-33"; and its light is about six times that of the sun. 
Its proper motion is large, 1-25", and its velocity at right angles 
to the line of sight is about 1 1 m. per second. Its proper motion 
shows large irregularities, pointing to a relatively massive com- 
panion; this satellite was discovered on the 13 th of November 
1896 by J. M. Schaeberle, with the great Lick telescope, as a 
star of the 13 th magnitude. Its mass is equal to about that 
of the sun, but its light is only one twenty-thousandth. 

CANITZ, FRIEDRICH RUDOLF LUDWIG, Freiherr von 
(1654-1699), German poet and diplomatist, was born at Berlin 
on the 27th of November 1654. He attended the universities 
of Leiden and Leipzig, travelled in England, France, Italy and 
Holland, and on his return was appointed groom of the bed- 
chamber (Kammerjunker) to the elector Frederick William 
of Brandenburg, whom he accompanied on his campaigns in 
Pomerania and Sweden. In 1680 he became councillor of lega- 
tion, and he was employed on various embassies. In 1697 the 
elector Frederick III. made him a privy councillor, and the 
emperor Leopold I. created him a baron of the Empire. Having 
fallen ill on an embassy to the Hague, he obtained his discharge 
and died at Berlin in 1699. Canitz's poems {Nebenstunden 
unterschiedener Gedichte), which did not appear until after his 
death (1700), are for the most part dry and stilted imitations 
of French and Latin models, but they formed a healthy 

2 For other values of the interval between the summer solstice 
and the rising of Sirius, see Smith's Diet, of Greek and Roman 
A ntiquities. 

1 See Thomas Barker, Phil. Trans., 1760, 51, p. 498, for quotations 
from classical authors; also T. J. J. See, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 
vol. xi. p. 269. 



184 



CANIZARES^-CANNIBALISM 



contrast to the coarseness and bombast of the later Silesian 
poets. 

A complete edition of Canitz's poems was published by U. Konig 
in 1727; see also L. Fulda, Die Gegner der zweiten schlesischen 
Schule, ii. (1883). 

CANIZARES, JOSfi DE (1676-1750), Spanish dramatist, was 
born at Madrid on the 4th of July 1676, entered the army, and 
retired with the rank of captain in 1702 to act as censor of the 
Madrid theatres and steward to the duke of Osuna. In his 
fourteenth year Canizares recast a play by Lope de Vega under 
the title of Las Cuentas del Gran Capitdn, and he speedily became 
a fashionable playwright. His originality, however, is slight, 
and El Dfimine Lucas, the only one of his pieces that is still read, 
is an adaptation from Lope de Vega. Canizares produced a 
version of Racine's Iphigenie shortly before 1716, and is to some 
extent responsible for the destruction of the old Spanish drama. 
He died on the 4th of September 175°, at Madrid. 

CANNAE (mod. Canne), an ancient village of Apulia, near the 
river Aufidus, situated on a hill on the right bank, 6 m. 
S.W. from its mouth. It is celebrated for the disastrous defeat 
which the Romans received there from Hannibal in 216 B.C. 
(see Punic Wars). There is a considerable controversy as to 
whether the battle took place on the right or the left bank of the 
river. In later times the place became a municipium, and un- 
important Roman remains still exist upon the hill known as 
Monte di Canne. In the middle ages it became a bishopric, 
but was destroyed in 1276. 

See O. Schwab, Das Schlachtfeld von Canna (Munich, 1898), and 
authorities under Punic Wars. 

CANNANORE, or Kananore, a town of British India, in the 
Malabar district of Madras, on the coast, 58 m. N. from Calicut 
and 470 m. by rail from Madras. Pop. (1901) 27,811. Cannanore 
belonged to the Kalahasti or Cherakal rajas till the invasion of 
Malabar by Hyder Ali. In 1498 it was visited by Vasco da 
Gama; in 1501 a Portuguese factory was planted here by 
Cabral; in 1502 da Gama made a treaty with the raja, and in 
1505 a fort was built. In 1656 the Dutch effected a settlement 
and built the present fort, which they sold to Ali Raja in 1771. 
In 1783 Cannanore was captured by the British, and the reigning 
princess became tributary to the East India Company. Here is 
the residence of the Moplah chief, known as the Ali Raja, who 
owns most of the Laccadive Islands. Cannanore was the military 
headquarters of the British on the west coast until 1887. 

CANNES, a seaport of France, in the department of the Alpes 
Maritimes, on the Mediterranean, 19 m. S.W. of Nice and 120 m. 
E. of Marseilles by rail. Pop.(i9o6) 24,531. It enjoys a southern 
exposure on a seaward slope, and is defended from the northern 
winds by ranges of hills. Previous to 1831, when it first attracted 
the attention of Lord Brougham, it mainly consisted of the old 
quarter (named Sucquet), and had little to show except an 
ancient castle, and a church on the top of Mont Chevalier, 
dedicated in 1603 to Notre Dame du Mont Esperance; but 
since that period it has become a large and important town, 
and is now one of the most fashionable winter resorts in the 
south of France, much frequented by English visitors, the 
Americans preferring Nice. The neighbourhood is thickly studded 
with magnificent villas, which are solidly built of a stone so soft 
that it is sawn and not hewn. There is an excellent quay, and 
a beautiful promenade runs along the beach; and numerous 
sheltered roads stretch up the valleys amidst groves of olive 
trees. On the north the modern town climbs up to Le Cannet 
(2 m.), while on the east it practically extends along the coast 
to Golfe Jouan (35 m.), where Napoleon landed on the 1st of 
March 18 15, on his return from Elba. From Cannes a railway 
runs north in 12^ m. to Grasse. On the top of the hill behind 
the town are a Roman Catholic and a Protestant cemetery. 
In the most prominent part of the latter is the grave of Lord 
Brougham, distinguished by a massive stone cross standing on 
a double basement, with the simple inscription — " Henricus 
Brougham, Natus mdcclxxvui., Decessit MDCCCLxvm."; and 
in the immediate vicinity lies James, fourth duke of Montrose, 
who died December 1874. The country around is very beautiful 



and highly fertile; orange and lemon trees are cultivated- like 
peach trees in England, while olives, almonds, figs, peaches, 
grapes and other fruits are grown in abundance, and, along 
with the produce of the fisheries, form the chief exports of the 
town. Essences of various kinds are manufactured, and flowers 
are extensively cultivated for the perfumers. The climate of 
Cannes has been the subject of a considerable variety of opinion, 
— the preponderance being, however, in its favour. According 
to Dr de Valcourt, it is remarkable by reason of the elevation 
and regularity of the temperature during the height of the day, 
the clearness of the atmosphere and abundance of light, the 
rarity of rain and the absence of fogs. 

Cannes is a place of great antiquity, but its earlier history 
is very obscure. It was twice destroyed by the Saracens in the 
8th and the 10th centuries; but it was afterwards repeopled 
by a colony from Genoa. Opposite the town is the island of 
Ste Marguerite (one of the Lerins) , in the citadel of which the Man 
with the Iron Mask was confined from 1686 to 1698, and which 
acquired notoriety as the prison whence Marshal Bazaine escaped 
in August 1874. On the other chief island (St Honorat) of the 
Lerins is the famous monastery (5th century to 1 788) , in connexion 
with which grew up the school of Lerins, which had a wide 
influence upon piety and literature in the 5th and 6th centuries. 

See L. Alliez, Histoire du monastere de Lerins (2 vols., Paris, 1862) ; 
and Les ties de Lerins, Cannes, et les rivages environnants (Paris, 1 860) ; 
Cartulaire du monastere de Lerins (2 vols., Paris, 1883 and 1905) ; de 
Valcourt, Cannes and its Climate (London, 1873); Joanne, special 
Guide to Cannes; J. R. Green, essay on Cannes and St Honorat, 
in the first series of his Stray Studies (1st ed., 1876); A. Cooper- 
Marsdin, The School of Lerins (Rochester, 1905). (W. A. B. C.) 

CANNIBALISM, the eating of human flesh by men (from a 
Latinized form of Carib, the name of a tribe of South America, 
formerly found also in the West Indies), also called "anthro- 
pophagy "(Gr. avdpuiros, man, and (txxyeiv, to eat). Evidence 
has been adduced from some of the palaeolithic cave-dwellings 
in France to show that the inhabitants practised cannibalism, 
at least occasionally. From Herodotus, Strabo and others we 
hear of peoples like the Scythian Massagetae, a nomad race 
north-east of the Caspian Sea, who killed old people and ate 
them. In the middle ages reports, some of them probably un- 
trustworthy, by Marco Polo and others, attributed cannibalism 
to the wild tribes of China, the Tibetans, &c. In our own days 
cannibalism prevails, or prevailed until recently, over a great part 
of West and Central Africa, New Guinea, Melanesia (especially 
Fiji) and Australia. New Zealand and the Polynesian Islands 
were great centres of the practice. It is extensively practised 
by the Battas of Sumatra and in other East Indian islands and 
in South America; in earlier days it was a common feature of 
Indian wars in North America. Sporadic cannibalism occurs 
among more civilized peoples as a result of necessity or as a 
manifestation of disease (see Lycanthropy) . 

Classification. — Cannibalistic practices may be classified from 
two points of view: (1) the motives of the act; (2) the cere-- 
monial regulations. A third division of subordinate importance 
is also possible, if we consider whether the victims are actually 
killed for food or whether only such are eaten as have met their 
death in battle or other ways. 

1. From a psychological point of view the term cannibalism 
groups together a number of customs, whose only bond of union 
is that they all involve eating of human flesh, (a) Food canni- 
balism, where the object is the satisfaction of hunger, may occur" 
sporadically as a result of real necessity or may be kept up for 
the simple gratification of a taste for human flesh in the absence 
of any lack of food in general or even of animal food, (i.) Canni- 
balism from necessity is found not only among the lower races, 
such as the Fuegians or Red Indian tribes, but also among 
civilized races, as the records of sieges and shipwrecks show. 
(ii.) Simple food cannibalism is common in Africa; the Niam- 
Niam and Monbuttu carry on wars for the sake of obtaining 
human flesh; in West Africa human flesh could formerly be 
seen exposed for sale in the market like any other article of 
commerce; and among some tribes it is the practice to sell the 
corpses of dead relatives for consumption as food, (b) In 



CANNING, LORD 



185 



curious contrast to this latter custom is the practice of devouring 
dead kinsfolk as the most respectful method of disposing of their 
remains. In a small number of cases this practice is combined 
with the custom of killing the old and sick, but in the great 
majority of peoples it is simply a form of burial; it seems to 
prevail in most parts of Australia, many parts of Melanesia, 
Africa and South America, and less frequently in other parts 
of the world. To this group belong the customs described by 
Herodotus; we may perhaps regard as a variant form the custom 
of using the skull of a dead man as a drinking-cup. This practice 
is widely found, and the statement of Herodotus that the skull 
was set in gold and preserved by the Issedones may point in 
this direction; from the account given of the Tibetans some 
seven hundred years ago by William of Ruysbruck (Rubruquis) 
it appears that they had given up cannibalism but still preserved 
the use of the skull as a drinking vessel. Another modification 
of an original ritual cannibalism is the custom of drinking the 
ashes of the dead, which is practised by some African and South 
American tribes. The custom of holding burial feasts has also 
been traced to the same origin. More incomprehensible to the 
European than any other form of cannibalism is the custom of 
partaking of the products of putrefaction as they run down from 
the body. The Australians smoke-dry the bodies of tribesmen; 
here, too, it is the custom to consume the portions of the body 
which are rendered liquid by the heat, (c) The ritual cannibal- 
ism just mentioned shades over into and may have been originally 
derived from magical cannibalism, of which three sub-species 
may be distinguished, (i.) Savages are accustomed, on the one 
hand, to abstain from certain foods in order that they may not 
acquire certain qualities; on the other hand other foods are 
eagerly desired in order that they may by partaking of the flesh 
also come to partake of the mental or bodily peculiarities of 
the man or animal from which the meat is derived; thus, after 
the birth of a child, especially the first-born, the parents are 
frequently forbidden the flesh of slow-moving animals, because 
that would prevent the child from learning to walk; conversely, 
eating the heart of a lion is recommended for a warrior to make 
him brave; from this point of view therefore we readily under- 
stand the motives which lead to the eating of those slain in 
battle, both friends and foes, (ii.) We may term protective an 
entirely different kind of magical cannibalism, which consists in 
the consumption of a small portion of the- body of a murdered 
man, in order that his ghost may not trouble the murderer; 
according to Hans Egede, the Eskimo, when they kill a witch, 
eat a portion of her heart, that she may not haunt them, (iii.) 
The practice is also said to have the effect of causing the relatives 
of the murdered man to lose heart or to prevent them from 
exercising the right of revenge; in this case it may be brought 
into relation with the ceremony of the blood covenant in one of 
the forms of which the parties drink each other's blood; or, it 
may point to a reminiscence of a ritual eating of the dead kins- 
man. The late survival of this idea in Europe is attested by its 
mention by Dante in the Purgatorio. (d) The custom of eating 
food offered to the gods is widespread, and we may trace to 
this origin Mexican cannibalism, perhaps, too, that of Fiji. The 
Aztec worship of the god of war, Huitzilopochtli, led to the 
sacrifice of prisoners, and the custom of sacrifice to their frequent 
wars. The priest took out the heart, offered it to the sun, and 
then went through the ceremonies of feeding the idol with the 
heart and blood; finally the bodies of the victims were consumed 
by the worshippers, (e) We reach an entirely different set of 
motives in penal and revenge cannibalism. For the origin of 
these ideas we may perhaps look to that of protective magic, 
dealt with above; but it seems possible that there is also some 
idea of influencing the lot of the criminal in a future life; it 
may be noted that the whole of the body is seldom eaten in 
protective cannibalism; among the Battas, however, the 
criminal, and in parts of Africa the debtor, are entirely consumed. 
Other cases, especially where the victim is an enemy, may be due 
to mere fury and bravado. (/) In the west of North America a 
peculiar kind of cannibalism is found, which is confined to a 
Certain body of magicians termed " Hametzen " and a necessary 



condition of admission to their order. Another kind of initiatory 
cannibalism prevailed in the south of Australia, where a magician 
had to eat a portion of a child's body before he was admitted. 
The meaning of these ceremonials is not clear. 

2. Most kinds of cannibalism are hedged round with ceremonial 
regulations. Certain tribes, as we have seen above, go to war 
to provide human flesh; in other cases it is only the nearest 
relatives who may not partake of a body; in other cases again 
it is precisely the nearest relatives on whom the duty falls. A 
curious regulation in south-east New Guinea prescribes that the 
killer of the victim shall not partake in the feast ; in some cases 
the whole of the clan to which belonged the man for whom 
revenge is taken abstains also; in other cases this clan, together 
with any others of the same intermarrying group, takes part in 
the feast to the exclusion of (a) the clan or group with which 
they intermarry and (b) all outside clans. Some peoples forbid 
women to eat human flesh; in others certain classes, as the 
Muri of the Bambala, a tribe in the Kassai, may be forbidden to 
eat it. In Mindanao the only person who might eat of a slain 
enemy was the priest who led the warriors, and he was not per- 
mitted to escape this duty. In Grand Bassam all who had taken 
part in a festival at the foundation of a new village were com- 
pelled to eat of the human victim. But the variations are too 
numerous for any general account to be given of ceremonial 
limitations. S. R. Steinmetz has proposed a division into endo- 
and exo-cannibalism; but these divisions are frequently of 
minor importance, and he has failed to define satisfactorily the 
limits of the groups on which his classification is based. 

Origin. — It will probably never be possible to say how canni- 
balism originated; in fact the multiplicity of forms and the 
diversity of ceremonial rules — some prescribing that tribesmen 
shall on no account be eaten, others that the bodies of none but 
tribesmen shall provide the meal of human flesh — point to a 
multiple origin. It has been maintained that the various forms 
of endo-cannibalism (eating of tribesmen) spring from an original 
practice of food cannibalism which the human race has in common 
with many animals; but this leaves unexplained inter alia the 
limitation of the right of participation in the funeral meal to the 
relatives of the dead man; at the same time it is possible to 
argue that the magical ideas now associated with cannibalism 
are of later growth. Against the view put forward by Steinmetz 
it may be urged that we have other instances of magical foods, 
such as the eating of a lion's heart, which do not point to an 
original custom of eating the animal as food. We shall probably 
be justified in referring all forms of endo-cannibalism to a ritual 
origin; otherwise the limitation is inexplicable; on the other 
hand exo-cannibalism, in some of its forms, and much of the 
extension of endo-cannibalism must be referred to a desire for 
human flesh, grown into a passion. 

Bibliography. — Steinmetz, in Mitt. Anthrop. Ges. Wien, N.F. 
xvi.; Andree, Die Anthropophagie ; Bergmann, Die Verbreitung 
der Anthropophagie; Schneider, Die Naturvolker, i. 121-200; Schaff- 
hausen, Anthropologische Studien, Internat. Archiv iii. 69-73; 
xii. 78; E. S. Hartland, Legend of Perseus, vol. ii. ; Dictionnaire 
des sci. mid., s.v. " Anthropophagie "; Dr Seligmann in Reports of 
the Cook-Daniels Expedition to New Guinea. (N. W. T.) 

CANNING, CHARLES JOHN, Earl (181 2-1862), English states- 
man, governor-general of India during the Mutiny of 1857, was 
the youngest child of George Canning, and was born at Brompton, 
near London, on the 14th of December 181 2. He was educated 
at Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated B.A. in 1833, as 
first class in classics and second class in mathematics. In 1836 
he entered parliament, being returned as member for the town 
of Warwick in the Conservative interest. He did not, however, 
sit long in the House of Commons; for, on the death of his 
mother in 1837, he succeeded to the peerage which had been 
conferred on her with remainder to her only surviving soh, 
and as Viscount Canning took his seat in the House of Lords. 
His first official appointment was that of under-secretary of 
state for foreign affairs, in the administration formed by Sir 
Robert Peel in 1841 — his chief being the earl of Aberdeen. 
This post he held till January 1846; and from January to July 
of that year, when the Peel administration was broken up, 



i86 



CANNING, GEORGE 



Lord Canning filled the post of commissioner of woods and 
forests. He declined to accept office under the earl of Derby; 
but on the formation of the coalition ministry under the earl 
of Aberdeen in January 1853, he received the appointment of 
postmaster-general. In this office he showed not only a large 
capacity for hard work, but also general administrative ability 
and much zeal for the improvement of the service. He retained 
his post under Lord Palmerston's ministry until July i8ss> 
when, in consequence of the death of Lord Dalhousie and a 
vacancy in the governor-generalship of India, he was selected 
by Lord Palmerston to succeed to that great position. This 
appointment appears to have been made rather on the ground 
of his father's great services than from any proof as yet given 
of special personal fitness on the part of Lord Canning. The new 
governor sailed from England in December 1855, and entered 
upon the duties of his office in India at the close of February 
1856. His strong common sense and sound practical judgment 
led him to adopt a policy of conciliation towards the native 
princes, and to promote measures tending to the betterment 
of the condition of the people. 

In the year following his accession to office the deep-seated 
discontent of the people broke out in the Indian Mutiny (q.v.). 
Fears were entertained, and even the friends of the viceroy 
to some extent shared them, that he was not equal to the crisis. 
But the fears proved groundless. He had a clear eye for the 
gravity of the situation, a calm judgment, and a prompt, swift 
hand to do what was really necessary. By the union of great 
moral qualities with high, though not the highest, intellectual 
faculties, he carried the Indian empire safely through the stress 
of the storm, and, what was perhaps a harder task still, he dealt 
wisely with the enormous difficulties arising at the close of such 
a war, established a more liberal policy and a sounder financial 
system, and left the people more contented than they were 
before. The name of " Clemency Canning," which was applied 
to him during the heated animosities of the moment, has since 
become a title of honour. 

While rebellion was raging in Oudh he issued a proclamation 
declaring the lands of the province forfeited; and this step 
gave rise to much angry controversy. A " secret despatch," 
couched in arrogant and offensive terms, was addressed to 
the viceroy by Lord Ellenborough, then a member of the Derby 
administration, which would have justified the viceroy in 
immediately resigning. But from a strong sense of duty he 
continued at his post; and ere long the general condemnation 
of the despatch was so strong that the writer felt it necessary 
to retire from office. Lord Canning replied to the despatch, 
calmly and in a statesman-like manner explaining and vindi- 
cating his censured policy. In April 1859 he received the thanks 
of both Houses of Parliament for his great services during the 
mutiny. He was also made an extra civil grand cross of the 
order of the Bath, and in May of the same year he was raised 
to the dignity of an earl. By the strain of anxiety and hard 
work his health and strength were seriously impaired, while 
the death of his wife was also a great shock to him; in the 
hope that rest in his native land might restore him, he left 
India, reaching England in April 1862. But it was too late. 
He died in London on the 17th of June following. About a 
month before his death he was created K.G. As he died without 
issue the title became extinct. 

See Sir H. S. Cunningham, Earl Canning ("Rulers of India" series), 
1891 ; and A. J. C. Hare, The Story of Two Noble Lives (1893). 

CANNING, GEORGE (1770-1827), British statesman, was born 
in London on the nth of April 1770. The family was of English 
origin and had been settled at Bishop's Canynge in Wiltshire. 
In 16 18 a George Canning, son of Richard Canning of Foxcote in 
Warwickshire, received a grant of the manor of Garvagh in 
Londonderry, Ireland, from King James I. The father of the 
statesman, also named George, was the eldest son of Mr Stratford 
Canning, of Garvagh. He quarrelled with and was disowned by 
his family. He came to London and led a struggling life, partly 
in trade and partly in literature. In May 1768 he married Mary 
Annie Costello, and he died on the nth of April 1771, exactly 



one year after the birth of his son. Mrs Canning, who was left 
destitute, received no help from her husband's family, and went 
on the stage, where she was not successful. She married a dis- 
solute and brutal actor of the name of Reddish. Her son owed 
his escape from the miseries of her household to another member 
of the company, Moody, who wrote to Mr Stratford Canning, a 
merchant in London and younger brother of the elder George 
Canning. Moody represented to Mr Stratford Canning that the 
boy, although full of promise, was on the high road to the gallows 
under the evil influence of Reddish. Mr Stratford Canning 
exerted himself on behalf of his nephew. An estate of the value 
of £200 a year was settled on the boy, and he was sent in succes- 
sion to a private school at Hyde Abbey near Winchester, to 
Eton in 1781, and to Christchurch, Oxford, in 1787. After 
leaving Eton and before going to Oxford, he was entered as a 
student at Lincoln's Inn. At Eton he edited the school magazine, 
The Microcosm, and at Oxford he took the leading part in the 
formation of a debating society. He made many friends, and his 
reputation was already so high that Sheridan referred to him in 
the House of Commons as a rising hope of the Whigs. According 
to Lord Holland, he had been noted at Oxford as a furious 
Jacobin and hater of the aristocracy. In 1792 he came to London 
to read for the bar. He had taken his B. A. in 1 791 and proceeded 
M.A. on the 6th of July 1794. 

Soon after coming to London he became acquainted with Pitt 
in some uncertain way. The hatred of the aristocracy, for which 
Lord Holland says he was noted at Oxford, would naturally 
deter an ambitious young man with his way to make in the 
world, and with no fixed principles, from attaching his fortune 
to the Whigs. Canning had the glaring examples of Burke and 
Sheridan himself to show him that the great " revolution 
families " — Cavendishes, Russells, Bentincks — who controlled 
the Whig party, would never allow any man, however able, who 
did not belong to their connexion, to rise to the first rank. He 
therefore took his place among the followers of Pitt. It is, 
however, only fair to note that he always regarded Pitt with 
strong personal affection, and that he may very naturally have 
been influenced, as multitudes of other Englishmen were, by 
the rapid development of the French Revolution from a reform- 
ing to an aggressive and conquering force. In a letter to his 
friend Lord Boringdon (John Parker, afterwards earl of Morley), 
dated the 13th of December 1792, he explicitly states that this 
was the case. Enlightened self-interest was doubtless combined 
with honest conviction in ranking him among the followers of 
Pitt. By the help of the prime minister he entered parliament 
for the borough of Newtown in the Isle of Wight in July 1793. 
His maiden speech, on the subvention to the king of Sardinia, 
was made on the 31st of January 1794. It is by some said to 
have been a failure, but he satisfied himself, and he soon estab- 
lished his place as the most brilliant speaker on the ministerial 
side. It may be most conveniently noted here, that his political 
patrons exerted themselves to provide for his private as well 
as his official prosperity. Their favour helped him to make a 
lucrative marriage with Miss Joan Scott, who had a fortune of 
£100,000, on the 8th of July 1800. The marriage was a very 
happy one, though the bulk of the fortune was worn away in the 
expenses of public and social life. Mrs Canning, who survived 
her husband for ten years, was created a viscountess in 1828. 
Four children were born of the marriage — a son who died in his 
father's lifetime, and was lamented by him in very touching 
verse; another a captain in the navy, drowned at Madeira in 
1827; a third son, Charles {q.v.), afterwards created Earl 
Canning; and a daughter Harriet, who married the marquess of 
Clanricarde in 1825. 

The public life of Canning may be divided into four stages. 
From 1793 to 1801 he was the devoted follower of Pitt, was in 
minor though important office, and was the wittiest of the 
defenders of the ministry in parliament and in the press. From 
1801 to 1809 he was partly in opposition, partly in office, fighting 
for the foremost place. Between 1809 and 1822 there was a 
period of comparative eclipse, during which he was indeed at 
times in office, but in lesser places than he would have beei 



CANNING, GEORGE 



187 



prepared to accept between 1804 and 1809, and was regarded 
with general distrust. From 1822 till his death in 1827 he was 
the most powerful influence in English, and one of the most 
powerful in European, politics. 

In the spring of 1796 he was appointed under-secretary for 
the foreign office, and in the election of that year he was 
returned for Wendover. He was also appointed receiver-general 
of the alienation office, a sinecure post which brought him 
£700 a year. His position as under-secretary brought him into 
close relations with Pitt and the foreign secretary, Lord Grenville 
(q.v.). During the negotiations for peace at Lille (1797), Canning 
was actively concerned in the devices which were employed by 
Pitt and Grenville to keep the real character of the discussion 
secret from other members of the cabinet. Canning had a taste 
for mystery and disguises, which he had shown at Oxford, and 
which did much to gain him his unfortunate reputation for 
trickery. From the 20th of November 1797, till the 9th of July 
1798, he was one of the most active, and was certainly the most 
witty of the contributors to the Anti- Jacobin, a weekly paper 
started to ridicule the frothy philanthropic and eleutheromaniac 
rant of the French republicans, and to denounce their brutal 
rapacity and cruelty. But Canning's position as under-secretary 
was not wholly pleasant to him. He disliked his immediate chief 
Grenville, one of the Whigs who joined Pitt, and a man of 
thoroughly Whiggish aristocratic insolence. In 1799 he left the 
foreign office and was named one of the twelve commissioners 
for India, and in 1800 joint paymaster of the forces, a post which 
he held till the retirement of Pitt in 1801. 

During these years of subordinate activity Canning had 
established his position as an orator and a wit. His oratory 
cannot be estimated with absolute confidence. Speeches were 
then badly reported. The text of his own, published by Therry 
(6 volumes, London, 1828), were revised by himself, and not for 
the better. Though his favourite author was Dryden, whose 
prose is uniformly manly and simple, and though he had a keen 
eye for faults of taste in the style of others, Canning had himself 
a leaning to preciosity and tinsel. His wit was, and remains, 
above all question. In public life it did him some harm in the 
opinion of serious people, who could not believe that so jocose 
a politician had solid capacity. It exasperated opponents, some 
of whom, notably Peter Pindar (see Wolcot, John), retaliated 
by brutal personalities. Canning was constantly reminded that 
his mother was a strolling actress, and was accused of foisting 
his pauper family on the public funds. The accusation was 
perfectly untrue, but this style of political controversy was 
common, and was adopted by Canning. He put himself on a 
level with Peter Pindar when he assailed Pitt's successor 
Addington (see Sidmouth, Viscount) on the ground that he 
was the son of a doctor. 

While out of office with Pitt, Canning proved a somewhat 
insubordinate follower. The snobbery and malignity of his 
attacks on Addington roused considerable feeling against him, 
and his attempts to act as a political go-between in ministerial 
arrangements were unfortunate. On the formation of Pitt's 
second ministry he took the post of treasurer of the navy on the 
12th of May 1804. In office he continued to be insubordinate, 
and committed mistakes which got him into bad odour as un- 
trustworthy. He endeavoured to persuade Lord Hawkesbury 
(see Liverpool, Earls or) to join in a scheme for turning an old 
friend out of the India Office. Though his relations with Pitt 
began to be somewhat strained towards the end, he left office on 
the minister's death on the 21st of January 1806. 

Canning, who delivered the eulogy of Pitt in the House of 
Commons on the 3rd of February, refused to take office in Fox's 
ministry of " all the talents." Attempts were made to secure 
him, and he was offered the leadership of the House of Commons, 
under the supervision of Fox, an absurd proposal which he had 
the good sense to decline. After the death of Fox, and the 
dismissal by the king of Lord Grenville's ministry, he joined the 
administration of the duke of Portland as secretary of state for 
foreign affairs. He held the office from the 25th of March 1807 
til! the 9th of September 1809. During these two years he had a 



large share in the vigorous policy which defeated the secret 
articles of the treaty of Tilsit by the seizure of the Danish fleet. 
As foreign secretary it fell to him to defend the ministry when it 
was attacked in parliament. He refused to tell how he be- 
came aware of the secret articles, and the mystery has never 
been fully solved. He threw himself eagerly into the prosecution 
of the war in Spain, yet his tenure of office ended in resignation 
in circumstances which left him under deep discredit. He be- 
came entangled in what can only be called two intrigues. In 
view of the failing health of the duke of Portland he told his 
colleague, Spencer Perceval, chancellor of the exchequer, that a 
new prime minister must be found, that he must be in the House 
of Commons, that the choice lay between them, adding that he 
might not be prepared to serve as subordinate. In April of 1809 
he had told the duke of Portland that Lord Castlereagh, 
secretary for the colonies and war, was in his opinion unfit for his 
post, and must be removed to another office. The duke, a 
sickly and vacillating man, said nothing to Castlereagh, and 
took no steps, and Canning did not enlighten his colleague. 
When he found that no measures were being taken to make a 
change of office, Canning resigned on the 7th of September. 
Castlereagh then learnt the truth, and after resigning sent 
Canning a challenge on the 19th of' September. In the duel on 
Putney Heath which followed Canning was wounded in the 
thigh. His apologists have endeavoured to defend him against 
the charge of double dealing, but there can be no question that 
Castlereagh had just ground to be angry. Public opinion was 
strong against Canning, and in the House of Commons he was 
looked upon with distrust. For twelve years he remained out of 
office or in inferior places. His ability made it impossible that he 
should be obscure. In 1810 he was a member of the Bullion 
Committee, and his speeches on the report showed his mastery 
of the subject. It was no doubt his reputation for economic 
knowledge which chiefly recommended him to the electors of 
Liverpool in 1812. He had been elected for Tralee in 1803, for 
Newtown (Hants) in 1806 and for Harwich in 1807. But in 
parliament he had lost all influence, and is described as wandering 
about neglected and avoided. In 181 2 he committed the serious 
mistake of accepting a well-paid ornamental mission to Lisbon, 
which he was about to visit for the health of his eldest son. He 
remained abroad for eighteen months. In 18 16 he submitted to 
enter office as president of the Board of Control in Lord Liver- 
pool's cabinet, in which Castlereagh, to whom he had now 
become reconciled, was secretary of state for foreign affairs. In 
1820 he resigned his post in order to avoid taking any part in the 
proceedings against Queen Caroline, the wife of George IV. 

Canning's return to great office and influence dates from the 
suicide of Castlereagh in 1822. He had accepted the governor- 
generalship of India, which would have implied his retirement 
from public life at home, and refused to remain unless he was 
promised " the whole inheritance " of Castlereagh, — the foreign 
office and the leadership of the House of Commons. His terms 
were accepted, and he took office in September 1822. He held the 
office from that date till April 1827, when he became prime 
minister in succession to Lord Liverpool, whose health had 
broken down. Even before this he was the real director of the 
policy of the cabinet — as Castlereagh had been from 181 2 to 

1822. It may be noted that he resigned his seat for Liverpool in 

1823, and was elected for Harwich, which he left for Newport in 
1826. Few English public men have represented so many 
constituencies. 

His fame as a statesman is based mainly on the foreign policy 
which he pursued in those years — the policy of non-intervention, 
and of the patronage, if not the actual support, of national and 
liberal movements in Europe (see the historical articles under 
Europe, Spain, Portugal, Turkey, Greece). To this policy 
he may be said to have given his name, and he has- enjoyed the 
reputation of having introduced a generous spirit into British 
politics, and of having undone the work of his predecessor at the 
foreign office, who was constantly abused as the friend of 
despotism and of despots. It may well be believed that Canning 
followed his natural inclinations, and it can be asserted without 



i88 



CANNIZZARO— CANNON 



the possibility of contradiction, if also without possibility of 
proof, that he had influenced the mind of Castlereagh. Yet the 
fact remains that when Canning came into office in September 
1822, he found the instructions to be given to the representative 
of the British government at the congress of Verona already 
drawn up by his predecessor, who had meant to attend the 
congress himself (see Londonderry, Robert Stewart, 2nd 
Marquess or). These instructions were handed on without 
change by Canning to the duke of Wellington, who went as 
representative, and they contain all the principles which have 
been said to have been peculiarly Canning's. Indeed this policy 
was dictated by the character and position of the British govern- 
ment, and had been followed in the main since the conference of 
Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818. Canning was its orator and minister 
rather than its originator. Yet his eloquence has associated with 
his name the responsibility for British policy at the time. No 
speech of his is perhaps more famous than that in which he 
claimed the initiative in recognizing the independence of the 
revolted Spanish colonies in South America in 1823 — " I resolved 
that, if France had Spain, it should not be Spain with the Indies. 
I called the New World into existence to redress the balance of 
the Old" (December 12, 1826). 

When Lord Liverpool was struck down in a fit on the 17 th of 
February 1827, Canning was marked out by position as his only 
possible successor. He was not indeed accepted by all the party 
which had followed Liverpool. The duke of Wellington, Sir 
Robert Peel and several other members of the ministry, moved 
perhaps by personal animosity, and certainly by dislike of his 
known and consistent advocacy of the claims of the Roman 
Catholics, refused to serve with him. Canning succeeded in 
constructing a ministry in April — but the hopes and the fears of 
friends and enemies proved to be equally unfounded. His 
health had already begun to give way, and broke down altogether 
under the strain of the effort required to form his ministry. He 
had caught cold in January at the funeral of the duke of York, 
and never recovered. He died on the 8th of August 1827, at 
Chiswick, in the house of the duke of Devonshire, where Fox had 
died, and in the same room. 

See Speeches, with a memoir by R. Therry (London, 1826) ; A.'G. 
Stapleton, Political Life of Canning, 1822-1827 (2nd ed., London, 
1831); Canning and His Times (London, 1859); Lord Dalling and 
Bulwer, Historical Characters (London, 1868); F. H. Hill, George 
Canning (London, 1887); Some Political Correspondence of George 
Canning, ed. E. J. Stapleton (2 vols., 1897); J. A. R. Marriott, 
George Canning and His Times, a Political Study (London, 1903) ; 
W. Alison Phillips, George Canning (London, 1903), with repro- 
ductions of contemporary portraits and caricatures; H. W. V. 
Temperley, George Canning (London, 1-905). 

CANNIZZARO, STANISLAO (1826-1910), Italian chemist, 
was born at Palermo on the 13th of July 1826. In 1841 he 
entered the university of his native place with the intention of 
making medicine his profession, but he soon turned to the study 
of chemistry, and in 1845 and 1846 acted as assistant to Rafaelle 
Piria (1815-1865), known for his work on salicin, who was then 
professor of chemistry at Pisa and subsequently occupied the 
same position at Turin. During the Sicilian revolution he served 
as an artillery officer at Messina and was also chosen deputy for 
Franca villa in the Sicilian parliament; and after the fall of 
Messina in September 1848 he was stationed at Taormina. 
On the collapse of the insurgents he escaped to Marseilles, in 
May 1849, and after visiting various French towns reached 
Paris in October. There he gained an introduction to M. E. 
Chevreul's laboratory, and in conjunction with F. S. Cloez 
(1817-1883) made his first contribution to chemical research 
in 1 8 5 1 , when they prepared cyanamide by the action of ammonia 
on cyanogen chloride in ethereal solution. In the same year 
he was appointed professor of physical chemistry at the National 
College of Alexandria, where he discovered that aromatic 
aldehydes are decomposed by alcoholic potash into a mixture 
of the corresponding acid and alcohol, e.g. benzaldehyde into 
benzoic acid and benzyl alcohol (" Cannizzaro's reaction "). 
In the autumn of 1855 he became professor of chemistry at 
Geneva university, and six years later, after declining professor- 



ships at Pisa and Naples, accepted the chair of inorganic and 
organic chemistry at Palermo. There he spent ten years, studying 
the aromatic compounds and continuing to work on the amines, 
until in 1871 he was appointed to the chair of chemistry at 
Rome university. Apart from his work on organic chemistry, 
which includes also an investigation of santonin, he rendered 
great service to the philosophy of chemistry when in his memoir 
Sunto di un corso di Filosofia chemica (1858) he insisted on the 
distinction, till then imperfectly realized, between molecular 
and atomic weights, and showed how the atomic weights of 
elements contained in volatile compounds can be deduced from 
the molecular weights of those compounds, and how the atomic 
weights of elements of whose compounds the vapour densities 
are unknown can be ascertained from a knowledge of their 
specific heats. For this achievement, of fundamental importance 
for the atomic theory in chemistry, he was awarded the Copley 
medal by the Royal Society in 1891. Cannizzaro's scientific 
eminence in 187 1 secured him admission to the Italian senate, 
of which he was vice-president, and as a member of the Council 
of Public Instruction and in other ways he rendered important 
services to the cause of scientific education in Italy. 

CANNOCK, a market town in the western parliamentary 
division of Staffordshire, England, in the district known as 
Cannock Chase, 130 m. N.W. from London by the London and 
North Western railway. Pop. of urban district (1891) 20,613; 
(1901) 23,974. The church of St Luke is Perpendicular, enlarged 
in modern times. The famous political preacher, Henry Sach- 
everell, held the living early in the 18th century. Cannock has 
tool, boiler, brick and tile works. Cannock Chase, a tract 
generally exceeding 500 ft. in elevation, extends on an axis 
from north-west to south-east over some 36,000 acres. It was 
a royal preserve, and remains for the most part an uncultivated 
waste, but it is also a rich coalfield, and there are mines in every- 
direction. Brownhills, Burntwood and Chase Town, Great 
Wyrley, Hednesford, Hammerwich, and Pelsall are townships 
or villages of the mining population. 

CANNON (a word common to Romance languages, from the 
Lat. canna, a reed, tube, with the addition of the augmentative 
termination -on, -one), a gun or piece of ordnance. The word, 
first found about 1400 (there is an indenture of Henry IV. 1407 
referring to " canones, seu instrumenta Anglice gunnes vocata"), 
is commonly applied to any form of firearm which is fired from 
a carriage or fixed mounting, in contradistinction to "small- 
arms," which are fired without a rest or support of any kind. 1 
An exception must be made, however, in the case of machine 
guns (q.v.), and the word as used in modern times may be defined 
as follows: "a piece of ordnance mounted upon a fixed or 
movable carriage and firing a projectile of greater calibre than 
i| in." In French, however, canon is the term applied to the 
barrel of small arms, and also, as an alternative to mitrailleuse 
or mitrailleur, to machine guns, as well as to ordnance properly 
so-called. The Hotchkiss machine gun used in several navies is 
officially called " revolving cannon." For details see Artillery, 
Ordnance, Machine Guns, &c. Amongst the many derived 
senses of the word may be mentioned " cannon curls," in which 
the hair is arranged in horizontal tubular curls one above the 
other. For "cannon" in billiards see Billiards. 

In the 16th and 17th centuries the "cannon" in England 
was distinctively a large piece, smaller natures of ordnance 
being called by various special names such as culverin, saker, 
falcon, demi-cannon, &c. We hear of Cromwell taking with 
him to Ireland (1649) " two cannon of eight inches, two cannon 
of seven, two demi-cannon, two twenty-four pounders," &c. 

Sir James Turner, a distinguished professional soldier con- 
temporary with Cromwell, says: " The cannon or battering 
ordnance is divided by the English into Cannon Royal, Whole 
Cannon and Demi-Cannon. The first is likewise called the 
Double Cannon, she weighs 8000 pound of metal and shoots a 
bullet of 60, 62 or 63 pound weight. The Whole Cannon weighs 
7000 pound of metal and shoots a bullet of 38, 39 or 40 pound. 

1 The original small arms, however, are often referred to as hand 
cannon. 



CANNON-BALL TREE— CANOE 



189 



The Demi-Cannon weighs about 6000 pound and shoots a bullet 
of 28 or 30 pound. . . . These three several guns are called 
cannons of eight, cannons of seven and cannons of six." The 
generic sense of " cannon, " in which the word is now exclusively 
used, is found along with the special sense above mentioned 
as early as 1474. A warrant of that year issued by Edward IV. 
of England to Richard Copcote orders him to provide "bumbardos, 
canones, culverynes . . . et alios canones quoscumque, ac pulveres, 
sulfer . . . pro eisdem canonibus necessarias." " Artillery " and 
" ordnance," however, were the more usual terms up to the time 
of Louis XIV. (c. 1670), about which time heavy ordnance 
began to be classified according to the weight of its shot, and the 
special sense of " cannon " disappears. 

CANNON-BALL TREE (Couroupita guianensis), a native of 
tropical South America (French Guiana), which bears large 
spherical woody fruits, containing numerous seeds, as in the 
allied genus Bertholletia (Brazil nut). 

CANNSTATT, or Kannstatt, a town of Germany in the 
kingdom of Wiirttemberg, pleasantly situated in a fertile valley 
on both banks of the Neckar, 25 m. from Stuttgart, with which 
it has been incorporated since 1904. Pop. (1905) 26,497. It is 
a railway centre, has two Evangelical and a Roman Catholic 
church, two bridges across the Neckar, handsome streets in the 
modern quarter of the town and fine promenades and gardens. 
There is a good deal of business in the town. Railway plant, 
•automobiles and machinery are manufactured; spinning and 
weaving are carried on; and there are chemical works and a 
brewery here. Fruit and vines are largely cultivated in the 
neighbourhood. A large population is temporarily attracted 
to Cannstatt by the fame of its mineral springs, which are valu- 
able for diseases of the throat and weaknesses of the nervous 
system. These springs were known to the Romans. Besides 
the usual bathing establishments there are several medical 
institutions for the treatment of disease. Near the town are the 
palaces of Rosenstein and Wilhelma; the latter, built (1842- 
1851) for King William of Wiirttemberg in the Moorish style, is 
surrounded by beautiful gardens. In the neighbourhood also 
are immense caves in the limestone where numerous bones of 
mammoths and other extinct animals have been found. On the 
Rotenberg, where formerly stood the ancestral castle of the 
house of Wiirttemberg, is the mausoleum of King William and his 
wife. 

Cannstatt (Condistat) is mentioned early in the 8th century as 
the place where a great court was held by Charlemagne for the 
trial of the rebellious dukes of the Alamanni and the Bavarians. 
From the emperor Louis the Bavarian it received the same rights 
and privileges as were enjoyed by the town of Esslingen, and 
until the middle of the 14th century it was the capital of the 
county of Wiirttemberg. Cannstatt was the scene of a victory 
gained by the French over the Austrians on the 21st of July 
1796. 

See Veiel, Der Kurort Kannstatt und seine Mineralquellen (Cann- 
statt, 1875). 

CANO, ALONZO (1601-1667), Spanish painter, architect and 
sculptor, was born at Granada. He has left in Spain a very 
great number of specimens of his genius, which display the 
boldness of his design, the facility of his pencil, the purity of his 
flesh-tints and his knowledge of chiaroscuro. He learned archi- 
tecture from his father, Miguel Cano, painting from Pacheco 
and sculpture from Juan Martinez Montafies. As a statuary, 
his most famous works are the Madonna and Child in the church 
of Nebrissa, and the colossal figures of San Pedro and San Pablo. 
As an architect he indulged in too profuse ornamentation, and 
gave way too much to the fancies of his day. Philip IV. made 
him royal architect and king's painter, and gave him the church 
preferment of a canon. His more important pictures are at 
Madrid. He was notorious for his ungovernable temper; and 
it is said that once he risked his life by committing the then 
capital offence of dashing to pieces the statue of a saint, when in 
a rage with the purchaser who grudged the price he demanded. 
His known passionateness also (according to another stbry) 
caused him to be suspected, and even tortured, for the murder of 



his wife, though all other circumstances pointed to his servant 
as the culprit. 

CANO, MELCHIOR (1325-1560), Spanish theologian, born at 
Tarancon, in New Castile, joined the Dominican order at an 
early age at Salamanca, where in 1546 he succeeded to the 
theological chair in that university. A man of deep learning 
and originality, proud and a victim to the odium theologicum, 
he could brook no rivalry. The only one who at that time could 
compare with him was the gentle Bartolomeo de Caranza, also a 
Dominican and afterwards archbishop of Toledo. At the uni- 
versity the schools were divided between the partisans of the 
two professors; but Cano pursued his rival with relentless 
virulence, and took part in the condemnation for heresy of his 
brother-friar. The new society of the Jesuits, as being the fore- 
runners of Antichrist, also met with his violent opposition; and 
he was not grateful to them when, after attending the council 
of Trent in 1545, he was sent, by their influence, in 1552, as 
bishop of the far-off see of the Canaries. His personal influence 
with Philip II. soon procured his recall, and he was made pro- 
vincial of his order in Castile. In 1556 he wrote his famous 
Consultatio theologica, in which he advised the king to resist the 
temporal encroachments of the papacy and, as absolute monarch, 
to defend his rights by bringing about a radical change in the 
administration of ecclesiastical revenues, thus making Spain 
less dependent on Rome. With this in his mind Paul IV. styled 
him " a son of perdition." The reputation of Cano, however, 
rests on a posthumous work, De Locis theologicis (Salamanca, 
1562), which stands to-day. unrivalled in its own line. In this, a 
genuine work of the Renaissance, Cano endeavours to free 
dogmatic theology from the vain subtleties of the schools and, 
by clearing away the puerilities of the later scholastic theologians, 
to bring religion back to first principles; and, by giving rules, 
method, co-ordination and system, to build up a scientific 
treatment of theology. He died at Toledo on the 30th of 
September 1560. (E. Tn.) 

CANOE (from Carib. candoa, the West Indian name found in 
use by Columbus; the Fr. canot, boat, and Ger. Kahn, are 
derived from the Lat. carina, reed, vessel), a sort of general term 
for a boat sharp at both ends, originally designed for propulsion 
by one or more paddles (not oars) held without a fixed fulcrum, 
the paddler facing the bow. As the historical native name for 
certain types of boat used by savages, it is applied in such cases 
to those which, like other boats, are open within from end to end, 
and the modern " Canadian canoe " preserves this sense; but 
a more specific usage of the name is for such craft as differ 
essentially from open boats by being covered in with a deck, 
except for a " well " where the paddler sits. Modern develop- 
ments are the cruising canoe, combining the use of paddle and 
sails, and the racing canoe, equipped with sails only. 

The primitive canoes were light frames of wood over which 
skins (as in the Eskimo canoe) or the bark of trees (as in the 
North Americanlndians' birch-bark canoe) were tightly stretched. 
The modern painted canvas canoe, built on Indian lines, was 
a natural development of this idea. The Indian also used, and 
the African still uses, the " dug-out," made from a tree hollowed 
by fire after the manner of Robinson Crusoe. Many of these are 
of considerable size and carrying capacity; one in the New York 
Natural History Museum from Queen Charlotte's Island is 63 ft. 
long, 8 ft. 3 in. wide, and 5 ft. deep, cut from a single log. The 
" war canoe " of paddling races is its modern successor. In the 
islands of the Pacific primitive canoes are wonderfully handled by 
the natives, who make long sea voyages in them, often stiffening 
them by attaching another hull (see Catamaran) . 

In the earlier part of the 19th century, what was known as a 
" canoe " in England was the short covered-in craft, with a 
" well- " for the paddler to sit in, which was popularly used for 
short river practice; and this type still survives. But the sport 
of canoeing in any real sense dates from 1865, when JohnMac- 
Gregor (q.v.) designed the canoe "Rob Roy " for long journeys 
by water, using both double-bladed paddle and sails, yet light 
enough (about 70 ft) to be carried over land. The general type 
of this canoe is built of oak with a cedar deck ; the length is from 



90 



GANON 



12 ft. to 15 ft., the beam from 26 in. to 30 in., the depth 10 in. 
to 16 in. The paddle is 7 ft. long and 6 in. wide in the blade, 
the canoeist sits low in a cockpit, and in paddling dips the blades 
first on one side and then the other. The rig is generally yawl. 

In 1866 the Royal Canoe Club was formed in England, and the 
prince of Wales (afterwards Edward VII.) became commodore. 
Its headquarters are at Kingston-on-Thames and it is still the 
leading organization. There is also the British Canoe Association, 
devoted to cruising. After the English canoes were seen in Paris 
at the Exhibition of 1867, others like them were built in France. 
Branches and clubs were formed also at the English universities, 
and in Liverpool, Hull, Edinburgh and Glasgow. The New York 
Canoe Club was founded in 187 1. One member of the Royal 
Canoe Club crossed the English Channel in his canoe, another the 
Irish Channel from Scotland to Ireland, and many rivers were 
explored in inaccessible parts, like the Jordan, the Kishon, and 
the Abana and the Pharpar at Damascus, as well as the Lake 
Menzaleh in the Delta of the Nile, and the Lake of Galilee and 
Waters of Merom'in Syria. 

W. Baden Powell modified the type of the " Rob Roy " in the 
" Nautilus," intended only for sailing. From this time the two 
kinds of pleasure canoe — paddling and sailing — parted company, 
and developed each on its own lines; the sailing canoe soon 
(1882) had a deck seat and tiller, a smaller and smaller cockpit, 
and a larger and larger sail area, with the consequent necessary 
air and water-tight bulkheads in the hull. Paul Butler of Lowell, 
Mass., added (1886) the sliding outrigger seat, allowing the 
canoeist to slide out to windward. The final stage is the racing 
machine pure and simple, seen in the exciting contests at the 
annual August meets of the American Canoe Association on the 
St Lawrence river, or at the more frequent race days of its 
constituent divisions, associated as Canadian (47 clubs), Atlantic 
(32 clubs), Central (26 clubs) and Western. 

The paddling canoe, propelled by single-bladed paddles, is also 
represented in single, tandem and crew (" war canoe ") races, 
and this form of the sport remains more of the amateur type. 
The " Canadian," a clinker or carvel built mahogany or cedar or 
bass-wood canoe, or the painted canvas, bark or compressed 
paper canoe, all on the general lines of the Indian birch bark, are 
as common on American rivers as the punt is on the Thames, and 
are similarly used. 

See MacGregor, A Thousand Miles in the Rob Roy Canoe (1866), 
The Rob Roy on the Baltic, &c. ; W. Baden Powell, Canoe Travelling 
(187 1) ; W. L. Alden, Canoe and the Flying Proa (New York, 1878) ; 
J. D. Hayward, Camping out with the British Canoe Association; 
C. B. Vaux, Canoe Handling (New York, 1888) ; Stephens, Canoe 
and Boat Building (New York, 1881). 

CANON. The Greek word navthv means originally a straight 
rod or pole, and metaphorically what serves to keep a thing 
upright or straight, a rule. In the New Testament it occurs in 
Gal. vi. 16, and 2 Cor. x. 13, 15, 16, signifying in the former 
passage a measure, in the latter what is measured, a district. 
The general applications of the word fall mainly into two groups, 
in one of which the underlying meaning is that of rule, in the other 
that of a list or catalogue, i.e. of books containing the rule. Of 
the first, such uses as that of a standard or rule of conduct or 
taste, or of a particular form of musical composition (see below) 
may be mentioned, but the principal example is of the sum of the 
laws regulating the ecclesiastical body (see Canon Law) . In the 
second group of uses that of the ecclesiastical dignitary (see below) , 
that of the list of the names of those persons recognized as saints 
by the Church (see Canonization) , and that of the authoritative 
body of Scriptures (see below) are examples. 

Music. — A canon in part-music is the form taken by the 
earliest compositions in harmony, successive or consequent parts 
having the same melody, but each beginning at a stated period 
after its precursor or antecedent. In many early polyphonic 
compositions, one or more voices were imitated note for note by 
the others, so that the other parts did not need to be written out 
at all, but were deduced from the leaders by a rule or canon. Sir 
Frederick Bridge has pointed out that in this way the term 
" canon " came to supersede the old name of the art-form, Fuga 
ligata. (See also under Fugue, Contrapuntal Forms and I 



Music.) When the first part completes its rhythmical sentence 
before the second enters, and then continues the melody as an 
accompaniment to the second, and so on for the third or fourth, 
this form of canon in England was styled a " round " or " catch " ; 
the stricter canon being one in which the succession of parts did 
not depend on the ending of the phrase. But outside England 
catches and canons were undifferentiated. The " round " 
derived its name from the fact that the first part returned to the 
beginning while the others continued the melody; the " catch " 
meant that each later part caught up the tune. The problem of 
the canon, as an artistic composition, is to find one or more points ' 
in a melody at which one or more successive parts may start the 
same tune harmoniously. Catches were familiar in English folk 
music until after the Restoration; different trades having 
characteristic melodies of their own. In the time of Charles II. 
they took a bacchanalian cast, and later became sentimental. 
Gradually the form went out as a type of folk music, and now 
survives mainly in its historical interest. (H. Ch.) 

The Church Dignitary. — A canon is a person who possesses a 
prebend, or revenue allotted for the performance of divine service 
in a cathedral or collegiate church. Though the institute of canons 
as it at present exists does not go back beyond the nth century it 
has a long history behind it. The name is derived from the list 
(matricula) of the clergy belonging to a church, Kavdov being thus 
used in the council of Nicaea (c. 16). In the synod of Laodicea 
the adjective kclvovlkos is found in this sense (c. 15); and 
during the 6th century the word canonicus occurs commonly in 
western Europe in relation to the clergy belonging to a cathedral 
or other church. Eusebius of Vercelli (d. 370) was the first to 
introduce the system whereby the cathedral clergy dwelt together, 
leading a semi-monastic life in common and according to rule; 
and St Augustine established a similar manner of life for the 
clergy of his cathedral at Hippo. The system spread widely over 
Africa, Spain and Gaul; a familiar instance is St Gregory's 
injunction to St Augustine that at Canterbury the bishop and his 
clergy should live a common life together, similar to the monastic 
life in which he had been trained; that these " clerics " at 
Canterbury were not monks is shown by the fact that those of 
them in the lower clerical grades were free to marry and live at 
home, without forfeiting their position or emoluments as members 
of the body of cathedral clergy (Bede, Hist. Eccl. i. 27). This 
mode of life for the secular clergj , which became common in the 
west, seems never to have taken root in the east. It came to be 
called vita canonica, canonical life, and it was the object of various 
enactments of councils during the 6th, 7th and 8th centuries. 
The first serious attempt to legislate for it and reduce it to rule 
was made by Chrodegang, bishop of Metz (c. 750) , who composed 
a rule for the clergy of his cathedral, which was in large measure 
an adaptation of the Benedictine Rule to the case of secular 
clergy living in common. Chrodegang's Rule was adopted in 
many churches, both cathedral and collegiate (i.e. those served 
by a body of clergy). In 816 the synod of Aix-la-Chapelle (see 
Mon. Germ. Concil. ii. 307) made further regulations for the 
canonical life, which became the law in the Frankish empire for 
cathedral and collegiate churches. The Rule of Chrodegang was 
taken as the basis, but was supplemented and in some points 
mitigated and made less monastic in character. There was a 
common dormitory and common refectory for all, but each canon 
Was allowed a dwelling room within the cloister; the use of flesh 
meat was permitted, and the clothing was of better quality than 
that of monks. Each canon retained the use of his private 
property and money, but the revenues of the cathedral or church 
were treated as a common fund for the maintenance of the whole 
establishment. The chief duty of the canons was the performance 
of the church services. Thus the canons were not monks, but 
secular clergy living in community, without taking the monastic 
vows or resigning their private means — a form of life somewhat 
resembling that of the fathers of the London or Birmingham 
Oratory in our day. The bishop was expected to lead the 
common life along with his clergy. 

The canonical life as regulated by the synod of Aix, subsisted 
in the 9th and 10th centuries; but the maintenance of this 



CANON 



191 



intermediate form of life was of extreme difficulty. . There was a 
constant tendency to relax the bonds of the common life, and 
attempts in various directions to restore it. In England, by the 
middle of the 10th century, the prescriptions of the canonical 
life seem to have fallen into desuetude, and in nine cathedrals 
the canons were replaced by communities of Benedictines. In 
the nth century the Rule of Chrodegang was introduced into 
certain of the English cathedrals, and an Anglo-Saxon transla- 
tion of it was made under Leofric for his church of Exeter. The 
turning point came in 1059, when a reforming synod, held at the 
Lateran, exhorted the clergy of all cathedral and collegiate 
churches to live in community, to hold all property and money in 
common, and to " lead the life of the Apostles " (cf . Acts ii.44, 
45). The clergy of numerous churches throughout Western 
Europe (that of the Lateran Basilica among them) set themselves 
to carry out these exhortations, and out of this movement grew 
the religious order of Canons Regular or Augustinian Canons 
(q.v.). The opposite tendency also ran its course and produced 
the institute of secular canons. The revenues of the cathedral 
were divided into two parts, that of the bishop and that of the 
clergy; this latter was again divided among the clergy them- 
selves, so that each member received his own separate income, 
and the persons so sharing, whatever their clerical grade, were 
the canons of the cathedral church. Naturally all attempt at 
leading any kind of common life was frankly abandoned. In 
England the final establishment of this order of things was due to 
St Osmund (1090). The nature and functions of the institute of 
secular canons are described in the article Cathedral. 

See Du Cange, Glossarium, under " Canonicus " ; Amort, Vetus 
Disciplina Canonicorum (1747), to be used with caution for the 
earlier period; C. du Molinet, Reflexions historiques et curieuses sur 
les antiquites des chanoines iant seculiers que reguliers (1674) ; Herzog, 
Realencyklopddie (3rd ed.), art. " Kapitel " ; Wetzer und Welte, 
Kirchenlexicon (2nd ed.), art. " Canonica vita " and " Canonikat." 
The history of the canonical institute is succinctly told, and the best 
literature named, by Max Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen, 
1896, i. § 55; also by Otto Zockler, Askese und Mbnchtum, 1897, 
pp. 422-425. On medieval secular canons a standard work is Chr. 
Wordsworth's Statutes of Lincoln Cathedral (1892-1897); see also an 
article thereon by Edm. Bishop in Dublin Review, July 1898. 

(E. C B.) 

In the Church of England, the canons of cathedral or collegiate 
churches retain their traditional character and functions, 
though they are now, of course, permitted to marry. Their 
duties were defined by the Canons of 1603, and included that of 
residence at the cathedrals according to "their local customs and 
statutes," and preaching in the cathedral and in the churches of 
the diocese, " especially those whence they or their church 
receive any yearly rent or profit." A canonry not being legally a 
" cure of souls," a canon may hold a benefice in addition to his 
prebend, in spite of the acts against pluralities. By the Canons 
of 1603 he was subject to discipline if he made his canonry an 
excuse for neglecting his cure. By the act of 1840 reforming 
cathedral chapters the number of canonries was greatly reduced, 
wbjje some were made applicable to the endowment of arch- 
deaconries and professorships. At the same time it was enacted 
that a canon must have been six years in priest's orders, except in 
the case of canonries annexed to any professorship, headship or 
other office in any university. The obligatory period of residence, 
hitherto varying in different churches, was also fixed at a uniform 
period of three months. The right of presentation to canonries 
is now vested in some cases in the crown, in others in the lord 
chancellor, the archbishop or in the bishop of the diocese. 

Honorary canons are properly canons who have no prebend or 
other emoluments from the common fund of the chapter. In the 
case of old cathedrals the title is bestowed upon deserving 
clergymen by the bishop as a mark of distinction. In new 
cathedrals, e.g. Manchester or Birmingham, where no endowment 
exists for a chapter, the bishop is empowered to appoint honorary 
canons, who carry out the ordinary functions of a cathedral 
body (see Cathedral). 

Minor canons, more properly styled priest-vicars, are ap- 
pointed by the dean and chapter. Their function is mainly to 
sing the service, and they are selected therefore mainly for their 



voices and musical qualifications. They may hold a benefice, if 
it lies within 6 m. of the cathedral. 

In the Protestant churches of the continent canons as ecclesi- 
astical officers have ceased to exist. In Prussia and Saxony, 
however, certain chapters, secularized at the Reformation, 
still exist. The canons (Domherren) are, however, laymen with 
no ecclesiastical character whatever, and their rich prebends are 
merely sources of endowment for the cadets of noble families. 

See Phillimore, Eccles. Law, 2 vols. (London, 1895). (W. A. P.) 

The Scriptures. — There are three opinions as to the origin of 
the application of the term " canon " to the writings used by the 
Christian Church. According to Semler, Baur and others, the word 
had originally the sense of list or catalogue — the books publicly 
read in Christian assemblies. Others, as Steiner, suppose that 
since the Alexandrian grammarians applied it to collections of 
old Greek authors as models of excellence or classics, it meant 
classical (canonical) writings. According to a third opinion, the 
term included from the first the idea of a regulating principle. 
This is the more probable, because the same idea lies in the New 
Testament use of the noun, and pervades its applications in the 
language of the early Fathers down to the time of Constantine, 
as Credner has shown. 1 The " navwv of the church " in the 
Clementine homilies, 2 the " ecclesiastical ko.v6>v" 3 and the " icavoiv 
of the truth " in Clement and Irenaeus, 4 the kolvwv of the faith in 
Polycrates, 6 the regula fidei of Tertullian, 6 and the libri regulates 
of Origen 7 imply a normative principle. Credner's view of Kavwv 
as an abbreviation of ypa<pai Kavbvos, equivalent to Scripturae 
legis in Diocletian's Act, 8 is too artificial, and is unsanctioned 
by usage. 

The earliest example of its application to a catalogue of the 
Old or New Testament books occurs in the Latin translation of 
Origen's homily on Joshua, where the original seems to have 
been Kavwv. The word itself is certainly in Amphilochius, 9 as 
well as in Jerome 10 and Rufinus. 11 As the Latin translation of 
Origen has canonicus and canonizatus, we infer that he used 
KavoviKos, opposed as it is to apocryphus or secrelus. The first 
occurrence of ko.vovi.k6s is in the 50th canon of the council of 
Laodicea, where it is contrasted with iSicotikos and aKavovurros. 
KavouL^bfxeva,"canonized books," is first used in Athanasius's festal 
epistle. 12 The kind of rule which the earliest Fathers thought the 
Scriptures to be can only be conjectured; it is certain that they 
believed the Old Testament books to be a divine and infallible 
guide. But the New Testament was not so considered till 
towards the close of the 2nd century, when the conception of a 
Catholic Church was realized. The collection of writings was not 
called Scripture, or put on a par with the Old Testament as sacred 
and inspired, till the time of Theophilus of Antioch (about 180 
a.d.). Hence Irenaeus applies the epithets divine and perfect to 
the Scriptures; and Clement of Alexandria calls them inspired. 

When distinctions were made among the Biblical writings other 
words were employed, synonymous with Kavovi^oneva, or mko.- 
ww/j6to, such as kvSiadrjKa, wpuxfiiva. The canon was thus 
a catalogue of writings, forming a rule of truth, sacred, divine, 
revealed by God for the instruction of men. The rule was 
perfect for its purpose. (See Bible: section Canon.) 

The term " canonical," i.e. that which is approved or ordered 
by the " canon " or rule, is applied to ecclesiastical vest- 
ments, " canonicals," and to those hours set apart by the 
Church for prayer and devotion, the " Canonical Hours " (see 
Breviary). (S. D.) 

1 Zur Gesckichte des Kanons, pp. 3-68. 

2 Clement Horn., ap. Coteler. vol. i. p. 608. 

3 Stromata, vi. 15, p. 803, ed. Potter. 

4 Adv. Haeres. i. 95. 5 Euseb. H.E. v. 24. 

6 De praescript. Haereticorum, chs. 12, 13. 

7 Comment, in Mat. iii. p. 916, ed. Delarue. 

8 Monumenta Vetera ad Donatistarum historiam pertinentia, ed. 
Dupin, p. 168. 

9 At the end of the Iambi ad Seleucum, on the books of the New 
Testament, he adds, outos a^evikararos kolv&iv av etq tu>v BeowvevaTav 
■ypa<t>S>v. 10 Prologus galeatus in ii. Reg. 

11 Expos, in Symb. Apost. 37, p. 374, ed. Migne. 

12 After the word is added kcu 7rapa8oflei'Ta, TnoTevOivra ri Oeia tivai. 
Opp. vol. i. p. 961, ed. Benedict. 



192 



CANONESS— CANONIZATION 



CANONESS (Fr. chanoinesse, Get. Kanonissin, Lat. canonica 
or canonica virgo), a female beneficiary of a religious college. In 
the 8th century chapters of canons were instituted in the Frankish 
empire, and in imitation of these certain women took common 
vows of obedience and chastity, though not of poverty. Like 
nuns they had common table and dormitory, and recited the 
breviary, but generally the rule was not so strict as in the case of 
nuns. The canonesses often taught girls, and were also employed 
in embroidering ecclesiastical vestments and transcribing 
liturgical books. A distinction was drawn between regular and 
secular canonesses, the latter being of noble family and not 
practising any austerity. Some of their abbesses were notable 
feudal princesses. In Germany several foundations of this 
kind (e.g. Gandersheim, Herford and Quedlinburg), which were 
practically secular institutions before the Reformation, adopted 
the Protestant faith, and still exist, requiring of their members 
the simple conditions of celibacy and obedience to their superior 
during membership. These institutions (Stifter) are now practi- 
cally almshouses for the unmarried daughters of noble families. 
In some cases the right of presentation belongs to the head of the 
family, sometimes admission is gained by purchase; but in 
modern times a certain number of prebends have been created for 
the daughters of deserving officials. The organization of the Stift 
is collegiate, the head bearing the ancient titles of abbess, prioress 
rr provostess (Prbbstin), and the canonesses (Siiftsdamen) meet 
periodically in Konvent for the discussion of the affairs of the 
community. The ladies are not bound to residence. In many of 
these Stifter quaint pre-Reformation customs and ceremonies 
still survive; thus, at the convent of St John the Baptist at 
Schleswig, on the day of the patron saint, the room in which the 
Konvent is held is draped in black and a realistic life-size wax 
head of St John on a charger is placed in the centre of the table 
round which the canonesses sit. 

CANONIZATION, in its widest sense, an act by which in the 
Christian Church the ecclesiastical authority grants to a deceased 
believer the honour of public cidtus. In the early Church there 
was no formal canonization. The cultus applied at first to local 
martyrs, and it was only in exceptional circumstances that a 
kind of judiciary inquiry and express decision became necessary 
to legitimate this cultus. The peculiar situation of the Church of 
Africa explains the Vindicatio martyrum, which was early 
practised there (Optatus Milevit. , i. 1 6) . In the cultus rendered to 
confessors, the authorization of the Church had long been merely 
implicit. But when an express decision was given, it was the 
bishop who gave it. Gradually the canonization of saints came 
to be included in the centralizing movement which reserved to the 
pope the most important acts of ecclesiastical power. The earliest 
acknowledged instance of canonization by the pope is that of 
Ulric of Augsburg, who was declared a saint by John XV. in a.d. 
993. From that time the pontifical intervention became more 
and more frequent, and, in practice, the right of the bishops in 
the matter of canonization continued to grow more restricted. 
In 1 1 70 the new right was sufficiently established for Pope 
Alexander III. to affirm that the bishops could not institute the 
cultus of a new saint without the authority of the Roman Church 
(Cap. Audivimus, Decret. De Rett, etvenerat. Sanctorum, iii. 115). 
The 12th and, especially, the 13th centuries furnish many 
examples of canonizations pronounced by the popes, and the 
procedure of this period is well ascertained. It was much more 
summary than that practised in modern times. The evidence of 
those who had known the holy personages was collected on the 
spot. The inquiry was as rapid as the judgment, and both often 
took place a short time after the death of the saint, as in the cases 
of St Thomas of Canterbury (died 1 1 70, canonized 1 1 73) , St Peter 
of Castelnau (died on the 15th of January 1208, canonized on the 
1 2th of March of the same year), St Francis of Assisi (died on the 
4th of October 1226, canonized on the 19th of July 1228), and St 
Anthony of Padua (died on the 13th of June 1231, canonized on 
the 3rd of June 1232). 

At this period there was no marked difference between canon- 
ization and beatification. In modern practice, as definitively 
settled by the decrees of Pope Urban VIII. (1625 and 1634), the 



two acts are. totally distinct. Canonization is the solemn and 
definitive act by which the pope decrees the plenitude of public 
honours. Beatification consists in permitting a cultus, the 
manifestations of which are restricted, and is merely a step 
towards canonization. 

The procedure at present followed at the Roman curia is either 
exceptional or common. The approval of immemorial cultus comes 
within the category of exceptional procedure. Urban VIII., 
while forbidding the rendering of a public cultus without author- 
ization from the Holy See, made an exception in favour of the 
blessed who were at that time (1625) in possession of an im- 
memorial cultus, i.e. dating back at least a century (1525). The 
procedure per viam casus excepti consists in the legitimation of a 
cultus which has been rendered to a saint for a very long time. 
The causes of the martyrs (declarations martyrii) also are 
exceptional. Juridical proof is required of the fact of the martyr- 
dom and of its cause, i.e. it must be established that the servant 
of God was put to death through hatred of the faith. These are 
the two cases which constitute exceptional procedure. 

The common procedure is that in which the cause is prosecuted 
per viam non cultus. It is, in reality, a suit at law, pleaded before 
the tribunal of the Congregation of Rites, which is a permanent 
commission of cardinals, assisted by a certain number of sub- 
ordinate officers and presided over by a cardinal. The supreme 
judge in the matter is the pope himself. The postulator, who is 
the mandatory of a diocese or ecclesiastical commonalty, is the 
solicitor. He must furnish the proofs, which are collected 
according to very stringent rules. The promoter of the faith, 
popularly called the " devil's advocate " (advocatus diaboli), is 
the' defendant, whose official duty is to point out to the tribunal 
the weak points of the case. 

The procedure is loaded with many formalities, of which the 
historical explanation lies in the tribunals of the ancient system, 
and which considerably delay the progress of the causes. The 
first decisive step is the introduction of the cause. If, by the advice 
of the cardinals who have examined the documents, the pope 
pronounce his approval, the servant of God receives the title of 
" Venerable," but is not entitled to any manifestation of cultus. 
Only in the event of the claimant passing this test successfully 
can the essential part of the procedure be begun, which will result 
in conferring on the Venerable the title of " Blessed." This part 
consists in three distinct proceedings: (1) to establish a reputation 
for sanctity, (2) to establish the heroic quality of the virtues, (3) 
to prove the working of miracles. A favourable judgment on all 
three of these tests is called the decree de tuto, by which the pope 
decides that they may safely proceed to the solemn beatification 
of the servant of God {Tuto procedi potest ad solemnem V. S.D.N, 
beatificationem) . In the ceremony of beatification the essential 
part consists in the reading of the pontifical brief, placing the 
Venerable in the rank of the Blessed, which is done during a 
solemn mass, celebrated with special rites in the great hall 
above the vestibule of the basilica of St Peter. 

The process of canonization, which follows that of beatification, 
is usually less lengthy. It consists principally jn the discussion of 
the miracles (usually two in number) obtained by the intercession 
of the Blessed since the decree of beatification. After a great 
number of formalities and prayers, the pope pronounces the 
sentence, and indicates eventually the day on which he will 
proceed to the ceremony of canonization, which takes place with 
great solemnity in the basilica of St Peter. 

The extremely complicated procedure which is prescribed for 
the conduct of the cases in order to ensure every opportunity for 
exercising rigour and discretion, considerably retards the progress 
of the causes, and necessitates a numerous staff. This circum- 
stance, together with the custom of ornamenting the basilica of 
St Peter very richly on the day of the ceremony, accounts for 
the considerable cost which a canonization entails. To prevent 
abuses, a minute tariff of expenses was drawn up during the 
pontificate of Leo XIII. 

The Greek Church, represented by the patriarch of Constanti- 
nople, and the Russian Church, represented by the Holy Synod, 
also canonize their saints after a preliminary examination of their 



CANON LAW 



i93 



titles to public cultus. Their procedure is less rigorous than 
that of the Roman Church, and as yet has been but imperfectly 
studied. 

See J. Fontanini, Codex Constitutionum quas sutnmi pontifices 
ediderunt in solemni canonizatione sanctorum (Rome, 1729, a collection 
of original documents); Pr. Lambertini (Pope Benedict XIV.). De. 
servorum Dei beatificatione et beatorum canonizatione (Bologna, 1734- 
: 738), several times reprinted, and more remarkable for erudition 
and knowledge of canon law than for historical criticism; Al. Lauri, 
Codex pro postulatoribus causarum beatificationis et canonizationis , 
recognovit Joseph Fornari (Romae, 1899) ; F. W. Faber, Essay on 
Beatification, Canonization, fife. (London, 1848); A. Boudinhon, 
Les Proces de beatification et de canonisation (Paris, 1905) ; E. Golu- 
binskii, Istorija Kanonizacii sviatichvrusskoj cerkvi (Moscow, 1903). 

(H. De.) 

CANON LAW. Canon law, jus canonicum, is the sum of the 
laws which regulate the ecclesiastical body; for this reason it is 
also called ecclesiastical law, jus ecclesiasticum. It is also re- 
ferred to under the name of canones, sacri canones, a title of 
great antiquity, for the Kavbves, regulae, were very early dis- 
tinguished from the secular laws, the vofioi, leges. 

The word Kavoiv, canon, has been employed in ecclesiastical 
literature in several different senses (see Canon above). The 
W 0nt disciplinary decisions of the council of Nicaea, for 

"canon." example (can. 1, 2, &c), employ it in the sense of an 
Different established rule, ecclesiastical in its origin and in its 
mean ngs. jjj ect g ut tfie expression is most frequently used to 
designate disciplinary laws, in which case canons are distinguished 
from dogmatic definitions. With regard to form, the decisions of 
councils, even when dogmatic, are called canons; thus the 
definitions of the council of Trent or of the Vatican, which 
generally begin with the words " Si quis dixerit," and end with 
the anathema, are canons; while the long chapters, even when 
dealing with matters of discipline, retain the name of chapters or 
decrees. Similarly, it has become customary to give the name of 
canons to the texts inserted in certain canonical compilations 
such as the Decretum of Gratian, while the name of chapters is 
given to the analogous quotations from the Books of the Decretals. 
It is merely a question of words and of usage. As to the ex- 
pression jus canonicum, it implies the systematic codification of 
ecclesiastical legislation, and had no existence previous to the 
labours which resulted in the Corpus juris canonici. 

Canon law is divided into public law and private law; the 
former is concerned with the constitution of the Church, and, 
Divisions conse q uen tly, with the relations between her and other 
bodies, religious and civil; the latter has as its object 
the internal discipline of the ecclesiastical body and its members. 
This division, which has been found convenient for the study of 
canon law, has no precedent in the collections of texts. With 
regard to the texts now in force, the name of jus antiquum, 
ancient law, has been given to the laws previous to the Corpus 
juris canonici; the legislation of this Corpus has been called 
jus novum, new law; and finally, the name of recent law, jus 
novissimum, has been given to the law established by the council 
of Trent and subsequent papal constitutions. There is a further 
distinction between the written law, jus scriptum, laws made by 
the councils or popes, which are to be found in the collections, 
and the unwritten law, jus non scriptum, a body of practical 
rules arising rather from natural equity and from custom than 
from formal laws; with this is connected the customary law. 
In the Church, as in other societies, it has happened that the 
unwritten customary law has undergone a gradual diminution 
in importance, as a consequence of centralization and the 
accumulation of written laws; nowadays it need not be reckoned 
with, save in cases where local customs are involved. The 
common law is that which is intended to regulate the whole 
body; special or local law is that which is concerned with 
certain districts or certain categories of persons, by derogation 
from or addition to the common law. 

By the sources or authors of the canon law are meant the 

authorities from which it is derived; they must obviously be of 

Sources. sucn a nature as t0 be binding upon the whole religious 

body, or at least upon a specified portion of it. In the 

highest rank must be placed Christ and the Apostles, whose 

v. 7 



dispositions for the constitution and government of the Church 
are contained in the New Testament, completed by tradition; 
for the Church did not accept the disciplinary and ritual pro- 
visions of the Old Testament as binding upon her (see Acts xi., 
xv.). To the apostles succeeded the episcopal body, with its 
chief the bishop of Rome, the successor of St. Peter, whose 
legislative and disciplinary power, by a process of centralization, 
underwent a slow but uninterrupted development. It is then to 
the episcopate, assembled in ecumenical council, and to its chief, 
that the function of legislating for the whole Church belongs; 
the inferior authorities, local councils or isolated bishops and 
prelates, can only make special laws or statutes, valid only for 
that part of the Church under their jurisdiction. Most of the 
canons, however, which constitute the ancient law, and notably 
those which appear in the Decretum of Gratian, emanate from 
local councils, or even from individual bishops; they have 
found a place in the common law because the collections of 
canons, of which they formed the most notable part, have been 
everywhere adopted. 

Having made these general observations, we must now consider 
the history of those texts and collections of canons which to-day 
form the ecclesiastical law of the Western Church: (1) up to the 
Decretum of Gratian, (2) up to the council of Trent, (3 and 4) up to 
the present day, including the codification ordered by Pius X. 

1. From the Beginning to the Decretum oj Gratian. — At no time, 
and least of all during the earliest centuries, was there any 
attempt to draw up a uniform system of legislation for the whole 
of the Christian Church. The various communities ruled them- 
selves principally according to their customs and traditions, 
which, however, possessed a certain uniformity resulting from 
their close connexion with natural and divine law. Strangely 
enough, those documents which bear the greatest resemblance to 
a small collection of canonical regulations, such as the Didache, 
the Didascalia and the Canons of Hippolytus, have not been 
retained, and find no place in the collections of canons, doubtless 
for the reason that they were not official documents. Even the 
Apostolical Constitutions (q.v.), an expansion of the Didache and 
the Didascalia, after exercising a certain amount of influence, 
were rejected by the council in Trullo (692). Thus the only 
pseudo-epigraphic document preserved in the law of the Greek 
Church is the small collection of the eighty-five so-called " Apos- 
tolic Canons " (q.v.). The compilers, in their several collections, 
gathered only occasional decisions, the outcome of no pre- 
determined plan, given by councils or by certain great bishops. 

These compilations began in the East. It appears that in 
several different districts canons made by the local assemblies 1 
were added to those of the council of Nicaea which 
were everywhere accepted and observed. The first collection. 
example seems to be that of the province of Pontus, 
where after the twenty canons of Nicaea were placed the twenty- 
five canons of the council of Ancyra (314), and the fifteen of that 
of Neocaesarea (3 1 5-3 20) . These texts were adopted at Antioch, 
where there were further added the twenty-five canons of the 
so-called council in encaeniis of that city (341). Soon after- 
wards, Paphlagonia contributed twenty canons passed at the 
council of Gangra (held, according to the Synodicon orientate, 
in 343), 2 and Phrygia fifty-nine canons of the assembly of 
Laodicea (345-381?), or rather of the compilation known as the 
work of this council. 3 The collection was so well and so widely 
known that all these canons were numbered in sequence, and 
thus at the council of Chalcedon (451) several of the canons of 
Antioch were read out under the number assigned to them in 
the collection of the whole. It was further increased by the 

1 The councils which we are about to mention, up to the 9th 
century, have been published several times, notably in the great 
collections of Hardouin, Mansi, &c. ; they will be found brought 
together in one small volume in Bruns, Canones apostolorum et 
conciliorum (Berlin, 1839). 

2 The date of this council was formerly unknown ; it is ascribed 
to 343 by the Syriac Nestorian collection recently published by 
M. Chabot, Synodicon Orientate, p. 278, note 4. 

3 See Boudinhon, " Note sur le concile de Laodicee," in the 
Compte rendu du premier congres des savants catholiques & Paris, 
1888 (Paris, 1889), vol. ii. p. 420. 



194 



CANON LAW 



twenty-eight (thirty) canons of Chalcedon; about the same 
time were added the four canons of the council of Constantinople 
of 381, under the name of which also appeared three (or seven) 
other canons of a later date. Towards the same date, also, the 
so-called " Apostolic Canons " were placed at the head of the 
group. Such was the condition of the Greek collection when 
it was translated and introduced into the West. 

In the course of the 6th century the collection was completed 
by the addition of documents already in existence, but which 
had hitherto remained isolated, notably the canonical letters of 
several great bishops, Dionysius of Alexandria, St Basil and 
others. It was at this time that the Latin collection of Dionysius 
Exiguus became known; and just as he had given the Greek 
councils a place in his collection, so from him were borrowed the 
canons of councils which did not appear in the Greek collection — 
the twenty canons of Sardica (343), in the Greek text, which 
differs considerably from the Latin ; and the council of Carthage 
of 419, which itself included, more or less completely, in 105 
canons, the decisions of the African councils. Soon after came 
the council in Trullo (692), also called the Quinisextum, because 
it was considered as complementary to the two councils (5th 
and 6th ecumenical) of Constantinople (553 and 680), which 
had not made any disciplinary canons. This assembly elabor- 
ated 102 canons, which did not become part of the Western law 
till much later, on the initiative of Pope John VIII. (872-881). 
Now, in the second of its canons, the council in Trullo recognized 
and sanctioned the Greek collection above men- 
torm* tioned; it enumerates all its articles, insists on the 
recognition of these canons, and at the same time pro- 
hibits the addition of others. As thus defined, the collection 
contains the following documents: firstly, the eighty-five 
Apostolic Canons, the Constitutions having been put aside 
as having suffered heretical alterations; secondly, the canons 
of the councils of Nicaea, Ancyra, Neocaesarea, Gangra, Antioch, 
Laodicea, Constantinople (381), Ephesus (the disciplinary 
canons of this council deal with the reception of the Nestorians, 
and were not communicated to the West), Chalcedon, Sardica, 
Carthage (that of 419, according to Dionysius), Constantinople 
(394) ; thirdly, the series of canonical letters of the following 
great bishops — Dionysius of Alexandria, Peter of Alexandria 
(the Martyr), Gregory Thaumaturgus, Athanasius, Basil, 
Gregory of Nyssa, Gregory of Nazianzus, Amphilochus of 
Iconium, Timotheus of Alexandria, Theophilus of Alexandria, 
Cyril of Alexandria, Gennadius of Constantinople; the canon 
of Cyprian of Carthage (the Martyr) is also mentioned, but with 
the note that it is only valid for Africa. With the addition of 
the twenty-two canons of the ecumenical council of Nicaea 
(787), this will give us the whole contents of the official collection 
of the Greek Church; since then it has remained unchanged. 
The law of the Greek Church was in reality rather the work of 
the Byzantine emperors. 1 

The collection has had several commentators; we need only 
mention the commentaries of Photius (883), Zonaras (n 20) 
and Balsamon (n 70). A collection in which the texts are 
simply reproduced in their chronological order is obviously 
inconvenient; towards 550, Johannes Scholasticus, patriarch 
of Constantinople, drew up a methodical classification of them 
under fifty heads. Finally should be mentioned yet another 
kind of compilation still in use in the Greek Church, bearing 
the name of nomocanon, because in them are inserted, 
side by side with the ecclesiastical canons, the imperial 
laws on each subject: the chief of them are the one 
bearing the name of Johannes Scholasticus, which belongs, 
however, to a later date, and that of Photius (883). 

The canon law of the other Eastern Churches had no marked 
influence on the collections of the Western Church, so we need 
not speak of it here. While, from the 5th century onwards a 
certain unification in the ecclesiastical law began to take place 

1 For the further history of the law of the Greek Church and that 
of the Eastern Churches, see Vering, Kirchenrecht, §§ T4-183 (ed. 
1893). The Russian Church, as we know, adopted the Greek ecclesi- 
astical law. 



Nomo- 
canon. 



Africa. 



within the sphere of the see of Constantinople, it was not till 
later that a similar result was arrived at in the West. For 
several centuries there is no mention of any but local 
collections of canons, and even these are not found till west. 

the 5th century; we have to come down to the 8th 
or even the 9th century before we find any trace of unification. 
This process was uniformly the result of the passing on of the 
various collections from one region to another. 

The most remarkable, and the most homogeneous, as well as 
without doubt the most ancient of these local collections is that 
of the Church of Africa. It was formed, so to speak, 
automatically, owing to the plenary assemblies of the 
African episcopate held practically every year, at which it was 
customary first of all to read out the canons of the previous 
councils. This gave to the collection an official character. At 
the time of the Vandal invasion this collection comprised the 
canons of the council of Carthage under Gratus (about 348) 
and under Genethlius (390), the whole series of the twenty or 
twenty-two plenary councils held during the episcopate of 
Aurelius, and finally, those of the councils held at Byzacene. 
Of the last-named we have only fragments, and the series of the 
councils under Aurelius is very incomplete. The African collec- 
tion has not come to us directly: we have two incomplete and 
confused arrangements of it, in two collections, that of the 
Hispana and that of Dionysius Exiguus. Dionysius knows 
only the council of 419, in connexion with the affair of Apiarius; 
but in this single text are reproduced, more or less fully, almost 
all the synods of the collection; this was the celebrated Con- 
cilium Africanum, so often quoted in the middle ages, which 
was also recognized by the Greeks. The Spanish collection 
divides the African canons among seven councils of Carthage 
and one of Mileve; but in many cases it ascribes them to the 
wrong source; for example, it gives under the title of the fourth 
council of Carthage, the Statuta Ecclesiae antiqua, an Arlesian 
compilation of Saint Caesarius,. which has led to a number of 
incorrect references. Towards the middle of the 6th century 
a Carthaginian deacon, Fulgentius Ferrandus, drew up a Brevia- 
tio canonum? a methodical arrangement of the African collec- 
tion, in the order of the subjects. From it we learn that the 
canons of Nicaea and the other Greek councils, up to that of 
Chalcedon, were also known in Africa. 

The Roman Church, even more than the rest, governed itself 
according to its own customs and traditions. Up to the end 
of the 5th century the only canonical document of 
non-Roman origin which it officially recognized was 
the group of canons of Nicaea, under which name were also 
included those of Sardica. A Latin version of the other Greek 
councils (the one referred to by Dionysius as prised) was known, 
but no canonical use was made of it. The local law was founded 
on usage and on the papal letters called decretals. The latter 
were of two kinds: some were addressed to the bishops of the 
ecclesiastical province immediately subject to the pope; the 
others were issued in answer to questions submitted from various 
quarters; but in both cases the doctrine is the same. At the 
beginning of the 6th century the Roman Church adopted the 
double collection, though of private origin, which was drawn 
up at that time by the monk Dionysius, known by the Dionysius 
name of Dionysius Exiguus, which he himself had Exiguus 
assumed as a sign of humility. He was a Scythian and his 
by birth, and did not come to Rome till after 496; °° e °"' 
his learning was considerable for his times, and to him we owe 
the employment of the Christian era and a new way of reckoning 
Easter. At the desire of Stephen, bishop of Salona, he undertook 
the task of making a new translation, from the original Greek 
text, of the canons of the Greek collection. The manuscript 
which he used contained only the first fifty of the Apostolic 
Canons; these he translated, and they thus became part of the 
law of the West. This part of the work of Dionysius was not 
added to later; it was otherwise with the second part. This 

'Edited by Pierre Pithou (Paris, 1588), and later by Chifflet, 
Fttlg. Frrrandi opera (Dijon, 1694); reproduced in Migne, Patr. 
Lai. vol. by, col. 949. 



Rome, 



CANON LAW 



r 95 



embodied the documents containing the local law, namely 39 
decretals of the popes from Siricius (384-398) to Anastasius II. 
(496-498). As was natural this collection received successive 
additions as further decretals appeared. The collection formed 
by combining these two parts remained the only official code 
of the Roman Church until the labours undertaken in consequence 
of the reforming movement in the nth century. In 774 Pope 
Adrian I. gave the twofold collection of the Scythian monk 
to the future emperor Charlemagne as the canonical book of the 
Roman Church; this is what is called the Dionysio-Hadriana. 
This was an important stage in the history of the centralization 
of canon law; the collection was officially received 
Hadrians, ^y t ' le F ran kish Church, imposed by the council of 
Aix-la-Chapelle of 802, and from that time on was 
recognized and quoted as the liber canonum. If we consider 
that the Church of Africa, which had already suffered considerably 
from the Vandal invasion, was at this period almost entirely 
destroyed by the Arabs, while the fate of Spain was but little 
better, it is easy to see why the collection of Dionysius became 
the code of almost the whole of the Western Church, with the 
exception of the Anglo-Saxon countries; though here too it 
was known. 

The other collections of canons, of Italian origin, compiled 
before the 10th century, are of importance on account of the 
documents which they have preserved for us, but as they have"' 
not exercised any great influence on the development of canon 
law, we may pass them over. 

The Dionysio-Hadriana did not, when introduced into Gaul, 
take the place of any other generally received collection of 
in Oaul. canons - I n this country the Church had not been 
centralized round a principal see which would have 
produced unity in canon law as in other things; even the 
political territorial divisions had been very unstable. The only 
canonical centre of much activity was the Church of Aries, 
which exercised considerable influence over the surrounding 
region in the 5th and 6th centuries. The chief collection known 
throughout Gaul before the Dionysio-Hadriana was the so- 
called collection of Quesnel, named after its first 
collection, editor. 1 It is a rich collection, though badly arranged, 
and contains 98 documents — Eastern and African 
canons and papal letters, but no Gallic councils; so that it is 
not a collection of local law. We might expect to find such a 
collection, in view of the numerous and important councils 
held in Gaul; but their decisions remained scattered among 
a great number of collections none of which had ever a wide 
circulation or an official character. 

It would be impossible to enumerate here all the Gallic councils 
which contributed towards the canon law of that country; we 
Councils. w ^ mention only the following: — Aries (314), of great 
importance; a number of councils in the district 
of Aries, completed by the Statuto, Ecclesiae antiqua of St 
Caesarius; 2 the councils of the province of Tours; the assemblies 
of the episcopate of the three kingdoms of the Visigoths at 
Agde (506), of the Franks at Orleans (511), and of the Bur- 
gundians at Epaone (517); several councils of the kingdoms 
of the Franks, chiefly at Orleans; and finally, the synods of the 
middle of the 8th century, under the influence of St Boniface. 
Evidently the impulse towards unity had to come from without; 
it began with the alliance between the Carolingians and the 
Papacy, and was accentuated by the recognition of the liber 
canonum. 

In Spain the case, on the contrary, is that of a strong centraliza- 
tion round the see of Toledo. Thus we find Spanish canon law 
in Spain, embodied in a collection which, though perhaps not 
official, was circulated and received everywhere; 
this was the Spanish collection, the Hispana. 3 The collection 
is well put together and includes almost all the important 

1 Published by Quesnel in his editku of the works of St Leo, 
vol. ii. (Paris, 1675); reproduced by the ^others Ballerini, with 
learned dissertations, Opera S. Leonis, vol. iii. , Migne, P.L. 56. 

2 Malnory, Saint Cesaire a" Aries (Paris, 1894). 

3 Collectio canonum Ecclesiae Hispanae (Madrid, 1808); repro- 
duced in Migne, P.L. 84. 



canonical documents. In the first part are contained the 
councils, arranged according to the regions in which they were 
held: Greek councils, following a translation of Italian origin, 
but known by the name of Hispana; African councils, 
Gallican councils and Spanish councils. The latter. 



The 
Hispana 



Ireland. 



which form the local section, are further divided into 
several classes: firstly, the synods held under the Roman 
empire, the chief being that of Elvira * (c. 300) ; next the texts 
belonging to the kingdom of the Suevi, after the conversion of 
these barbarians by St Martin of Braga: these are, the two 
councils of Braga (563 and 572), and a sort of free translation or 
adaptation of the canons of the Greek councils, made by Martin 
of Braga; this is the document frequently quoted in later days 
under the name of Capitula Martini papae; thirdly, the de- 
cisions of the councils of the Visigothic Church, after its con- 
version to Catholicism. Nearly all these councils were held at 
Toledo, beginning with the great council of 589. The series 
continued up to 694 and was only interrupted by the Mussulman 
invasion. Finally, the second part of the Hispana contains 
the papal decretals, as in the collection of Dionysius. 

From the middle of the 9th century this collection was to 
become even more celebrated; for, as we know, it served as 
the basis for the famous collection of the False Decretals. 

The Churches of Great Britain and Ireland remained still 
longer outside the centralizing movement. Their contribution 
towards the later system of canon law consisted in areat 
two things: the Penitentials and the influence of the Britain 
Irish collection, the other sources of local law not f"f_ 
having been known to the predecessors of Gratian 
nor to Gratian himself. 

The Penitentials 5 are collections intended for the guidance 
of confessors in estimating the penances to be imposed for various 
sins, according to the discipline in force in the Anglo- 
Saxon countries. They are all of Anglo-Saxon or tMsT"' 
Irish origin, and although certain of them were com- 
piled on the continent, under the influence of the island mis- 
sionaries, it seems quite certain that a Roman Penitential has 
never existed. 6 They are, however, of difficult and uncertain 
ascription, since the collections have been largely amended and 
remodelled as practice required. Among the most important 
we may mention those bearing the names of Vinnianus (d. 589), 
Gildas (d. 583), Theodore of Canterbury (d. 690), the Venerable 
Bede (d. 735) and Egbert of York (732-767); the Penitentials 
which are ascribed to St Columbanus, the founder of Luxeuil 
and Bobbio (d. 615), and Cumean (Cumine Ailbha, abbot of 
Iona); in the Frankish kingdom the most interesting work 
is the Penitential of Halitgar, bishop of Cambrai 7 from 817 to 
831. As penances had for a long time been lightened, and the 
books used by confessors began to consist more and more of 
instructions in the style of the later moral theology (and this 
is already the case of the books of Halitgar and Rhabanus 
Maurus), the canonical collections began to include a greater or 
smaller number of the penitential canons. 

The Irish collection, 8 though it introduced no important 
documents into the law of the Western Church, at least set 
canonists the example of quoting passages from the 
Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers. This col- c „aec«on. 
lection seems to date from the 8th century; besides 
the usual sources, the author has included several documents 
of local origin, beginning with the pretended synod of St 
Patrick. 

4 L. Duchesne, " Le Concile d'Elvire " in the Melanges Renier. 

6 For the Penitentials, see Wasserschleben, Die Bussordnungen 
der abendldndischen Kirche (Halle, 1 851) ; Mgr.H.J.Schmitz, Die Buss- 
biicher und die Bussdisciplin der Kirche (2 vols., Mainz, 1883, 1898). 

6 This is proved, in spite of the contrary opinions of Wasser- 
schleben and Schmitz, by M. Paul Fournier, " fitude sur les Peni- 
tentiels," in the Revue d'histoire et de litterature religieuses , vol. vi. 
(1901), pp. 289-317, and vol. vii., 1902, pp. 59-70 and 121-127. 

7 In Migne, P.L. 105, col. 651. 

8 Edited by Wasserschleben (Giessen, 1874). See also P. Fournier, 
" De l'influence de la collection irlandaise sur la formation des 
collections canoniques," in Nouvelle Revue historigue de droit fran- 
cais et etranger, vol. xxiii, note I, 



196 



GANON LAW 



In the very middle of the 9th century a much enlarged edition 
of the Hispana began to be circulated in France. To this rich 

collection the author, who assumes the name of Isidore, 
decretals. tne sa i nt ly bishop of Seville, added a good number 

of apocryphal documents already existing, as well as 
a series of letters ascribed to the popes of the earliest centuries, 
from Clement to Silvester and Damasus inclusive, thus filling 
up the gap before the decretal of Siricius, which is the first 
genuine one in the collection. The other papal letters only rarely 
show signs of alteration or falsification, and the text of the 
councils is entirely respected. 1 From the same source and at 
the same date came two other forged documents — firstly, a 
collection of Capitularies, in three books, ascribed to a certain 
Benedict (Benedictus Levita), 2 a deacon of the church of Mainz; 
this collection, in which authentic documents find very little 
place, stands with regard to civil legislation exactly in the 
position of the False Decretals with regard to canon law. The 
other document, of more limited scope, is a group of Capitula 
given under the name of Angilram, bishop of Metz. It is now- 
adays admitted by all that these three collections come from the 
same source. For a study of the historical questions connected 
with the famous False Decretals, see the article Decretals 
(False); here we have only to consider them with reference 
to the place they occupy in the formation of ecclesiastical law. 
In spite of some hesitation, with regard rather to the official 
character than to the historical authenticity of the letters attri- 
buted to the popes of the earlier centuries, the False Decretals 
were accepted with confidence, together with the authentic 
texts which served as a passport for them. All later collections 
availed themselves indiscriminately of the contents of this vast 
collection, whether authentic or forged, without the least 
suspicion. The False Decretals did not greatly modify nor corrupt 
the Canon Law, but they contributed much to accelerate its 
progress towards unity. For they were the last of the chrono- 
logical collections, i.e. those which give the texts in the order 
in which they appeared. From this time on, canonists began 
Syste- to exercise their individual judgment in arranging. 
matic their collections according to some systematic order, 

coliec grouping their materials under divisions more or less 
oas ' happy, according to the object they had in view. 

This was the beginning of a codification of a common canon law, 
in which the sources drawn upon lose, as it were, their local 
character. This is made even more noticeable by the fact that, 
in a good number of the works extant, the author is not content 
merely to set forth and classify the texts; but he proceeds to 
discuss the point, drawing conclusions and sometimes outlining 
some controversy on the subject, just as Gratian was to do more 
fully later on. 

During this period, which extended from the end of the 9th 
century to the middle of the 1 2th, we can enumerate about forty 
systematic collections, of varying value and circulation, which 
all played a greater or lesser part in preparing the juridical 
renaissance of the 12th century, and most of which were 
utilized by Gratian. We need mention only the chief of them 
— the Collectio Anselmo dedicata, by an unknown author of the 
_ . end of the 9th century; the Libri duo de synodalibus 

causis et disciplinis ecclesiasticis, 3 compiled about 906 
by Regino, abbot of Priim, and dedicated to Hatto of Mainz, 
relatively a very original treatise; the enormous compilation 
Burchard ln twenty books of Burchard, bishop of Worms (1112- 

11 22), the Decretum or Collectarium* very widely 
spread and known under the name of Brocardum, of which the 
19th book, dealing with the process of confession, is specially 
noteworthy. Towards the end of the nth century, under the 

1 The collection of the False Decretals has been published with 
a long critical introduction by P. Hinschius, Decretales Pseudo- 
Isidorianae et capitula Angilramni (Leipzig, 1863). For the rest of 
the bibliography, see Decretals (False). 

2 The latest edition is in Pertz, Monumenta Germaniae, vol. ii. 
part ii. 

3 Edited by Wasserschleben (Leipzig, 1840) ; reproduced by Migne, 
P.L. 132. 

4 Edited several times; in Migne, P.L. 140, 



influence of Hildebrand, the reforming movement makes itself 
felt in several collections of canons, intended to support the 
rights of the Holy See and the Church against the pretensions 
of the emperor. To this group belong an anonymous collec- 
tion, described by M. P. Fournier as the first manual of the 
Reform; 5 the collection of Anselm, bishop of Lucca, 6 in 13 
books (1080-1086); that of Cardinal Deusdedit, 7 
in 4 books, dedicated to Pope Victor III. (1086-1087); D eusdedu% 
and lastly that of Bonizo, 8 bishop of Sutri, in 10 books 
(1089). In the 1 2 th century, the canonical works of Ivo of 
Chartres 9 are of great importance. His Panormia, compiled 
about 1095 or 1096, is a handy and well-arranged 
collection in 8 books; as to the Decretum, a weighty chartres 
compilation in 17 books, there seems sufficient proof 
that it is a collection of material made by Ivo in view of his 
Panormia. To the 12th century belong the collection in the 
MS. of Saragossa {Caesaraugustana) to which attention was 
drawn by Antonio Agustin; that of Cardinal Gregory, called 
by him the Polycarpus, in 8 books (about 1115); and finally 
the Liber de misericordia et justitia of Algerus, 10 scholasticus 
of Liege, in 3 books, compiled at latest in n 23. 

But all these works were to be superseded by the Decretum 
of Gratian. 

2. The Decretum of Gratian and the Corpus Juris Canonici. — 
The work of Gratian, though prepared and made possible by 
those of his predecessors, greatly surpasses them in 
scientific value and in magnitude. It is certainly n e e cretam 
the work which had the greatest influence on the oforatian. 
formation of canon law; it soon became the sole 
manual, both for teaching and for practice, and even after the 
publication of the Decretals was the chief authority in the 
universities. The work is not without its faults; Gratian is 
lacking in historical and critical faculty; his theories are often 
hesitating; but on the whole, his treatise is as complete and as 
perfect as it could be; so much so that no other work of the 
same kind has been compiled; just as there has never been 
made another Book of the Sentences. These two works, which 
were almost contemporary (Gratian is only about two years 
earlier), 11 were destined to have the same fate; they were the 
manuals, one for theology, the other for canon law, in use in 
all the universities, taught, glossed and commented on by the 
most illustrious masters. From this period dates the more 
marked and definitive separation between theology and ecclesi- 
astical law. 

Of Gratian we know practically nothing. He was a Camaldu- 
lensian monk of the convent of St Felix at Bologna, where he 
taught canon law, and published, probably in 1 148, his treatise 
called at first Concordantia discordanlium canonum, but soon 
known under the name of the Decretum. Nowadays, and for 
some time past, the only part of the Decretum considered is 
the collection of texts; but it is actually a treatise, in which 
the author endeavours to piece together a coherent juridical 
system from the vast body of texts, of widely differing periods 
and origin, which are furnished by the collections. These texts 
he inserts bodily in the course of his dissertation; 
where they do not agree, he divides them into opposite aratiaaL 
groups and endeavours to reconcile them; but the 
really original part of his work are the Dicta Gratiani, inserted 
between the texts, which are still read. Gratian drew his 
materials from the existing collections, and especially from the 

5 P. Fournier, " Le Premier Manuel canonique de la reforme du 
XI e siecle," in Melanges de V 'Itcole francaise de Rome, xiv. (1894). 

6 Unpublished. 

7 Edited by Mgr. Pio Martinucci(Venice, 1869). On this collection 
see Wolf von Glanvell, Die Kanonessammlung des Kardinals Deus- 
dedit (Paderborn, 1905). 

8 Unpublished. 

9 Several times edited; in Migne, P.L. 161. See P. Fournier, 
" Les Collections can^niques attributes a Yves de Chartres," Biblio- 
iheque de I'Hcole de' Chartes (1896 and 1897). 

10 Printed in Martene, Nov. Thesaur. anecdot. vol. v. col. 1019. 

11 See P. Fournier, " Deux Controverses sur les origines du Decret 
de Gratien," in the Revue d'histoire et de littirature religieuses vol. iii. 
(1898), pp. n. 2 and 3. 



CANON LAW 



197 



richer of them; when necessary, he has recourse to the Roman 
laws, and he made an extensive use of the works of the Fathers 
and the ecclesiastical writers ; he further made use of the canons 
of the recent councils, and the recently published decretals, 
up to and including the Lateran council of 1139. His immense 
Contents wor k consists of three parts (partes). The first, 

treating of the sources of canon law and of ecclesi- 
astical persons and offices, is divided according to the method 
of Paucapalea, Gratian's pupil, into 101 distinctiones, which 
are subdivided into canones. The second part consists of 36 
causae (cases proposed for solution) , subdivided into quaestiones 
(the several questions raised by the case), under each of which 
are arranged the various canones (canons, decretals, &c.) bearing 
on the question. But causa xxxiii. quaestio 3, headed Tractatus 
de Poenitentia, is divided like the main part into seven dis- 
tinctiones, containing each several canones. The third part, 
which is entitled De Consecratione, gives, in five distinctiones, 
the law bearing on church ritual and the sacraments. The 

following is the method of citation. A reference to 
citation. tne nrst P art indicates the initial words or number 

of the canon and the number of the distinctio, e.g. 
can. Propter ecclesiasticas, dist. xviii. or c. 15, d. xviii. The 
second part is cited by the canon, causa and quaestio, e.g.. can. 
Si quis suadente, C. 17, qu. 4, ore. 29, C.xvii.,qu. 4. The treatise 
De Poenitentia, forming the 3rd quaestio of the 33rd causa of the 
second part, is referred to as if it were a separate work, e.g. c. 
Principium, D. ii. de poenit. or c. 45, D. ii. de poenit. In quoting 
a passage from the third part the canon and distinctio are given, 
t.g. c. Missar. solenn. D. I. de consecrat., or c. 12, D. I. de 
(onsecr. 

Considered from the point of view of official authority, the 
Decretum occupies an intermediate position very difficult to 
Authority define. It is not and cannot be a really official code, 

in which every text has the force of a law. It has never 
been recognized as such, and the pretended endorsement of it 
by Pope Eugenius III. is entirely apocryphal. Moreover, it 
could not have become an official code; it would be impossible 
to transform into so many laws either the discordant texts 
which Gratian endeavoured to reconcile or his own Dicta; a 
treatise on canon law is not a code. Further, there wa.s as yet 
no idea of demanding an official compilation. The Decretum 
has thus remained a work of private authority, and the texts 
embodied in it have only that legal value which they possess 
in themselves. On the other hand, the Decretum actually 
enjoys a certain public authority which is unique; for centuries 
it has been the text on which has been founded the instruction 
in canon law in all the universities; it has been glossed and 
commented on by the most illustrious canonists; it has become, 
without being a body of laws, the first part of the Corpus juris 
canonici, and as such it has been cited, corrected and edited 
by the popes. It has thus, by usage, obtained an authority 
perfectly recognized and accepted by the Church. 1 

Gratian's collection, for the very reason that it had for its aim 
the creation of a systematic canon law, was a work of a transi- 

tional character. Henceforth a significant differentia - 
aratian. fi° n began to appear; the collections of texts, the 

number of which continued to increase, were clearly 
separated from the commentaries in which the canonists con- 
tinued the formation and interpretation of the law. Thus the 
way was prepared for official collections. The disciples of 
Gratian, in glossing or commenting on the Decretum, turned to 
the papal decretals, as they appeared, for information and the 
determination of doubtful points. Their idea, then,- was to 
make collections of these points, to support their teaching; 
this is the origin of those Compilationes which were soon to be 
embodied in the collection of Gregory IX. But we must not 
forget that these compilations were intended by their authors 
to complete the Decretum of Gratian; in them were included 
the decretals called extravagantes, i.e. quae vagabantur extra 
Decretum. This is why we find in them hardly any documents 
earlier than the time of Gratian, and also why canonists have 
1 See Laurin, Introductio in corpus juris canonici, c. vii. p. 73. 



continued to refer to the decretals of Gregory IX. by the abbrevia- 
tion X (Extra, i.e. extra Decretum) . 

There were numerous collections of this kind towards the end 
of the 1 2th and at the beginning of the 13th century. Passing 
over the first Additiones to the Decretum and the 
Appendix concilii Lateranensis (council of n 79), we "Q u,n w e 
will speak only of the Quinque compilationes,' 2 which tiones." 
served as a basis for the works of Raymond of Penna- 
forte. The first and most important is the work of Bernard, 
provost and afterwards bishop of Pavia, namely, the Breviarium 
extravagantium, compiled about n 90; it included the decretals 
from Alexander III. to Clement III., together with Bernard 
certain " useful chapters " omitted by Gratian. The ot Pavia, 
important feature of the book is the arrangement " B . reyl " l 
of the decretals or sections of decretals in five books, 
divided into titles (tituli) logically arranged. The five books 
treat of (1) ecclesiastical persons and dignitaries or judges; 
(2) procedure; (3) rights, duties and property of the clergy, i.e. 
benefices, dues, sacraments, &c, with the exception of marriage, 
which is the subject of book (4); (5) of penalties. There is a 
well-known hexameter summing up this division : 

Judex, judicium, clerus, connubia, crimen. 

This is the division adopted in all the official collections of the 
Corpus juris. By a bull of the 28th of December 1210 Innocent 
III. sent to the university of Bologna an authentic 
collection of the decretals issued during the first twelve oiiaUo 
years of his pontificate; this collection he had caused tertia." 
to be drawn up by his notary, Petrus Collivacinus of 
Benevento, his object being to supersede the collections in circu- 
lation, which were incomplete and to a certain extent 
spurious. This was the Compilatio tertia; for soon cunda." 
after, Joannes Galensis (John of Wales) collected the 
decretals published between the collection of Bernard of Pavia 
and the pontificate of Innocent III.; and this, though of later 
date, became known as the Compilatio secunda. The nQ uarta- it 
quarta, the author of which is unknown, contained 
the decretals of the last six years of Innocent III., and the 
important decrees of the Lateran council of 121 5. ..pnxnte." 
Finally, in 1226, Honorius III. made an official pre- 
sentation to Bologna of his own decretals, this forming the Com- 
pilatio quinta. 

The result of all these supplements to Gratian's work, apart 
from the inconvenience caused by their being so scattered, was 
the accumulation of a mass of material almost as 
considerable as the Decretum itself, from which they /q]LLL, 
tended to split off and form an independent whole, ix. 
embodying as they did the latest state of the law. 
From 1230 Gregory IX. wished to remedy this condition of 
affairs, and gave to his penitentionary, the Dominican Raymond 
of Pennaforte, the task of condensing the five compilations in use 
into a single collection, freed from useless and redundant docu- 
ments. The work was finished in 1 234, and was at once sent by 
the pope to Bologna with the bull Rex pacificus, declaring it to be 
official. Raymond adopts Bernard of Pavia's division into five 
books and into titles; in each title he arranges the decretals in 
chronological order, cutting out those which merely repeat one 
another and the less germane parts of those which he preserves; 
but these partes decisae, indicated by the words " et infra " or 
" et j," are none the less very useful and have been printed in 
recent editions. Raymond does not attempt any original 
work ; to the texts already included in the Quinque compilationes, 
he adds only nine decretals of Innocent III. and 196 chapters of 
Gregory IX. This first official code was the basis of the second 
part of the Corpus juris canonici. The collection of Gregory IX. 
is cited as follows: the opening words of. the chapter are given, 
or else its order or number, then the title to which it belongs; 
earlier scholars added X (extra); nowadays, this indication is 
omitted, and the order or number of the title in the book is given 

2 By referring to the decretals of Gregory IX. for the texts in- 
serted there, E. Friedberg has succeeded in giving a much abridged 
edition of the Quinque compilationes (Leipzig, 1882). 



198 



CANON LAW 



instead, e.g. Quum olim, de Consuetudine, X. ; or cap. 6, de consuet. 
(I. iv.); that is to say, book I., title iv., de consuetudine, chapter 
6, beginning with the words Quum olim. 

Though Gregory IX. wished to supersede the compilationes, he 
had no idea of superseding the Decretum of Gratian, still less of 
Their codifying the whole of the canon law. Though his 

relation to collection is still in theory the chief monument of 
the general ecclesiastical law, it only marked a certain stage and 
aw ' was before long to receive further additions. The 

reason for this is that in most cases the decretals did not formu- 
late any law, but were merely solutions of particular cases, 
given as models; to arrive at the abstract law it was necessary 
to examine the solution in each case with regard to the circum- 
stances and thus formulate a rule; this was the work of the 
canonists. The " decretalists " commented on the new collec- 
tion, as the " decretists " had done for that of Gratian; but the 
canonists were not legislators: even the summaries which they 
placed at the head of the chapters could not be adduced as 
legislative texts. The abstract law was to be found rather in the 
Summae of the canonists than in the decretals. Two important 
results, however, were achieved: on the one hand, supple- 
mentary collections on private authority ceased to be made, for 
this Gregory IX. had forbidden; on the other hand, the collec- 
tions were no longer indefinitely swelled by the addition of new 
decisions in particular cases, those already existing being enough 
to form a basis for the codification of the abstract law; and for 
this reason subsequent collections contain as a rule only the 
" constitutions " of popes or councils, i.e. rules laid down as of 
general application. Hence arose a separation, which became 
more and more marked, between legislation and jurisprudence. 
This change was not produced suddenly, the old method being at 
first adhered to. In 1245 Innocent IV. sent to the universities a 
collection of 45 decretals, with the order that they should 
be inserted under their proper titles in the collection of 
Gregory IX. In 1253 he sent a further list of the first words 
{principia) of the complementary constitutions and decretals; 
but the result was practically nil and the popes gave up 
this system of successive additions. It was, however, found 
expedient to publish a new official collection. At the instance of 
the university of Bologna, Boniface VIII., himself an eminent 
canonist, had this prepared by a committee of canonists and 
published it in 1298. As it came as an addition to the five 
books of Gregory IX., it was called the sixth book, the Liber 

Sextus. It includes the constitutions subsequent to 
"Liber I2 34> an d notably the decrees of the two ecumenical 
Sextus." councils of Lyons, and is arranged in books and titles, 

as above described; the last title, de regulis juris, con- 
tains no less than eighty-eight legal axioms, mostly borrowed 
from Roman law. The Liber Sextus is cited like the decretals of 
Gregory IX., only with the addition of: in sexto (in VI .). 

The same observations apply to the next collection, the 
Clementinae. It was prepared under the care of Clement V., and 

even promulgated by him in consistory in March 13 14 ; 
"Ciemea- ^ ut > * n con sequence of the death of the pope, which 
tinae." took place almost immediately after, the publication 

and despatch of the collection to the universities was 
postponed till 1317, under John XXII. It includes the consti- 
tutions of Clement V., and above all, the decrees of the council of 
Vienne of 131 1, and is divided, like preceding collections, into 
books and titles; it is cited in the same way, with the additional 
indication Clem-ientino) . 

At this point the official collections stop. The two last, 
which have found a place in the editions of the Corpus, are 
"Extrava- collections of private authority, but in which all the 
gantes" of documents are authentic. Evidently the strict pro- 
•?*" hibition of the publishing of collections not approved 

by the Holy See had been forgotten. The Exlravo- 
ganles (i.e. extra collectiones publicas) of John XXII. number 20, 

and are classified under fourteen titles. The Extra- 

vagantes communes (i.e. coming from several popes) 

number 73, from Boniface VIII. to Sixtus IV. (1484), 
*ud are classified in books and titles. These two collections 



And "com- 
munes. " 



were included in the edition of Jean Chappuis in 1500; they 
passed into the later editions, and are considered as forming part 
of the Corpus juris canonici. As such, and without receiving any 
complementary authority, they have been corrected and re- 
edited, like the others, by the Correctores romani. They are cited, 
like the decretals, with a further indication of the collection to 
which they belong: Extrav. Jo. XXII., or inter -comm-(unes~). 

Thus was closed, as the canonists say, the Corpus juris canonici; 
but this expression, which is familiar to us nowadays, is only a 
bibliographical term. Though we find in the 15th 
century, for example, at the council of Basel the pu l'j' ar u' 
expression corpus juris, obviously suggested by the canonici." 
Corpus juris civilis, not even the official edition of 
Gregory XIII. has as its title the words Corpus juris canonici, 
and we do not meet with this title till the Lyons edition of 167 1. 

The history of the canonical collections forming the Corpus 
juris would not be complete without an account of the labours 
of which they were the object. We know that the 
universities of the middle ages contained a Faculty /l^,"„ y 
of Decrees, with or without a Faculty of Laws, i.e. law. 
civil law. The former made doctores decretorum, the 
latter doctores legum. The teaching of the magistri consisted in 
oral lessons (lecturae) directly based on the text. The short 
remarks explanatory of words in the text, originally written 
in the margin, became the gloss which, formed thus 
by successive additions, took a permanent form and gfosses. 
was reproduced in the manuscripts of the Corpus, and 
later in the various editions, especially in the official Roman 
edition of 1582; it thus acquired by usage a kind of semi-official 
authority. The chief of the glossatores of the Decretum of 
Gratian were Paucapalea, the first disciple of the master, Rufinus 
(1160-1170), John of Faenza (about 1170), Joannes Teutonicus 
(about 1210), whose glossary, revised and completed by Bar- 
tholomeus Brixensis (of Brescia) became the glossa ordinaria 
decreti. For the decretals we may mention Vincent the Spaniard 
and Bernard of Botone (Bernardus Parmensis, d. 1263), author of 
the Glossa ordinaria. That on the Liber Sextus is due to the 
famous Joannes Andreae (c. 1340); and the one which he began 
for the Clementines was finished later by Cardinal Zabarella 
(d. 1417). The commentaries not so entirely concerned with the 
text were called Apparatus; and Summae was the name given to 
general treatises. The first of these works are of capital 
importance in the formation of a systematic canon «sum- 
law. Such were the Summae of the first disciples of mae." 
Gratian: Paucapalea (1150), 1 Rolando Bandinelli 2 
(afterwards Alexander III., c. 1150), Rufinus 3 (c. 1165), Etienne 
of Tournai 4 (Stephanus Tornacensis, c. 1168), John of Faenza 
(c. 1 1 70), Sicard, bishop of Cremona (c. 11 80), and above all 
Huguccio (c. 1180). For the Decretals we should mention: 
Bernard of Pavia 6 (c. 1195), Sinibaldo Fieschi (Innocent IV., 
c. 1240), Henry of Susa (d. 1271), commonly called (cardinalis) 
Hostiensis, whose Summa Hostiensis or Summa aurea is a work 
of the very highest order; Wilhelmus Durantis or Durandus, 
Joannes Andreae, Nicolas de Tudeschis (abbas siculus), &c. 
The isth century produced few original treatises; but after 
the council of Trent the Corpus juris was again commented on 
by distinguished canonists, e.g. the Jesuit Paul Laymann (1575-- 
1635), the Portuguese Agostinho Barbosa (1590-1649), Manuel 
Gonzalez Tellez (d. 1649) and Prospero Fagnani (1 598-1687), 
who, although blind, was secretary to the Congregation of the 
Council. But as time goes on, the works gradually lose the 
character of commentaries on the text, and develop into ex- 
positions of the law as a whole. 

1 Edited by Schulte, Die Summa des Paucapalea (Giessen, 1890). 

2 Edited by Thaner, Die Summa Magistri Rolandi (Innsbruck, 
1874) ; _ later by Gietl, Die Sentenzen Rolands (Freiburg im B., 1891). 

8 Edited by H. Singer, Die Summa Decretorum des Magister Rufinus 
(Paderborn, 1902). 

4 Edited by Schulte, Die Summe des Stephanus Tornacensis 
(Giessen, 1891). 

6 He made a Summa of his own collection, ed. E. Laspeyres, 
Bernardi Papiensis Summa Decretalium (Mainz, i860). The com- 
mentaries of Innocent IV. and Henry of Susa have been frequently 
published. 



CANON LAW 



99 



We can mention here only the chief editions of the Corpus. 
The council of Trent, as we know, ordered that the official books 
Editions °^ tne R° man Church — sacred books, liturgical books, 

&c. — should be issued in official and more correct 
editions; the compilations of ecclesiastical law were also re- 
vised. The commission of the Correctores romani, x established 

about 1563 by Pius IV., ended its work under Gregory 
™rt " Cor ~ XIII. , and the official edition, containing the text and 
romani." tne glosses, appeared at Rome in 1582. Richter's 

edition (2 vols., Leipzig, 1839) remains valuable, but 
has been greatly surpassed by that of E. Friedberg (Leipzig, 
••instltu- 1879-1881). Many editions contain also the Institu- 
tiones tiones composed at the command of Paul IV. (1555- 
Latux- 1559) by Giovanni Paolo Lancelotti, a professor of 
ott ' Bologna, on the model of the Institutes of Justinian. 

The work has merits, but has never been officially 
approved. 

Though the collections of canon law were to receive no more 
additions, the source of the laws was not dried up; decisions 
of councils and popes continued to appear; but there was no 
attempt made to collect them. Canonists obtained the recent 
texts as they could. Moreover, it was an epoch of trouble: the 
great Schism of the West, the profound divisions which were 
its result, the abuses which were to issue in the Reforma- 
tion, were conditions little favourable for a reorganization 
of the ecclesiastical laws. Thus we are brought to the third 
period. 

3. After the Council of Trent. — The numerous important 
decrees made by the council of Trent, in the second part of its 
sessions, called dc reformalione, are the starting-point of the 
canon law in its latest stage, jus novissimum; it is this which is 
still in force in the Roman Church. It has in no way undermined 
the official status of the Corpus juris; but it has completed the 
legislation of the latter in many important respects, and in some 
>jases reformed it. 

The law during this period, as abstracted from the texts and 
compilations, suggests the following remarks. The laws are 

formulated in general terms, and the decisions in 
F ' na/ particular cases relegated to the sphere of juris- 

thelaw. prudence; and the canonists have definitely lost the 

function which fell to them in the 12th and 13th 
centuries: they receive the law on authority and no longer have 
to deduce it from the texts. The legislative power is powerfully 
centralized in the hands of the pope: since the reforming decrees 
of the council of Trent it is the pontifical constitutions alone 
which have made the common law; the ecumenical council, 
doubtless, has not lost its power, but none were held until that 
of the Vatican (1870), and this latter was unable to occupy 
itself with matters of discipline. Hence the separation, in- 
creasingly marked, between the common law and the local 
laws, which cannot derogate from the common law except 
by concession of the Holy See, or by right of a lawfully 
authorized custom. This centralization, in its turn, has greatly 
increased the tendency towards unity and uniformity, which 
have reached in the present practice of the Roman Church 
a degree never known before, and considered by some to be 
excessive. 

If we now consider the laws in themselves, we shall find that 
the dispersed condition of the legislative documents has not 

been modified since the closure of the Corpus juris; 
n'/fh"' " on t ' le contrar y, the enormous number of pontifical 

constitutions, and of decrees emanating from the 

Roman Congregations, has greatly aggravated the 
situation; moreover, the attempts which have been made to 
resume the interrupted process of codification have entirely 
failed. As regards the texts, the canon law of to-day is in a very 
similar position to that of English law, which gave rise to J. S. 
Mill's saying: " All ages of English history have given one 

1 The history of this commission and the rules which it followed 
for editing the Decretum, will be found in Laurin, Introductio in 
corpus juris canonici, p. 63, or in the Prolegomena to Friedbcrg's 
edition of the Decretum. 



of the 
texts. 



another rendezvous in English law; their several products 
may be seen all together, not interfused, but heaped one upon 
another, as many different ages of the earth may be read in some 
perpendicular section of its surface." 2 Nothing has been 
abrogated, except in so far as this has been implicitly demanded 
by subsequent laws. From this result insoluble controversies 
and serious uncertainties, both in the study and practice of the 
law; and, finally, it has become impossible for most people to hav^ 
a first-hand knowledge of the actual laws. 

For this third period, the most important and most consider- 
able of the canonical texts is the body of disciplinary decrees 
of the council of Trent (1 545-1 563). In consequence Decrees 
of the prohibition issued by Pius IV., they have not of the 
been published separately from the dogmatic texts Council of 
and other acts, and have not been glossed; 3 but their 
official interpretation has been reserved by the popes to the 
" Congregation of the cardinal interpreters of the Council of 
Trent," whose decisions form a vast collection of jurisprudence. 
Next in importance come the pontifical constitutions, which 
are collected together in the Bullarium; but this is 
a collection of private authority, if we except the coos<ft „. 
Bullarium of Benedict XIV., officially published by tlons. 
him in 1747; further, the Bullarium is a compilation 
arranged in chronological order, and its dimensions make it 
rather unwieldy. In the third place come the decrees of the 
Roman Congregations, which have the force of law. Several 
of these organs of the papal authority have published 
official collections, in which more place is devoted oMh^" 
to jurisprudence than to laws; several others have curia. 
only private compilations, or even none at all, among 
others the most important, viz. the Holy Office (see Curia 
Romana). The resulting confusion and uncertainty may be 
imagined. 

These drawbacks were felt a long time back, and to this feeling 
we owe two attempts at a supplementary codification which 
were made in the 16th century, both of which are "Liber 
known under the name of Liber Septimus. The first septimus" 
was of private origin, and had as its author Pierre °J^' U 
Mathieu, the Lyons jurist (1563-1621); it appeared 
in 1590 at Lyons. It is a continuation of the Extravaganlcs 
communes, and includes a selection of papal constitutions, 
from Sixtus IV. (1471-1484) to Sixtus V. (1585-1590) inclusive, 
with the addition of a few earlier documents. It follows the 
order of the decretals. This collection has been of some service, 
and appears as an appendix in many editions of the Corpus juris; 
the chief reason for its failure is that it has no official sanction. 
The second attempt was official, but it came to nothing. It 
was connected with the movement of reform and revision which 
followed the council of Trent. Immediately after the publication 
of the official edition of the Corpus juris, Gregory XIII. appointed 
a committee of cardinals charged with the task of drawing up 
a Liber septimus. Sixtus V. hurried on its execution, which was 
rapidly proceeded with, mainly owing to Cardinal 



Mathieu. 



of Clement 
VIII. 



Pinelli, who submitted the draft of it to Clement VIII. 
The pope had this Liber VII. printed as a basis for 
further researches; but after long deliberations the volume was 
suppressed, and the idea of a fresh codification was abandoned. 
The collection included the decrees of the council of Trent, and 
a number of pontifical constitutions, arranged in the order of 
the titles of the decretals. 4 But even had it been promulgated, 
it is doubtful whether it would have improved the situation. 
It would merely have added another collection to the previous 
ones, which were already too voluminous, without resulting 
in any useful abrogations. 

2 Quoted by Hogan, Clerical Studies, p. 235. 

3 There are innumerable editions of the council of Trent. That 
which is favoured by canonists is Richter's edition (Leipzig, 1863), 
in which each chapter de reformatione is followed by a selection of 
decisions of the S.C. of the council. 

4 Republished by F. Sentis, from one of the few copies which have 
escaped destruction: Clementis Papae VIII. Decretales, quae vulgo 
nuncnpantur Liber septimus Decretalium Clementis VIII. (Freiburg 
sm 1)., 1870). 



200 



CANON LAW 



4. The Future Codification. — Neither Clement VIII. nor, at 
a later date, Benedict XIV., could have dreamt of the radical 

reform at present in course of execution. Instead of 
toTcodi- accumulating the texts of the laws in successive collec- 
tlcatlon. tions, it is proposed entirely to recast the system of 

editing them. This codification in a series of short 
articles was suggested by the example of the French codes, 
the history of which during the 19th century is well known. 
From all quarters the Catholic episcopate had submitted to the 
Vatican council petitions in this sense. " It is absolutely clear," 
said some French bishops, " and has for a long time past been 
universally acknowledged and asserted, that a revision and 
reform of the canon law is necessary and most urgent. As 
matters now stand, in consequence of the many and grave changes 
in human affairs and in society, many laws have become useless, 
others difficult or impossible to obey. With regard to a great 
number of canons, it is a matter of dispute whether they are 
still in force or are abrogated. Finally, in the course of so many 
centuries, the number of ecclesiastical laws has increased to such 
an extent, and these laws have accumulated in such immense 
collections, that in a certain sense we can well say: We are 
crushed beneath the laws, obruimur legibus. Hence arise 
infinite and inextricable difficulties which obstruct the study 
of canon law; an immense field for controversy and litigation; 
a thousand perplexities of conscience; and finally contempt for 
the laws." 1 We know how the Vatican council had to separate 
without approaching the question of canonical reform; but this 
general desire for a recasting of the ecclesiastical code was taken 
up again on the initiative of Rome. On the 19th of March 1904, 

Pius X. published a Motu proprio, " de ecclesioe legibus 
of Plus x. {M unum redigendis." After briefly reviewing the 

present condition of the canonical texts and collec- 
tions, he pointed out its inconvenience, referred to the many 
requests from the episcopate, and decreed the preparation of 
a general code of canon law. This immense undertaking in- 
volved the codification of the entire canon law, drawing it up in 
a clear, short and precise form, and introducing any expedient 
modifications and reforms. For this purpose the pope appointed 

a commission of cardinals, of which he himself became 

president; also a commission of " consultors " 
resident at Rome, which asked for a certain amount of assistance 
from canonists at various universities and seminaries. Further, 
the assembled bishops of each province were invited to give 
their opinion as to the points in which they considered the canon 
law might profitably be modified or abrogated. Two consultors 
had the duty of separately drawing up a preliminary plan for each 
title, these projects being twice submitted for the deliberation 
of the commission (or sub-commission) of consultors, the version 
adopted by them being next submitted to the commission of 
cardinals, and the whole finally sent up for the papal sanction. 
These commissions started work at the end of 1904. 

Local Law. — The common law of the Roman Church cannot 
by itself uniformly regulate all the churches of the different 

nations; each of them has its own local law, which 

we must briefly mention here. In theory, this law 
has as its author the local ecclesiastical authorities, councils 
or bishops; but this is true only for laws and regulations 
which are in harmony with the common law, merely completing 
or defining it. But if it is a question of derogating from the 
common law, the authority of the Holy See must intervene to 
legalize these derogations. This intervention takes the form 
either of " iadults," i.e. graceful concessions granted at the 
request of the episcopate, or of special approbation of conciliary 
resolutions. It would, however, be impossible to mention any 
compilations containing only local law. Whether in the case 
of national or provincial councils, or of diocesan synods, the 
chief object of the decrees is to reinforce, define or apply the 
law; the measures which constitute a derogation have only a 
small place in them. It is, then, only in a limited sense that we 
can see a local canon law in the councils of the various regional 

1 Omnium concilii Vaticani . . . documentorum collectio, per Con- 
radum Martin (Paderborn, 1873), p. 152. 



Method. 



Local law. 



churches. Having made this remark, we must distinguish 
between the countries which are still subject to the system of 
concordats and other countries. 

In the case of the former, the local law is chiefly founded 
on the concordat {q.v.), including the derogations and privileges 
resulting from it. The chief thing to note is the countries 
existence, for these countries, of a civil-ecclesiastical subject to 
law, that is to say, a body of regulations made by the- con " 
civil authority, with the consent, more or less explicit, cordats - 
of the Church, about ecclesiastical matters, other than spiritual; 
these dispositions are chiefly concerned with the nomination or 
confirmation by the state of ecclesiastics to the most important 
benefices, and with the administration of the property of the 
Church; sometimes also with questions of jurisdiction, both 
civil and criminal, concerning the persons or property of the 
Church. It is plain that the agreements under the concordats 
have a certain action upon a number of points in the canonical 
laws ; and all these points go to constitute the local concordatory 
law. This is the case for Austria, Spain, Portugal, Bavaria, 
the Prussian Rhine provinces, Alsace, Belgium, and, in America, 
Peru. Up to 1905 it was also the case in France, where the ancient 
local customs now continue, pending the reorganization of the 
Church without the concordat. 

We do not imply that in other countries the Church can always 
find exemption from legislative measures imposed upon her by 
the civil authorities, for example, in Italy, Prussia and Russia; 
but here it is a situation de facto rather than dejure, which the 
Church tolerates for the sake of convenience; and these regula- 
tions only form part of the local canon law in a very irregular 
sense. 

In other countries the episcopal assemblies lay down the local 
law. England has its council of Westminster (1852), the United 
States their plenary councils of Baltimore (1852, 1866, 
1884), without mentioning the diocesan synods; and countries. 
the whole of Latin America is ruled by the special law 
of its plenary council, held at Rome in 1899. The same is the 
case with the Eastern Churches united to the Holy See; follow- 
ing the example of the famous council of Lebanon for the Maron- 
ites, held in 1730, and that of Zamosc for the Ruthenians, in 
1720, these churches, at the suggestion of Leo XIII., have drawn 
up in plenary assembly their own local law: the Syrians at 
Sciarfa in 1888; the Ruthenians at Leopol in 1891; and a little 
later, the Copts. The framing of local law will certainly be more 
clear and more easy when the general code of canon law has been 
published. 

Bibliography. — For the texts and collections: the dissertations 
of Dom Coustant, De antiquis canonum ccllectionibus, deque variis 
epistolarum Rom. Pont, editionibus (Paris, 1721); P. de Marca, 
De veteribus collectionibus canonum (Paris, 1681); the brothers 
Peter and Jerome Ballerini, De antiquis turn editis turn ineditis collec- 
tionibus el collectoribus canonum ad Gratianum usque (Venice, 1757). 
This is the best of all these works; it is reproduced in Migne, P.L., 
vol. 56; C. Seb. Berardi, De variis sacrorum canonum collectionibus 
ante Gratianum (Turin, 1752) ; P. Quesnel, De codice canonum 
Ecclesioe Romanae; de variis fidei libellis in antiquo Rom. Reel, 
codice contentis; de primo usu codicis canonum Dionysii .Exigui in 
Gallicanis regionibus (Paris, 1675; with the critical notes of the 
brothers Ballerini, also in Migne, loc. cit.); and finally, Florent, 
De methodo atque auctoritate collectionis Gratiani (Paris, 1679), and 
Antonio Agustin, archbishop of Tarragona, De emendatione Gratiani 
(Tarragona, 1586) ; these have all been brought together in Gallandi, 
De vetustis canonum collectionibus dissertationum sylloge (Venice, 
1778). The most complete work on the texts up to the 9th century 
is F. Maassen, Geschichte der Quellen und der Literatur des canonischen 
Rechts im Abendlande, vol. i. (all that has yet appeared, Gratz, 1870). 
For the period between the False Decretals and Gratian, there is 
no work of this sort, but the materials have been put together and 
published in part by M. P. Fournier. After Gratian, the classic 
work is Schulte, Geschichte der Quellen und Literatur des .canonischen 
Rechts von Gratian bis auf die Gegenwart (3 vols., Stuttgart, 1875 et: 
seq.). Manuals for the study of the sources: Ph. Schneider, Die 
Lehre von den Kirchenrechtsquellen (Regensburg, 1892); F. Laurin, 
Introductio in Corpus juris canonici (Freiburg, 1889); Tardif, 
Histoire des sources du droit canonique (Paris, 1887). Most of the 
German manuals on canon law devote considerable space to the 
history of the sources: see Phillips, vol. ii (3rd ed., 1857; French 
translation by the abbe Crouzet) ; Vering, 3rd ed. (Freiburg, 1893); 
Schulte, Das kaihalische Kirchenrecht, pt. i. (Giessen, i860), &c. 



CANON LAW 



20I 



For the Greek Church : Pitra, Juris ecclesiae graecorum hisloria et 
monumenta (Rome, 1864); the later history of the Greek law: 
Zachariae, Historiae juris graecorum delineatio (Heidelberg, 1839); 
Mortreuil, Histoire du droit byzantin (Paris, 1843-1846) ; the recent 
texts in the Conciliorum Collectio lacensis, vol. ii.; Acta et decreta 
s. conciliorum, quae ab episcopis rituum orientalium ab a, 1682 usque 
ad a. 1789 indeque ad a. i86g sunt celebrata (Freiburg, 1876). Short 
manual of Institutions: Jos. Papp-Szilagyi, Enchiridion juris eccl. 
orientalis catholicae (Magno-Varadini, 1862). For recent canonical 
texts: Richter's edition of the council of Trent (Leipzig, 1863); 
the Collectanea S.C. de Propaganda Fide (Rome, 1893); the 
Bullarium, a collection of papal acts and constitutions ; the editions 
of Cocquelines (28 vols., Rome, 1 733-1 756), and of Cherubini (19 vols., 
Luxemburg, 1727-1758), which are better than the enlarged reprint 
of Turin, which was unfinished (it goes up to 1730). The official 
edition of the Bullarium of Benedict XIV. (4 vols., Rome, 1754- 
1758) has been reprinted several times and is of great importance; 
the continuation of the Bullarium since Benedict XIV. has been 
published by Barberi, Bullarii romani continuaiio, in 20 vols., going 
up to the fourth year of Gregory XVI. Every year, since 1854, has 
been printed a collection of pontifical acts, Acta Pii IX., Acta 
Leonis XIII., &c, which are the equivalents of the Bullarium. 
Dictionaries: Durand de Maillane, Dictionnaire canonique (Paris, 
1786), re-edited by Andre under the title, Cours alphabetique et 
methodique de droit canonique, and by Wagner (Paris, 1894), has 
Gallican tendencies; Ferraris, Prompta bibliotheca canonica, &c, 
several new and enlarged editions; the best is that of Migne (1866), 
completed by Father Bucceroni, Ferraris Supplementum (Rome, 
1899). Articles on canon law in Wetzer und Welte's Kirchenlexicon 
(2nd ed., Freiburg, 1880 et seq.) ; Hauck, Realencyklopddie fur prot. 
Theologie und Kirche (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1 877-1 888) ; Vacant-Mange- 
not's Dictionnaire de theologie catholique, in course of publication 
(Paris, 1899 et seq.). Periodicals: Analecta juris pontificii, ed. by 
Mgr. Chaillot (1863-1889); Analecta ecclesiastica (since 1893); Acta 
Sanctae sedis (since 1865); Archiv fur kathol. Kirchenrecht (since 
1857); Le Canoniste contemporain (since 1878). (A. Bo.*) 

Canon Law in England and in the Anglican Communion. — 
There were matters in which the local English and Irish canon 
law, even before the 16th century, differed from that obtaining 
on the western part of the European continent. Thus (1), it has 
been said that — whereas the continental canon law recognized 
a quadripartite division of Church revenue of common right 
between (a) the bishop, (b) the clergy, (c) the poor, (d) the fabric 
— the English law maintained a tripartite division — (a) clergy, 
(b) the poor, (c) the fabric. Lord Selborne (Ancient Facts and 
Fictions concerning Churches and Tithes, 2nd ed., 1892) denies 
that there was any division of tithe in England. (2) By the 
general canon law the burden of repairing the nave, as well as 
the chancel of the church, was upon the parson or rector who 
collected the whole tithe. But the custom of England trans- 
ferred this burden to the parishioners, and some particular 
local customs (as in the city of London) placed even the burden 
of repair of the chancel on them. To meet this burden church 
rates were levied. (3) A church polluted by the shedding of 
blood, as by suicide or murder, was reconsecrated on the 
continent. In England the custom was (and is) simply to 
" reconcile." (4) A much more important difference, if the 
decision of the Irish court of exchequer chamber upheld in 
the House of Lords, where the peers were equally divided, 
correctly stated the English Canon law (Reg. v. Millis, 10 CI. 
& Fin., 534) was in regard to the essentials of marriage. By 
the general Western canon law before the council of Trent, 
the parties themselves were said to be the " ministers of the 
Sacrament " in the case of holy matrimony. The declared 
consent of the parties to take each other there and then con- 
stituted at once (although irregularly) holy matrimony. The 
presence of priest or witnesses was not necessary. In Reg. v. 
Millis, however, it was held that in England it was always 
otherwise and that here the presence of a priest was necessary. 
High authorities, however, have doubted the historical accuracy 
of this decision. (5) The addition of houses of priests to the pro- 
vincial synods seems peculiar to England and Ireland. 

The historical position of the general canon law of the Catholic 
Church in the English provinces has, since the separation from 
Rome, been the subject of much consideration by English 
lawyers and ecclesiastics. The view taken by the king's courts, 
and acquiesced in by the ecclesiastical courts, since Henry VIII., 
is that the Church of England was always an independent 
national church, subject indeed to the general principles of the 



jus commune ecclesiasticum (Whitlock J. in Ever v. Owen, God- 
bolt's Reports, 432), but unbound by any particular constitu- 
tions of council or pope; unless those constitutions had been 
" received " here by English councils, or so recognized by English 
courts (secular or spiritual) as to become part of the ecclesiastical 
custom of the realm. Foreign canon law never bound (so it has 
been taught) proprio vigore. 

The sources of English ecclesiastical law (purely ecclesiastical) 
were therefore (1) the principles of the jus commune eccle- 
siasticum; (2) foreign particular constitutions received here, as 
just explained; (3) the constitutions and canons of English 
synods (cf. PhUl. Ecc. Law, part i. jzh. iv., and authorities there 
cited). 

1. On the existence of this jus commune ecclesiasticum and 
that the Church of England, in whatever sense independent, 
takes it over until she repeals it, see Escott v. Mastin, 4 Moo. 
P.C.C. 119. Lord Brougham, in delivering the judgment, 
speaks of the " common law prevailing for 1400 years over 
Christian Europe," and (p. 137) says that " nothing but express 
enactment can abrogate the common law of all Christendom 
before the Reformation of the Anglican Church." 

2. As to foreign particular constitutions in England, there are 
a great number of them, of which, it has been and is admitted, 
that they have currency in England. However papal in their 
origin, post-Reformation lawyers have regarded them as valid, 
unless they can be shown to be contrary to the king's pre- 
rogative, or to the common or statute law of the realm. To this 
doctrine express statutory authority (as the events have 
happened) has been given by 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19, sect. 7. A 
striking example of the doctrine is furnished by the decree of 
Innocent III. in the Fourth Lateran Council against pluralities. 
This decree was enforced in the court of Arches against a pluralist 
clerk in 1848 (Burder v. Mavor, 1 Roberts, 614). The courts 
of common law from Lord Coke's time downwards have recog- 
nized this " constitution of the pope " (as the queen's bench 
called it in 1598). The exchequer chamber, in 1837, declared 
it to have "become part of the common law of the land" 
(Alstan v. Atlay, 7 A. and E. 289). 

3. The particular constitutions of English synods are numer- 
ous and cover a large field. At least in legal theory, the only 
distinction between pre-Reformation and post-Reformation 
constitutions is in favour of the former — so long as they do not 
contravene the royal prerogative or the law of the land (see 
25 Hen. VIII. c. 19). The most important are collected to- 
gether and digested (so far as regards England) in Lyndwood's 
Provinciale, a work which remains of great authority in English 
courts. These constitutions are again divided into two classes: 

(a) provincial constitutions promulgated by provincial synods, 
usually in the name of the presiding archbishop or bishop; and 

(b) decrees of papal legates, Otho in 1236 and Othobon (Otto- 
buono de' Fieschi, afterwards Pope Adrian V.) in 1269. Canons 
passed since 25 Hen. VIII. c. 19 have not the parliamentary 
confirmation which that act has been held to give to previous 
canons, and do not necessarily bind the laity, although made 
under the king's licence and ratified by him. This doctrine 
laid down by Lord Hardwicke in Middleton v. Croft (2 Stra. 
1056) was approved in i860 in Marshall v. Bp. of Exeter (L.R, 3 
H.L. 17). Nevertheless, there are many provisions in these post- 
Reformation canons which are declaratory of the ancient usage 
and law of the Church, and the law which they thusrecord is bind- 
ing on the laity. The chief body of English post-Reformation 
canon law is to be found in the canons of 1603, amended in 
1865 and 1888. The canons of 1640 are apparently upon the 
same footing as those of 1603; notwithstanding objections made 
at the time that they were void because convocation continued 
to sit after the dissolution of parliament. The opinion of all 
the judges taken at the time was in favour of the legality of this 
procedure. 13 Car. ii. c. 12 simply prpvided that these canons 
should not be given statutory force by the operation of that 
act. 

In addition to the enactment of canons (strictly so-called) the 
English provincial synods since the Henrician changes have 



20U 



CANON LAW 



legislated — in 1570 by the enactment of the Thirty-Nine 
Articles, in 1661 by approving the present Book of Common 
Prayer, and in 1873 by approving shorter forms of matins and 
evensong. 

The distinction between pre-Henrician and post-Henrician 
procedure lies in the requirement, since 25 Hen. VIII., of the 
royal licence and confirmation. Apparently diocesan synods 
may still enact valid canons without the king's authority; but 
these bodies are not now called. 

The prevailing legal view of the position of the Church of 
England in regard to canon law has been just stated, and that is 
the view taken by judicial, authority for the past three cen- 
turies. On the other hand, it is suggested by, e.g., the late 
Professor Maitland, that it was not, in fact, the view taken here 
in the later middle ages-^-that in those ages there was no theory 
that " reception " here was necessary to validate papal decrees. 
It is said by this school of legal historians that, from the Con- 
quest down to Henry VIII., the Church of England was regarded 
by churchmen not as in any sense as separate entity, but as two 
provinces of the extra-territorial, super-national Catholic Church, 
and that the pope at this period was contemplated as the princeps 
of this Catholic Church, whose edicts bound everywhere, as those 
of Augustus had bound in the Roman empire. 

It is right that this view should be stated, but it is not that 
of the writer of this article. 

As to Ireland, in a national synod of the four Irish provinces 
held at Dublin before the four archbishops, in 1634, a hundred 
canons were promulgated with the royal licence, containing 
much matter not dealt with by similar constitutions in England. 
In 171 1, some further canons were promulgated (with royal 
licence) by another national synod. Some forms of special 
prayer were appended to these canons. 

In 1869 the Irish Church Act (32 and 33 Vict. c. 42) " dis- 
established " the Irish Church, sect. 19 repealed any act of 
parliament, law or custom whereby the bishops, clergy or laity 
of the said church were prohibited from holding synods or elect- 
ing representatives thereto for the purpose of making rules for 
the well-being and ordering of the said church, and enacted that 
no such law, &c, should hinder the said bishops, clergy and laity, 
by such representatives, lay and clerical, and so elected as they 
shall appoint, from meeting in general synod or convention and 
in such general synod or convention forming constitutions and 
providing for future representation of the members of the church 
in diocesan synods, general convention or otherwise. The 
Church of Ireland, so set free, created for herself new legislative 
authorities, unknown to the old canon law, viz. mixed synods 
of clergy and laity, and a system of representation by election, 
unknown to primitive or medieval times. Similar changes had, 
however, been introduced during the preceding century in some 
parts of the Anglican communion outside the British Isles 
(see infra). Sect. 20 of the same statute kept alive the old 
ecclesiastical law of Ireland by way of assumed contract (cf. 
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction). 

Under the provisions of this statute, the " archbishops and 
bishops of the ancient Apostolic and Catholic Church of Ire- 
land " (so they describe themselves), together with representa- 
tives of the clergy and laity, assembled in 1870, in " General 
Convention," to " provide for the regulation " of that church. 
This Convention declared that a General Synod of the arch- 
bishops and bishops, with representatives of the clergy and 
laity, should have chief legislative power in the Irish Church, 
with such administrative power as might be necessary and con- 
sistent with the church's episcopal constitution. This General 
Synod was to consist of two Houses — -the House of Bishops and 
the House of Lay and Clerical Representatives. No question was 
to be carried unless there were in its favour a majority of the 
clerical and lay representatives, voting either conjointly or by 
orders, and also a majority of the bishops, should they desire 
to vote. This General Synod was given full power to alter or 
amend canons, or to repeal them, or to enact new ones. For 
any alteration or amendment of " articles, doctrines, rites or 
nibrics," a two-thirds majority of each order of the represen- 



tative house was required and a year's delay for consultation of 
the diocesan synods. Provisions were made as to lay repre- 
sentation in the diocesan synods. The Convention also enacted 
some canons and a statute in regard to ecclesiastical tribunals 
(see Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction). It expressly provided 
that its own legislation might be repealed or amended by future 
general synods. 

In 187 1 the General Synod attempted to codify its canon 
law in forty-eight canons which, " and none other," were to 
have force and effect as the canons of the Church of Ireland. 
Since 1871 the General Synod has, from time to time, put forth 
other canons. 

The post-Reformation history of canon law in the Anglican 
communion in Scotland has differed from the story of that law 
in the last four centuries in Ireland. After the legislation under 
William and Mary disestablishing episcopacy in Scotland and 
subjecting its professors to civil penalties, little attention was 
given to canon law for many years. Synods of bishops at 
Edinburgh in 1724 and 1731 dealt with some disputed questions 
of ritual and ceremonial. In 1743 an assembly of five bishops 
enacted sixteen canons. A " primus " was to be chosen indiffer- 
ently from the bishops, but to have no other powers than those 
of convoking and presiding over synods. He was to hold office 
only during pleasure of the other bishops. Bishops were to be 
elected by the presbyters of the district. Such election was 
subject to the confirmation of the majority of the bishops. In 
1811, a " Code of Canons " was enacted by a " General Ecclesi- 
astical Synod," consisting of the bishops, the deans (viz. 
presbyters appointed by the bishops in each diocese to defend 
the interests of the presbyters and now for the first time given 
" decisive " voice in synods) and certain clerical representatives 
from the " districts " or dioceses. Future synods, called for the 
purpose of altering the code, were to consist of two chambers. 
The first was to be composed of the bishops; the second to 
consist of <the " deans " and clerical representatives. No law 
or canon was to be enacted or abrogated, save by the consent 
of both chambers. These canons were revised in 1828, 1829 
and 1838. The code of this last year created diocesan synods, 
to be held annually and to consist of the bishop, dean and all 
instituted clergy of the diocese. It also provided for the annual 
meeting of a purely episcopal synod, which was to receive 
appeals from either clergy or laity. In 1862-1863, another 
General Synod further revised and amended the Code of Canons. 
This revised code enabled the bishop to appoint a learned and 
discreet layman to act as his chancellor, to advise him in legal 
matters and be his assessor at diocesan synods. Assistant 
curates and mission priests were, under certain restrictions, 
given seats in diocesan synods. Male communicants were also 
permitted to be present at such synods, with a deliberative but 
not " decisive " voice; unless in special circumstances the 
bishop excluded them. Canon 46 provides that " if any question 
shall arise as to the interpretation of this Code of Canons or of 
any part thereof, the general principles of canon law shall be 
alone deemed applicable thereto." This provision was re- 
enacted in Canon 47 of 1876. Canon 51 of 1890, however, 
weakens this provision. It enacts that: " The preceding canons 
shall in all cases be construed in accordance with the principles 
of the civil law of Scotland. Nevertheless, it shall be lawful, 
in cases of dispute or difficulty concerning the interpretation 
of these canons, to appeal to any generally recognized principles 
of canon law." The canons of 1862-1863 also provided for a lay 
share in the election of bishops. In 1 890 the 3 2nd canon enacted 
that the " General Synod " should thereafter be called the 
Provincial Synod. 

The canon law in Scotland before the 16th century was gener- 
ally that of the continent of Europe. The usages of the church 
were similar to those in France, and had not the insular character 
of those in England and Ireland. The canon law regulating 
marriage, legitimacy and succession was taken over by the 
Scottish secular courts (see Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) 
and survived as part of the common law of the land almost un- 
impaired. Thus, the courts recognize marriages by verba de 



CANOPUS— CANOSA 



203 



praesenti or by verba de futuro cum copula — in this last matter 
following a decree of Gregory IX. — and also legitimation per 
subsequens matrimonium. But though one of the fontes juris 
Scotiae, canon law never was of itself authoritative in Scotland. 
In the canons of her national provincial councils (at whose yearly 
meetings representatives attended on behalf of the king) that 
country possessed a canon law of her own, which was recognized 
by the parliament and the popes, and enforced in the courts of 
law. Much of it, no doubt, was borrowed from the Corpus juris 
canonici and the English provincial canons. But the portions 
so adopted derived their authority from the Scottish Church. 
The general canon law, unless where it has been acknowledged 
by act of parliament, or a decision of the courts, or sanctioned 
by the canons of a provincial council, is only received in Scotland 
according to equity and expediency. 

The " Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States " is 
the organization of the Anglican Communion in the American 
colonies before the separation. This communion was subject to 
" all the laws of the Church of England applicable to its situa- 
tion " (Murray Hoffman, A Treatise on the Law of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church, New York, 1850, p. 17). This body of law 
the Protestant Episcopal Church of the United States took over 
{op. cit. p. 41 et seq.; F. Vinton, A Manual Commentary on the 
General Canon Law and the Constitution of the Protestant Epis- 
copal Church, New York, 1870, p. 16 et seq.). Much, however, 
of the English post-Reformation canonical legislation was not 
applicable to the United States, because of different circum- 
stances, as e.g. a very large portion of the canons of 1603 (Vinton, 
p. 32). In 1789, a General Convention, consisting of clerical 
and lay deputies as well as of bishops, assumed for itself and 
provided for its successors supreme legislative power. The 
concurrence of both " orders," clerical and lay, was required 
for the validity of any vote. Since 1853 a lay deputy to the 
Convention has been required to be a communicant (ib. p. 102). 
Upon the American bishops numbering more than three, they 
became a separate " House " from the " Convention." The 
House of Bishops was given a right to propose measures to the 
" House of Deputies," and to negative acts of the House of 
Deputies, provided they complied with certain forms. Similar 
" constitutions " providing for representation of the laity have 
been adopted by the different dioceses (Hoffman, op. cit. p. 184 
et seq.). Deacons are also admitted to a deciding voice in every 
diocese but New Jersey, where they may speak but not vote. 
A great body of legislation has been put forth by these bodies 
during the past century. 

Since 1870, at least, the " Church of the Province of South 
Africa " has secured autonomy while yet remaining a part of 
the Anglican Communion. By its constitution of that year 
the English Church in South Africa adopts the laws and usages 
of the Church of England, as far as they are applicable to an 
unestablished church, accepts the three creeds, the Thirty- 
Nine Articles, the Book of Common Prayer, the decisions of the 
undisputed general councils, the Authorized English Version 
of the Scriptures, disclaims the right of altering any of these 
standards of faith and doctrine, except in agreement with such 
alterations as may be adopted by a general synod of the Anglican 
Communion. But in interpreting these standards of faith and 
doctrine, the Church of the Province of South Africa is not 
bound by decisions other than those of its own Church courts, 
or such court as the Provincial Synod may recognize as a tribunal 
of appeal. The Provincial Synod is the legislative authority 
subject to a general synod of the Anglican Communion, provided 
such latter synod include representatives from the Church of 
South Africa. The Provincial Synod consists of (1) the House 
of Bishops, (2) the House of the Clergy, (3) the House of the 
Laity. No resolution can be passed which is not accepted by 
all three orders. Bishops are elected by the clergy with the 
assent of lay representatives, subject to the confirmation of the 
metropolitan and comprovincial bishops. The metropolitan 
is to be consecrated in England by the archbishop of Canterbury. 
He now bears the title of archbishop. All bishops are to enter 
into a contract to obey and maintain the constitution and canons 



of the province. Canon 18 of the Code of 1870 recognizes the 
offices of catechist, reader and sub-deacon (Wirgman, The 
English Church and People in South Africa, p. 223 et seq.). 

In the West Indies, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, 
provincial and diocesan synods or conventions have been formed 
on one or other of the types above mentioned and have enacted 
canons. (W. G. F. P.) 

CANOPUS, or Canobus, an ancient coast town of Lower 
Egypt, a hundred and twenty stadia, or 15 m. east of Alexandria, 
the principal port in Egypt for Greek trade before the foundation 
of Alexandria, situated at the mouth of the westernmost (Canopic 
or Heracleotic) branch of the Nile, on the western bank. The 
channel, which entered the Mediterranean at the western end 
of the Bay of Aboukir, is entirely silted up, but on the shore at 
Aboukir there are extensive traces of the city with its quays, &c. 
Excavation has disclosed granite monuments with the name 
of Rameses II., but they may have been brought at a late 
period for the adornment of the place. It is not certain that 
Canopus was an old Egyptian town, but it appears in Herodotus 
as an ancient port. In the 9th year of Ptolemy Euergetes 
(239 B.C.) a great assembly of priests at Canopus passed an 
honorific degree, inter alia, conferring the title ~Evepykrris 
" Benefactor " on the king. Two examples of this decree are 
known, inscribed in hieroglyphic, demotic and Greek. From 
it we learn that the native form of the name of Canopus was 
Karob. A temple of Osiris was built by Euergetes, but very 
near to Canopus was an older shrine, a temple of Heracles 
mentioned by Herodotus as an asylum for fugitive slaves. The 
decree shows that Heracles here stands for Ammon. Osiris 
was worshipped at Canopus under a peculiar form, a vase with 
a human head, and was identified with Canopus, the pilot of 
Menelaus, who was said to have been buried here: the name 
canopic has been applied, through an old misunderstanding, 
to the vases with human and animal heads in which the internal 
organs were placed by the Egyptians after embalming. In the 
Roman epoch the town was notorious for its dissoluteness. 
Aboukir means " father Cyrus," referring to a Coptic saint of 
that name. (F. Ll. G.) 

CANOPY (through Fr. canape, from Med. Lat. canapeum, 
classical conopeum, a mosquito curtain, Gr- Kwvwtp, a gnat), the 
upper part or cover of a niche, or the projecting ornament over 
an altar or seat or tomb. Early English canopies are generally 
simple, with trefoiled or cinquefoiled heads; but in the later 
styles they are very rich, and divided into compartments with 
pendants, knots, pinnacles, &c. The triangular arrangement 
over an Early English and Decorated doorway is often called 
a canopy. The triangular canopies in the north of Italy are 
peculiar. Those in England are generally part of the arrangement 
of the arch mouldings of the door, and form, as it were, the hood- . 
moulds to them, as at York. The former are above and in- 
dependent of the door mouldings, and frequently support an 
arch with a tympanum, above which is a triangular canopy, 
as in the Duomo at Florence. Sometimes the canopy and arch 
project from the wall, and are carried on small jamb shafts, as 
at San Pietro Martire, at Verona. There is an extremely curious 
canopy, being a sort of horseshoe arch, surmounting and breaking 
into a circular arch, at Tournai. Similar canopies are often 
over windows, as at York, over the great west window, and lower 
tiers in the towers. These are triangular, while the upper 
windows in the towers have ogee canopies. 

CANOSA (anc. Canusium), a town of Apulia, Italy, in the 
province of Bari, situated on the right bank of the Ofanto 
(anc. Aufidus), 505 ft. above sea-level, 15 m. S.W. of Barletta 
by rail. Pop. (1901) 24,230. It was rebuilt in 963 below the 
Roman city, which had been abandoned after its devastation 
by the Saracens in the 9th century. The former cathedral 
of S. Sabino (the bishopric passed in i8r8 to Andria), in the 
southern Romanesque style, was consecrated in 1101: it has 
five domes (resembling St Mark's at Venice, except that it is 
a Latin cross, instead of a Greek cross, in plan) and many ancient 
columns. The archiepiscopal throne and pulpit of the end of the 
nth century are also fine. On the south side of the building 



204 



CANOSSA— CANOVA 



is the detached mausoleum of Bohemund, son of Robert Guiscard, 
who died in mi, constructed partly in Byzantine, partly in 
the local style. It has fine bronze doors with long inscriptions; 
the exterior is entirely faced with cipollino (Carystian) marble. 
The conception of this mortuary chapel, which is unique at this 
period, was undoubtedly derived from the turbeh before a 
mosque; these turbehs are square, domed-roofed tombs in 
which the sultans and distinguished Mahommedans are buried 
(E. Bertaux, V Art dans l' Italic meridionale, Paris, 1904, i. 312). 
A medieval castle crowns the hill on the side of which the city 
stands. (See Canusium.) (T. As.) 

CANOSSA, a ruined castle, 1890 ft. above sea -level, in Emilia, 
Italy, 12 m. S.W. of Reggio Emilia, commanding a fine view of 
the Apennines. It belonged to the countess Matilda of Tuscany 
(d. 1 11 5), and is famous as the scene of the penance performed 
by the emperor Henry IV. before Pope Gregory VII. in 1077. 
The castle was destroyed by the inhabitants of Reggio in 1255. 

CANOVA, ANTONIO (1757-1822), Italian sculptor, was born 
on the 1st of November 1757, at Passagno, an obscure village 
situated amid the recesses of the hills of Asolo, where these 
form the last undulations of the Venetian Alps, as they subside 
into the plains of Treviso. At three years of age Canova was 
deprived of both parents, his father dying and his mother re- 
marrying. Their loss, however, was compensated by the tender 
solicitude and care of his paternal grandfather and grandmother, 
the latter of whom lived to experience in her turn the kindest 
personal attention from her grandson, who, when he had the 
means, gave her an asylum in his house at Rome. His father 
and grandfather followed the occupation of stone-cutters or 
minor statuaries; and it is said that their family had for several 
ages supplied Passagno with members of that calling. As soon 
as Canova 's hand could hold a pencil, he was initiated into the 
principles of drawing by his grandfather Pasino. The latter 
possessed some knowledge both of drawing and of architecture, 
designed well, and showed considerable taste in the execution 
of ornamental works. He was greatly attached to his art; 
and upon his young charge he looked as one who was to per- 
petuate, not only the family name, but also the family profession. 
The early years of Canova were passed in study. The bias of 
his mind was to sculpture, and the facilities afforded for the 
gratification of this predilection in the workshop of his grand- 
father were eagerly improved. In his ninth year he executed 
two small shrines of Carrara marble, which are still extant. 
Soon after this period he appears to have been constantly 
employed under his grandfather. Amongst those who patronized 
the old man was the patrician family Falier of Venice, and by 
this means young Canova was first introduced to the senator 
of that name, who afterwards became his most zealous patron. 
.Between the younger son, Giuseppe Falier, and the artist a 
friendship commenced which terminated only with life. The 
senator Falier was induced to receive him under his immediate 
protection. It has been related by an Italian writer and since 
repeated by several biographers, that Canova was indebted to 
a trivial circumstance — the moulding of a lion in butter — for 
the warm interest which Falier took in his welfare. The anecdote 
may or may not be true. By his patron Canova was placed 
under Bernardi, or, as he is generally called by filiation, Torretto, 
a sculptor of considerable eminence, who had taken up a 
temporary residence at Pagnano, a village in the vicinity of the 
senator's mansion. This took place whilst Canova was in his 
thirteenth year; and with Torretto he continued about two 
years, making in many respects considerable progress. This 
master returned to Venice, where he soon afterwards died; but 
by the high terms in which he spoke of his pupil to Falier, the 
latter was induced to bring the young artist to Venice, whither 
he accordingly went, and was placed under a nephew of Torretto. 
With this instructor he continued about a year, studying with 
the utmost assiduity. After the termination of this engagement 
he began to work on his own account, and received from his 
patron an order for a group, " Orpheus and Eurydice." The 
first figure, which represents Eurydice in flames and smoke, 
in the act of leaving Hades, was completed towards the close 



of his sixteenth year. It was highly esteemed by his patron 
and friends, and the artist was now considered qualified to appear 
before a public tribunal. The kindness of some monks supplied 
him with his first workshop, which was the vacant cell of a 
monastery. Here for nearly four years he laboured with the 
greatest perseverance and industry. He was also regular in 
his attendance at the academy, where he carried off several 
prizes. But he relied far more on the study and imitation of 
nature. From his contemporaries he could learn nothing, for 
their style was vicious. From their works, therefore, he re- 
verted to living models, as exhibited in every variety of situation. 
A large portion of his time was also devoted to anatomy, which 
science was regarded by him as " the secret of the art." He 
likewise frequented places of public amusement, where he care- 
fully studied the expressions and attitudes of the performers. 
He formed a resolution, which was faithfully adhered to for 
several years, never to close his eyes at night without having 
produced some design. Whatever was likely to forward his 
advancement in sculpture he studied with ardour. On archaeo- 
logical pursuits he bestowed considerable attention. With 
ancient and modern history he rendered himself well acquainted 
and he also began to acquire some of the continental languages. 
Three years had now elapsed without any production coming 
from his chisel. He began, however, to complete the group for 
his patron, and the Orpheus which followed evinced the great 
advance he had made. The work was universally applauded, 
and laid the foundation of his fame. Several groups succeeded 
this performance, amongst which was that of " Daedalus and 
Icarus," the most celebrated work of his noviciate. The 
simplicity of style and the faithful imitation of nature which 
characterized them called forth the warmest admiration. His 
merits and reputation being now generally recognized, his 
thoughts began to turn from the shores of the Adriatic to the 
banks of the Tiber, for which he set out at the commencement 
of his twenty-fourth year. 

Before his departure for Rome, his friends had applied to. the 
Venetian senate for a pension, to enable him to pursue his studies 
without embarrassment. The application was ultimately suc- 
cessful. The stipend amounted to three hundred ducats (about 
£60 per annum), and was limited to three years. Canova had 
obtained letters of introduction to the Venetian ambassador, 
the Cavaliere Zulian, and enlightened and generous protector of 
the arts, and was received in the most hospitable manner. His 
arrival in Rome, on the 28th of December 1780, marks a new era 
in his life. It was here he was to perfect himself by a study of the 
most splendid relics of antiquity, and to put his talents to the 
severest test by a competition with the living masters of the art. 
The result was equal to the highest hopes cherished either by 
himself or by his friends. The work which first established his 
fame at Rome was " Theseus vanquishing the Minotaur." The 
figures are of the heroic size. The victorious Theseus is repre- 
sented as seated on the lifeless body of the monster. The 
exhaustion which visibly pervades his whole frame proves the 
terrible nature of the conflict in which he has been engaged. 
Simplicity and natural expression had hitherto characterized 
Canova's style; with these were now united more exalted 
conceptions of grandeur and of truth. The Theseus was 
regarded with fervent admiration. 

Canova's next undertaking was a monument in honour of 
Clement XIV.; but before he proceeded with it he deemed it 
necessary to request permission from the Venetian senate, 
whose servant he considered himself to be, in consideration of the 
pension. This he solicited- in person, and it was granted. He 
returned immediately to Rome, and opened his celebrated 
studio close to the Via del Babuino. He spent about two years 
of unremitting toil in arranging the design and composing the 
models for the tomb of the pontiff. After these were completed, 
other two years were employed in finishing the monument, and 
it was finally opened to public inspection in 1787. The work, 
in the opinion of enthusiastic dilettanti, stamped the author as 
the first artist of modern times. After five years of incessant 
labour, he completed another cenotaph to the memory of Clement 



CANOVA 



205 



XIII., which raised his fame still higher. Works now came 
rapidly from his chisel. Amongst these is Psyche, with a butter- 
fly, which is placed on the left hand, and held by the wings with 
the right. This figure, which is intended as a personification of 
man's immaterial part, is considered as in almost every respect 
the most faultless and classical of Canova's works. In two 
different groups, and with opposite expression, the sculptor has 
represented Cupid with his bride; in the one they are standing, 
in the other recumbent. These and other works raised his 
reputation so high that the most flattering offers were sent him 
from the Russian court to induce him to remove to St Petersburg, 
but these were declined.. " Italy," says he, in writing of the 
occurrence to a friend, " Italy is my country — is the country and 
native soil of the arts. I cannot leave her; my infancy was 
nurtured here. If my poor talents can be useful in any other 
land, they must be of some utility to Italy; and ought not her 
claim to be preferred to all others ? " 

Numerous works were produced in the years 1795-1797, of 
which several were repetitions of previous productions. One 
was the celebrated group representing the " Parting of Venus 
and Adonis. ' ' This famous production was sent to Naples. The 
French Revolution was now extending its shocks over Italy; 
and Canova sought obscurity and repose in his native Passagno. 
Thither he retired in 1798, and there he continued for about a 
year, principally employed in painting, of which art also he had 
some knowledge. He executed upwards of twenty paintings 
about this time. One of his productions is a picture representing 
the dead body of the Saviour just removed from the cross, 
surrounded by the three Marys, S. John, Joseph of Arimathea, 
and, somewhat in the background, Nicodemus. Above appears 
the Father, with the mystic dove in the centre of a glory, and 
surrounded by a circle of cherubs. This composition, which was 
greatly applauded, he presented to the parochial church of his 
native place. Events in the political world having come to a 
temporary lull, he returned to Rome; but his health being 
impaired from arduous application, he took a journey through a 
part of Germany, in company with his friend Prince Rezzonico. 
He returned from his travels much improved, and again com- 
menced his labours with vigour and enthusiasm. 

Canova's sculptures have been distributed under three heads: 
— (1) Heroic compositions; (2) Compositions of grace and 
elegance; and (3) Sepulchral monuments and relievos. In 
noticing the works which fall under each of these divisions, it 
will be impossible to maintain a strict chronological order, but 
perhaps a better idea of his productions may thus be obtained. 
Their vast number, however, prevents their being all enumerated. 

(1) His " Perseus with the Head of Medusa " appeared soon 
after his return. The moment of representation is when the 
hero, flushed with conquest, displays the head of the " snaky 
Gorgon," whilst the right hand grasps a sword of singular 
device. By a public decree, this fine work was placed in one of 
the stanze of the Vatican hitherto reserved for the most precious 
works of antiquity; but it would be a mistake to say that it 
wholly sustains this comparison, or that it rivals the earlier 
realization of the same subject in Italian art, that by Cellini. 
In 1802, at the personal request of Napoleon, Canova repaired 
to Paris to model a bust of the first consul. The artist was 
entertained with munificence, and various honours were 
conferred upon him. The statue, which is colossal, was not 
finished till six years after. On the fall of the great Napoleon, 
Louis XVIII. presented this statue to the British government, 
by whom it was afterwards given to the duke of Wellington. 
" Palamedes," " Creugas and Damoxenus," the " Combat of 
Theseus and the Centaur," and "Hercules and Lichas" may 
close the class of heroic compositions, although the catalogue 
might be swelled by the enumeration of various others, such as 
" Hector and Ajax," and the statues of Washington, King 
Ferdinand of Naples, and others. The group of " Hercules and 
Lichas " is considered as the most terrible conception of Canova's 
mind, and in its peculiar style as scarcely to be excelled. 

(2) Under the head of compositions of grace and elegance, the 
statue of Hebe takes the first place in point of date. Four times 



has the artist embodied in stone the goddess of youth, and each 
time with some variation. The only material improvement, 
however, is the substitution of a support more suitable to the 
simplicity of the art. Each of the statues is, in all its details, in 
expression, attitude and delicacy of finish, strikingly elegant. 
The " Dancing Nymphs " maintain a character similar to that of 
the Hebe. The " Graces " and the " Venus " are more elevated. 
The " Awakened Nymph " is another work of uncommon 
beauty. The mother of Napoleon, his consort Maria Louisa 
(as Concord), to model whom the author made a further journey 
to Paris in 18 10, the princess Esterhazy and the muse Polymnia 
(Elisa Bonaparte) take their place in this class, as do the ideal 
heads, comprising Corinna, Sappho, Laura, Beatrice and Helen 
of Troy. 

(3) Of the cenotaphs and funeral monuments the most splendid 
is the monument to the archduchess Maria Christina of Austria, 
consisting of nine figures. Besides the two for the Roman 
pontiffs already mentioned, there is one for Alfieri, another for 
Emo, a Venetian admiral, and a small model of a cenotaph for 
Nelson, besides a great variety of monumental relievos. 

The events which marked the life of the artist during the first 
fifteen years of the period in which he was engaged on the above- 
mentioned works scarcely merit notice. His mind was entirely 
absorbed in the labours of his studio, and, with the exception of 
his journeys to Paris, one to Vienna, and a few short intervals of 
absence in Florence and other parts of Italy, he never quitted 
Rome. In his own words, " his statues were the sole proofs of 
his civil existence." There was, however, another proof, which 
modesty forbade him to mention, an ever-active benevolence, 
especially towards artists. In 181 5 he was commissioned by the 
Pope to superintend the transmission from Paris of those works 
of art which had formerly been conveyed thither under the 
direction of Napoleon. By his zeal and exertions, for there 
were many conflicting interests to reconcile, he adjusted the 
affair in a manner at once creditable to his judgment and fortunate 
for his country. In the autumn of this year he gratified a wish he 
had long entertained of visiting London, where he received the 
highest tokens of esteem. The artist for whom he showed 
particular sympathy and regard in London was Haydon, who 
might at the time be counted the sole representative of historical 
painting there, and whom he especially honoured for his cham- 
pionship of the Elgin marbles, then recently transported to 
England, and ignorantly depreciated by polite connoisseurs. 
Canova returned to Rome in the beginning of 1816, with the 
ransomed spoils of his country's genius. Immediately after, 
he received several marks of distinction, — by the hand of the 
Pope himself his name was inscribed in " the Golden Volume of 
the Capitol," and he received the title of marquis of Ischia, with 
an annual pension of 3000 crowns, about £625. 

He now contemplated a great work, a colossal statue of 
Religion. The model filled Italy with admiration; the marble 
was procured, and the chisel of the sculptor ready to be applied 
to it, when the jealousy of churchmen as to the site, or some other 
cause, deprived the country of the projected work. The mind of 
Canova was inspired with the warmest sense of devotion, and 
though foiled in this instance he resolved to consecrate a shrine to 
the cause. In his native village he began to make preparations 
for erecting a temple which was to contain, not only the above 
statue, but other works of his own; within its precincts were 
to repose also the ashes of the founder. Accordingly he repaired 
to Passagno in 1819. At a sumptuous entertainment which he 
gave to his workmen, there occurred an incident which marks 
the kindliness of his character. When the festivities of the day 
had terminated, he requested the shepherdesses and peasant- 
girls of the adjacent hamlets to pass in review before him, and to 
each he made a present, expending on the occasion about £400. 
We need not, therefore, be surprised that a few years afterwards, 
when the remains of the donor came to be deposited in their last 
asylum, the grief which the surrounding peasantry evinced was 
in natural expression so intense as to eclipse the studied solemnity 
of more pompous mourning. 

After the foundation-stone of this edifice had been kid, 



2o6 



CANOVAS DEL CASTILLO 



Canova returned to Rome; but every succeeding autumn he 
continued to visit Passagno, in order to direct the workmen, and 
encourage them with pecuniary rewards and medals. In the 
meantime the vast expenditure exhausted his resources, and 
compelled him to labour with unceasing assiduity notwithstand- 
ing age and disease. During the period which intervened between 
commencing queries at Passagno and his decease, he executed
or finished some of his most striking works'. Amonpst these were 
the group " Mars and Venus," the colossal figure of Pius VI., the 
" Pieta," the " St John," the " recumbent Mag.lalen." The 
last performance which issued from his hand was a colossal bust 
of his friend , the Count Cicognara. In May 1 8 2 2 he paid a visit to 
Naples, to superintend the construction of wax moulds for an 
equestrian statue of the perjured Bourbon king Ferdinand. 
This journey materially injured his health, but he rallied again on 
his return to Rome. Towards the latter end of the year he paid 
his annual visit to the place of his birth, when he experienced a 
relapse. He proceeded to Venice, and expired there on the 
13th of October 1822, at the age of nearly sixty-five. His disease 
was one which had affected him from an early age, caused by the 
continual use of carving-tools, producing a depression of the ribs. 
The most distinguished funeral honours were paid to his remains, 
which were deposited in the temple at Passagno on the 25th of 
the same month. 

Canova, in a certain sense, renovated the art of sculpture in 
Italy, and brought it back to that standard from which it had 
declined when the sense both of classical beauty and moderation, 
and of Titanic invention and human or superhuman energy as 
embodied by the unexampled genius of Michelangelo, had 
succumbed to the overloaded and flabby mannerisms of the 17th 
and 18th centuries. His finishing was refined, and he had a special 
method of giving a mellow and soft appearance to the marble. 
He formed his models of the same size as the work was intended 
to be. The prominent defect of Canova's attractive and highly 
trained art is that which may be summed up in the word artifici- 
ality, — that quality, so characteristic of the modern mind, which 
seizes upon certain properties of conception and execution in the 
art of the past, and upon certain types of beauty or emotion in 
life, and makes a compound of the two — regulating both by the 
standard of taste prevalent in contemporary " high society," a 
standard which, referring to cultivation and refinement as its 
higher term, declines towards fashion as the lower. Of his moral 
character a generous and unwearied benevolence formed the most 
prominent feature. The greater part of the vast fortune realized 
by his works was distributed in acts of this description. He 
established prizes for artists and endowed all the academies of 
Rome. The aged and unfortunate were also the objects of his 
peculiar solicitude. His titles were numerous. He was enrolled 
amongst thenobilityof severalstates, decora ted withvariousorders 
of knighthood, and associated in the highest professional honours. 

See the Life of Canova by Memes; that by Missirini ; the Biografia 
">y the Count Cicognara ; Canova et ses ouvrages, by Quatremere de 
Quincy (1834) ; Opere scelte di Antonio Canova, by Anzelmi (Naples, 
1842) ; Canova, by A. G. Meyer (1898) ; and La Relazione del Canova 
con Napoli . . . memorie con documer.ti inediti, by Angelo Borzelli 
(1901). (W. M. R.) 

CANOVAS DEL CASTILLO, ANTONIO (1828-1897), Spanish 
statesman, was born in Malaga on the 8th of February 1828. 
Educated in his native town, he went to Madrid in 1845, bent 
upon finding means to complete his literary and philosophical 
studies. His uncle, Don Serafin Estebanez Calderon, found him 
a situation as clerk in the Madrid-Aranjuez railway, but Canovas 
soon took to journalism and literature, earning enough to support 
himself and pay for his law studies at the Madrid University. 
During this period he published his two best works — an historical 
novel, Las Campanas de Huesca, and the history of the decay of 
Spain from Philip III. to Charles II. under the house of Austria. 
He became a politician through his Junius-like letters to the 
" Murcielago " — The Bat, a satirical political journal— and by 
drawing up the manifesto of Manzanares in 1854 for Marshal 
O'Donnell, of whom he always remained a loyal adherent. 
Canovas entered the Cortes in 1854; he was made governor of 
Cadiz in 1857, sub-director of the state department in 1858, 



under-secretary at the home office in i860, minister of the 
interior in 1864, minister of the colonies in 1865, minister oi 
finance in 1866, and was exiled by Marshal Narvaez in the same 
year, afterwards becoming a bitter opponent of all the reactionary 
cabinets until the revolution of 1868. He took no part in 
preparing that event. He sat in the Cortes Constituyentes of 
1869 as a doctrinaire Conservative, combating all Radical and 
democratic reforms, and defending the exiled Bourbons; but he 
abstained from voting when the Cortes elected Amadeus king on 
the 16th of November 1870. He did not object to some of his 
political friends, like Silvela and Elduayen, entering the cabinets 
of King Amadeus, and in 1872 declared that his attitude would 
depend on the concessions which government would make to 
Conservative principles. After the abdication of Amadeus and 
the proclamation of the federal republic, Canovas took the lead 
of the propaganda in favour of the restoration of the Bourbons, 
and was their principal agent and adviser. He drew up the 
manifesto issued in 1874 by the young king Alphonso XII., at 
that time a cadet at Sandhurst; but he dissented from the 
military men who were actively conspiring to organize an 
Alphonsist pronunciamiento. Like Marshal Concha, marquis del 
Duero, he would have preferred to let events develop enough to 
allow of the dynasty being restored without force of arms, and he 
severely blamed the conduct of the generals when he first heard 
of the pronunciamiento of Marshal Campos at Sagunto. Sagasta 
thereupon caused Canovas to be arrested(3othof December 1874) ; 
but the next day the Madrid garrison also proclaimed Alphonso 
XII. king, and Canovas showed the full powers he had received 
from the king to assume the direction of affairs. He formed a 
regency ministry pending the arrival of his majesty, who con- 
firmed his appointment, and for six years Canovas was premier 
except during the short-lived cabinets of Marshal Jovellar in 

1875 and Marshal Campos for a few months in 1879. Canovas 
was, in fact, the soul of the Restoration. He had to reconstruct a 
Conservative party out of the least reactionary parties of the days 
of Queen Isabella and out of the more moderate elements of the 
revolution. With such followers he made the constitution of 

1876 and all the laws of the monarchy, putting a limited franchise 
in the place of universal suffrage, curtailing liberty of conscience, 
rights of association and of meeting, liberty of the press, checking 
democracy, obliging the military to abstain from politics, con- 
ciliating the Carlists and Catholics by his advances to the Vatican, 
the Church and the religious orders, pandering to the protection- 
ists by his tariff policy, and courting abroad the friendship of 
Germany and Austria after contributing to the marriage of his 
king to an Austrian princess. Canovas crowned his policy by 
countenancing the formation of a Liberal party under Sagasta, 
flanked by Marshal Serrano and other Liberal generals, which 
took office in 1 88 1. He again became premier in 1883, and 
remained in office until November 1885; but he grew very un- 
popular, and nearly endangered the monarchy in 1885 by his 
violent repression of popular and press demonstrations, and of 
student riots in Madrid and the provinces. At the death of 
Alphonso XII. he at once advised the queen regent to send for 
Sagasta and the Liberals, and during five years he looked on 
quietly whilst Sagasta re-established universal suffrage and most 
of the liberties curtailed in 1876, and carried out a policy of free 
trade on moderate lines. In 1890 Canovas took office under the 
queen regent, and one of his first acts was to reverse the tariff 
policy of the Liberals, denouncing all the treaties of commerce, 
and passing in 1892 a highly protectionist tariff. This was the 
starting-point of the decline in foreign trade, the advance of 
foreign exchanges, the decay of railway traffic, and the monetary 
and financial crisis which continued from 1892 to 1898. Splits in 
the Conservative ranks forced Canovas to resign at the end of 
1893, and Sagasta came in for eighteen months. Canovas 
resumed office in March 1895 immediately after the outbreak of 
the Cuban insurrection, and devoted most of his time and efforts, 
with characteristic determination, to the preparation of ways and 
means for sending 200,000 men to the West Indies to carry out 
his stern and unflinching policy of no surrender, no concessions 
and no reforms. He was making up his mind for another effort 



CANROBERT— CANTABRIAN MOUNTAINS 



207 



to enable General Weyler to enforce the reforms that had 
been wrung from the Madrid government, more by American 
diplomacy than from a sense of the inevitable, when the bullet of 
an anarchist, in August 1897, at the baths of Santa Agueda, cut 
short his career. On the whole, Canovas must be regarded as the 
greatest Spanish statesman of the close of the 19th century. He 
was not only a politician but also a man of the world, a writer of 
considerable merit, a scholar well versed in social, economic 
and philosophical questions, a great debater, a clever lecturer, a 
member of all the Madrid academies and a patron of art and 
letters. (A. E. H.) 

CANROBERT, FRANCOIS CERTAIN (1809-1895), marshal of 
France, was born at St Cere (Lot) on the 27th of June 1809 and 
educated at St Cyr; he received a commission as sub-lieutenant 
in 1828, becoming lieutenant in 1833. He went to Algeria in 
1835, served in the expedition to Mascara, at the capture of 
Tlemcen, and in 1837 became captain. In the same year he was 
wounded in the storm of Constantine, receiving the Legion of 
Honour for his conduct. In 1839 he was employed in organizing 
a battalion of the Foreign Legion for the Carlist Wars. In 1841 
he was again serving in Africa. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 
1846 and colonel of the 3rd regiment in 1847, he commanded the 
expedition against Ahmed Sghir in 1848, and defeated the 
Arabs at the Djerma Pass. Transferred to the Zouaves, he 
defeated the Kabyles, and in 1849 displayed both courage and 
energy in reinforcing the blockaded garrison of Bou Sada, and in 
command of one of the attacking columns at Zaatcha (December 
1849). For his valour on the latter occasion he received the 
rank of general of brigade and the commandership of the Legion 
of Honour. He led the expedition against Narah in 1850 and 
destroyed the Arab stronghold. Summoned to Paris, he was 
made aide-de-camp to the president, Louis' Napoleon, and took 
part in the coup d'etat of the 2nd of December 1851. In the 
Crimean War he commanded a division at the Alma, where he 
was twice wounded. He held a dormant commission entitling 
him to command in case of St Arnaud's death, and he thus 
succeeded to the chief command of the French army a few days 
after the battle. He was slightly wounded and had a horse 
killed under him at Inkerman, when leading a charge of Zouaves. 
Disagreements with the English commander-in-chief and, in 
general, the disappointments due to the prolongation of the 
siege of Sevastopol led to his resignation of the command, but he 
did not return to France, preferring to serve as chief of his old 
division almost up to the fall of Sevastopol. After his return to 
France he was sent on diplomatic missions to Denmark and 
Sweden, and made a marshal and senator of France (grand cross 
Legion of Honour, and honorary G.C.B.). He commanded the 
III. army corps in Lombardy in 1859, distinguishing himself at 
Magenta and Solferino. He successively commanded the camp 
at Chalons, the IV. army corps at Lyons and the army of Paris. 
In the Franco-German War he commanded the VI. army corps, 
which won the greatest distinction in the battle of Gravelotte, 
where Canrobert commanded on the St Privat position. The 
VI. corps was amongst those shut up in Metz and included in the 
surrender of that fortress. After the war Canrobert was appointed 
a member of the superior council of war, and was also active in 
political life,, being elected senator for Lot in 1876 and for 
Charente in 1879 and again in 1885. He died at Paris on the 
28th of January 1895 and his remains received a public funeral. 
His Souvenirs were published in 1898 at Paris. 
. CANT, ANDREW (1590 7-1663), a leader of the Scottish 
Covenanters. About 1623 the people of Edinburgh called him to 
be their minister, but he was rejected by James I. Ten years 
later he was minister of Pitsligo in Aberdeenshire, a charge 
which he left in 1638 for that of Newbattle in Mid-Lothian. In 
July of that year he went with other commissioners to Aberdeen 
in the vain attempt to induce the university and the presbytery 
of that city to subscribe the National Covenant, and in the 
following November sat in the general assembly at Glasgow 
which abolished episcopacy in Scotland. In 1 640 he was chaplain 
to the Scottish army and then settled as minister at Aberdeen. 
Though a stanch Covenanter, he was a zealous Royalist, 



preaching before Charles I. in Edinburgh, and stoutly advocating 
the restoration of the monarchy in the time of the Commonwealth. 
Cant's frequent and bitter attacks on various members of his 
congregation led in 1660 to complaints laid before the magis- 
trates, in consequence of which he resigned his charge. His son 
Andrew was principal of Edinburgh University (1675-1685) . 

CANT. (1) (Possibly through the Fr. fromLat. cantos, corner), 
in architecture, a term used where the corner of a square is cut 
off, octagonally or otherwise. Thus a bay window, the sides of 
which are not parallel, or at right angles to the spectator, is said 
to be canted. (2) (From the Lat. cantare, to sing, very early in 
use, in a depreciatory sense, of religious services), a word appear- 
ing in English in the 16th century 'for the whining speech of 
beggars; hence it is applied to thieves' or gipsies' jargon, to the 
peculiar language of any class or sect, to any current phrase or 
turn of language, and particularly to the hypocritical use of 
pious phraseology. 

CANTABRI, an ancient tribe which inhabited the north coast 
of Spain near Santander and Bilbao and the mountains behind — 
a district hence known as Cantabria. Savage and untameable 
mountaineers, they long defied the Roman arms and made them- 
selves a name for wild freedom. They were first attacked by the 
Romans about 1 50 B.C. ; they were not subdued till Agrippa and 
Augustus had carried out a series of campaigns (29-19 B.C.) which 
ended in their partial annihilation. Thenceforward their land 
was part of the province Hispania Tarraconensis with some 
measure of local self-government. They became slowly Roman- 
ized, but developed little town life and are rarely mentioned in 
history. They provided recruits for the Roman auxilia, like 
their neighbours the Asttires, and their land contained lead mines, 
of which, however, little is known. 

CANTABRIAN MOUNTAINS (Span. Cordillera Cantabrica), 
a mountain chain which extends for more than 300 m. across 
northern Spain, from the western limit of the Pyrenees to the 
borders of Galicia, and on or near the coast of the Bay of Biscay. 
The Cantabrians stretch from east to west, nearly parallel to the 
sea, as far as the pass of Leitariegos, afterwards trending south- 
ward between Leon and Galicia. Their western boundary is 
marked by the valley of the river Mifio (Portuguese Minho), by 
the lower Sil, which flows into the Mifio, and by the Cabrera, 
a small tributary of the Sil. Some geographers regard the 
mountains of Galicia beyond the Mifio as an integral part of the 
same system ; others confine the name to the eastern half of the 
highlands between Galicia and the Pyrenees, and call their 
western half the Asturian Mountains. There are also many 
local names for the subsidiary ranges within the chain. As a 
whole, the Cantabrian Mountains are remarkable for their 
intricate ramifications, but almost everywhere, and especially in 
the east, it is possible to distinguish two principal ranges, 
from which the lesser ridges and mountain masses radiate. One 
range, or series of ranges, closely follows the outline of the coast; 
the other, which is loftier, forms the northern limit of the great 
tableland of Castile and Leon, and is sometimes regarded as a 
continuation of the Pyrenees. The coastal range rises in some 
parts sheer above the sea, and everywhere has so abrupt a 
declivity that the strearhs which flow seaward are all short and 
swift. The descent from the southern range to the high plateaus 
of Castile is more gradual, and several large rivers, notably the 
Ebro, rise here and flow to the south or west. The breadth of the 
Cantabrian chain, with all its ramifications, increases from about 
60 m. in the east to about 115 m. in the west. Many peaks are 
upwards of 6000 ft. high, but the greatest altitudes are attained 
in the central ridges on the borders of Leon, Oviedo, Palencia 
and Santander. Here are the Pefia Vieja (8743 ft.), Prieta 
(8304 ft.) and E'spinguete (7898 ft.); an unnamed summit in 
the Penas de Europa, to which range the Pefia Vieja also belongs, 
rises on the right bank of the Sella to a height of 8045 ft. ; farther 
west the peaks of Manipodre, Ubifia, Rubia and Cuifia all exceed 
7000 ft. A conspicuous feature of the chain, as of the adjacent 
tableland, is the number of its parameras, isolated plateaus shut 
in by lofty mountains or even by precipitous walls of rock. At 
the south-western extremity of the chain is el Vierzo, once a 



208 



CANTACUZINO— CANTARINI 



lake-bed, now a valley drained by the upper Sil and enclosed by 
mountains which bifurcate from the main range south of the 
pass of Leitariegos — the Sierra de Justredo and Montafias de 
Leon curving towards the east and south-west, the Sierra de 
Picos, Sierra del Caurel and other ranges curving towards the 
west and south-east. The Cantabrians are rich in coal and iron; 
an account of their geological structure is given under Spain. 
They are crossed at many points by good roads and in their 
eastern half by several railways. In the west, near the pass of 
Pajares, the railway from Leon to Gijon passes through the 
Perruca tunnel, which is 2 m. long and 4200 ft. above sea-level; 
the railway descends northward through fifty-eight smaller 
tunnels. The line from Leon to Orense also traverses a remark- 
able series of tunnels, bridges and deep cuttings. 

CANTACUZINO, Cantacuzen or Cantactjzene, the name 
of a family which traces its origin to the Byzantine emperors and 
writers of the same name (see under John V., Cantacuzene) . 
The founder of the family, Andronik, migrated to Rumania in 
1633, and from his two sons Constantine and Gheorge sprang the 
two principal lines which afterwards branched into numerous 
families of nobles and high dignitaries, including hospodars 
(rulers) of Walachia and Moldavia. The Cantacuzinos were 
represented in every branch of administration and in the world 
of letters. Under their influence the Rumanian language and 
literature in the 17th century reached their highest development. 
Among the more prominent members of the family the following 
may be mentioned. <i) Sherban Cantacuzino (1640-1688), 
appointed hospodar of Walachia in 1679. He served under the 
Turks in the siege of Vienna, and when they were defeated it is 
alleged that he conceived the plan of marching on Constantinople 
to drive the Turks out of Europe, the western powers having 
promised him their moral support. In the midst of his prepara- 
tions he died suddenly, poisoned, it is said, by the boyars who 
were afraid of his vast plans. Far more important was his activity 
in economic and literary directions. He introduced the maize 
into Rumania; it is now the staple food of the country. He 
founded the first Rumanian school in Bucharest; he assisted 
liberally in the establishment of various printing offices; and 
under his auspices the famous Rumanian Bible appeared in 
Bucharest in 1688. Through his influence also the Slavonic 
language was officially and finally abolished from the liturgy 
and the Rumanian language substituted for it. (2) Stefan 
Cantacuzino, son of Constantine, prince of Walachia, 1714-1716. 
(3) Demetrius Cantacuzino, prince of Moldavia, 1674-1676. 
He left an unsatisfactory record. Descendants of Demetrius and 
Sherban have emigrated to Russia, and held high positions there 
as governors of Bessarabia and in other responsible posts. (4) 
Of the Moldavian Cantacuzinos, Theodore is well known as a 
chronicler of his times (c. 1740). (5) Gheorge Cantacuzino 
(b. 1837), son of Gregori (1 800-1 849). He was appointed in 
1870 minister of public instruction in Rumania; in 1889, pre- 
sident of the chamber; in 1892, president of the senate; from 
1899 he was head of the Conservative party, and from 1905 
to 1907 prime minister (see also Rumania: History). (M. G.) 

CANTAGALLO, an inland town of the state of Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, about 100 m. by rail N.E. of the port of Rio de Janeiro, 
with which it is connected by the Cantagallo railway. Pop. 
(1890) of the municipality, 26,067, of whom less than one-fourth 
live in the town. Cantagallo is situated in the fertile Parahyba 
valley and is the commercial centre of a rich coffee-producing 
district. There are exhausted gold placer mines in its vicinity, 
but they were not rich enough to cause any considerable develop- 
ment in mining. Coffee production is the principal industry, 
but sugar-cane is grown to a limited extent, and some attention 
is given to the raising of cattle and swine. The district is an 
excellent fruit region. 

CANTAL, a department of central France, formed from 
Haute-Auvergne, the southern portion of the old province of 
Auvergne. It is bounded N. by the department of Puy-de- 
D6me, E. by Haute-Loire, S.E. by Lozere, S. by Aveyron and 
Lozere, and W. by Correze and Lot. Area 2231 sq. m. Pop. 
(1906) 228,690. Cantal is situated in the middle of the central 



plateau of France. It takes its name from the Monts du Cantal, 
a volcanic group occupying its central region, and continued 
towards the north and east by ranges of lower altitude. The 
Plomb du Cantal, the culminating summit of the department, 
attains a height of 6096 ft.; and its neighbours, the Puy Mary 
and the Puy Chavaroche, attain a height of 5863 and 5722 ft. 
respectively. Immediately to the east of this central mass lies 
the lofty but fertile plateau of Planeze, which merges into the 
Monts de la Margeride on the eastern border. The valley of the 
Truyere skirts the Planeze on the south and divides it from the 
Monts d'Aubrac, at the foot of which lies Chaudesaigues, noted 
for its thermal springs, the most important in the department. 
Northwards the Monts du Cantal are connected with the Monts 
Dore by the volcanic range of Cezallier and the arid plateaus of 
Artense. In the west of the department grassy plateaus and 
beautiful river valleys slope gently down from the central 
heights. Most of the streams of the department have their 
sources in this central ridge and fall by a short and rapid course 
into the rivers which traverse the extensive valleys on either side. 
The principal rivers are the Alagnon, a tributary of the Allier; 
the Celle and Truyere, tributaries of the Lot; and the Cere and 
Rue, tributaries of the Dordogne. The climate of the depart- 
ment varies considerably in the different localities. In the 
alluvial plain between Murat and St Flour, and in the south- 
west in the arrondissement of Aurillac, it is generally mild and 
dry; but in the northern and central portions the winters are 
long and severe and the hurricanes peculiarly violent. The 
cold and damp of the climate in these districts are great obstacles 
to the cultivation of wheat, but rye and buckwheat are grown 
in considerable quantities, and in natural pasture Cantal is 
extremely rich. Cattle are accordingly reared with profit, 
especially around Salers and in the Monts d'Aubrac, while butter 
and Roquefort cheese are made in large quantities. Large flocks 
of sheep pasture in the Monts d'Aubrac and elsewhere in the 
department; goats are also reared. The inhabitants are simple 
and primitive and accustomed to live on the scantiest fare. 
Many of them migrate for part of the year to Paris and the pro- 
vinces, where they engage in the humblest occupations. The 
principal articles of food are rye, buckwheat and chestnuts. 
The internal resources of the department are considerable; but 
the difficulty of land-carriage prevents them being sufficiently 
developed. The hills and valleys abound with game and the 
streams with fish. Cantal produces a vast variety of aromatic 
and medicinal plants; and its mineral products include coal, 
antimony and lime. The department has no prominent manu- 
factures. Live-stock, cheese, butter and coal are the principal 
exports; coal, wine, cereals, flour and earthenware are im- 
ported. The department is served by the railways of the Orleans 
and Southern companies, the construction of which at some 
points demanded considerable engineering skill, notably in the 
case of the viaduct of Garabit spanning the gorge of the Truyere. 
Cantal is divided into four arrondissements — Aurillac, Mauriac, 
Murat and St Flour — 23 cantons and 267 communes. It belongs 
to the region of the XIII. army corps and to the acad6mie 
(educational division) of Clermont-Ferrand. Its bishopric is 
at St Flour and depends on the archbishopric of Bourges. Its 
court of appeal is at Riom. The capital is Aurillac (<?.».), and 
St Flour (q.v.) is the other principal town. 

CANTARINI, SIMONE (161 2-1648), called Simone da Pesaro, 
painter and etcher, was born at Oropezza near Pesaro in 161 2. 
He was a disciple of Guido Reni and a fellow-student of Domeni-, 
chino and Albano. The irritability of his temper and his vanity 
were extreme; and it is said that his death, which took place 
at Verona in 1648, was occasioned by chagrin at his failure in 
a portrait of the duke of Mantua. Others relate that he was 
poisoned by a Mantuan painter whom he had injured. His 
pictures, though masterly and spirited, are deficient in originality. 
Some of his works have been mistaken for examples of Guido 
Reni, to whom, indeed, he is by some considered superior in the 
extremities of the figures. Among his principal paintings are 
"St Anthony," at Cagli; the "Magdalene," at Pesaro; the 
"Transfiguration," in the Brera Gallery, Milan; the "Portrait 



CANTATA— CANTERBURY, VISCOUNT 



209 



of Guido," in the Bologna gallery; and " St Romuald," in the 
Casa Paolucci. His most celebrated etching is " Jupiter, 
Neptune and Pluto, honouring the arms of Cardinal Borghese." 

CANTATA (Italian for a song or story set to music), a vocal 
composition accompanied by instruments and generally con- 
taining more than one movement. In the 16th century, when 
all serious music was vocal, the term had no reason to exist, but 
with the rise of instrumental music in the 1 7th century cantatas 
began to exist under that name as soon as the instrumental art 
was definite enough to be embodied in sonatas. From the middle 
of the 17th till late in the 18th century a favourite form of Italian 
chamber music was the cantata for one or two solo voices, with 
accompaniment of harpsichord and perhaps a few other solo 
instruments. It consisted at first of a declamatory narrative 
or scene in recitative, held together by a primitive aria repeated 
at intervals. Fine examples may be found in the church music 
of Carissimi; and the English vocal solos of Purcell (such as 
Mad Tom and Mad Bess) show the utmost that can be made of 
this archaic form. With the rise of the Da Capo aria the cantata 
became a group of two or three arias joined by recitative. 
Handel's numerous Italian duets and trios are examples on a 
rather large scale. His Latin motet Silete Venti, for soprano 
solo, shows the use of this form in church music. 

The Italian solo cantata naturally tended, when on a large 
scale, to become indistinguishable from a scene in an opera. 
In the same way the church cantata, solo or choral, is indis- 
tinguishable from a small oratorio or portion of an oratorio. 
This is equally evident whether we examine the unparalleled 
church cantatas of Bach, of which nearly 200 are extant, or the 
Chandos Anthems of Handel. In Bach's case many of the 
larger cantatas are actually called oratorios; and the Christmas 
Oratorio is a collection of six church cantatas actually intended 
for performance on six different days, though together forming 
as complete an artistic whole as any classical oratorio. 

The essential point, however, in Bach's church cantatas is 
that they formed part of a church service, and moreover of 
a service in which the organization of the music was far more 
coherent than is possible in the Anglican church. Many of 
Bach's greatest cantatas begin with an elaborate chorus followed 
by a couple of arias and recitatives, and end with a plain chorale. 
This has often been commented upon as an example of Bach's 
indifference to artistic climax in the work as a whole. But no 
one will maintain this who realizes the place which the church 
cantata occupied in the Lutheran church service. The text was 
carefully based upon the gospel or lessons for the day; unless 
the cantata was short the sermon probably took place after the 
first chorus or one of the arias, and the congregation joined in 
the final chorale. Thus the unity of the service was the unity 
of the music; and, in the cases where all the movements of the 
cantata were founded on one and the same chorale-tune, this 
unity has never been equalled, except by those 16th-century 
masses and motets which are founded upon the Gregorian tones 
of the festival for which they are written. 

In modern times the term cantata is applied almost exclusively 
to choral, as distinguished from solo vocal music. There has, 
. perhaps, been only one kind of cantata since Bach which can 
be recognized as an art form and not as a mere title for works 
otherwise impossible to classify. It is just possible to recognize 
as a distinct artistic type that kind of early 19th-century cantata 
in which the chorus is the vehicle for music more lyric and song- 
like than the oratorio style, though at the same time not exclude 
ing the possibility of a brilliant climax in the shape of a light 
order of fugue. Beethoven's Glorreiche Augenblick is a brilliant 
" pot-boiler " in this style; Weber's Jubel Cantata is a typical 
specimen, and Mendelssohn's Walpargisnacht is the classic. 
Mendelssohn's " Symphony Cantata," the Lobgesang, is a hybrid 
work, partly in the oratorio style. It is preceded by three sym- 
phonic movements, a device avowedly suggested by Beethoven's 
ninth symphony; but the analogy is not accurate, as Beet- 
hoven's work is a symphony of which the fourth movement is 
a choral finale of essentially single design, whereas Mendelssohn's 
" Symphony Cantata " is a cantata with three symphonic 



preludes. The full lyric possibilities of a string of choral 
songs were realized at last by Brahms in his Rinaldo, set to a 
text which Goethe wrote at the same time as he wrote thai of 
the Walpurgisnacht. ■ The point of Brahms's work (his only 
experiment in this genre) has naturally been lost by critics who 
expected in so voluminous a composition the qualities of an 
elaborate choral music with which it has nothing whatever 
to do. Brahms has probably said the last word on this subject; 
and the remaining types of cantata (beginning with Beethoven's 
Meeres-stille, and including most of Brahms's and many notable 
English small choral works) are merely so many different ways 
of setting to choral music a poem which is just too long to be 
comprised in one movement. (D. F. T.) 

CANTEEN (through the Fr. cantine, from Ital. cantina, a 
cellar), a word chiefly used in a military sense for an official 
sutler's shop, where provisions, &c, are sold to soldiers. The 
word was formerly applied also to portable equipments for carry- 
ing liquors and food, or for cooking in the field. Another sense 
of the word, which has survived to the present day, is that of a 
soldier's water-bottle, or of a small wooden or metal can for 
carying a workman's liquor, &c. 

CANTEMIR, the name of a celebrated family of Tatar origin, 
which came from the Crimea in the 17th century and settled in 
Moldavia. 

Constantine Cantemir became a prince of Moldavia, 1685- 
1693. He was a good and conscientious ruler, who protected 
the people from the rapacity of the tax-gatherers and introduced 
peace into his country. He was succeeded on the throne by his 
son Antioch, who ruled twice, 1696-1700 and 1705-1707. 

His youngest brother, Demetrius or Demeter Cantemir 
(b. October 26, 1673), was made prince of Moldavia in 1710; he 
ruled only one year, 1710-1711, when he joined Peter the Great 
in his campaign against the Turks and placed Moldavia under 
Russian suzerainty. Beaten by the Turks, Cantemir emigrated 
to Russia, where he and his family finally settled. He died at 
Kharkov in 1723. He was known as one of the greatest linguists 
of his time, speaking and writing eleven languages, and being 
well versed in Oriental scholarship. He was a voluminous and 
original writer of great sagacity and deep penetration, and his 
writings range over many subjects. The best known is his 
History of the Growth and Decay of the Ottoman Empire. He also 
wrote a history of oriental music, which is no longer extant; the 
first critical history of Moldo-Walachia; the first geographical, 
ethnographical and economic description of Moldavia, De- 
scriptio Moldaviae, under the name of Historia Hieroglyphica, to 
which he furnished a key, and in which the principal persons are 
represented by animals; also the history of the two ruling 
houses of Brancovan and Cantacuzino; and a philosophical 
treatise on the old theme of the disputation between soul and 
body, written in Greek and Rumanian under the title Divanul 
Lumii. 

The latter's son, Antioch Cantemir (born in Moldavia, 1700; 
died in Paris, 1744), became in 1731 Russian minister in Great 
Britain, and in 1736 minister plenipotentiary in Paris. He 
brought to London the Latin MS. from whence the English 
translation of his father's history of the Turkish empire was made 
by N. Tindal, London, 1756, to which he added an exhaustive 
biography and bibliography of the author (pp. 455-460). He 
was a Russian poet and almost the first author of satires in 
modern Russian literature. 

Bibliography. — Operele Principelui D. Cantemir, ed. Academia 
Romana (1872 foil.); A. Philippide, Introducere in istoria limbei si 
literal, romane (Iasi, 1888), pp. 192-202; O. G. Lecca, Familiile 
boeresti romane (Bukarest, 1898), pp. 144-148; M. Gaster, Chrestom. 
romana, i. 322, 359 (in Cyrillic). (M. G.) 

CANTERBURY, CHARLES MANNERS-SUTTON, ist Vis- 
count (1780-1845), speaker of the House of Commons, was the 
elder son of Charles Manners-Sutton (q.v.), afterwards archbishop 
of Canterbury, and was born on the 29th of January 1780. 
Educated at Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge, he graduated 
B.A. in 1802, and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1806. 
At the general election of this year he was returned to parliament 



2IO 



CANTERBURY 



in the Tory interest as member for Scarborough, and in 1809 
became judge-advocate-general in the ministry of Spencer 
Perceval. He retained this position until June 181 7, when he 
was elected speaker in succession to Charles Abbot, created 
Baron Colchester, refusing to exchange this office in 1827 for 
that of home secretary. In 1832 he abandoned Scarborough and 
was returned to parliament as one of the members for the 
university of Cambridge. Before the general election of 1832 
Manners-Sutton had intimated his desire to retire from the 
position of speaker and had been voted an annuity of £4000 a 
year. The ministry of Earl Grey, however, reluctant to meet 
the reformed House of Commons with a new and inexperienced 
occupant of the chair, persuaded him to retain his office, and in 
1833 he was elected speaker for the seventh time. Some feeling 
had been shown against him on this occasion owing to his Tory 
proclivities, and the Whigs frequently complained that outside 
the House he was a decided partisan. The result was that when 
a new parliament met in February 1835 a sharp contest ensued 
for the speakership, and Manners-Sutton was defeated by James 
Abercromby, afterwards Lord Dunfermline. In March 1835 the 
retiring speaker was raised to the peerage as Baron Bottesford 
and Viscount Canterbury. In 1835 he was appointed high 
commissioner for Canada, but owing to domestic reasons he 
never undertook the appointment. He died in London on the 
21st of July 1845 and was buried at Addington. His first wife 
was Lucy (d. 1815), daughter of John Denison of Ossington, by 
whom he had two sons and a daughter. Both his sons, Charles 
John (1812-1869), and John Henry Thomas (1814-1877), 
succeeded in turn to the viscounty. By his second wife, Ellen 
(d. 1845), widow of John Home-Purves, he had a daughter. 

CANTERBURY, a city and county of a city, the metropolis of 
an archdiocese of the Church of England, and a municipal, 
county and parliamentary borough of Kent, England, 62 m. 
E.S.E. of London by the South-Eastern & Chatham railway. 
Pop. (1901) 24,889. It lies on the river Stour, which here 
debouches from a beautiful narrow valley of the North Downs, 
the low but abrupt elevations of which command fine views of 
the city from the west and south, while the river presently enters 
upon the flat belt of land which separates the elevated Isle of 
Thanet from the rest of Kent. This belt represents the existence, 
in early historic times, of a sea-strait, and Fordwich, little more 
than 2 m. north-east of Canterbury, was once accessible for ship- 
ping. The city surrounds the precincts of the great cathedral. 

The Cathedral. — It was to Canterbury, as the capital of 
jEthelberht, the fourth Saxon king of Kent, that in 597 Augustine 
and his fellow-missionaries came from Rome, and their settle- 
ment by /Ethelberht in his capital became the origin of its 
position, held ever since, as the metropolis of the Church of 
England. ^Ethelberht, whose queen, Bertha, was already a 
Christian, gave the missionaries a church whose mythical founder 
was King Lucius. Augustine was a Benedictine and established 
the monastery of that order attached to the cathedral; this 
foundation was set upon a firm basis after the Norman Conquest 
by Archbishop Lanfranc, who placed its charge (as distinct from 
that of the diocese) in the hands of a prior. 

Preparatory to the description of the cathedral, the principal 
epochs in the history of its erection may be noted. The Romano- 
British church occupied by St Augustine, of basilica 
oAtM? J 01 ™, remained long in use, though it was largely 
building, rebuilt by Archbishop Odo, c. 950; after further 
vicissitudes it was destroyed by fire in 1067. Arch- 
bishop Lanfranc, taking up his office in 1070, undertook the 
building of an entirely new church, but under Anselm (c. 1100) 
Prior Ernulf rebuilt the eastern part, and his successor Conrad 
carried on the work. A fire destroyed much of this part of the 
building in n 74, and from that year the architect, William of 
Sens, took up the work of rebuilding until n 78, when, on his 
suffering serious injury by falling from a scaffold, another 
William, commonly distinguished as the Englishman, carried on 
the work and completed it in 1184. In 1376 Archbishop 
Sudbury entered upon the construction of a new nave, and Prior 
Chillenden continued this under Archbishop Courtenay. The 



building of the central tower was undertaken c. 1495 by Prior 
Goldstone, with the counsel of Selling, his predecessor, and 
Archbishop Morton. 

This Perpendicular tower is the most notable feature of the 
exterior. It rises in two storeys to a height of 235 ft. from the 
ground, and is known variously as Bell Harry tower Exterior 
from the great bell it contains, or as the Angel steeple 
from the gilded figure of an angel which formerly adorned the 
summit. The Perpendicular nave is flanked at the west front 
by towers, whose massive buttresses, rising in tiers, serve to 
enhance by contrast the beautiful effect of the unbroken straight 
lines of Bell Harry tower. The south-western of these towers 
is an original Perpendicular structure by Prior Goldstone, while 
the north-western was copied from it in 1834- 1840, replacing a 
Norman tower which had carried a spire until 1705 and had 
become unsafe. The north-west and south-west transepts are 
included in Chillenden's Perpendicular reconstruction; but east 
of these earlier work is met with. The south-east transept 
exhibits Norman work; the projecting chapel east of this is 
known as Anselm's tower. The cathedral terminates eastward in 
a graceful apsidal form, with the final addition of the circular 
eastern chapel built by William the Englishman, and known as 
the Corona or Becket's Crown. St Andrew's tower or chapel 
on the north side, corresponding to Anselm's on the south, is 
the work of Ernulf. From this point westward the various 
monastic buildings adjoin the cathedral on the north side, so 
that the south side is that from which the details of the exterior 
must be examined. 

When the nave of the cathedral is entered, the complete 
separation of the interior into two main parts, not only owing 
to the distinction between the two main periods of i a t e rior 
building; but by an actual structural arrangement, 
is realized as an unusual and, as it happens, a most impressive 
feature. In most English cathedrals the choir is separated from 
the nave by a screen ; at Canterbury not only is this the case, 
but the separation is further marked by a broad flight of steps 
leading up to the screen, the choir floor (but not its roof) being 
much higher than that of the nave. Chillenden, in rebuilding 
the nave, retained only the lower parts of some of the early 
Norman walls of Lanfranc and the piers of the central tower 
arches. These piers were encased or altered on Perpendicular 
lines. In the choir, the late 12th-century work of the two 
Williams, the notable features are its great length, the fine 
ornamentation and the use of arches both round and pointed, 
a remarkable illustration of the transition between the Norman 
and Early English styles; the prolific use of dark marble in the 
shafts and mouldings strongly contrasting with the light stone 
which is the material principally used; and, finally, the graceful 
incurve of the main arcades and walls at the eastern end of the 
choir where it joins the chapel of the Trinity, an arrangement 
necessitated by the preservation of the earlier flanking chapels 
or towers of St Anselm and St Andrew. From the altar eastward 
the floor of the church is raised again above that of the choir. 
The choir screen was built by Prior de Estria, c. 1300. The 
organ is not seen, being hidden in the triforium and played from 
the choir. There are several tombs of archbishops in the choir. 
The south-east transept serves as the chapel of the King's school 
and exhibits the work of William of Sens in alteration of that 
of Ernulf. Anselm's chapel or tower, already mentioned, may 
be noticed again as containing a Decorated window (1336). This 
style is not common in the cathedral. 

Behind the altar is Trinity Chapel, in the centre of which 
stood the celebrated shrine of St Thomas of Canterbury. The 
priory owed its chief fame to the murder of Archbishop Becket's 
Becket (1170) in the church, his canonization as St shrine. 
Thomas of Canterbury, and the resort of the Christian PUgrim- 
world on pilgrimage to his shrine. Miracles were ages ' 
almost immediately said to be worked at his grave in the crypt 
and at the well in which his garments had been washed; and 
from the time when Henry II. did his penance for the murder 
in the church, and the battle of Alnwick was gained over the 
Scots a few days afterwards — it was supposed as a result — the 



CANTERBURY 



211 



fame of the martyr's power and the popularity of his worship 
became established in England. On the rebuilding of the 
cathedral after the fire of 1174, a magnificent shrine was erected 
for him in Trinity Chapel, which was built for the purpose, and 
became thronged for three centuries by pilgrims and worshippers 
of all classes, from kings and emperors downward. Hence- 
forward the interests of the city became bound up in those of 
the cathedral, and were shown in the large number of hostels 
for the accommodation of pilgrims, and of shops containing 
wares especially suited to their tastes. A pilgrimage to Canter- 
bury became not only a pious exercise, but a favourite summer 
excursion; and the poet Chaucer, writing in the 14th century, 
gives an admirable picture of such pilgrimages, with the manners 
and behaviour of a party of pilgrims, leisurely enjoying the 
journey and telling stories on the road. The English language 
even preserved two words originating in these customs — a 
" canterbury," or a " canterbury tale," a phrase used for a 
fiction, and a " canter," which is a short form for a " Canterbury 
-gallop," an allusion to the easy pace at which these pilgrimages 
were performed. The shrine with its vast collected wealth was 
destroyed, and every reminiscence connected with it as far as 
possible effaced, by King Henry VIII.'s commissioners in 1538. 
But some of the beautiful old windows of stained glass, illustrat- 
ing the miracles wrought in connexion with the saint, are pre- 
served. The north-west transept was the actual scene of Becket's 
murder; the spot where he fell is shown on the floor, but this 
part of the building is of later date than the tragedy. 

Close to the site of the shrine is the fine tomb of Edward the 
Black Prince, with a remarkable portrait effigy, and above it 
his helmet, shield and other equipment. There is also in this 
chapel the tomb of King Henry IV. The Corona, at the extreme 
east of the church, contains the so-called St Augustine's chair 
in which the archbishops are enthroned. It is of marble, but 
its name is not deserved, as it dates probably from c. 1 200. The 
western part of the crypt, beneath the choir, is the work of 
Ernulf, and perhaps incorporates some of Lanfranc's work. 
The chapel of St John or St Gabriel, beneath Anselm's tower, 
is still used for service, in which the French language is used; 
it was devoted to this purpose in 1561, on behalf of French 
Protestant refugees, who were also permitted to carry on their 
trade as weavers in the crypt. The eastern and loftier part of 
the crypt, with its apsidal termination, is the work of William 
the Englishman. Here for some time lay the body of Becket, 
and here the celebrated penance of Henry II. was performed. 

The chief entrance to the precincts is through an ornate gate- 
way at the south-west, called Christchurch gateway, and built 
by Prior Goldstone in 1517. Among the remains of 
buildings. tne monastic buildings there may be mentioned the 
Norman ruins of the infirmary, the fine two-storeyed 
treasury and the lavatory tower, Norman in the lower part and 
Perpendicular in the upper. The cloisters are of various dates, 
containing a little rich Norman work, but were very largely 
rebuilt by Prior Chillenden. The upper part of the chapter- 
house is also his work, but the lower is by Prior de Estria. The 
library is modern. The site of the New Hall of the monastery 
is covered by modern buildings of King's school, but the Norman 
entry-stair is preserved-— a magnificent example of the slyle, 
with highly ornate arcading. 

The principal dimensions of the cathedral are: length (out- 
side) 522 ft., nave 178 ft., choir 180 ft. The nave is 71 ft. in 
breadth and 80 ft. in height. 

The archbishop of Canterbury is primate of all England; the 

ecclesiastical province of Canterbury covers England 

and " Ce an< ^ Wales south of Cheshire and Yorkshire; and the 

diocese. diocese covers a great part of Kent with a small part 

of Sussex. The following is a list of archbishops of 

Canterbury: — 

655 



603 



I. 


Augustine, 597 to 605. 


6. 


Deusdedit (Frithona), 


2. 


Lawrence (Laurentius), 605 




to 664. 




to 619. 


7- 


Theodore, 668 to 690. 


3- 


Mellitus, 619 to 624. 


8. 


Brethwald (Bcrhtuald) 


4- 


Justin. 624 to 627. 




to 731. 


5- 


Honorius, 627 to 653. 


9- 


Taetwine. 731 to 734. 



10. 

II. 

12. 

13- 
14. 

15- 

16. 

17- 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 

23- 

24. 

25- 

26. 

27- 

28. 

29. 
30. 

3i- 
32. 

33- 
34- 
35- 
36. 

37- 

38- 
39- 
40. 
41. 

42- 
43- 
44. 

45- 
46. 

47- 



Nothelm, 734 to 740. 59. 

Cuthbert, 740 to 758. 

Breogwine, 759 to 762. 60. 

Jaenberht, 763 to 790. 

vEthelhard, 790 to 803. 61. 

Wulfred, 803 to 829. 

Fleogild, 829 to 830. 62. 

Ceolnoth, 8Jo to 870. 

^thelred, 870 to 889. 63. 

Plegemund, 889 to 914. 64. 

.3ithelm, 914 to 923. 65. 

Wulfelm, 923 to 942. 

Odo, 942 to 959. 66. 

/Elsine, 959. 67. 

Dunstan, 960 to 988. 

^Ethelgar, 988 to 989. 68. 

Sigeric, 990 to 994. 

/Elfric, 995 to 1005. 69. 

Alphege "(/Elfeah), 1005 to 

1012. 70. 

Lyfmg, 1013 to 1020. 71. 

/Ethelnoth, 1020 to 1038. 
Eadsige, 1038 to 1050. 72. 

Robert of Jumieges, 105 1 to 

1052. 73. 

Stigand, 1052 to 1070. 74. 

Lanfranc, 1070 to 1089. 
Anselm, 1093 to 1109. 75. 

Ralph de Turbine, 11 14 to 76. 

1 122. 77. 

William de Corbeuil (Cur- 78. 

bcllio), 1 123 to 1 136. 
Theobald, 1 139 to 1161. 79. 

Thomas Becket, 1 162 to 1170. 
Richard, ii74to 1184. 80. 

Baldwin, 1 185 to U90. 81. 

Reginald Fitz-Jocelyn, 1191. 
Hubert Walter, 1 193 to 1205. 82. 
Stephen Langton, 1207 to 8v 

1228. 84. 

Richard Wethershed, 1229 

to 1231. 85. 

EdmundRich (deAbbendon) 

1234 to 1240. 86. 

Boniface of Savoy, 1241 to 

1270. 87. 

Robert Kilwardby, 1273 to 

1278. 88. 

John Peckham, 1279 to 1292. 89. 
Robert Winchelsea, 1293 to 

1313. 90. 

Walter Reynolds, 13 13 to 

1327. 91. 

Simon de Meopham, 1328 to 

1333- 92- 

John Stratford, 1333 to 1348. 
John de Ufford, 1348 to 1349. 93. 
Thomas Bradwardin, 1349. 
Simon Islip, 1349 to 1366. 94. 

Simon Langham, 1366 to 

1368- 95- 

William Whittlesea, 1368 
to 1374. 96. 



Simon Sudbury, 1375 to 

1381. 
William Courtenay, 1381 to 

1396. 
Thomas Arundel, 1396 to 

1414. 
Henry Chicheley, 1414 to 

H43- 
John Stafford, 1443 to 1452. 
John Kemp, 1452 to 1454. 
Thomas Bourchier, 1454 to 

i486. 
John Morton, i486 to 1500. 
Henry Dean (Dene), 1501 to 

1503- 
William Warham, 1503 to 

1532. 
Thomas Cranmer, 1533 to 

1556. 
Reginald Pole, 1556 to 1558. 
Matthew Parker, 1559 to 

1575- 
Edmund Grindal, 1575 to 

I583- 
John Whitgift, 1583 to 1604. 
Richard Bancroft, 1604 to 

1610. 
George Abbot, 1610 to 1633. 
William Laud, 1633 to 1645. 
William Juxon, 1660 to 1663. 
Gilbert Sheldon, 1663 to 

1677. 
William Sancroft, 1678 to 

1691. 
John Tillotson, 1691 to 1694. 
Thomas Tenison, 1694 to 

I7I5- 
William Wake, !7i6to 1737. 
John Potter, 1737 to 1747. 
Thomas Herring, 1747 to 

1757- 
Matthew Hutton, 1757 to 

1758. 
Thomas Seeker, 1758 to 

1768. 
Frederick Cornwallis, 1768 

to 1783. 
John Moore, 1783 to 1805. 
Charles Manners -Sutton, 

1805 to 1828. 
William Howley, 1828 to 

1848. 
John Bird Sumner, 1848 to 
^ 1862. 
Charles Thomas Longley, 

1862 to 1868. 
Archibald Campbell Tait, 

1868 to 1882. 
Edward White Benson, 1882 

to 1896. 
Frederick Temple, 1896 to 

1903. 
Randall Thomas Davidson. 



The archbishop has a seat at Lambeth Palace, London. 
There are fragments in Palace Street of the old archbishop's 
palace which have been incorporated with a modern palace. 

Other Ecclesiastical Foundations. — Canterbury naturally 
abounded in religious foundations. The most important, apart 
from the cathedral, was the Benedictine abbey of St Augustine. 
This was erected on a site granted by King ^Ethelberht outside 
his capital, in a tract called Longport. Augustine dedicated 
it to St Peter and St Paul, but Archbishop Dunstan added the 
sainted name of the founder to the dedication, and in common 
use it came to exclude those of the apostles. The site is now 
occupied by St Augustine's Missionary College, founded in 1844 
when the property was acquired by A. J. B. Beresford Hope. 
Some ancient remnants are preserved, the principal being the 
entrance gateway (1300) , with the cemetery gate, dated a century 
later, and the guest hall, now the refectory; but the scanty 
ruins of St Pancras' chapel are of high interest, and embody 
Roman material. The chapel is said to have received its dedica- 
tion from St Augustine on account of the special association of 
St Pancras with children, and in connexion with the famous 
story of St Gregory, whose attention was first attracted to Britain 



212 



CANTHARIDES 



when he saw the fair-faced children of the Angles who had been 
brought to Rome, and termed them " not Angles but angels." 

There were lesser houses of many religious orders in Canterbury, 
but only two, those of the Dominicans near St Peter's church 
in St Peter's Street, and the Franciscans, also in St Peter's 
Street, have left notable remains. The Dominipan refectory is 
used as a chapel. Among the many churches, St Martin's, 
Longport, is of the first interest. This was the scene of the 
earliest work of Augustine in Canterbury, and had seen Christian 
service before his arrival. Its walk contain Roman masonry, 
but whether it is in part a genuine remnant of a Romano-British 
Christian church is open to doubt. There are Norman, Early 
English and later portions; and the font may be in part pre- 
Norman, and is indeed associated by tradition with the baptism 
of ^Ethelberht himself. St Mildred's church exhibits Early 
English and Perpendicular work, and the use of Roman material 
is again visible here. St Paul's is of Early English origin; 
St Dunstan's, St Peter's and Holy Cross are mainly Decorated 
and Perpendicular. The village of Harbledown, on the hill 
west of Canterbury on the London road, from the neighbourhood 
of which a beautiful view over the city is obtained, has many 
associations with the ecclesiastical life of Canterbury. It is 
mentioned by Chaucer in his pilgrimage under the name, appro- 
priate to its site, of " Bob up and down." The almshouses, 
which occupy the site of Lanfranc's hospital for lepers, include 
an ancient hall and a chapel in which the west door and northern 
nave arcade are Norman, and are doubtless part of Lanfranc's 
buildings. The neighbouring parish church is in great part 
rebuilt. Among the numerous charitable institutions in Canter- 
bury there are several which may be called the descendants of 
medieval ecclesiastical foundations. 

City Buildings, &c. — The old city walls may be traced, and 
the public walk called the Dane John (derived probably from 
donjon) follows the summit of a high artificial mound within 
the lines. The cathedral is finely seen from this point. Only 
the massive turreted west gate, of the later part of the 14th 
century, remains out of the former six city gates. The site of 
the castle is not far from the Dane John, and enough remains of 
the Norman keep to show its strength and great size. Among 
other buildings and institutions there may be mentioned the 
guildhall in High Street, of the early part of the 18th century; 
the museum, which includes a fine collection of local, including 
many Roman, relics; and the school of art, under municipal 
management, but founded by the painter T. Sidney Cooper 
(d. 1902), who was a resident at Harbledown. A modern statue 
of a muse commemorates the poet Christopher Marlowe (1564- 
iS93)i a native of the city; and a pillar indicates the place where 
a number of persons were burnt at the stake in the reign of Mary. 

The King's school, occupying buildings adjacent to the 
cathedral, developed out of the early teaching furnished by the 
monastery. It was refounded by Henry VIII. in 1541 (whence 
its name), and is managed on the lines of ordinary public schools. 
It has about 250 boys; and there is besides a junior or prepara- 
tory school. The school is still connected with the ecclesiastical 
foundation, the dean and chapter being its governors. 

A noted occasion of festivity in Canterbury is the Canterbury 
cricket-week, when the Kent county cricket eleven engages in 
matches with other first-class teams, and many visitors are 
attracted to the city. 

Canterbury has a considerable agriculture trade, breweries, 
tanneries, brickworks and other manufactures. The parlia- 
mentary borough returns one member. The city is governed by 
a mayor, 6 aldermen and 18 councillors. Area, 3955 acres. 

History of the City. — The existence of a Romano-British town 
on the site of Canterbury has already been indicated. It was 
named Durovernum, and was a flourishing county town on the 
road from the Kentish ports to London. Mosaic pavements and 
other remains have been found in considerable abundance. The 
city, known by the Saxons as Cantwaraburh, the town of the men 
of Kent, was the metropolis of ^Ethelberht's kingdom. At the 
time of the Domesday survey Canterbury formed part of the 
royal demesne and was governed by a portreeve as it had been 



before the Conquest. In the 13th and 14th centuries, two 
bailiffs presided over the burghmote, assisted by a larger and 
smaller council. Henry II., by an undated charter, confirmed 
former privileges and granted to the citizens that no one should 
implead them outside the city walls and that the pleas of the 
crown should be decided according to the customs of the city. 
In 1256 Henry III. granted them the city at an annual fee farm 
of £60, also the right of electing their bailiffs. Confirmations 
of former charters with additional liberties were granted by later 
sovereigns, and Henry VI. incorporated Canterbury, which he 
called " one of our most ancient cities," under the style of the 
mayor and commonalty, the mayor to be elected by the burgesses. 
James I. in 1609 confirmed these privileges, giving the burgesses 
the right to be called a body corporate and to elect twelve alder- 
men and a common council of twenty-four. Charles II., after 
calling in the charters of corporations, granted a confirmation in 
1684. Canterbury was first represented in parliament in 1283, 
and it continued to return two members until 1885, when the 
number was reduced to one. A fair was granted by Henry VI. 
to the citizens to be held in the city or suburbs on the 4th of 
August and the two days following; other fairs were in the 
hands of the monasteries; the corn and cattle markets and a 
general market have been held by prescription from time 
immemorial. Canterbury was a great centre of the silk- weaving 
trade in the 17 th century, large numbers of Walloons, driven by 
persecution to England, having settled there in the reign of 
Elizabeth. In 1676 Charles II. granted a charter of incorporation 
to the Walloon congregation under style of the master, wardens 
and fellowship of weavers in the city of Canterbury. The market 
for the sale of corn and hops was regulated by a local act in 1801. 

See A. P. Stanley, Historical Memorials of Canterbury (London, 
1855); J- Brent, Canterbury in the Olden Time (Canterbury, 1879); 
J. W. Legg and W. H. St J. Hope, Inventories of Christchurch, 
Canterbury (London, 1902) ; Victoria County History, Kent. 

CANTHARIDES, or Spanish Flies, the common blister- 
beetles (Cantharis vesicatoria) of European pharmacy. They are 
bright, iridescent, golden-green or bluish-coloured beetles (see 
Coleoptera), with the breast finely punctured and pubescent, 
head and thorax with a longitudinal channel, and elytra with two 
slightly elevated lines. The insect is from half-an-inch to an inch 
in length, and from one to two lines broad, the female being 
broader in the abdomen and altogether larger than the male. 
It is a native of the south of Europe, being found in Spain, 
France, Germany, Italy, Hungary and the south of Russia, and 
it is also obtained in Siberia. The Spanish fly is also occasionally 
found in the south of England. The insects feed upon ash, lilac, 
privet and jasmine leaves, and are found more rarely on elder, 
rose, apple and poplar trees. Their presence is made known by 
a powerful disagreeable odour, which penetrates to a considerable 
distance. They are collected for use at late evening or early 
morning, while in a dull bedewed condition, by shaking them off 
the trees or shrubs into cloths spread on the ground; and they 
are killed by dipping them into hot water or vinegar, or by expos- 
ing them for some time over the vapour of vinegar. They are 
then dried and put up for preservation in glass-stoppered 
bottles; and they require to be very carefully guarded against 
mites and various other minute insects, to the attacks of which 
they are peculiarly liable. It has been shown by means of 
spectroscopic observations that the green colour of the elytra, 
&c, is due to the presence of chlorophyll; and that the varia- 
tions of the spectral bands are sufficient, after the lapse of many 
years, to indicate with some certainty the kind of leaves on which 
the insects were feeding shortly before they were killed. 

Cantharides owe their value to the presence of a peculiar 
chemical principle, to which the name cantharidin has been given. 
It is most abundant in large full-grown insects, while in very 
young specimens no cantharidin at all has been found. From 
about one-fourth to rather more than one-half per cent, of 
cantharidin has been obtained from different samples; and it 
has been ascertained that the elytra or wing-sheaths of the 
insect, which alone are used in pharmacy, contain more of the 
active principle than the soft parts taken together; but 



CANTICLES 



213 



apparently cantharidin is most abundant in the eggs and 
generative organs. 

Cantharidin constitutes from £ to 1 % of cantharides. It has the 
formula G0H12O4, and on hydrolysis is converted into cantharinic 
acid, G0H44O5. It crystallizes in colourless plates and is 
readily soluble in alcohol, ether, &c, but not in water. The 
British Pharmacopeia contains a large number of preparations of 
cantharides, but the only one needing special mention is the tinc- 
ture, which is meant for internal administration; the small dose is 
noteworthy, five minims being probably the maximum for safety. 
The external action of cantharides or cantharidin is extremely 
characteristic. When it is applied to the skin there are no 
obvious consequences for some hours. Thereafter the part 
becomes warm and painful, owing to marked local vascular 
dilatation. This is the typical rubefacient action. Soon after- 
wards there is an accumulation under the epidermis of a serum 
derived from the dilated blood-vessels. The numerous small 
blisters or vesicles thus derived coalesce, forming a large sac full 
of " blister-fluid." The drug is described as a counter-irritant, 
though the explanation of this action is very doubtful. Ap- 
parently there is an influence on the afferent nerves of the part 
which causes a reflex contraction— some authors say dilatation — 
of the vessels in the internal organs that are under the control of 
the same segment of the nervous system as that supplying the area 
of skin from which the exciting impulse comes. When applied 
in this fashion a certain quantity of the cantharides is absorbed. 

Taken internally in any but minute doses, the drug causes 
the most severe gastro-intestinal irritation, the vomited and 
evacuated matters containing blood, and the patient suffering 
agonizing pain and extreme depression. The further character- 
istic symptoms are displayed in the genito-urinary tract. The 
drug circulates in the blood in the form of an albuminate and is 
slowly excreted by the kidneys. The effect of large doses is to 
cause great pain in the renal region and urgent wish to micturate. 
The urine is nevertheless small in amount and contains albumen 
and blood owing to the local inflammation produced in the 
kidney by the passage of the poison through that organ. The 
drug often has a marked aphrodisiac action, producing priapism, 
or in the female sex the onset of the catamenia or abortion. 

Cantharides is used externally for its counter-irritant action. 
There are certain definite contra-indications to its use. It must 
not be employed in cases of renal disease, owing to the risks 
attendant upon absorption. It must always be employed with 
caution in the case of elderly persons and children ; and it must 
not be applied to a paralysed limb (in which the power of healing 
is deficient), nor to parts upon which the patient lies, as other- 
wise a bed-sore is likely to follow its use. The drug is admini- 
stered internally in certain cases of impotence and occasionally 
in other conditions. Its criminal employment is usually intended 
to heighten sexual desire, and has frequently led to death. 

The toxic symptoms have already been detailed, the patient 
usually dying from arrest of the renal functions. The treatment 
is far from satisfactory, and consists in keeping up the strength 
and diluting the poison in the blood and in the urine by the 
administration of bland fluids, such as soda-water, milk and plain 
water, in quantities as large as possible. External warmth should 
also be applied to the regions specially affected by the drug. 

A very large number of other insects belonging to the same 
family possess blistering properties, owing to their containing 
cantharidin. Of these the most remarkable is the Telini " fly " 
of India (Mylabris cichorii), the range of which extends from 
Italy and Greece through Egypt and central Asia as far as China. 
It is very rich in cantharidin, yielding fully twice as much as 
ordinary cantharides. Several green-coloured beetles are, on 
account of their colour, used as adulterants to cantharides, but 
they are very easily detected by examination with the eye, or, 
if powdered, with the microscope. 

CANTICLES. The Old Testament book of Canticles, or the 
Song of Solomon, is called in Hebrew The Song of Songs (that is, 
the choicest of songs), or, according to the full title which stands as 
the first verse of the book, The choicest of the songs of Solomon. 
In the Western versions the book holds the third place among 



the so-called Solomonic writings, following Proverbs and Ecclesi- 
astes. In Hebrew Bibles it stands among the Megilloth, the five 
books of the Hagiographa which have a prominent place in the 
Synagogue service. In printed Bibles and in German MSS. it 
is the first of these because it is read at the Passover, which is 
the first great feast of the sacred year of the Jews. 

No part of the Bible has called forth a greater diversity of 
opinions than the Song of Solomon, and this for two reasons. 
In the first place, the book holds so unique a position in the 
Old Testament, that the general analogy of Hebrew literature 
is a very inadequate key to the verbal difficulties, the artistic 
structure, and the general conception and purpose of the poem. 
In point of language the departures from ordinary Hebrew are 
almost always in the direction of Aramaic. Many forms unique 
in Biblical Hebrew are at once explained by the Aramaic dialects, 
but not a few are still obscure. The philological difficulties 
of the book are, however, less fundamental than those which 
lie in the unique character of the Song of Solomon in point of 
artistic form, and in the whole atmosphere of thought and feeling 
in which it moves. Even in these respects it is not absolutely 
isolated. Parallels to the peculiar imagery may be found in 
the book of Hosea, in Ezekiel xvi. and xxiii. and above all in the 
45th Psalm; but such links of union to the general mass of the 
Old Testament literature are too slight to be of material assistance 
in the solution of the literary problem of the book. Here, again, 
as in the lexical difficulties already referred to, we are tempted 
or compelled to argue from the distant and insecure analogy 
of other Eastern literatures, or are thrown back upon traditions 
of uncertain origin and ambiguous authority. 

The power of tradition has been the second great source of 
confusion of opinion about the Song of Solomon. To tradition 
we owe the title, which apparently indicates Solomon as the 
author and not merely as the subject of the book. The authority 
of titles in the Old Testament is often questionable, and in the 
present case it is certain on linguistic grounds that the title is 
not from the hand that wrote the poem; while to admit that it 
gives a correct account of the authorship is to cut away at one 
stroke all the most certain threads of connexion between the 
book and our historical knowledge of the Old Testament people 
and literature. 

To tradition, again, we owe the prejudice in favour of an 
allegorical interpretation, that is, of the view that from verse 
to verse the Song sets forth the history of a spiritual and not 
merely of an earthly love. To apply such an exegesis to Canticles 
is to violate one of the first principles of reasonable interpretation. 
True allegories are never without internal marks of their 
allegorical design. The language of symbol is not so perfect 
that a long chain of spiritual ideas can be developed without 
the use of a single spiritual word or phrase; and even were this 
possible it would be false art in the allegorist to hide away his 
sacred thoughts behind a screen of sensuous and erotic imagery, 
so complete and beautiful in itself as to give no suggestion that 
it is only the vehicle of a deeper sense. Apart from tradition, 
no one, in the present state of exegesis, would dream of allegoriz- 
ing poetry which in its natural sense is so full of purpose and 
meaning, so apt in sentiment, and so perfect in imagery as the 
lyrics of Canticles. We are not at liberty to seek for allegory 
except where the natural sense is incomplete. This is not the 
case in the Song of Solomon. On the contrary, every form of 
the allegorical interpretation which has been devised carries 
its own condemnation in the fact that it takes away from the 
artistic unity of the poem and breaks natural sequences of 
thought. 1 The allegorical interpretation of the Song of Solomon 
had its rise in the very same conditions which forced a deeper 

1 An argument for the allegorical interpretation has been often 
drawn from Mahommedan mysticism — from the poems of Hafiz, and 
the songs still sung by dervishes. See Jones, Poeseos Asiaticae Com. 
pt. iii. cap. 9; Rosenmuller's remarks on howth's Praelectio,xxxi., and 
Lane's Modern Egyptians, ch. xxiv. But there is no true analogy 
between the Old Testament and the pantheistic mysticism of Islam, 
and there is every reason to believe that, where the allegory takes a 
form really analogous to Canticles, the original sense of these songs 
was purely erotic. . 



214 



CANTICLES 



sense, now universally discarded, upon so many other parts 
of scripture. Yet strangely enough there is no evidence that 
the Jews of Alexandria extended to the book their favourite 
methods of interpretation. The arguments which have been 
adduced to prove that the Septuagint translation implies an 
allegorical exegesis are inadequate; 1 and Philo does not mention 
the book. Nor is there any allusion to Canticles in the New Testa- 
ment. The first trace of an allegorical view identifying Israel 
with the " spouse " appears to be in the Fourth Book of Ezra, near 
the close of the ist Christian century (v. 24, 26; vii. 26). Up 
to this time the canonicity of the Canticles was not unquestioned; 
and the final decision as to the sanctity of the book, so energetic- 
ally carried through by R. Aqiba, when he declared that " the 
whole world is not worth the day on which the Song of Songs 
was given to Israel; for all the scriptures (or Hagiographa) 
are holy, but the Canticles most holy," must be understood as 
being at the same time a victory of the allegorical interpretation 
over the last remains of a view which regarded the poem as 
simply erotic. 2 

The form in which the allegorical theory became fixed in the 
synagogue is contained in the Midrash Chazita and in the Targum, 
which is a commentary rather than a translation. The spouse 
is Israel, her royal lover the divine king, and the poem is ex- 
plained as tracing the great events of the people's history from 
the Exodus to the Messianic glory and final restoration. 3 

The authority of Origen, who, according to Jerome, surpassed 
himself in his commentary of ten volumes on this book, estab- 
lished the allegorical theory in the Christian church in the two 
main forms in which it has since prevailed. The bridegroom is 
Christ, the bride either the church or the believing soul. The 
latter conception is, of course, that which lends itself most 
readily to purposes of mystical edification, and which has 
made Canticles the manual in all ages of a wide-spread type of 
religious contemplation. But the other view, which identifies 
the bride with the church, must be regarded as the standard of 
orthodox exegesis. Of course the allegorical principle admitted 
of very various modifications, and readily adapted itself to new 
religious developments, such as the rise of Mariolatry. Within 
the limits of the orthodox traditions the allegory took various 
colours, according as its mystical or its prophetical aspect was 
insisted on. Among medieval commentators of the former class 
S. Bernard holds a pre-eminent place; while the second class is 
represented by Nicolaus de Lyra, who, himself a converted Jew, 
modified the Jewish interpretation so as to find in the book an 
account of the processus ecclesiae under the Old and New Testa- 
ments. The prophetic exegesis reached its culminating point 
in the post-Reformation period, when Cocceius found in the 
Canticles a complete conspectus of church history. But the 
relaxation of traditional authority opened the door to still 
stranger vagaries of interpretation. Luther was tempted to 
understand the book of the political relations of Solomon and 
his people. Others detected the loves of Solomon and Wisdom — 
a view which found a supporter in Rosenmiiller. 

The history of the literal interpretation begins with the great 
" commentator "of the Syrian Church, Theodorus of Mopsuestia 
(died 429), who condemned equally the attempt to find in the 
book a prophecy of the blessings given to the church, and the 
idea even at that time expressed in some quarters that the book 
is immoral. Theodorus regarded the Canticles as a poem 
written by Solomon in answer to the complaints of his people 
about his Egyptian marriage; and this was one of the heresies 
charged upon him after his death, which led to his condemnation 

1 Repeated recently by Scholz, Rommentar, pp. iii. and iv. 

2 The chief passages of Jewish writings referring to this dispute are 
Mishna Jadaim, iii. 5 and Tosifta Sanhedrin, xii. For other passages 
see Gratz's Commentary, p. 115, and in control of his criticism the 
introduction to the commentary of Delitzsch. 

3 The text of the Targum in the Polyglots and in Buxtorf's 
Rabbinic Bible is not complete. The complete text is given in the 
Venice editions, and in Lagarde's Hagiographa Chaldaice (Lipsiae, 
'873). The Polyglots add a Latin version. A German version is 
given by Riedel in his very useful book, Die Auslegung des Hohen- 
liedes (1898), which also reviews the interpretation of Canticles by 
Hippolytus, Origen and later Greek writers. 



at the second council of Constantinople (553 A.D.). A literal 
interpretation was not again attempted till in 1544 Chateillon 
(Castellio or Castalion) lost his regency at Geneva for proposing 
to expel the book from the canon as impure. Grotius (Annot. 
in V.T., 1644) took up a more moderate position. Without 
denying the possibility of a secondary reference designed by 
Solomon to give his poem a more permanent value, he regards 
the Canticles as primarily an bapLcxTVS (conjugal prattle) between 
Solomon and Pharaoh's daughter. The distinction of a primary 
and secondary sense gradually became current not only among 
the Remonstrants, but in England (Lightfoot, Lowth) and even 
in Catholic circles (Bossuet, 1693). In the actual understanding 
of the book in its literal sense no great progress was made. 
Solomon was still viewed as the author, and for the most part 
the idea that the poem is a dramatic epithalamium was borrowed 
from Origen and the allegorists, and applied to the marriage 
of Pharaoh's daughter. 

From Grotius to Lowth the idea of a typical reference designed 
by Solomon himself appears as a mere excrescence on the natural 
interpretation, but as an excrescence which could not be removed 
without perilling the place of Canticles in the canon, which, 
indeed, was again assailed by Whiston in 1723. But in his notes 
on Lowth 's lectures, J. D. Michaelis, who regarded the poem as a 
description of the enduring happiness of true wedded love long 
after marriage, proposed to drop the allegory altogether, and to 
rest the canonicity Of the book, as of those parts of Proverbs 
which treat of conjugal affection, on the moral picture it presents 
(i758). 

Then came Herder's exquisite little treatise on Solomon's 
Songs of Love, the Oldest and Sweetest of the East (1778). Herder, 
possessing delicacy of taste and sympathetic poetical genius, 
delighted in the Canticles as the transparently natural expression 
of innocent and tender love. He expressed the idea that the 
poem is simply a sequence of independent songs without inner 
unity, grouped so as to display various phases and stages of love 
in a natural order, culminating in the placid joys of wedded life. 
The theory of Herder, which refuses to acknowledge any con- 
tinuity in the book, was accepted by Eichhorn on the part of 
scholars, and with some hesitation by Goethe on the part of the 
poets. Commentaries based on this view are those of Dopke 
(1820), Magnus (1842), Noyes (1846). 

The prevalent view of the 19th century, however, recognizes 
in the poem a more or less pronounced dramatic character, and 
following Jacobi (1771) distinguishes the shepherd, the true love 
of the Shulamite, from King Solomon, who is made to play an 
ignominious part. Propounded by Staudlin (1792) and Ammon 
(1795), this view was energetically carried out by Umbreit (1820), 
and above all by Ewald, whose acuteness gave the theory a new 
development, while his commanding influence among Hebrew 
scholars acquired for it general recognition. Ewald assumed a 
very simple dramatic structure, and did not in his first publica- 
tion (1826) venture to suppose that the poem had ever been acted 
on a stage. His less cautious followers have been generally 
tempted to dispose of difficulties by introducing more complicated 
action and additional interlocutors (so, for example, Hitzig, 
1855; Ginsburg, 1857; Renan, i860); while Bottcher (1850) 
did his best to reduce the dramatic exposition to absurdity by 
introducing the complexities and stage effects of a modern 
operetta. Another view is that of Delitzsch (1851 and 1875) 
and his followers, who also plead for a dramatic form — though 
without supposing that the piece was ever acted — but adhere 
to the traditional notion that Solomon is the author, who cele- 
brates his love to a peasant maiden, whom he made his wife, and 
in whose company the proud monarch learned to appreciate the 
sweetness of a true affection and a simple rustic life. 

In view of the prevalence of the " dramatic " theory of 
Canticles during the 19th century, and its retention by some 
comparatively recent writers (Oettli, Driver, Adeney, Harper), 
it seems desirable that this theory should be presented in some 
detail. A convenient summary of the form it assumed in the 
hands of Ewald (the shepherd-hypothesis) and of Delitzsch (the 
king-hypothesis) is given by Driver (Literature of the Old 



CANTICLES 



215 



Testament, ch. x. § 1). The following presentation of the theory, 
on the general lines of Ewald, gives that form of it which 
Robertson Smith was able to accept in 1876. 

The centre of attraction is throughout a female figure, and the 
unity of this figure is the chief test of the unity of the book. In 
the long canto, i. i-ii. 7, the heroine appears in a royal palace 
(i. 4) among the daughters of Jerusalem, who are thus presumably 
ladies of the court of Zion. At i. 9, an additional interlocutor is 
introduced, who is plainly a king, and apparently Solomon 
(i. 9, 12). He has just risen from table, and praises the charms 
of the heroine with the air of a judge of beauty, but without 
warmth. He addresses her simply as "my friend" (not as 
English version, "my love"). The heroine, on the contrary, is 
passionately in love, but nothing can be plainer than that the 
object of her affection is not the king. She is not at home in the 
palace, for she explains (i. 6) that she has spent her life as a 
peasant girl in the care of vineyards. Her beloved, whom she 
knows not where to find (i. 7), but who lies constantly on her 
heart and is cherished in her bosom like a spray of the sweet 
henna flowers which Oriental ladies delight to wear (i. 13, 14), is 
like herself a peasant — a shepherd lad (i. 7) — with whom she was 
wont to sit in the fresh greenwood under the mighty boughs of 
the cedars (i. 16, 17). Even before the king's entrance the ladies 
of the court are impatient at so silly an affection, and advise her, 
" if she is really so witless," to begone and rejoin her plebeian 
lover (i. 8). To them she appeals in ii. 5, 6, where her self- 
control, strung to the highest pitch as she meets the compliments 
of the king with reminiscences of her absent lover, breaks down 
in a fit of half-delirious sickness. The only words directed to the 
king are those of i. 12, which, if past tenses are substituted for the 
presents of the English version, contain a pointed rebuff. Finally, 
ii. 7 is, on the plainest translation, a charge not to arouse love till 
it please. The moral of the scene is the spontaneity of true 
affection. 

Now, at viii. 5, a female figure advances leaning upon her 
beloved, with whom she claims inseparable union, — "for love is 
strong as death, its passion inflexible as the grave, its fire a 
divine flame which no waters can quench or floods drown. Yea, 
if a man would give all his wealth for love he would only be 
contemned." This is obviously the sentiment of ii. 7, and the 
suitor, whose wealth is despised, must almost of necessity be 
identified with the king of chapter i., if, as seems reasonable, we 
place viii. n, 12 in the mouth of the same speaker — "King 
Solomon has vineyards which bring him a princely revenue, and 
enrich even the farmers. Let him and them keep their wealth; 
my vineyard is before me" (i.e. I possess it in present fruition). 
The last expression is plainly to be connected with i. 6. But this 
happiness has not been reached without a struggle. The speaker 
has proved herself an impregnable fortress (ver. 10), and, armed 
only with her own beauty and innocence, has been in his eyes as 
one that found peace. The sense is that, like a virgin fortress, 
she has compelled her assailant to leave her in peace. To these 
marks of identity with the heroine of ch. i. are to be added that 
she appears here as dwelling in gardens, there as a keeper of 
vineyards (i. 6, and viii. 13), and that as there it was her brethren 
that prescribed her duties, so here she apparently quotes words in 
which her brothers, while she was still a child, speculated as to her 
future conduct and its reward (viii. 8, 9). 

If this analysis of the commencement and close of the book is 
correct, it is certain that the poem is in a sense dramatic, that is, 
that it uses dialogue and monologue to develop a story. The 
heroine appears in the opening scene in a difficult and painful 
situation, from which in the last chapter she is happily ex- 
tricated. But the dramatic progress which the poem exhibits 
scarcely involves a plot in the usual sense of that word. The 
words of viii. 9, 10 clearly indicate that the deliverance of the 
heroine is due to no combination of favouring circumstances, 
but to her own inflexible fidelity and virtue. 

The constant direction of the maiden's mind to her true love is 
partly expressed in dialogue with the ladies of the court (the 
daughters of Jerusalem), who have no dramatic individuality, 
»nd whose only function in the economy of the piece is to give 



the heroine opportunity for a more varied expression of her 
feelings. In i. 8 we found them contemptuous. In chapter iii. 
they appear to be still indifferent; for when the heroine relates a 
dream in which the dull pain of separation and the uneasy 
consciousness of confinement and danger in the unsympathetic 
city disappear for a moment in imagined reunion with her lover, 
they are either altogether silent or reply only by taking up a 
festal part song describing the marriage procession of King 
Solomon (iii. 6-1 1), which stands in jarring' contrast to the 
feelings of the maiden. 1 A second dream (v. 2-8), more weird 
and melancholy, and constructed with that singular psycho- 
logical felicity which characterizes the dreams of the Old Testa- 
ment, gains more sympathy, and the heroine is encouraged to 
describe her beloved at large (v. 10-vi. 3). The structure of 
these dialogues is so simple, and their purpose is so strictly 
limited to the exhibition of the character and affection of the 
maiden, that it is only natural to find them supplemented by a 
free use of pure monologue, in which the heroine recalls the 
happiness of past days, or expresses her rising hope of reunion 
with her shepherd, and restoration to the simple joys of her 
rustic life. The vivid reminiscence of ii. 8-17 takes the form of a 
dialogue within the main dialogue of the poem, a picture within a 
picture — the picture of her beloved as he stood at her window in 
the early spring time, and of her own merry heart as she laugh- 
ingly answered him in the song with which watchers of the 
vineyards frighten away the foxes. It is, of course, a fault of 
perspective that this reminiscence is as sharp in outline and as 
strong in colour as the main action. But no one can expect 
perspective in such early art, and recollection of the past is 
clearly enough separated from present reality by ii. 16, 17. The 
last monologue (vii. 10-viii. 3), in which the hope of immediate 
return with her lover is tempered by maidenly shame, and a 
maiden's desire for her mother's counsel, is of special value 
for a right appreciation of the psychology of the love which 
the poem celebrates, and completes a picture of this flower 
of the northern valleys which is not only firm in outline, but 
delicate in touch. The subordinate action which supports the 
portraiture of the maiden of Galilee is by no means easy to 
understand. 

We come next to chapter vi., which again sings the praises 
of the heroine, and takes occasion in this connexion to introduce, 
with the same want of perspective as we observed in ch. ii., 
a dialogue descriptive of Solomon's first meeting with the maiden. 
We learn that she was an inhabitant of Shulem or Shunem in 
Issachar, whom the king and his train surprised in a garden on 
the occasion of a royal progress through the north. Her beauty 
drew from the ladies of the court a cry of admiration. The 
maiden shrinks back with the reply — "I was gone down into 
my garden to see its growth. ... I know not how my soul 
hath brought me among the chariots of princes"; but she is 
commanded to turn and let herself be seen in. spite of her bashful 
protest — " Why do ye gaze on the Shulamite as at a dance of 
Mahanaim (a spectacle)?" Now the person in whose mouth 
this relation is placed must be an eye-witness of the scene, and 
so none other than the king. But in spite of the verbal repetition 
of several of the figures of ch. iv. . . . the tone in which the 
king now addresses the Shulamite is quite changed. She is 
not only beautiful but terrible, her eyes trouble him, and he 
cannot endure their gaze. She is unique among women, the choice 
and only one of her mother. The unity of action can only be 
maintained by ignoring vii. 1-9, and taking the words of Solomon 
in chapter vi. in their obvious sense as implying that the king 
at length recognizes in the maiden qualities of soul unknown in 
the harem, a character which compels respect, as well as a beauty 
that inflames desire. The change of feeling which was wrought 
in the daughters of Jerusalem in the previous scene now extends 
to Solomon himself, and thus the glad utterances of vii. 10, seq., 

1 Ewald and others make this song a distinct scene in the action of 
the poem, supposing that the author here exhibits the honourable 
form of espousal by which Solomon thought to vanquish the scruples 
of the damsel. This view, however, seems to introduce a com- 
plication foreign to the plan of the book. 



2l6 



CANTICLES 



have a sufficient motive, and the dinouement is no longer violent 
and unprepared. 

The nodus of the action is fully given in chapter i., the final 
issue in chapter viii. The solution lies entirely in the character 
and constancy of the heroine, which prevail, in the simplest 
possible way, first over the ladies of the court and then over 
the king. 

The attractiveness of the above theory cannot be denied; 
but it may be asked whether the attraction does not lie in the 
appeal to modern taste of a story which is largely the product 
of modern imagination. It supposes a freedom of intercourse 
between lovers inconceivable for the East. The initial situation 
of the maiden in the harem of Solomon is left as a problem for 
the reader to discover, until he comes to its supposed origin in 
vi. n ; the expedient might be granted in the case of one of 
Browning's Men and Women, but seems very improbable in 
the present case. The more elaborate dramatic theories can 
find no parallel in Semitic literature to the " drama " of Canticles, 
the book of Job being no exception to this statement; whilst 
even the simpler theories ask us to believe that the essential 
parts of the story — the rape of the Shulamite, the change in 
Solomon's disposition, her release from the harem — are to be 
supplied by the reader from obscure and disputable references. 
More serious still is the fact that any progress of action from 
first to last is so difficult to prove. In the first chapter we listen 
to a woman speaker desiring to be kissed by the man who has 
brought her into his chambers, and speaking of "our bed"; 
in the last we leave her " leaning upon her beloved." The 
difficulties of detail are equally great. To suppose that all the 
male love-making, by hypothesis unsuccessful, belongs to 
Solomon, whilst the heroine addresses her passionate words to 
the continuously absent shepherd, is obviously unconvincing; 
yet, if this shepherd speaks in iv. 8-v. i , how are we to explain 
his appearance in the royal harem? This and other difficulties 
were acknowledged by Robertson Smith, notably the presence 
of vii. 1-9, which he proposed to set aside as an interpolation, 
because of its sensuality and of the difficulty of working it into 
the dramatic scheme. The fact that this passage has subse- 
quently become the central element in the new interpretation 
of the book is, perhaps, a warning against violent measures with 
difficulties. 

Attention has already been drawn to Herder's proposal, 
accepted by some later writers, including Diestel and Reuss, to 
regard the book as a collection of detached songs. This received 
new and striking confirmation from the anthropological data 
supplied by J. G. Wetstein (1873), Prussian consul at Damascus. 
His observations of the wedding customs of Syrian peasants led 
him to believe that Canticles is substantially a collection of 
songs originally sung at such festivities. Wetstein's contribution 
was republished shortly afterwards by Delitzsch, in an appendix 
to his Commentary:, but it received little attention. The first 
amongst Old Testament scholars to perceive its importance 
seems to have been Stade, who accepted Wetstein's view in a 
footnote to his History 0} the Jewish People (ii. p. 197), published 
in 1888; to Budde, however, belongs the distinction of the 
systematic and detailed use of Wetstein's suggestions, especially 
in his Commentary (1898). This interpretation of the book is 
accepted by Kautzsch (1896), Siegfried (1898), Cheyne (1899), 
and other eminent scholars. The last-named states the theory 
tersely as follows: " The book is an anthology of songs used at 
marriage festivals in or near Jerusalem, revised and loosely 
connected by an editor without regard to temporal sequence " 
(Ency. Bibl. 691). The character of the evidence which has 
contributed to the acceptance of this view may be indicated 
in Wetstein's own statements : — 

" The finest time in the life of the Syrian peasant consists of the 
first seven days after his wedding, in which he and his young wife 
play the part of king (melik) and queen (melika), both being so 
treated and served by their village and the invited communities of 
the neighbourhood. The majority of the greater village weddings 
fall in the month of March, the finest of the Syrian year. The 
winter rains being over, and the sun still refreshing, not oppressive 
as in the following months, the weddings are celebrated in the open 



air on the village threshing-floor, which at this time of the year is 
with few exceptions a flowery mead. . . . We pass over the wedding- 
day itself with its displays, the sword-dance of the bride, and the 
great feast. On the morrow, bridegroom and bride awake as king 
and queen. Already before sunrise they receive the leader of the 
bridesmen, as their vizier, and the bridesmen themselves; the latter 
thereupon fetch the threshing-board and bring it to the threshing- 
floor, singing a rousing song of battle or love, generally both. There 
it is erected as a throne, and after the royal couple have taken their 
seats and the necessary formalities are gone through, a great dance 
in honour of the young couple begins; the accompanying song is 
concerned only with themselves, its principal element being the 
inevitable wasf, i.e. a description of the physical perfections of both 
and their ornaments. The eulogy of the queen is more moderate, 
and praises her visible, rather than veiled, charms; this is due to 
the fact th^t she is to-day a married woman, and that the wasf 
sung on the previous day during her sword-dance has left nothing 
to desire. This wasf is the weak element in Syrian wedding-songs 
according to our taste; its comparisons are to us frequently too 
clumsy and reveal the stereotyped pattern. It is the same with the 
little collection of charming wedding-songs and fragments of them 
which has been received into the canon of the Old Testament under 
the name of Canticles; the wasf (iv.-vii.) is considerably below the 
rest in poetical value. With this dance begin the sports, lasting 
seven days, begun in the morning on the first, shortly before midday 
on the other days, and continuing far into the night by the light of 
the fires that are kindled; on the last day alone all is over by sunset. 
During the whole week both royalties are in marriage attire, must do 
no work and have no cares ; they have only to look down from the 
merteba (throne) on the sports carried on before them, in which they 
themselves take but a moderate part; the queen, however, occa- 
sionally gives a short dance to attract attention to her bridal attire." ' 

For the general application of these and the related customs 
to the interpretation of the book, reference should be made to 
Budde's Commentary, which recognizes four wasfs, viz. iv. 1-7 
(describing the bride from head to breasts), v. 10-16 (the bride- 
groom), vi. 4-7 (similar to and partly repeating iv. 1-7), and 
vii. 1-9, belonging to the sword-dance of the bride, her physical 
charms being sung from feet to head (cf . vii. 1 ; " Why look ye 
on the Shulamite as (on) a dance of camps?" i.e. a war-dance). 
This dance receives its name from the fact that she dances it 
with a sword in her hand in the firelight on the evening of her 
wedding-day, and amid a circle of men and women, whilst such 
a was} as this is sung by the leader of the choir. The passage 
relating to the litter of Solomon (iii. 6-1 1) — an old difficulty 
with the dramatizers— relates to the erection of the throne 
on the threshing-floor. 2 The terms " Solomon " and " the 
Shulamite " are explained as figurative references to the 
famous king, and to Abishag the Shulamite, " fairest among 
women," on the lines of the use of " king " and " queen " noted 
above. Other songs of Canticles are referred by Budde to the 
seven days of festivities. It need hardly be said that difficulties 
still remain in the analysis of this book of wedding-songs; 
whilst Budde detects 23 songs, besides fragments, Siegfried 
divides the book into io. 3 Such differences are to be expected 
in the case of a collection of songs, some admittedly in dialogue 
form, all concerned with the common theme of the love of man 
and woman, and without any external indication of the transition 
from one song to the next. 

Further, we must ask whether the task has been complicated 
by any editorial rearrangement or interpolation; the collector 
of these songs has certainly not reproduced them in the order 
of their use at Syrian weddings. Can we trace any principle, or 
even any dominant thought in this arrangement? In this 
connexion we touch the reason for the reluctance of some scholars 
to accept the above interpretation, viz. the alleged marks of 

1 Wetstein, Zeitschrift f. Ethn., 1873, pp. 270-302; quoted and 
condensed by Budde as above in Comm. p. xvii. ; for a fuller repro- 
duction of Wetstein in English see Harper, The Song of Songs, pp. 74- 
76. 

2 For the connexion of the threshing-floor with marriage through 
the idea of sexual fertility, we may compare many primitive ideas 
and customs, such as those described by Frazer (The Golden Bough, 
ii. p. 181 f., 186). 

3 Castelli (// Canticodei Cantici, 1892) has written a very attractive 
little book on Canticles (quite apart from the Wetstein development) 
regarded as " a poem formed by a number of dialogues mutually 
related by a certain succession"; they require for their under- 
standing nothing but some indication of the speaker at each tran- 
sition (such as we find in codex A of the Septuagint). 



CANTILEVER— CANTILUPE, T. DE 



217 



literary unity which the book contains (e.g. Driver, loc. tit.). 
These are (1) general similarity of treatment, seen in the use 
of imagery (the bride as a garden, iv. 12; vi. 2, 3), the frequent 
references to nature and to particular places, and the recurrence 
of descriptions of male and female beauty; (2) references to 
" Solomon " or " the king," to " the Shulamite " and to " the 
daughters of Jerusalem " (from which, indeed, the dramatic 
theory has found its chief inspiration) ; (3) indications that the 
same person is speaking in different places (cf. the two dreams 
of a woman, and the vineyard references, i. 6; viii. 12); (4) 
repetitions of words and phrases especially of the refrains, 
" disturb not love" (ii. 7; iii. 5; viii. 4), and "until the day 
break " (ii. 17; iv. 6). But of these (1) is no more than should 
be expected, since the songs all relate to the same subject, and 
spring from a common world of life and thought of the same 
group of people; (2) finds at least a partial parallel and explana- 
tion in the use of " king " and " queen " noted above; whilst 
(3) and (4) alone seem to require something more than the work 
of a mere collector of the songs. It is, of course, true that, in 
recurrent ceremonies, the same thought inevitably tends to 
find expression in the same words. But this hardly meets the 
case of the refrains, whilst the reference to the vineyard at be- 
ginning and end does suggest some literary connexion. It is to 
be noted that the three refrains " disturb not love " severally 
follow passages relating to the consummation of the sexual 
relation, whilst the two refrains " until the day break " appear 
to form an invitation and an answer in the same connexion, 
whilst the " Omnia vincit Amor " passage in the last chapter 
forms a natural climax (cf. Haupt's translation). So far, then, 
as this somewhat scanty evidence goes, it may point to some 
one hand which has given its semblance of unity to the book by 
underlining the joy of consummated love — to which the vineyard 
and garden figures throughout allude — and by so arranging the 
collection that the descriptions of this joy find their climax 
in viii. 6-7. 1 

Whatever conclusion, however, may be reached as to the 
present arrangement of Canticles, the recognition of wedding- 
songs as forming its nucleus marks an important stage in the 
interpretation of the book; even Rothstein (1902), whilst 
attempting to resuscitate a dramatic theory, " recognizes . . . 
the possibility that older wedding-songs (as, for instance, the 
wasfs) are worked up in the Song of Songs " (Hastings' D.B. 
p. 504b). The drama he endeavours to construct might, indeed, 
be called " The Tokens of Virginity," since he makes it culminate 
in the procedure of Deut. xxii. 13 f., which still forms part of 
the Syrian ceremonies. But his reconstruction is open to the 
same objection as all similar attempts, in that the vital moments 
of the dramatic action have to be supplied from without. Thus 
between v. 1 and v. 2, the baffled king is supposed to have dis- 
appeared, and to have been replaced by the happy lover; 
between viii. 7 and viii. 8, we are required to imagine " the 
bridal night and its mysteries "; whilst between viii. 9 and viii. 
10, we must suppose the evidence that the bride has been found 
a virgin is exhibited. He also attempts, with considerable 
ingenuity, to trace the legend involved in the supposed drama 
to the fact that Abishag remained a virgin in regard to David 
(1 Kings i. 4) whilst nothing is said of her marriage to Solomon. 2 

On the view accepted above, Canticles describes in a number 

1 On the erotic meaning of many of the figures employed see the 
notes of Haupt in The American Journal of Semitic Languages (July 
1902); also G. Jacob, Das Hohelied (1902), who rightly protests 
against the limitation in the Cotnm. of Budde and Siegfried (p. 10) 
of all the songs to the marriage relation. Haupt thinks that the songs 
were not originally composed for weddings, though used there 
(p. 207, op. cit.). Diestel had pointed out, in another connexion 
(B.L. 125), that nothing is said in the book of the blessing of children, 
the chief end of marriage from a Hebrew standpoint. 

2 Rothstein's criticism of Budde turns chiefly on the latter's 
admission of redactional elements, introducing " movement and 
action," and may be summed up in the statement that "Budde 
himself by the characteristics he assigns to the redactor points the 
way again past his own hypothesis to the dramatical view of the 
Song " (loc. cit. 594b). A. Harper, " The Song of Songs " [Cambridge 
Bible), also criticizes Budde at length in favour of the conventional 
dramatical theory (Appendix). 



of separate poems the central passion of human life, and is 
wholly without didactic tendencies. Of its earliest history as 
a book we have no information. It is already included in the 
Hebrew canon (though its right to be there is disputed) when 
the first explicit mention of the book occurs. We have no 
evidence, therefore, of the theory of interpretation prevalent 
at the time of its incorporation with the other books of the 
canon. It seems, however, fair to infer that it would hardly 
have found acceptance but for a Solomonic theory of authorship 
and a " religious " theory of meaning. The problem raised by 
its present place in the canon occurs in relation to mistaken 
Jewish theories about other books also; it suggests, at least, 
that divine inspiration may belong to the life of a people rather 
than to the letter of their literature. Of that life Canticles 
portrays a central element — the passion of love — in striking 
imagery and graceful language, however far its oriental standard 
of taste differs from that of the modern West. 

From the nature of the book, it is impossible to assign a 
precise date for its origin; the wedding-songs of which it chiefly 
consists must belong to the folklore of more than one century. 
The only evidence we possess as to date is drawn from the char- 
acter of the Hebrew in which the book is written, which shows 
frequent points of contact with new Hebrew. 3 On this ground, 
we may suppose the present form of the work to date from the 
Greek period, i.e. after 332 B.C. This is the date accepted by 
most recent writers, e.g. Kautzsch, Cheyne, Budde, Rothstein, 
Jacob, Haupt. This late date finds some confirmation in the 
fact that Canticles belongs to the third and latest part of the Old 
Testament canon, and that its canonicity was still in dispute 
at the end of the 1st century a.d. The evidence offered for a 
north Israelite origin, on the ground of linguistic parallels and 
topographical familiarity (Driver, loc. cit.), does not seem very 
convincing; Haupt, however, places the compilation of the book 
in the neighbourhood of Damascus. 

Literature. — Most of the older books of importance are named 
above; Ginsburg, The Song of Songs (1857), gives much informa- 
tion as to the history of the 'exegesis of Canticles; Diestel's 
article, " Hohes Lied," in Schenkel's Bibel Lexikon (1871), reviews 
well the history of interpretation prior to Wetstein; cf. also Riedel, 
Die Auslegung des Hohenliedes in der jiidischen Gemeinde und der 
griechischen Kirche (1898). The most important commentary is 
that by Budde, in Marti's Kurzer Hand-Commentar {Die fiinf 
Megilloth) (1898), where references to the literature of the 19th 
century are given. To his list add Siegfried, " Prediger und Hohes- 
lied," in Nowack's Handkommentar (1898); Cheyne's article 
"Canticles," in the Encyclopaedia Biblica (1899); Dalman, Palas- 
linischer Diwan (1901), parallels to the songs; Rothstein's article, 
" Song of Songs," in Hastings' Dictionary of the Bible (1902); G. 
Jacob, Das Hohelied auf Grund arabischer und anderer Parallelen 
von neuem Untersucht (1902) ; A. Harper, The Song of Songs (1902); 
Haupt, " The Book of Canticles," in The American Journal of 
Semitic Languages (July 1902) ; Scholz, Kommentar uber das 
Hohelied und Psalm 45 (1904) (written from the Roman Catholic 
dogmatic standpoint of allegorical interpretation, with a vigorous 
criticism of other positions). No commentator in English, except 
Haupt, in the article named above, has yet worked on the lines of 
the above anthology theory. Haupt gives valuable notes, with a 
translation and rearrangement of the separate songs. 

(W. R. S.; H. W. R.*) 

CANTILEVER (a word of doubtful origin, probably derived 
from " lever," in its ordinary meaning, and " cant," an angle 
or edge, or else from modern Lat. quanta libra, of what weight), 
a building term for a stone, iron or wooden bracket, considerably 
greater in length than depth, used to support a gallery, &c; 
and for a system of bridge-building (see Bridges). 

CANTILUPE, THOMAS DE (c. 1218-1282), English saint and 
prelate, was a son of William de Cantilupe, the 2nd baron (d. 1 251), 
one of King John's ministers, and a nephew of Walter de Canti- 
lupe, bishop of Worcester. He was educated at Paris and 
Orleans, afterwards becoming a teacher of canon law at Oxford 
and chancellor of the university in 1262. During the Barons' 
War Thomas favoured Simon de Montfort and the baronial 
party. He represented the barons before St Louis of France 

3 E.g. the late form of the relative pronoun used throughout 
except in title ; foreign words, Persian and Greek ; Aramaic words 
and usages (details in the Comm. or in E.B. 693). 



2l8 



CANTILUPE, W. DE— CANTON 



at Amiens in 1264; he was made chancellor of England in 
February 1265, but was deprived of this office after Montfort's 
death at Evesham, and lived out of England for some time. 
Returning to England, he was again chancellor of Oxford Uni- 
versity, lectured on theology, and held several ecclesiastical 
appointments. In 1 274 he attended the second council of Lyons, 
and in 1275 he was appointed bishop of Hereford. Cantilupe 
was now a trusted adviser of Edward I. ; he attended the royal 
councils, and even when differing from the king did not forfeit 
his favour. The archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Kilwardby, 
was also his friend; but after Kilwardby's death in 1279 a series 
of disputes arose between the bishop and the new archbishop, 
John Peckham, and this was probably the cause which drove 
Cantilupe to visit Italy. He died at Orvieto, on the 25th of 
August 1282, and he was canonized in 1330. Cantilupe appears 
to have been an exemplary bishop both in spiritual and secular 
affairs. His charities were large and his private life blameless; 
he was constantly visiting his diocese, correcting offenders and 
discharging other episcopal duties; and he compelled neighbour- 
ing landholders to restore estates which rightly belonged to the 
see of Hereford. In 1905 the Cantilupe Society was founded to 
publish the episcopal registers of Hereford, of which Cantilupe's 
is the first in existence. 

See the Ada Sanctorum, Boll., 1st October; and the Register of 
Thomas de Cantilupe, with introduction by W. W. Capes (1906). 

CANTILUPE, WALTER DE id. 1265), bishop of Worcester, 
came of a family which had risen by devoted service to the 
crown. His father and his elder brother are named by Roger of 
Wendover among the " evil counsellors " of John, apparently 
for no better reason than that they were consistently loyal 
to an unpopular master. Walter at first followed in his father's 
footsteps, entering the service of the Exchequer and acting as an 
itinerant justice in the early years of Henry III. But he also 
took minor orders, and, in 1236, although not yet a deacon, 
received the see of Worcester. As bishop, he identified himself 
with the party of ecclesiastical reform, which was then led by 
Edmund Rich and Robert Grosseteste. Like his leaders he was 
sorely divided between his theoretical belief in the papacy as a 
divine institution and his instinctive condemnation of the policy 
which Gregory IX. and Innocent IV. pursued in their dealings 
with the English church. At first a court favourite, the bishop 
came at length to the belief that the evils of the time arose from 
the unprincipled alliance of crown and papacy. He raised his 
voice against papal demands for money, and after the death of 
Grosseteste (1253) was the chief spokesman of the nationalist 
clergy. At the parliament of Oxford (1258) he was elected by 
the popular party as one of their representatives on the committee 
of twenty-four which undertook to reform the administration; 
from that time till the outbreak of civil war he was a man of 
mark in the councils of the baronial party. During the war he 
sided with Montfort and, through his nephew, Thomas, who was 
then chancellor of Oxford, brought over the university to the 
popular side. He was present at Lewes and blessed the Mont- 
fortians before they joined battle with the army of the king; 
he entertained Simon de Montfort on the night before the final 
rout of Evesham. During Simon's dictatorship, the bishop 
appeared only as a mediating influence; in the triumvirate of 
" Electors " who controlled the administration, the clergy were 
represented by the bishop of Chichester. Walter de Cantilupe 
died in the year after Evesham (1266). He was respected by 
all parties, and, though far inferior in versatility and force of 
will to Grosseteste, fully merits the admiration which his moral 
character inspired. He is one of the few constitutionalists of his 
day whom it is impossible to accuse of interested motives. 

See the Chronica Maiora of Matthew Paris (" Rolls " series, ed. 
Luard) ; the Chronicon de Bellis (ed. Halliwell, Camden Society) ; 
and the Annates Monastici (" Rolls " series, ed. Luard) ; also T. F. 
Tout in the Political History of England, vol. iii. (1905). 

CANTO (from the Lat. cantus, a song), one of the divisions of 
a long poem, a convenient division when poetry was more usually 
sung by the minstrel to his own accompaniment than read. In 
-*iusic, the canto, in a concerted piece, is that part to which the 



air is given. In modern music this is nearly always the soprano. 
The old masters, however, more frequently allotted it to the tenor. 
Canto fermo, or cantus firmus, is that part of the melody which 
remains true to the original motive, while the other parts vary 
with the counterpoint; also in Church music the simple straight- 
forward melody of the old chants as opposed to canto figurato, 
which is full of embellishments of a florid character (see Plain 
Song). 

CANTON, JOHN (1718-1772), English natural philosopher, 
was born at Stroud, Gloucestershire, on the 31st of July 1718. 
At the age of nineteen, he was articled for five years as clerk to 
the master of a school in Spital Square, London, with whom at 
the end of that time he entered into partnership. In 1750 he 
read a paper before the Royal Society on a method of making 
artificial magnets, which procured him election as a fellow of the 
society and the award of the Copley medal. He was the first 
in England to verify Benjamin Franklin's hypothesis of the 
identity of lightning and electricity, and he made several import- 
ant electrical discoveries. In 1762 and 1764 he published 
experiments in refutation of the decision of the Florentine 
Academy, at that time generally accepted, that water is incom- 
pressible; and in 1768 he described the preparation, by calcining 
oyster-shell with sulphur, of the phosphorescent material known 
as Canton's phosphorus. His investigations were carried on 
without any intermission of his work as a schoolmaster. He 
died in London on the 22nd of March 1772. 

CANTON (more correctly Kwang-chow Fu), a large and 
populous commercial city of China, in the province of Kwang- 
tung, situated on the eastern bank of the Pearl river, which at 
Canton is somewhat broader than the Thames at London Bridge, 
and is navigable 300 m. into the interior. The Pearl river has an 
additional course of 80 m. to the sea, the first part of which lies 
through a rich alluvial plain. Beyond this rises a range of hills 
terminating in abrupt escarpments along the course of the river. 
The bold shore thus formed compresses the stream at this point 
into a narrow pass, to which the Chinese have given the name of 
Hu-mun, or Tiger's Gate. This the Portuguese translated into 
Boca Tigre, whence the designation of " the Bogue," by which it 
is commonly known among Europeans. When viewed from the 
hills on the north, Canton appears to be little more than an 
expanse of reddish roofs relieved by a few large trees, — two 
pagodas shooting up within the walls, and a five-storeyed tower 
near the northern gate, being the most conspicuous objects. 
These hills rise 1 200 ft. above the river. Little or no vegetation 
is seen on them; and their acclivities, covered for miles with 
graves and tombs, serve as the necropolis of this vast city. 
Three or four forts are built on the points nearest the northern 
walls. Facing the city on the opposite side of the river is the 
suburb and island of Honan. The part of Canton enclosed by 
walls is about 6 m. in circumference, and has a partition wall, 
running east and west, and dividing the city into two unequal 
parts. The northern and larger division is called the old, and the 
southern the new city. Including the suburbs, the city has a 
circuit of nearly 10 m. The houses stretch along the river for 4 m., 
and the banks are almost entirely concealed by boats and rafts. 
The walls of the city are of brick, on a foundation of sandstone 
and granite, are 20 ft. thick, and rise to an average height of 25 ft. 
On the north side the wall rises to include a hill which it there 
meets with, and on the other three sides the city is surrounded 
by a ditch, which is filled by the rising tide, when, for a time, the 
revolting mass of filth that lies in its bed is concealed from view. 
There are twelve outer gates — four of which are in the partition 
wall, and two water gates, through which boats pass from east to 
west across the new city. The gates are all shut at night, and in 
the daytime a guard is stationed at them to preserve order. 
The streets, amounting in all to upwards of 600, are long, straight, 
and very narrow. They are mostly paved and are not as dirty 
as those of some of the other cities in the empire; in fact, 
considering the habits of the people and the inattention of the 
government to these matters, Canton may be said to be a well- 
governed and comparatively cleanly city. The houses are in 
general small, seldom consisting of more than two storeys, the 



CANTON 



219 



ground floor serving as a shop, and the rest of the house, with the 
court behind, being used as a warehouse. Here are to be found 
the productions of every quarter of the globe ; and the merchants 
are in general attentive, civil, expert men of business, and 
generally assiduous. 

The temples and public buildings of Canton are numerous, but 
none of them presents features worthy of special remark. There 
are two pagodas near the west gate of the old city, and 124 
temples, pavilions, halls and other religious edifices within the 
city. One of the pagodas called the Kwangtah, or Plain Pagoda, 
is a Mahommedan mosque, which was erected by the Arabian 
voyagers who were in the habit of visiting Canton about ten 
centuries ago. It rises in an angular tapering tower to the height 
of 160 ft. Theotherisanoctagonalpagodaofninestoreys, 170 ft. 
in height, and was first erected more than thirteen centuries ago. 
A Buddhist temple at Honan, opposite the foreign factories, and 
named in Chinese Hai-ch'wang-sze, or the Temple of the Ocean 
Banner, is one of the largest in Canton. Its grounds, which 
cover about seven acres, are surrounded by a wall, and are 
divided into courts, gardens and a burial-ground, where are 
deposited the ashes of priests, whose bodies are burned. There 
a re about 175 priests connected with this establishment. Besides 
the Hai-ch'wang-sze the most noteworthy temples in and about 
the city are those of the Five Hundred Gods and of Longevity, 
both in the western suburbs; the Tatar City Temple and the 
Temple of the Five Genii. The number of priests and nuns in 
Canton is not exactly known, but they probably exceed 2000, 
nine-tenths of whom are Buddhists. The temples are gloomy- 
looking edifices. The areas in front of them are usually occupied 
by hucksters, beggars and idlers, who are occasionally driven 
off to make room for the mat-sheds in which the theatrical 
performances got up by the wealthy inhabitants are acted. The 
principal hall, where the idol sits enshrined, is lighted only in 
front, and the inner apartments are inhabited by a class of men 
almost as senseless as the idols they serve. 

The residences of the high officers of government are all 
within the walls of the old city. The residence of the governor- 
general used to be in the south-west corner of the new city, but it 
was utterly destroyed by the bombardment in 1856. The site 
remained desolate until i860, when it was taken possession of by 
the French authorities, who erected a Roman Catholic cathedral 
upon it. The residence of the commander-in-chief is in the old 
city, and is said to be one of the best houses in Canton. There 
are four prisons in the city, all large edifices. For the space of 
4 or J m. opposite Canton boats and vessels are ranged parallel to 
each other in such close order as to resemble a floating city; 
and these marine dwellings are occupied by numerous families, 
who reside almost constantly on the water. In the middle of the 
river lie the Chinese junks, some of them of from 600 to 1000 tons 
burden, which trade to the north and to the Strait Settlements. 
The various gilds and associations among the people and the 
merchants from other provinces have public halls each for its own 
particular use. The number of these buildings is not less than 
1 50. Canton was long the only seat of British trade with China, 
and was no doubt fixed upon by the Chinese government for the 
European trade, as being the most distant from the capital 
Peking. 

Formerly only a limited number of merchants, called the 
hong or security merchants, were allowed to trade with foreigners. 
They were commonly men of large property and were famed 
for integrity in their transactions. All foreign cargoes passed 
through the hands of these merchants, and by them also the 
return cargoes were furnished. They became security for the 
payment of customs duties, and it was criminal for any other 
merchant to engage in the trade with foreigners. 

Although it is in the same parallel of latitude as Calcutta, the 
climate of Canton is much cooler, and is considered superior to 
that of most places situated between the tropics. The extreme 
range of the thermometer is from 38° to ioo° F., though these 
extremes are rarely reached. In ordinary years the winter 
minimum is about 42 and the maximum in summer 06°. 
The hot season is considered to last from May to October; 



during the rest of the year the weather is cool. In shallow 
vessels ice sometimes forms at Canton; but so rarely is snow 
seen that when in February 1835 a fell to the depth of 2 in. 
occurred, the citizens hardly knew its proper name. Most of the 
rain falls during May and June, but the amount is nothing in 
comparison with that which falls during a rainy season in 
Calcutta. July, August and September are the regular monsoon 
months, the wind coming from the south-west with frequent 
showers, which allay the heat. In the succeeding months the 
northerly winds begin, with some interruptions at first, but from 
October to January the temperature is agreeable, the sky clear 
and the air invigorating. Few large cities are more generally 
healthy than Canton, and epidemics rarely prevail there. 

Provisions and refreshments of all sorts are abundant, and in 
general are excellent in quality and moderate in price. It is 
a singular fact that the Chinese make no use of milk, either in 
its natural state or in the form of butter or cheese. Among the 
delicacies of a Chinese market are to be seen horse-flesh, 
dogs, cats, hawks, owls and edible birds'-nests. The business 
between foreigners and natives at Canton is generally transacted 
in a jargon known as " pidgin English," the Chinese being 
extremely ready in acquiring a sufficient smattering of English 
words to render themselves intelligible. 

The intercourse between China and Europe by the way of 
the Cape of Good Hope began in 1517, when Emanuel, king of 
Portugal, sent an ambassador, accompanied by a fleet of eight 
ships, to Peking, on which occasion the sanction of the emperor 
to establish a trade at Canton was obtained. It was in 1596, 
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, that the English first attempted 
to open an intercourse with China, but ineffectually, for the 
two ships which were despatched on this mission were lost on 
the outward voyage, and it was not till about 1634 that English 
ships visited Canton. Unfortunately at this time a misunder- 
standing having occurred with the Chinese authorities owing to 
the treachery of the Portuguese, a rupture and a battle took 
place, and it was with difficulty that peace was again restored. 
In 1673 China was again visited by an English ship which was 
subsequently refused admission into Japan, and in 1677 a factory 
was established at Amoy. But during an irruption of the 
Tatars three years later this building was destroyed, and it was 
not till 1 685 that the emperor permitted any trade with Europeans 
at that port. Upon the union of the two East India Companies 
in London, an imperial edict was issued, restricting the foreign 
commerce to the port of Canton. 

Tea was first imported into England about the year 1667, and 
in 1689 a customs duty of 5s. per lb was for the first time imposed. 
From this date to 1834 the East India Company held a monopolv 
of the trade at Canton, and during this period the prosperity 
of the port increased and multiplied, notwithstanding the ob- 
structions which were constantly thrown in the way of the 
" barbarians " by the Chinese government. The termination of 
the Company's monopoly brought no alteration in the conduct 
of the native authorities, whose oppressions became before long 
so unbearable that in 1839 war was declared on the part of Great 
Britain. In 1841, while the forces under Sir Hugh (afterwards 
Lord) Gough were preparing to capture Canton, Captain Elliott 
entered into negotiations with the Chinese, and consented to 
receive a pecuniary ransom in lieu of occupying the city. Mean- 
while the war was carried on in central China, and finally re- 
sulted in the conclusion of the Nanking treaty in August 1842, 
under the terms of which four additional ports, viz. Shanghai, 
Ningpo, Fu-chow and Amoy, were thrown open to foreign trade, 
and foreigners were granted permission to enter the city of 
Canton, from which they had hitherto been excluded. This 
latter provision of the treaty, however, the Chinese refused to 
carry out; and after endless disputes about this and other 
improper acts of the Chinese government, war was again declared 
in 1856, the immediate cause of which was an insult offered to 
the British flag by the capture of certain Chinese on board the 
" Arrow," a small craft trading under English colours. The 
outbreak of hostilities was followed by the pillage and destruction 
of the foreign "factories" in December 1856 by a Chinese mob, 



2-2 O 



CANTON 



and twelve months later Canton was taken by assault by a force 
under Sir Charles Straubenzee, which had been sent out from 
England for the purpose. From this time until October 1861 
the city was occupied by an English and French garrison, and 
the administration of affairs was entrusted to an allied com- 
mission, consisting of two English officers and one French officer, 
acting under the English general. Since the withdrawal of this 
garrison, the city of Canton has been freely open to foreigners 
of all nationalities, and the English consul has his residence 
in the Yamun formerly occupied by the allied commissioners, 
within the city walls. 

On the conclusion of peace it became necessary to provide 
a foreign settlement for the merchants whose " factories " had 
been destroyed, and after some consultation it was determined 
to fill in and appropriate as the British settlement an extensive 
mud flat lying to the westward of the old factory site, and 
known as Sha-mien or " The Sand Flats." This site having 
been leased, it was converted into an artificial island by building 
a massive embankment of granite in an irregular oval form. 
Between the northern face of the site and the Chinese suburb 
a canal of 100 ft. in width was constructed, thus forming an island 
of about 2850 ft. in length and 950 ft. in greatest breadth. The 
expense of making this settlement was 325,000 Mexican dollars, 
four-fifths of which were defrayed by the British government 
and one-fifth by the French government. The British portion 
of the new settlement was laid out in eighty* two lots; and so 
bright appeared the prospect of trade at the time of their sale 
that 9000 dollars and upwards was paid in more than one instance 
for a lot with a river frontage, measuring 12,645 sq. ft. The 
depression in trade, however, which soon followed acted as a 
bar to building, and it was not until the British consulate was 
erected in 1865 that the merchants began to occupy the settle- 
ment in any numbers. The British consulate occupies six lots, 
with an area of 75,870 sq. ft. in the centre of the site, overlooking 
the river, and is enclosed with a substantial wall. A ground-rent 
of 15,000 cash (about £3) per mow (a third of an acre) is annually 
paid by the owners of lots to the Chinese government. 

The Sha-mien settlement possesses many advantages. It is 
close to the western suburb of Canton, where reside all the 
wholesale dealers as well as the principal merchants and brokers ; 
it faces the broad channel known as the Macao Passage, up 
which the cool breezes in summer are wafted almost uninter- 
ruptedly, and the river opposite to it affords a safe and com- 
modious anchorage for steamers up to 1000 tons burden. 
Steamers only are allowed to come up to Canton, sailing vessels 
being restricted to the anchorage at Whampoa. There is daily 
communication by steamer with Hong-Kong, and with the 
Portuguese colony of Macao which lies near the mouth of the 
river. Inland communication by steam is now open by the west 
river route to the cities of Wuchow and Nanking. The opening 
of these inland towns to foreign trade, which has been effected, 
cannot but add considerably to the volume of Canton traffic. 
The native population is variously estimated at from 1,500,000 
to 2,000,000, the former being probably nearer the truth. The 
foreign residents number about 400. Canton is the headquarters 
of the provincial government of Kwangtung and Kwangsi, 
generally termed the two Kwang, at the head of which is a 
governor-general or viceroy, an office which next to that of 
Nanking is the most important in the empire. It possesses a 
mint built in 1889 by the then viceroy Chang Chih-tung, and 
equipped with a very complete plant supplied from England. 
It turns out silver subsidiary coinage and copper cash. Con- 
tracts have been entered into to connect Canton by railway 
with Hong-Kong (Kowlun), and by a grand trunk line with 
Hankow on the Yangtsze. It is connected by telegraph with 
all parts. The value of the trade of Canton for the year 1904 
was £13,749,582, £7,555,090 of which represented imports and 
£6,194,490 exports. (R. K. D.) 

CANTON, a city of Fulton county, Illinois, U.S.A., in the W. 
part of the state, 12 m. N. of the Illinois river, and 28 m. S.W. 
of Peoria. Pop. (1890) 5604; (1900) 6564 (424 foreign-born) ; 
(1910) 10,453. Canton is served by the Chicago, Burlington & 



Quincy, the Toledo, Peoria & Western, and the Illinois Central 
Electric Interurban railways. About 1 m. from the centre of 
the city are the Canton Chautauqua grounds. The city has a 
public library. Canton is situated in a rich agricultural region, 
for which it is a supply point, and there are large coal-mines in 
the vicinity. Among the manufactures are agricultural imple- 
ments (particularly ploughs), machine-shop and foundry products 
(particularly mining-cars and equipment), flour, cigars, cigar- 
boxes, brooms, and bricks and tile. The municipal water-works 
are supplied from a deep artesian well. Canton was laid out in 
1825; it was incorporated as a town in 1837 and as a village in 
1849, an d was chartered as a city in 1854. 

CANTON, a village and the county-seat of St Lawrence county, 
New York, U.S.A., 17 m. S.E. of Ogdensburg, on the Grasse 
river. Pop. (1890) 2580; (1900) 2757; (1905) 3083; (1910) 
2701. The village is served by the Rome, Watertown & Ogdens- 
burg division of the New York Central & Hudson River railway. 
Canton is the seat of St Lawrence University (co-educational; 
chartered in 1856; at first Universalist, afterwards unsectarian), 
having a college of letters and science, which developed from an 
academy, opened in 1859; a theological school (Universalist), 
opened in 1858; a law school, established in 1869, discontinued 
in 1872 and re-established in Brooklyn, New York, in 1903 as 
the Brooklyn Law School of St Lawrence University; and a 
state school of agriculture, established in 1906 by the state 
legislature and opened in 1907. In 1907-1908 the university 
had 52 instructors, 168 students in the college of letters and 
science, 14 students in the theological school, 287 in the law 
school and 13 in the agricultural school. The Clinton Liberal 
Institute (Universalist, 1832), which was removed in 1879 from 
Clinton to Fort Plain, New York, was established in Canton in 
1 901. The Grasse river furnishes water-power, and the village 
has saw-, planing- and flour-mills, and plant for the building of 
small boats and launches. The village corporation owns a fine 
water-supply system. Canton was first settled in 1800 by 
Daniel Harrington of Connecticut and was incorporated in 
1845. It was for many years the home of Silas Wright, who was 
buried here. 

CANTON, a city and the county-seat of Stark county, Ohio, 
U.S.A., on Nimisillen Creek, 60 m. S. by E. of Cleveland. Pop. 
(1890) 26,189; (io°°) 30,667, of whom 4018 were foreign-born; 
and (1910) 50,217. It is served by the Pennsylvania, the 
Baltimore & Ohio, and the Wheeling & Lake Erie railways, and 
is connected by an interurban electric system with all the 
important cities and towns within a radius of 50 m. It lies at an 
elevation of about 1030 ft. above sea-level, in a wheat-growing 
region, in which bituminous coal, limestone, and brick and 
potter's clay abound. Meyer's Lake in the vicinity is a summer 
attraction. The principal buildings are the post-office, court- 
house, city hall, an auditorium with a seating capacity of 5000, 
a Masonic building, an Oddfellows' temple, a Y.M.C.A. building 
and several handsome churches. On Monument Hill, in West 
Lawn Cemetery, in a park of 26 acres — a site which President 
McKinley had suggested for a monument to the soldiers and 
sailors of Stark county-^- there is a beautiful monument to the 
memory of McKinley, who lived in Canton. This memorial is 
built principally of Milford (Mass.) granite, with a bronze statue 
of the president, and with sarcophagi containing the bodies of 
the president and Mrs McKinley, and has a total height, from 
the first step of the approaches to its top, of 163 ft. 6 in., the 
mausoleum itself being 98 ft. 6 in . high and 7 8 ft. 9 in . in diameter ; 
it was dedicated on the 30th of September 1907, when an address 
was delivered by President Roosevelt. Another monument 
commemorates the American soldiers of the Spanish-American 
War. Among the city's manufactures are agricultural imple- 
ments, iron bridges and other structural iron work, watches and 
watch-cases, steel, engines, safes, locks, cutlery, hardware, 
wagons, carriages, paving-bricks, furniture, dental and surgical 
chairs, paint and varnish, clay-working machinery and saw-mill 
machinery. The value of the factory product in 1905 was 
$10,591,143, being iO'6 % more than the product value of 1900. 
Canton was laid out as a town in 1805, became the county-seat 



CANTON— CANUTE THE GREAT 



221 



in 1808, was incorporated as a village in 1822 and in 1854 was 
chartered as a city. 

CANTON (borrowed from the Ital. cantone, a corner or angle), 
a word used for certain divisions of some European countries. 
In France, the canton, which is a subdivision of the arrondisse- 
ment, is a territorial, rather than an administrative, unit. The 
canton, of which there are 2908, generally comprises, on an 
average, about twelve communes, though very large communes 
are sometimes divided into several cantons. It is the seat of 
a justice of the peace, and returns a member to the conseil 
d'arrondissement (see France). In Switzerland, canton is the 
name given to each of the twenty-two states comprising the 
Swiss confederation (see Switzerland). 

In heraldry, a " canton " is a corner or square division on a 
shield, occupying the upper corner (usually the dexter). It is in 
area two-thirds of the quarter (see Heraldry). 

CANTONMENT (Fr. cantonnement, from cantonner, to quarter; 
Ger. Ortsunterkunjt or Quarlier). When troops are distributed 
in small parties amongst the houses of a town or village, they are 
said to be in cantonments, which are also called quarters or 
billets. Formerly this method of providing soldiers with shelter 
was rarely employed on active service, though the normal 
method in " winter quarters," or at seasons when active military 
queries were not in progress. In the field, armies lived as a
rule in camp (?.».), and when the provision of canvas shelter was 
impossible in bivouac. At the present time, however, it is 
unusual, in Europe at any rate, for troops on active service to 
hamper themselves with the enormous trains of tent wagons that 
would be required, and cantonments or bivouacs, or a combina- 
tion of the two have therefore taken the place, in modern warfare, 
of the old long rectilinear lines of tents that marked the resting- 
place and generally, too, the order of battle of an 18th-century 
army. Th'e greater part of an army operating in Europe at 
the present day is accommodated in widespread cantonments, 
an army corps occupying the villages and farms found within 
an area of 4 m. by 5 or 6. This allowance of space has 
been ascertained by experience to be sufficient, not only for 
comfort, but also for subsistence for one day, provided that the 
density of the ordinary civil population is not less than 200 
persons to the square mile. Under modern conditions there is 
little danger from such a dissemination of the forces, as each 
fraction of each army corps is within less than two hours' march 
of its concentration post. If the troops halt for several days, of 
course they require cither a more densely populated country from 
which to requisition supplies, or a wider area of cantonments. 
The difficulty of controlling the troops, when scattered in private 
houses in parties of six or seven, is the principal objection to this 
system of cantonments. But since Napoleon introduced the 
" war of masses " the only alternative to cantoning the troops 
is bivouacking, which if prolonged for several nights is more 
injurious to the well-being of the troops than the slight relaxation 
of discipline necessitated by the cantonment system, when the 
latter is well arranged and policed. The troops nearest the 
enemy, however, which have to be maintained in a state of 
constant readiness for battle, cannot as a rule afford the time 
either for dispersing into quarters or for rallying on an alarm, and 
in western Europe at any rate they are required to bivouac. 
In India, the term " cantonment " means more generally a 
military station or standing camp. The troops live, not in 
private houses, but in barracks, huts, forts or occasionally camps. 
The large cantonments are situated in the neighbourhood of the 
North-Western frontier, of the large cities and of the capitals of 
important native states. Under Lord Kitchener's redistribution 
of the Indian army in 1903, the chief cantonments are Rawalpindi, 
Quetta, Peshawar, Kohat, Bannu, Nowshera, Sialkot, Mian Mir, 
Umballa, Muttra, Ferozepore, Meerut, Lucknow, Mhow, Jubbul- 
pore, Bolarum, Poona, Secunderabad and Bangalore. 

CANTU, CESARE (1804-1895), Italian historian, was born at 
Brivio in Lombardy and began his career as a teacher. His firsL 
literary essay (1828) was a romantic poem entitled Algiso, la 
Lega Lombarda (new ed., Milan, 1876), and in the following year 
he produced a Storia di Como in two volumes (Como, 1829). The 



death of his father then left him in charge of a large family, and 
he worked very hard both as a teacher and a writer to provide for 
them. His prodigious literary activity led to his falling under 
the suspicions of the Austrian police, and he was mixed up in a 
political trial and arrested in 1833. While in prison writing 
materials were denied him, but he managed to write on rags with 
a tooth-pick and candle smoke, and thus composed the novel 
Margherita Pusterla (Milan, 1838). On his release a year later, 
as he was interdicted from teaching, literature became his only 
resource. In 1836 the Turinese publisher, Giuseppe Pomba, 
commissioned him to write a universal history, which his vast 
reading enabled him to do. In six years the work was completed 
in seventy-two volumes, and immediately achieved a general 
popularity; the publisher made a fortune out of it, and Cantu's 
royalties amounted, it is said, to 300,000 lire (£12,000). Just 
before the revolution of 1848, being warned that he would be 
arrested, he fled to Turin, but after the " Five Days " he returned 
to Milan and edited a paper called La Guardia Nazionale. 
Between 1849 and 1850 he published his Storia degli Italiani 
(Turin, 1855) and many other works. In 1857 the archduke 
Maximilian tried to conciliate the Milanese by the promise of a 
constitution, and Cantu was one of the few Liberals who accepted 
the olive branch, and went about in company with the archduke. 
This act was regarded as treason and caused Cantu much annoy- 
ance in after years. He continued his literary activity after the 
formation of the Italian kingdom, producing volume after 
volume until his death.. For a short time he was member of the 
Italian parliament; he founded the Lombard historical society, 
and was appointed superintendent of the Lombard archives. 
He died in March 1895. His views are coloured by strong 
religious and political prejudice, and by a moralizing tendency, 
and his historical work has little critical value and is for the most 
part pure book-making, although he collected a vast amount of 
material which has been of use to other writers. In dealing with 
modern Italian history he is reactionary and often wilfully 
inaccurate. Besides the above-mentioned works he wrote Gli 
Eretici in Italia (Milan, 1873); Cronisloria dell' Indipendenza 
italiana (Naples, 1872-1877); II Conciliatore e i Carbonari 
(Milan, 1878), &c. (L.V.*) 

CANUSIUM (Gr. Kavwwv, mod. Canosa), an ancient city of 
Apulia, on the right bank of the Aufidus (Ofanto), about 12 m. 
from its mouth, and situated upon the Via Traiana, 85 m. E.N.E. 
of Beneventum. It was said to have been founded by Diomede, 
and even at the time of Horace (Sat. i. 10. 30) both Greek and 
Latin were spoken there. The legends on the coins are Greek, 
and a very large number of Greek vases have been found in the 
necropolis. The town came voluntarily under Roman sover- 
eignty in 318 B.C., afforded a refuge to the Roman fugitives after 
Cannae, and remained faithful for the rest of the war. It 
revolted in the Social War, in which it would appear to have 
suffered, inasmuch as Strabo (vi. 283) speaks of Canusium and 
Arpi as having been, to judge from the extent of their walls, the 
greatest towns in the plain of Apulia, but as having shrunk 
considerably in his day. Its importance was maintained, 
however, by its trade in agricultural products and in Apulian 
wool (which was there dyed and cleaned), by its port (probably 
Cannae) at the mouth of the Aufidus, and by its position on the 
high-road. It was a municipium under the early empire, but was 
converted into a colonia under Antoninus Pius by Herodes Atticus, 
who provided it with a water-supply. In the 6th century it was 
still the most important city of Apulia. Among the ancient 
buildings which are still preserved, an amphitheatre, an aqueduct 
and a city gate may be mentioned. 

See N. Jacobone, Ricerche sulla storia e la topografia di Canosa 
Antica (Canosa di Puglia, 1905). (T. As.) 

CANUTE (Cnut), known as "the Great" (c. 995-1035), king 
of Denmark and England, second son of King Sweyn Forkbeard 
and his first wife, the daughter of the Polish prince, Mieszko, 
was born c. 995. On the death of his father he was compelled 
to quit England by a general rising of the Anglo-Saxons, on 
which occasion in a fit of rage, for he was not naturally cruel, 
he abandoned his hostages after cutting off their hands, ears 



222 



CANUTE VI. 



and noses. In the following year, 1015, he returned with a 
great fleet manned by a picked host, " not a thrall or a freedman 
among them." He speedily succeeded in subduing all England 
except London, now the last refuge of King ^Ethelred and his 
heroic son, Edmund Ironside. On the death of ^Ethelred (23rd of 
April 1016) Canute was elected king by an assembly of notables 
at Southampton; but London clung loyally to Edmund, who 
more than once succeeded in raising the western shires against 
Canute. Edmund indeed approved himself the better general 
of the two, and would doubtless have prevailed, but for the 
treachery of his own ealdormen. This was notably the case 
at the great battle of Assandun, in which by the desertion of 
Eadric an incipient Anglo-Saxon victory was converted into 
a crushing defeat. Nevertheless, the antagonists were so evenly 
matched that the great men on both sides, fearing that the 
interminable war would utterly ruin the land, arranged a con- 
ference between Canute and Edmund on an island in the Severn, 
when they agreed to divide England between them, Canute 
retaining Mercia and the north, while Edmund's territory com- 
prised East Anglia and Wessex with London. On the death of 
Edmund, a few months later (November 1016), Canute was 
unanimously elected king of all England at the beginning of 
1017. The young monarch at once showed himself equal to 
his responsibilities. He did his utmost to deserve the confidence 
of his Anglo-Saxon subjects, and the eighteen years of his reign 
were of unspeakable benefit to his adopted country. He identi- 
fied himself with the past history of England and its native 
dynasty by wedding Emma, or yElgifu, to give her her Saxon 
name (the Northmen called her Alfifa), who came over from 
Normandy at his bidding, Canute previously repudiating his 
first wife, another ^Elgifu, the daughter of the ealdorman 
jElfhem of Deira, who, with her sons, was banished to Denmark. 
In 1018 Canute inherited the Danish throne, his elder brother 
Harold having died without issue. He now withdrew most 
of his army from England, so as to spare as much as possible 
the susceptibilities of the Anglo-Saxons. For the same reason 
he had previously dispersed all his warships but forty. On 
his return from Denmark he went a step farther. In a remark- 
able letter, addressed to the prelates, ealdormen and people, 
he declared his intention of ruling England by the English, 
and of upholding the laws of King Edgar, at the same time 
threatening with his vengeance all those who did not judge 
righteous judgment or who let malefactors go free. The tone 
of this document, which is not merely Christian but sacerdotal, 
shows that he had wisely resolved, in the interests of law and 
order, to form a close alliance with the native clergy. Those 
of his own fellow-countrymen who refused to co-operate with 
him were summarily dismissed. Thus, in 102 1, the stiff necked 
jarl Thorkil was banished the land, and his place taken by an 
Anglo-Saxon, the subsequently famous Godwin, who became 
one of Canute's chief counsellors. The humane and conciliatory 
character of his government is also shown in his earnest efforts 
to atone for Danish barbarities in the past. Thus he rebuilt 
the church of St Edmundsbury in memory of the saintly king 
who had perished there at the hands of the earlier Vikings, and 
with great ceremony transferred the relics of St Alphege from 
St Paul's church at London to a worthier resting-place at 
Canterbury. His work of reform and reconciliation was in- 
terrupted in 1026 by the attempt of Olaf Haraldson, king of 
Norway, in conjunction with Anund Jakob, king of Sweden, 
to conquer Denmark. Canute defeated the Swedish fleet at 
Stangebjerg, and so seriously injured the combined squadrons 
at the mouth of the Helgeaa in East Scania, that in 1028 he was 
able to subdue the greater part of Norway " without hurling 
a dart or swinging a sword." But the conquest was not per- 
manent, the Norwegians ultimately rising successfully against 
the tyranny of Alfifa, who misruled the country in the name 
of her infant son Sweyn. Canute also succeeded in establishing 
the dominion of Denmark over the southern shores of the Baltic, 
in Witland and Samland, now forming part of the coast of 
Prussia. Of the details of Canute's government in Denmark 
proper we know but little. His most remarkable institution 



was the Tinglid, a military brotherhood, originally 3000 in 
number, composed of members of the richest and noblest families, 
who not only formed the royal bodyguard, but did garrison duty 
and defended the marches or borders. They were subject to 
strict discipline, embodied in written rules called the Viderlog 
or Vederlag, and were the nucleus not only of a standing army 
but of a royal council. Canute is also said to have endeavoured 
to found monasteries in Denmark, with but indifferent success, 
and he was certainly the first Danish king who coined money, 
with the assistance of Anglo-Saxon mint-masters. Of his 
alliance with the clergy we have already spoken. Like the other 
great contemporary kingdom-builder, Stephen of Hungary, 
he clearly recognized that the church was the one civilizing 
element in a world of anarchic barbarism, and his submission 
to her guidance is a striking proof of his perspicacity. But it 
was no slavish submission. When, in 1027, he went to Rome, 
with Rudolf III. of Burgundy, to be present at the coronation 
of the emperor Conrad II., it was quite as much to benefit his 
subjects as to receive absolution for the sins of his youth. He 
persuaded the pope to remit the excessive fees for granting the 
pallium, which the English and Danish bishops had found such 
a grievous burden, substituting therefor a moderate amount 
of Peter's pence. He also induced the emperor and other 
German princes to grant safe-conducts to those of his subjects 
who desired to make the pilgrimage to Rome. 

Canute died at Shaftesbury on the 12th of November 1035 
in his 40th year, and was buried at Winchester. He was cut 
off before he had had the opportunity of developing most of his 
great plans; yet he lived long enough to obtain the title of 
"Canute the Wealthy" {i.e. "Mighty"), and posterity, still 
more appreciative, has well surnamed him " the Great." A 
violent, irritable temper was his most salient defect, and more 
than one homicide must be laid to his charge. But' the fierce 
Viking nature was gradually and completely subdued; for 
Canute was a Christian by conviction and sincerely religious. 
His humility is finely illustrated by the old Norman poem which 
describes how he commanded the rising tide of the Thames at 
Westminster to go back. The homily he preached to his courtiers 
on that occasion was to prepare them for his subsequent journey 
to Rome and his submission to the Holy Sec. Like his father 
Sweyn, Canute loved poetry, and the great Icelandic skalder, 
ThorarLovtunge and Thormod Kolbrunarskjold, were as welcome 
visitors at his court as the learned bishops. As an administrator 
Canute was excelled only by Alfred. He possessed in an eminent 
degree the royal gift of recognizing greatness, and the still more 
useful faculty of conciliating enemies. No English king before 
him had levied such heavy taxes, yet never were taxes more 
cheerfully paid; because the people felt that every penny of 
the money was used for the benefit of the country. According 
to the Knytlinga Saga King Canute was huge of limb, of great 
strength, and a very goodly man to look upon, save for his nose, 
which was narrow, lofty and hooked; he had also long fair 
hair, and eyes brighter and keener than those of any man living. 

See Danmarks Riges Hislorie. Old Tiden og den aeldre Middelalder , 
pp. 382-406 (Copenhagen, 1897-1905); Freeman, Norman Conquest 
(Oxford, 1870-1875); Steenstrup, Normannerne (Copenhagen, 1876- 
1882). (R. N. B.) 

CANUTE VI. (1163-1202), king of Denmark, eldest son of 
Valdemar I., was crowned in his seventh year (1170), as his 
father's co-regent, so as to secure the succession. In 1182 he 
succeeded to the throne. During his twenty years' reign Den- 
mark advanced steadily along the path of greatness and pros- 
perity marked out for her by Valdemar I., consolidating and 
extending her dominion over the North Baltic coast and adopt- 
ing a more and more independent attitude towards Germany. 
The emperor Frederick I.'s claim of overlordship was haughtily 
rejected at the very outset, and his attempt to stir up Duke 
Bogislav of Pomerania against Denmark's vassal, Jaromir of 
Riigen, was defeated by Archbishop Absalon, who destroyed 
465 of Bogislav's 500 ships in a naval action off Strela (Stralsund) 
in 1 184. In the following year Bogislav did homage to Canute on 
the deck of his long-ship, off Jomsborg in Pomerania, Canute 



CANVAS— CANYON 



223 



henceforth styling himself king of the Danes and Wends. This 
victory led two years later to the voluntary submission of the two 
Abodrite princes Niklot and Borwin to the Danish crown, where- 
upon the bulk of the Abodrite dominions, which extended from 
the Trave to the Warnow, including modern Mecklenburg, were 
divided between them. The concluding years of Canute's reign 
were peaceful, as became a prince who, though by no means a 
coward, was not of an overwhelmingly martial temperament. 
In 1 197, however, German jealousy of Denmark's ambitions, 
especially when Canute led a fleet against the pirates of Esthonia, 
induced Otto, margrave of Brandenburg, to invade Pomerania, 
while in the following year Otto, in conjunction with Duke 
Adolf of Holstein, wasted the dominions of the Danophil 
Abodrites. The war continued intermittently till 1201, when 
Duke Valdemar, Canute's younger brother, conquered the whole 
of Holstein, and Duke Adolf was subsequently captured at 
Hamburg and sent in chains to Denmark. North Albingia, as 
the district between the Eider and the Elbe was then called, now 
became Danish territory. Canute died on the 1 2th of November 
1202. Undoubtedly he owed the triumphs of his reign very 
largely to the statesmanship of Absalon and the valour of 
Valdemar. But he was certainly a prudent and circumspect 
ruler of blameless life, possessing, as Arnold of Lubeck (c. 1160- 
1212) expresses it, " the sober wisdom of old age even in his 
tender youth." 

See Danmarks Riges Histnrie. Oldtiden og den aeldre Middelalder 
(Copenhagen, 1897-1905), pp. 721-735. (R. N. B.) 

CANVAS, a stout cloth which probably derives its name from 
cannabis, the Latin word for hemp. This would appear to indi- 
cate that canvas was originally made from yarns of the hemp 
fibre, and there is some ground for the assumption. This fibre 
and that of flax have certainly been used for ages for the produc- 
tion of cloth for furnishing sails, and for certain classes of cloth 
used for this purpose the terms " sailcloth " and " canvas " are 
synonymous. Warden, in his Linen Trade, states that the 
manufacture of sailcloth was established in England in 1590, as 
appears by the preamble of James I., cap. 23: — " Whereas the 
cloths called Mildernix and Powel Dailies, whereof sails and other 
furniture for the navy and shipping are made, were heretofore 
altogether brought out of France and other parts beyond sea, and 
the skill and art of making and weaving of the said sailcloths 
never known or used in England until about the thirty-second 
year of the late Queen Elizabeth, about what time and not before 
the perfect art or skill of making or weaving of the said cloths was 
attained to, and since practised and continued in this realm, to the 
great benefit and commodity thereof." But this, or a similar 
cloth of the same name had been used for centuries before this 
time by the Egyptians and Phoenicians. Since the introduction 
of the power loom the cloth has undergone several modifications, 
and it is now made both from flax, hemp, tow, jute and cotton, 
or a mixture of these, but the quality of sailcloth for the British 
government is kept up to the original standard. All flax canvas 
is essentially of double warp, for it is invariably intended to 
withstand some pressure or rough usage. 

In structure it is similar to jute tarpaulin; indeed, if it were 
not for the difference in the fibre, it would be difficult to say 
where one type stopped and the other began. " Bagging," 
" tarpaulin " and " canvas " form an ascending series of cloths 
*o far as fineness is concerned, although the finest tarpaulins are 
finer than some of the lower canvases. The cloth may be 
natural colour, bleached or dyed, a very common colour being 
tan. It has an enormous number of different uses other than 
naval. 

Amongst other articles made from it are: — receptacles for 
photographic and other apparatus; bags for fishing, shooting, 
golf and other sporting implements; shoes for cricket and 
other games, and for yachting; travelling cases and hold-alls, 
letter-bags, school-bags and nose-bags for horses. Large 
quantities of the various makes of flax and cotton canvases are 
tarred, and then used for covering goods on railways, wharves, 
docks, etc. 

Sail canvas is, naturally, of a strong build, and is quite different 








from the canvas cloth used for embroidery purposes, often called 
" art canvas." The latter is similar in structure to cheese cloths 
and strainers, the chief difference being that the yarns for art 
canvas are, in general, of a superior nature. All kinds of 
vegetable fibres are used in their production, chief among which 
are cotton, flax and jute. The yarns are almost invariably two 
or more ply, an arrangement which tends to obtain a uniform 
thickness — a very desirable element in these open-built fabrics. 
The plain weave A in the figure is extensively used for these 
fabrics, but in many cases special weaves 
are used which leave the open spaces well '," 
defined. Thus weave B is often employed, " 
while the " imitation gauze " weaves, C 
and D, are also largely utilized in the 
production of these embroidery cloths. 
Weave B is known as the hopsack, and 
probably owes its name to being originally 
used for the making of bags for hops. 
The cloth for this purpose is now called 
" hop pocketing," and is of a structure u u 

between bagging and tarpaulin. Another class of canvas, 
single warp termed ■" artists' canvas," is used, as its name implies, 
for paintings in oils. It is also much lighter than sail canvas, 
but must, of necessity, be made of level yarns. The best qualities 
are made of cream or bleached flax line, although it is not unusual 
to find an admixture of tow, and even of cotton in the commoner 
kinds. When the cloth comes from the loom, it undergoes a 
special treatment to prepare the surface for the paint. 

CANVASS (an older spelling of " canvas "), to sift by shaking 
in a sheet of canvas, hence to discuss thoroughly; as a political 
term it means to examine carefully the chances of the votes in a 
prospective election, and to solicit the support of the electors. 

CANYNGES, Canynge, WILLIAM (c. 1399-1474), English 
merchant, was born at Bristol in 1399 or 1400, a member of a 
wealthy family of merchants and cloth-manufacturers in that 
city. He entered, and in due course greatly extended, the 
family business, becoming one of the richest Englishmen of his 
day. Canynges was five times mayor of, and twice member of 
parliament for, Bristol. He owned a fleet of ten ships, the 
largest hitherto known in England, and employed, it is said, 
800 seamen. By special license from the king of Denmark he 
enjoyed for some time a monopoly of the fish trade between 
Iceland, Finland and England, and he also competed successfully 
with the Flemish merchants in the Baltic, obtaining a large 
share of their business. In 1456 he entertained Margaret of 
Anjou at Bristol, and in 1461 Edward IV. Canynges undertook at 
his own expense the great work of rebuilding the famous Bristol 
church of St Mary, Redcliffe, and for a long time had a hundred 
workmen in his regular service for this purpose. In 1467 he 
himself took holy orders, and in 1469 was made dean of 
Westbury. He died in 1474. The statesman George Canning 
and the first viscount Stratford de Redcliffe were descendants of 
his family. 

See Pryce, Memorials of the Canynges Family and their Times 
(Bristol, 1854). 

CANYON (Anglicized form of Span, canon, a tube, pipe or 
cannon; the Spanish form being also frequently written), a 
type of valley with huge precipitous sides, such as the Grand 
Canyons of the Colorado and the Yellowstone livers, and the gorge 
of the Niagara river below the falls, due to rapid stream erosion 
in a " young " land. A river saws its channel vertically down- 
wards, and a swift stream erodes chiefly at the bottom. In 
rainy regions the valleys thus formed are widened out by slope- 
wash and the resultant valley-slopes are gentle, but in arid 
regions there is very little side-extension of the valleys and 
the river cuts its way downwards, leaving almost vertical 
cliffs above the stream. If the stream be swift as in the 
western plateau of North America, the cutting action will be 
rapid. The ideal conditions for developing a canyon are: great 
altitude and slope causing swift streams, arid conditions with 
absence of side- wash, and hard rock horizontally bedded which 
will hold the walls up. 



224 



CANZONE— CAPE BRETON 



CANZONE, a form of verse which has reached us from Italian 
literature, where from the earliest times it has been assiduously 
cultivated. The word is derived from the Provencal canso, 
a song, but it was in Italian first that the form became a literary 
one, and was dedicated to the highest uses of poetry. The 
canzone-strophe consists of two parts, the opening one being 
distinguished by Dante as the fronte, the closing one as the 
sirma. These parts are connected by rhyme, it being usual 
to make the rhyme of the last line of the fronte identical with 
that of the first line of the sirma. In other respects the canzone 
has great liberty, as regards number and length of lines, arrange- 
ment of rhymes and conduct of structure. An examination 
of the best Italian models, however, shows that the tendency 
of the canzone-strophe is to possess 9, 10, n, 13, 14 or 16 verses, 
and that of these the strophe of 14 verses is so far the most 
frequent that it may almost be taken as the type. In this form 
it resembles an irregular sonnet. The Vita Nuova contains many 
examples of the canzone, and these are accompanied by so 
many explanations of their form as to lead us to believe that 
the canzone was originally invented or adopted by Dante. 
The following is the proemio or fronte of one of the most cele- 
brated canzoni in the Vita Nuova (which may be studied in 
English in Dante Gabriel Rossetti's translation) : — 

" Donna pietosa e di novella etate, 
Adorna assai di gentilezza umane, 
Era la ov' io chiamava spesso Morte. 
Veggendo gli occhi mlei pien di pietate, 
Ed ascoltando le parole vane, 
Si mosse con paura a pianger forte ; 
Ed altro donne, che si furo accorte 
Di me per quella che meco piangia, 
Fecer lei partir via 
Ed apprissarsi per farmi sentire. 
Quel dicea : ' Non dormire ' ; 
E qual dicea : ' Perche s} te sconforte? ' 
Allor lasciai la nuova fantasia, 
Chiamando il nome della donna mia." 

The Canzoniere of Petrarch is of great authority as to the 
form of this species of verse. In England the canzone was 
introduced at the end of the sixteenth century by William 
Drummond of Hawthornden, who has left some very beautiful 
examples. In German poetry it was cultivated by A. W. von 
Schlegel and other poets of the Romantic period. It is doubtful, 
however, whether it is in agreement with the genius of any 
language but Italian, and whether the genuine " Canzone 
toscana " is a form which can be reproduced elsewhere than 
in Italy. (E. G.) 

CAPE BRETON, the north-east portion of Nova Scotia, 
Canada, separated from the mainland by a narrow strait, known 
as the Gut of Canceau or Canso. Its extreme length from north 
to south is about no m., greatest breadth about 87 m., and area 
3120 sq. m. It juts out so far into the Atlantic that it has been 
called " the long wharf of Canada," the distance to the west 
coast of Ireland being less by a thousand miles than from New 
York. A headland on the east coast is also known as Cape 
Breton, and is said by some to be the first land made by Cabot 
on his voyage in 1497-1498. The large, irregularly-shaped, 
salt-water lakes of Bras d'Or communicate with the sea by two 
channels on the north-east; a short ship canal connects them 
with St Peter's bay on the south, thus dividing the island into 
two parts. Except on the north-west, the coast-line is very 
irregular, and indented with numerous bays, several of which 
form excellent harbours. The most important are Aspy, St 
Ann's, Sydney, Mira, Louisburg, Gabarus, St Peter's and Mabou; 
of these, Sydney Harbour, on which are situated the towns of 
Sydney and North Sydney, is one of the finest in North America. 
There are numerous rivers, chiefly rapid hill streams not navigable 
for any distance; the largest are the Denys, the Margaree, 
the Baddeck and the Mira. Lake Ainslie in the west is the most 
extensive of several fresh-water lakes. The surface of the island 
is broken in several places by ranges of hills of moderate elevation, 
well wooded, and containing numerous picturesque glens and 
gorges; the northern promontory consists of a plateau, rising 
at Cape North to a height of 1800 ft. This northern projection 



is formed of Laurentian gneiss, the only instance in Nova Scotia 
of this formation, and is fringed by a narrow border of carboni- 
ferous rocks. South of this extends a Cambrian belt, a continua- 
tion of the same formation on the Atlantic coast of Nova Scotia. 
On various portions of the west coast, and on the south side 
of the island at Seacoal Bay and Little River (Richmond county), 
valuable seams of coal are worked. Still more important is 
the Sydney coal-field, which occupies the east coast from Mira 
Bay to St Ann's. The outcrop is plainly visible at various 
points along the coast, and coal has been mined in the neighbour- 
hood from a very early period. Since 1893 the queries have
been greatly extended, and over 3,000,000 tons a year are now 
shipped, chiefly to Montreal and Boston. The coal is bituminous, 
of good quality and easily worked, most of the seams dipping 
at a low angle. Several have been mined for some distance 
beneath the ocean. Slate, marble, gypsum and limestone are 
quarried, the latter, which is found in unlimited quantities, 
being of great value as a flux in the blast-furnaces of Sydney. 
Copper and iron are also found, though not in large quantities. 

Its lumber, agricultural products and fisheries are also im- 
portant. Nearly covered with forest at the time of its discovery, 
it still exports pine, Oak, beech, maple and ash. Oats, wheat, 
turnips and potatoes are cultivated, chiefly for home consump- 
tion; horses, cattle and sheep are reared in considerable numbers; 
butter and cheese are exported. The Bras d'Or lakes and the 
neighbouring seas supply an abundance of cod, mackerel, herring 
and whitefish, and the fisheries employ over 7000 men. Salmon 
are caught in several of the rivers, and trout in almost every 
stream, so that it is visited by large numbers of tourists arid 
sportsmen from the other provinces and from the United States. 
The Intercolonial railway has been extended to Sydney, and 
crosses the Gut of Canso on a powerful ferry. From the same 
strait a railway runs up the west coast, and several shorter 
lines are controlled by the mining companies. Of these the most 
important is that connecting Sydney and Louisburg. Numerous 
steamers, with Sydney as their headquarters, ply upon the 
Bras d'Or lakes. The inhabitants are mainly of Highland 
Scottish descent, and Gaelic is largely spoken in the country 
districts. On the south and west coasts are found a number of 
descendants of the original French settlers and of the Acadian 
exiles (see Nova Scotia), and in the mining towns numbers of 
Irish are employed. Several hundred Mic Mac Indians, for the 
most part of mixed blood, are principally employed in making 
baskets, fish-barrels and butter-firkins. Nearly the whole 
population is divided between the Roman and Presbyterian 
creeds, and the utmost cordiality marks the relations between 
the two faiths. The population is steadily increasing, having 
risen from 27,580 in 1851 to over 100,000 in 1906. 

There is some evidence in favour of early Norse and Icelandic 
voyages to Cape Breton, but they left no trace. It was probably 
visited by the Cabots in 1497-1498, and its name may either 
have been bestowed in remembrance of Cap Breton near 
Bayonne, by the Basque sailors who early frequented the coast, 
or may commemorate the hardy mariners of Brittany and 
Normandy. 

In 1629 James Stewart, fourth Lord Ochiltree, settled a small 
colony at Baleine, on the east side of the island; but he was 
soon after taken prisoner with all his party by Captain Daniell 
of the French Company, who caused a fort to be erected at Great 
Cibou (now St Ann's Harbour). By the peace of St Germain 
in 1632, Cape Breton was formally assigned to France; and in 
1654 it formed part of the territory granted by patent to Nicholas 
Denys, Sieur de Fronsac, who made several small settlements 
on the island, which, however, had only a very temporary success. 
When by the treaty of Utrecht (1713) the French were deprived 
of Nova Scotia and Newfoundland, they were still left in posses- 
sion of Cape Breton, and their right to erect fortifications for 
its defence was formally acknowledged. They accordingly 
transferred the inhabitants of Plaisance in Newfoundland to 
the settlement of Havre a. l'Anglois, which soon after, under the 
name of Louisburg, became the capital of Cape Breton (or He 
Royale, as it was then called), and an important military post. 



CAPE COAST— GAPE COLONY 



225 



Cod-fishing formed the staple industry, and a large contraband 
trade in French wines, brandy and sugar, was carried on with 
the English colonies to the south. In 1745 it was captured by 
a force of volunteers from New England, under Sir William 
Pepperell (1696-1759) aided by a British fleet under Commodore 
Warren (1703-1752). By the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, the town 
was restored to France; but in 1758 was again captured by a 
British force under General Sir Jeffrey Amherst and Admiral 
Boscawen. On the conclusion of hostilities the island was ceded 
to England by the treaty of Paris; and on the 7th of October 
1763 it was united by royal proclamation to the government 
of Nova Scotia. In 1784 it was separated from Nova Scotia, 
and a new capital founded at the mouth of the Spanish river 
by Governor Desbarres, which received the name of Sydney 
in honour of Lord Sydney (Sir Thomas Townshend), then 
secretary of state for the colonies. There was immediately 
a considerable influx of settlers to the island, which received 
another important accession by the immigration of Scottish 
Highlanders from 1800 to 1828. In 1820, in spite of strong 
opposition, it was again annexed to Nova Scotia. Since then, 
its history has been uneventful, chiefly centring in the 
development of the mining industry. 

Bibliography. — Historical: Richard Brown, A History of the 
Island of Cape Breton (1869), and Sir John Bourinot, Historical and 
Descriptive Account of Cape Breton (1892), are both excellent. See 
also Denys, Description geogr. et hist, des cdtes de V Amirique sep- 
tentrionale (1672) ; Pichon, Letlres et memoires du Cap Breton (1760). 
General: Reports of Geological Survey, 1872 to 1 882-1 886, and 
1895 to 1899 (by Robb, H. Fletcher and Faribault); H. Fletcher, 
The Sydney Coal Fields, Cape Breton, N.S. (1900); Richard Brown, 
The Coal Fields of Cape Breton (1871 ; reprinted, 1899). 

CAPE COAST, a port on the Gold Coast, British West Africa, 
in 5 5' N., i° 13' W., about 80 m. W. of Accra. Pop. (1901) 
28,948, mostly Fantis. There are about 100 Europeans and a 
colony of Krumen. The town is built on a low bank of gneiss 
and micaceous slate which runs out into the sea and affords 
some protection at the landing-place against the violence of 
the surf. (This bank was the Caoo Corso of the Portuguese, 
whence the English corruption of Cape Coast.) The castle faces 
the sea and is of considerable size and has a somewhat imposing 
appearance. Next to the castle, used as quarters for military 
officers and as a prison, the principal buildings are the residence 
of the district commissioner, the churches and schools of various 
denominations, the government schools and the colonial hospital. 
Many of the wealthy natives live in brick-built residences. 
The streets are hilly, and the town is surrounded on the east and 
north by high ground, whilst on the west is a lagoon. Fort 
Victoria lies west of the town, and Fort William (used as a light- 
house) on the east. 

The first European settlement on the spot was that of the 
Portuguese in 1610. In 1652 the Swedes established themselves 
here and built the castle, which they named Carolusburg. In 
1659 the Dutch obtained possession, but the castle was seized 
in 1664 by the English under Captain (afterwards Admiral Sir) 
Robert Holmes, and it has not since been captured in spite 
of an attack by De Ruyter in 1665, a French attack in 1757, 
and various assaults by the native tribes. Next to Elmina 
it was considered the strongest fort on the Guinea Coast. Up 
to 1876 the town was the capital of the British settlements on 
the coast, the administration being then removed to Accra. 
It is still one of the chief ports of the Gold Coast Colony, and 
from it starts the direct road to Kumasi. In 1905 it was granted 
municipal government. In the courtyard of the castle are 
buried George Maclean (governor of the colony 1830-1843) 
and his wife (Laetitia Elizabeth Landon). The graves are 
marked by two stones bearing respectively the initials" L. E. L." 
and " G. M." The land on the east side of the town is 
studded with disused gold-diggers' pits. The natives are 
divided into seven clans called companies, each under the rule 
of recognized captains and possessing distinct customs and 
fetish. 

See A. Ffoulkes, " The Company System in Cape Coast Castle," 
in Jnl. African Soc. vol. viL, 1908 ; and Gold Coast. 

v. 8 



CAPE COLONY (officially, " Province or the Cape of Goob 
Hope "), the most southern part of Africa, a British possession 
since 1806. It was named from the promontory on its south- 
west coast discovered in 1488 by the Portuguese navigator Diaz, 
and near which the first settlement of Europeans (Dutch) was 
made in 1652. From 1872 to 1910 a self-governing colony, in 
the last-named year it entered the Union of South Africa as an 
original province. Cape Colony as such then ceased to exist. 
In the present article, however, the word " colony " is retained. 
The " provinces " referred to are the colonial divisions existing 
before the passing of the South Africa Act 1909, except in the 
sections Constitution and Government and Law and Justice, where 
the changes made by the establishment of the Union are set 
forth. (See also South Africa.) 

Boundaries and Area. — The coast-line extends from the mouth 
of the Orange (28 38' S. 16° 27' E.) on the W. to the mouth of 
the Umtamvuna river (31 4' S. 30 12' E.) on the E., a distance 
of over 1300 m. Inland the Cape is bounded E. and N.E. by 
Natal, Basutoland, Orange Free State and the Transvaal; N. 
by the Bechuanaland Protectorate and N. W. by Great Namaqua- 
land (German S.W. Africa). From N.W. to S.E. the colony has a 
breadth of 800 m., from S.W. to N.E. 750 m. Its area is 276,995 
sq. m. — more than five times the size of England. Walfish Bay 
(q.v.) on the west coast north of the Orange river is a detached 
part of Cape Colony. 

Physical Features. — The outstanding orographic feature of the 
country is the terrace-formation of the land, which rises from 
sea-level by well-marked steps to the immense plateau which 
forms seven-eighths of South Africa. The coast region varies in 
width from a few miles to as many as fifty, being narrowest on the 
south-east side. The western coast line, from the mouth of the 
Orange to the Cape peninsula, runs in a general south-east 
direction with no deep indentations save just south of 33 S. 
where, in Saldanha Bay, is spacious and sheltered anchorage. 
The shore is barren, consisting largely of stretches of white 
sand or thin soil sparsely covered with scrub. The Cape 
peninsula, which forms Table Bay on the north and False Bay on 
the south, juts pendant beyond the normal coast line and consists 
of an isolated range of hills. The scenery here becomes bold and 
picturesque. Dominating Table Bay is the well-known Table 
Mountain (3549 ft.), flat-topped and often covered with a " table- 
cloth " of cloud. On its lower slopes and around Table Bay is 
built Cape Town, capital of the colony. Rounding the storm- 
vexed Cape of Good Hope the shore trends south-east in a series of 
curves, forming shallow bays, until at the saw-edged reefs of Cape 
Agulhas (Portuguese, Needles) in 34 51' 15" S. 20 E. the 
southernmost point of the African continent is reached. Hence 
the coast, now very slightly indented, runs north by east until at 
Algoa Bay (25 45' E.) it takes a distinct north-east bend, and so 
continues beyond the confines of the colony. Along the southern 
and eastern shore the country is better watered, more fertile and 
more picturesque than along the western seaboard. Cape Point 
(Cape of Good Hope) stands 840 ft. above the sea ; Cape Agulhas 
455 ft. Farther on the green-clad sides of the Uiteniquas 
Mountains are plainly visible from the sea, and as the traveller 
by boat proceeds eastward, stretches of forest are seen and 
numbers of mountain streams carrying their waters to the ocean. 
In this part of the coast the only good natural harbour is the 
spacious estuary of the Knysna river in 23 5' E. The entrance, 
which is over a bar with 14 ft. minimum depth of water, is 
between two bold sandstone cliffs, called the Heads. 

Off the coast are a few small islands, mainly mere rocks within 
the bay. None is far from the mainland. The largest are 
Dassen Island, 20 m. S. of Saldanha Bay, and Robben Island, 
at the entrance to Table Bay. St Croix is a rock in Algoa Bay, 
upon which Diaz is stated to have erected a cross. A number of 
small islands off the coast of German South- West Africa, chiefly 
valuable for their guano deposits, also belong to Cape Colony 
(see Angra Pequena) . 

Ocean Currents.— OS the east and south shores of the colony 
the Mozambique or Agulhas current sweeps south-westward 
with force sufficient to set up a back drift. This back drift or 



226 



CAPE COLONY 



[GEOGRAPHY 



counter current flowing north-east is close in shore and is taken 
advantage of by vessels going from Cape Town to Natal. On the 
west coast the current runs northwards. It is a deflected stream 
from the west drift of the " roaring forties " and coming from 
Antarctic regions is much colder than the Agulhas current. Off 
the southern point of the continent the Agulhas current meets the 
west drift, giving rise to alternate streams of warm and cold water. 
This part of the coast, subject alike to strong westerly and south- 
easterly winds, is often tempestuous, as is witnessed by the name, 



corruption of a Hottentot word meaning dry, arid. Having 
crossed the Little Karroo, from which rise minor mountain chains, 
a second high range has to be climbed. This done the traveller 
finds himself on another tableland — the Great Karroo. It has an 
average width of 80 m. and is about 350 m. long. Northwards 
the Karroo (q.v.) is bounded- by the ramparts of the great inner 
tableland, of which only a comparatively small portion is in 
Cape Colony. This sequence of hill and plain — namely (1) the 
coast plain, (2) first range of hills, (3) first plateau (Little Karroo), 




BECHUANALAN 



PROTECTORA TE 



\^X 1 




CAPE 
CO L ON Y 



■ 



CAPE COLONY 



Eng-lish Miles 
50 100 200 



Courses of intermittent riuers shown thus: 
Railways shown thus:- 



Pret?riai 

JT R Ayfr 
Johannesburg 



_A|L 



•'- ••'-•-1 I^Bechuan a^^flkn^dl 

H § i • *^ 

1 lip i^rdoou ; ,<-f]N, V" 

C-r eat Namaquajj 1 _ A — r#>#/.« 



tm 



Heilbron"^ 
Croonstad 



Land ^ 



3mm 

NollutW.i 



SftTx ' B "uTH m ail la;n dhSfa 



"!£ 



jugs'*""' 



^ J Vfc ^ BritsUgE 








fe- 4^ imb ^y N!S#feL& 



BethleheiSv»-H*_ \ 1L^#§JM? 

O R A NX E \ R IpERWrl^ 






\-3 




it > 

^ffuzburi 



jjBeAar" 



1" >- 

£pnng;foii$£m i_R* 

*Mk- o'jf " 

-fl 9Burgheraffif> 



Yd*?*®* 



«HS§S 






^.faipplaal 






^ == - ■ ,jMalmeSbiifS 









Simon sTo-.vn'i 



t^^^B 






tfrf: 






^ *'*. 







Longitude East 25° of Greenwich 



Cabo Tormentoso, given to the Cape of Good Hope, and to the 
many wrecks off the coast. The most famous was that of the 
British troopship " Birkenhead," on the 26th of February 1852, 
off Danger Point, midway between Cape of Good Hope and Cape 
Agulhas. 

Mountains and Tablelands. — It has been stated that the land 
rises by well-marked steps to a vast central plateau. Beyond the 
coast plain, which here and there attains a height of 600 ft.; are 
mountain ranges running parallel to the shore. These mountains 
are the supporting walls of successive terraces. When the steep 
southern sides of the ranges nearest the sea are ascended the hills 
are often found to be flat-topped with a gentle slope northward 
giving on to a plateau rarely more than > 40 m. wide. This 
plateau is called the Southern or Little Karroo, Karroo being a 



(4) second range of hills, (5) second plateau (the Great Karroo), (6) 
main chain of mountains guarding, (7) the vast interior tableland 
— is characteristic of the greater part of the colony but is not 
clearly marked in the south-east and north-west borders. The 
innermost, and most lofty, chain of mountains follows a curve 
almost identical with that of the coast at a general distance of 
120 m. from the ocean. It is known in different places under 
different names, and the same name being also often given to one 
or more of the coast ranges the nomenclature of the mountains is 
confusing (see the map) . The most elevated portion of the inner- 
most range, the Drakensberg (q.v.) follows the curve of the coast 
from south to north-east. Only the southern slopes of the range 
are in Cape Colony, the highest peaks — over 10,000 ft. — being in 
Basutoland and Natal. Going westward from the Drakensber 



GEOGRAPHY] 



CAPE COLONY 



227 



the rampart is known successively as the Stormberg, Zuurberg, 
Sneeuwberg and Nieuwveld mountains. These four ranges face 
directly south. In the Sneeuwberg range is Compass Berg, 
8500 ft. above the sea, the highest point in the colony. In the 
Nieuwveld are heights of over 6000 ft. The Komsberg range, 
which joins the Nieuwveld on the east, sweeps from the south to 
the north-west and is followed by the Roggeveld mountains, 
which face the western seaboard. North of the Roggeveld the 
interior plateau approaches closer to the sea than in southern 
Cape Colony. The slope of the plateau being also westward, the 
mountain rampart is less elevated, and north of 32° S. few points 
attain 5000 ft. The coast ranges are here, in Namaqualand and 
the district of Van Rhyns Dorp, but the outer edges of the inner 
range. They attain their highest point in the Kamies Berg, 5511 
ft. above the sea. Northward the Orange river, marking the 
frontier of the colony, cuts its way through the hills to the 
Atlantic. 

From the Olifants river on the west to the Kei river on the 
east the series of parallel ranges, which are the walls of the 
terraces between the inner tableland and the sea, are clearly 
traceable. Their general direction is always that of the coast, 
and they are cut across by rugged gorges or kloofs, through 
which the mountain streams make their way towards the sea. 
The two chief chains, to distinguish them from the inner chain 
already described, may be called the coast and central chains. 
Each has many local names. West to east the central chain is 
known as the Cedarberg, Groote Zwarteberg (highest point 
6088 ft.), Groote river, Winterhoek (with Cockscomb mountain 
5773 ft. high) and Zuurberg ranges. The Zuurberg, owing to the 
north-east trend of the shore, becomes, east of Port Elizabeth, a 
coast range, and the central chain is represented by a more 
northerly line of hills, with a dozen different names, which are a 
south-easterly spur of the Sneeuwberg. In this range the Great 
Winter Berg attains a height of 7800 ft. 

The coast chain is represented west to east by the Olifants 
mountains (with Great Winterhoek, 6618 ft. high), Drakenstein, 
Zonder Einde, Langeberg (highest point 5614 ft.), Attaquas, 
Uiteniquas and various other ranges. In consequence of the 
north-east trend of the coast, already noted, several of these 
ranges end in the sea in bold bluffs. From the coast plain rise 
many short ranges of considerable elevation, and on the east side 
of False Bay parallel to Table Bay range is a mountain chain 
with heights of 4000 and 5000 ft. East of the Kei river the whole 
of the country within Cape Colony, save the narrow seaboard, is 
mountainous. The southern part is largely occupied with spurs 
of the Stormberg; the northern portion, Griqualand East and 
Pondoland, with the flanks of the Drakensberg. Several peaks 
exceed 7000 ft. in height. Zwart Berg, near, the Basuto-Natal 
frontier, rises 7615 ft. above the sea. Mount Currie, farther 
south, is 7296 ft. high. The Witte Bergen (over 5000 ft. high) 
are an inner spur of the Drakensberg running through the 
Herschel district. 

That part of the inner tableland of South Africa- which is in the 
colony has an average elevation of 3000 ft., being higher in the 
eastern than in the western districts. It consists of wide rolling 
treeless plains scarred by the beds of many rivers, often dry for a 
great part of the year. The tableland is broken by the Orange 
river, which traverses its whole length. North of the river the 
plateau slopes northward to a level sometimes as low as 2000 
ft. The country is of an even more desolate character than south 
of the Orange (see Bechuanaland) . Rising from the plains 
are chains of isolated flat-topped hills such as the Karree 
Bergen, the Asbestos mountains and Kuruman hills, compara- 
tively unimportant ranges. 

Although the mountains present bold and picturesque outlines 
on their outward faces, the general aspect of the country north of 
the coast-lands, except in its south-eastern corner, is bare and 
monotonous. The flat and round-topped hills (kopjes) , which are 
very numerous on the various plateaus, scarcely afford relief to the 
eye, which searches the sun-scorched landscape, usually in vain, 
for running water. The absence of water and of large trees is one 
of the most abiding impressions of the traveller. Yet the vast 



arid plains are covered with shallow beds of the richest soil, 
which only require the fertilizing power of water to render them 
available for pasture or agriculture. After the periodical rains, 
the Karroo and the great plains of Bushmanland are converted 
into vast fields of grass and flowering shrubs, but the summer sun 
reduces them again to a barren and burnt-up aspect. The 
pastoral lands or velds are distinguished according to the nature 
of their herbage as " sweet " or " sour." Shallow sheets of water 
termed vleis, usually brackish, accumulate after heavy rain at 
many places in the plateaus; in the dry seasons these spots, 
where the soil is not excessively saline, are covered with rich 
grass and afford favourite grazing land for cattle. Only in the 
southern coast-land of the colony is there a soil and moisture 
supply suited to forest growth. 

Rivers. — The inner chain of mountains forms the watershed of 
the colony. North of this great rampart the country drains to the 
Orange (q.v.), which flows from east to west nearly across the 
continent. For a considerable distance, both in its upper and 
lower courses, the river forms the northern frontier of Cape 
Colony. In the middle section, where both banks are in the 
colony, the Orange receives from the north-east its greatest 
tributary, the Vaal (q.v.). The Vaal, within the boundaries of the 
colony, is increased by the Harts river from the north-east and 
the Riet river from the south-east, whilst just within the colony 
the Riet is joined by the Modder. All these tributaries of the 
Orange flow, in their lower courses, through the eastern part of 
Griqualand West, the only well-watered portion of the colony 
north of the mountains. From the north, below the Vaal 
confluence, the Nosob, Molopo and Kuruman, intermittent 
streams which traverse Bechuanaland, send their occasional 
surplus waters to the Orange. In general these rivers lose them- 
selves in some vlei in the desert land. The Molopo and Nosob 
mark the frontier between the Bechuanaland Protectorate and 
the Cape; the Kuruman lies wholly within the colony. From 
the south a number of streams, the Brak and Ongers, the Zak 
and Olifants Vlei (the two last uniting to form the Hartebeest), 
flow north towards the Orange in its middle course. Dry for a 
great part of the year, these streams rarely add anything to the 
volume of the Orange. 

South of the inner chain the drainage is direct to the Atlantic 
or Indian Oceans. Rising at considerable elevations, the coast 
rivers fall thousands of feet in comparatively short courses, and 
many are little else than mountain torrents. They make their 
way down the mountain sides through great gorges, and are 
noted in the eastern part of the country for their extremely 
sinuous course. Impetuous and magnificent streams after heavy 
rain, they become in the summer mere rivulets, or even dry up 
altogether. In almost every instance the mouths of the rivers 
are obstructed by sand bars. Thus, as is the case of the Orange 
river also, they are, with rare exceptions, unnavigable. 

Omitting small streams, the coast rivers running to the Atlantic 
are the Buffalo, Olifants and Berg. It may be pointed out here 
that the same name is repeatedly applied throughout South 
Africa to different streams, Buffalo, Olifants (elephants') and 
Groote (great) being favourite designations. They all occur 
more than once in Cape Colony. Of the west coast rivers, the 
Buffalo, about 125m. long, the most northern and least important, 
flows through Little Namaqualand. The Olifants (150 m.), 
which generally contains a fair depth of water, rises in the 
Winterhoek mountains and flows north between the Cedarberg 
and Olifants ranges. The Doom, a stream with a somewhat 
parallel but more easterly course, joins the Olifants about 50 m. 
above its mouth, the Atlantic being reached by a semicircular 
sweep to the south-west. The Berg river (125 m.) rises in the 
district of French Hoek and flows through fertile country, in a 
north-westerly direction, to the sea at St Helena Bay. It is 
navigable for a few miles from its mouth. 

On the south coast the most westerly stream of any size is the 
Breede (about 165 m. long), so named from its low banks and 
broad channel. Rising in the Warm Bokkeveld, it pierces the 
mountains by Mitchell's Pass, flows by the picturesque towns of 
Ceres and Worcester, and receives, beyond the last-named place, 



228 



CAPE COLONY 



[CLIMATE 



the waters which descend from the famous Hex River Pass. 
The Breede thence follows the line of the Langeberg mountains as 
far as Swellendam, where it turns south, and traversing the coast 
plain, reaches the sea in St Sebastian Bay. From its mouth the 
river is navigable by small vessels for from 30 to 40 m. East of 
the Breede the following rivers, all having their rise on the inner 
mountain chain, are passed in the order named:- — Gouritz 
(200 m.), 1 Gamtoos (290 m.), Sunday (190 m.),GreatSalt (230 m.), 
Kei (150 m.), Bashee (90 m.) and Umzimvuba or St John's 
(140 m.). 

The Gouritz is formed by the junction of two streams, the 
Gamka and the Olifants. The Gamka rises in the Nieuwveld 
not far from Beaufort West, traverses the Great Karroo from 
north to south, and forces a passage through the Zwarteberg. 
Crossing the Little Karroo, it is joined from the east by the 
Olifants (115 m.), a stream which rises in the Great Karroo, 
being known in its upper course as the Traka, and pierces the 
Zwarteberg near its eastern end. Thence it flows west across the 
Little Karroo past Oudtshoorn to its junction with the Gamka. 
The united stream, which takes the name of Gouritz, flows south, 
and receives from the west, a few miles above the point where it 
breaks through the coast range, a tributary (125 m.) bearing the 
common name Groote, but known in its upper course as the 
Buffels. Its headwaters are in the Komsberg. The Touws 
(90 m.), which rises in the Great Karroo not far from the sources of 
the Hex river, is a tributary of the Groote river. Below the 
Groote the Gouritz receives no important tributaries and 
enters the Indian Ocean at a point 20 m. south-west of Mossel 
Bay. 

The Gamtoos is also formed by the junction of two streams, 
the Kouga, an unimportant river which rises in the coast hills, 
and the Groote river. This, the Groote river of Cape Colony, has 
its rise in the Nieuwveld near Nels Poort, being known in its upper 
course as the Salt river. Flowing south-east, it is joined by the 
Kariega on the left, and breaking through the escarpment of the 
Great Karroo, on the lower level changes its name to the Groote, 
the hills which overhang it to the north-east being known as 
Groote River Heights. Bending south, the Groote river passes 
through the coast chain by Cockscomb mountain, and being 
joined by the Kouga, flows on as the Gamtoos to the sea at St 
Francis Bay. 

Sunday river does not, like so many of the Cape streams, 
change its name on passing from the Great to the Little Karroo 
and again on reaching the coast plain. It rises in the Sneeuwberg 
north-west of Graaff Reinet, flows south-east through one of the 
most fertile districts of the Great Karroo, which it pierces at the 
western end of the Zuurberg (of the coast chain), and reaches the 
ocean in Algoa Bay. 

Great Salt river is formed by the junction of the Kat with 
the Great Fish river, which is the main stream. Several small 
streams rising in the Zuurberg (of the inner chain) unite to form 
the Great Fish river which passes through Cradock, and crossing 
the Karroo, changes its general direction from south to east, and 
is joined by the Kooner (or Koonap) and Kat, both of which 
rise in the Winterberg. Thence, as the Great Salt river, it winds 
south to the sea. Great Fish river is distinguished for the sudden 
and great rise of its waters after heavy rain and for its exceedingly 
sinuous course. Thus near Cookhouse railway station it makes an 
almost circular bend of 20 m., the ends being scarcely 2 m. apart, 
in which distance it falls 200 ft. Although, like the other streams 
which cross the Karroo, the river is sometimes dry in its upper 
course, it has an estimated annual discharge of 51,724,000,000 
cubic ft. 

The head-streams of the Kei, often called the Great Kei, rise 
in the Stormberg, and the river, which resembles the Great Fish 
in its many twists, flows in a general south-east direction through 
mountainous country until it reaches the coast plain. Its 
mouth is 40 m. in a direct line north-east of East London. In 

1 The distances given after the names of rivers indicate the length 
of the river valleys, including those of the main upper branch. In 
nearly all instances the rivers, owing to their sinuous course, are 
much longer. 



the history of the Cape the Kei plays an important part as long 
marking the boundary between the colony and the independent 
Kaffir tribes. (For the Umzimvuba and other Transkei rivers 
see Kaffraria.) 

Of the rivers rising in the coast chain the Knysna (30 m.), 
Kowie (40 m.), Keiskama (75 m.) and Buffalo (45 m.) may be 
mentioned. The Knysna rises in the Uiteniquas hills and is of 
importance as a feeder of the lagoon or estuary of the same 
name, one of the few good harbours on the coast. The banks 
of the Knysna are very picturesque. Kowie river, which rises 
in the Zuurberg mountains near Graham's Town, is also noted 
for the beauty of its banks. At its mouth is Port Alfred. The 
water over the bar permits the entrance of vessels of 10 to 12 ft. 
draught. The Buffalo river rises in the hilly country north of 
King William's Town, past which it flows. At the mouth of 
the river, where the scenery is very fine, is East London, third 
in importance of the ports of Cape Colony. 

The frequency of " fontein " among the place names of the 
colony bears evidence of the number of springs in the country. 
They are often found on the flat-topped hills which dot the 
Karroo. Besides the ordinary springs, mineral and thermal 
springs are found in several places. 

Lakes and Caves. — Cape Colony does not possess any lakes 
properly so called. There are, however, numerous natural 
basins which, filled after heavy rain, rapidly dry up, leaving an 
incrustation of salt on the ground, whence their name of salt 
pans. The largest, Commissioner's Salt Pan, in the. arid north- 
west district, is 18 to 20 m. in circumference. Besides these 
pans there are in the interior plateaus many shallow pools or 
■vleis whose extent varies according to the dryness or moisture 
of the climate. West of Knysna, and separated from the seashore 
by a sandbank only, are a series of five vleis, turned in flood 
times into one sheet of water and sending occasional spills to 
the ocean. These vleis are known collectively as " the lakes." 
In the Zwarteberg of the central chain are the Cango Caves, 
a remarkable series of caverns containing many thousand of 
stalactites and stalagmites. These caves, distant 20 m. from 
Oudtshoorn, have been formed in a dolomite limestone bed 
about 800 ft. thick. There are over 120 separate chambers, 
the caverns extending nearly a mile in a straight line. 

Climate. — The climate of Cape Colony is noted for its healthi- 
ness. Its chief characteristics are the dryness and clearness 
of the atmosphere and the considerable daily range in tempera- 
ture; whilst nevertheless the extremes of heat and cold are 
rarely encountered. The mean annual temperature over the 
greater part of the country is under 65° F. The chief agents 
in determining the climate are the vast masses of water in the 
southern hemisphere and the elevation of the land. The large 
extent of ocean is primarily responsible for the lower temperature 
of the air in places south of the tropics compared with that 
experienced in countries in the same latitude north of the equator. 
Thus Cape Town, about 34 S., has a mean temperature, 63° F., 
which corresponds with that of the French and Italian Riviera, 
in 41 to 43 N. For the dryness of the atmosphere the elevation 
of the country is responsible. The east and south-east winds, 
which contain most moisture, dissipate their strength against 
the Drakensberg and other mountain ranges which guard the 
interior. Thus while the coast-lands, especially in the south- 
east, enjoy an ample rainfall, the winds as they advance west 
and north contain less and less moisture, so that over the larger 
part of the country drought is common and severe. Along the 
valley of the lower Orange rain does not fall for years together. 
The drought is increased in intensity by the occasional hot 
dry wind from the desert region in the north, though this wind 
is usually followed by violent thunderstorms. 

Whilst the general characteristics of the climate are as here 
outlined, in a country of so large an area as Cape Colony there 
are many variations in different districts. In the coast-lands 
the daily range of the thermometer is less marked ihsLn in the 
interior and the humidity of the atmosphere is much greater. 
Nevertheless, the west coast north of the Olifants river is practic- 
ally rainless and there is great difference between day and night 



GEOLOGY] 



CAPE COLONY 



229 



temperatures, this part of the coast sharing the characteristics 
of the interior plateau. The division of the year into four seasons 
is not clearly marked save in the Cape peninsula, where excep- 
tional conditions prevail. In general the seasons are but two— • 
summer and winter, summer lasting from September to April 
and winter filling up the rest of the year. The greatest heat is 
experienced in December, January and February, whilst June and 
July are the coldest months. In the western part of the colony 
the winter is the rainy season, in the eastern part the chief rains 
come is summer. A line drawn from Port Elizabeth north-west 
across the Karroo in the direction of Walfish Bay roughly divides 
the regions of the winter and summer rains. All the country 
north of the central mountain chain and west of 23° E., including 
the western part of the Great Karroo, has a mean annual rainfall 
of under 12 in. East of the 23° E. the plateaus have a mean 
annual rainfall ranging from 12 to 25 in. The western coast- 
lands and the Little Karroo have a rainfall of from 10 to 20 in.; 
the Cape peninsula by exception having an average yearly 
rainfall of 40 in. (see Cape Town). Along the south coast and 
in the south-east the mean annual rainfall exceeds 25 in., and is 
over 50 in. at some stations. The rain falls, generally, in heavy 
and sudden storms, and frequently washes away the surface soil. 
The mean annual temperature of the coast region, which, as stated, 
is 63° F. at Cape Town, increases to the east, the coast not only 
trending north towards the equator but feeling the effect of the 
warm Mozambique or Agulhas current. 

On the Karroo the mean maximum temperature is 77 F., the 
mean minimum 40 , the mean daily range about 27 . In summer 
the drought is severe, the heat during the day great, the nights 
cool and clear. In.winter frost at night is not uncommon. The 
climate of the northern plains is similar to that of the Karroo, 
but the extremes of cold and heat are greater. In the summer 
the shade temperature reaches no F., whilst in winter nights 
12 of frost have been registered. The hot westerly winds of 
summer make the air oppressive, though violent thunderstorms > 
in which form the northern districts receive most of their scanty 
rainfall, occasionally clear the atmosphere. Mirages are occasion- 
ally seen. The keen air, accompanied by the brilliant sunshine, 
renders the winter climate very enjoyable. Snow seldom falls 
in the coast region, but it lies on the higher mountains for three 
or four months in the year, and for as many days on the Karroo. 
Violent hailstorms, which do great damage, sometimes follow 
periods of drought. The most disagreeable feature of the 
climate of the colony is the abundance of dust, which seems 
to be blown by every wind, and is especially prevalent in the 
rainy season. 

That white men can thrive and work in Cape Colony the 
history of South Africa amply demonstrates. Ten generations 
of settlers, from northern Europe have been born, lived and died 
there, and the race is as strong and vigorous as that from which 
it sprang. Malarial fever is practically non-existent in Cape 
Colony, and diseases of the chest are rare. (F. R. C.) 

Geology. — The colony affords the typical development of the 

geological succession south of the Zambezi. The following 

general arrangement has been determined : — 

Table of Formations. 

Post-Cretaceous and Recent. 

Cretaceous fPondoland Cretaceous Series \ c re t a ceous 

System ^Uitenhage Series ' J 

fStormberg Series T 

Beaufort Series I Carboniferous 

Ecca Series f to Jurassic 

Dwyka Series J 

(Witteberg Series ~| 

S eVe M d unl e rn Sandstone De ~ 
Series J 

flncludes several independent! ^ rcnaean to 
Pre-Cape Rocks-! unfossiliferous formations of f- SilurianC) 
t pre-Devonian age J 

The general structure of the colony is simple. It may be 
regarded as a shallow basin occupied by the almost horizontal 
rocks of the Karroo. These form the plains and plateaus of the 



interior. Rocks of pre-Cape age rise from beneath them on the 
north and west; on the south and east the Lower Karroo and 
Cape systems are bent up into sharp folds, beneath which, but in 
quite limited areas, the pre-Cape rocks emerge. In the folded 
regions the strike conforms to the coastal outline on the south 
and east. 

Pre-Cape rocks occur in three regions, presenting a different 
development in each: — 



North. 


West. 


South. 


Matsap Series 


Nieuwerust Beds 


Cango Beds 


Ongeluk Volcanic Series 


» 




Griquatown Series 


Ibiquas Beds 




Campbell Rand Series 






Black Reef Series 






Pniel Volcanic Series 






Keis Series 






Namaqualand Schists 


Namaqualand Schists and 


Malmesbury 




Malmesbury Beds 


Beds 



The pre-Cape rocks are but little understood. They no doubt 
represent formations of widely different ages, but all that can be 
said is that they are greatly older than the Cape System. The 
hope that they will yield fossils has been held out but not yet 
fulfilled. Their total thickness amounts to several thousand feet. 
The rocks have been greatly changed by pressure in most cases 
and by the intrusion of great masses of igneous material, the 
Namaqualand schists and Malmesbury beds being most altered. 

The most prominent member of the Cango series is a coarse 
conglomerate; the other rocks include slates, limestone and 
porphyroids. The Ibiquas beds consist of conglomerates and 
grits. Both the Cango and Ibiquas series have been invaded 
by granite of older date than the Table Mountain series. The 
Nieuwerust beds contain quartzite, arkose and shales. They 
rest indifferently on the Ibiquas series or Malmesbury beds. 

The pre-Cape rocks of the northern region occur in the Camp- 
bell Rand, Asbestos mountains, Matsap and Langebergen, and in 
the Schuftebergen. They contain a great variety of sediments 
and igneous rocks. The oldest, or Keis, series consists of quart- 
zites, quartz-schists, phyllites and conglomerates. These are 
overlain, perhaps unconformably. by a great thickness of lavas 
and volcanic breccias (Pniel volcanic series, Beer Vley and 
Zeekoe Baard amygdaloids), and these in turn by the quartzites, 
grits and shales of the Black Reef series. The chief rocks of the 
Campbell Rand series are limestones and dolomites, with some 
interbedded quartzites. Among the Griquatown series of quart- 
zites, limestones and shales are numerous bands of jasper and 
large quantities of crocidolite (a fibrous amphibole); while 
at Blink Klip a curious breccia, over 200 ft. thick, is locally 
developed. Evidences of one of the oldest known glaciations 
have been found near the summit in the district of Hay. The 
Ongeluk volcanic series, consisting of lavas and breccias, conform- 
ably overlies the Griquatown series; while the grits, quartzites 
and conglomerates of the Matsap series rest on them with a great 
discordance. 

Rocks of the Cape System have only been met with in the 
southern and eastern parts of South Africa. The lowest member 
(Table Mountain Sandstone) consists of sandstones with sub- 
ordinate bands of shale. It forms the upper part of Table 
Mountain and enters largely into the formation of the southern 
mountainous folded belt. It is unfossiliferous except for a few 
obscure sheils obtained near the base. A bed of conglomerate is 
regarded as of glacial origin. 

The Table Mountain Sandstone passes up conformably into 
a sequence of sandstones and shales (Bokkeveld Beds), well 
exposed in the Cold and Warm Bokkevelds. The lowest beds 
contain many fossils, including Phacops, Homalonotus, Lepto- 
coelia, Spirifer, Chonetes, Orthothetes, Orthoceras, Bellerophon. 
Many of the species are common to the Devonian rocks of the 
Falkland Islands, North and South America and Europe, with 
perhaps a closer resemblance to the Devonian fauna of South 
America than to that of any other country. 

The Bokkeveld beds are conformably succeeded by the sand- 
stones, quartzites and shales of the Witteberg series. So far 



230 



CAPE COLONY 



[FLORA AND FAUNA 



imperfect remains of plants (Spirophyton) are the only fossils, 
and these are not sufficient to determine if the beds belong to the 
Devonian or Carboniferous System. 

The thickness of the rocks of the Cape System exceeds 5000 ft. 

The Karroo System is par excellence the geological formation of 
South Africa. The greater part of the colony belongs to it, as do 
large tracts in the Orange Free State and Transvaal. It includes 
the following well-defined subdivisions: — 

Feet. 
f Volcanic Beds .... 4000 
I Cave Sandstone .... 800 



Stormberg 
Series 



Red Beds 1400- 

. . 2000 



■Jurassic 



Beaufort 
Series 

Ecca 
Series 

Dwyka 
Series 



■ Trias 



5000 



[ Permian 
2600 ] 



Carboniferous 



I Molteno Beds 

( Burghersdorp Beds 

< Dicynodon Beds 

( Pareiasaurus Beds 

I Shales and Sandstones ) 

■j Laingsburg Beds [ 

( Shales ) 

( Upper Shales 600 

} Conglomerates . . - . . 1000 
( Lower Shales .... 700 j 

In the southern areas the Karroo formation follows the Cape 
System conformably; in the north it rests unconformably on 
very much older rocks. The most remarkable deposits are 
the conglomerates of the Dwyka series. These afford the 
clearest evidences of glaciation on a great scale in early Carboni- 
ferous times. The deposit strictly resembles a consolidated 
modern boulder clay. It is full of huge glaciated blocks, and in 
different regions (Prieska chiefly) the underlying pavement is 
remarkably striated and shows that the ice was moving south- 
ward. The upper shales contain the small reptile Mesosaurus 
tenuidens. 

Plants constitute the chief fossils of the Ecca series; among 
others they include Glossopteris, Gangamopteris, Phyllotheca. 
The Beaufort series is noted for the numerous remains of remark- 
able and often gigantic reptiles it contains. The genera and 
species are numerous, Dicynodjm, Oudenodon, Pareiasaurus 
being the best known. Among plants Glossopteris occurs for the 
last time. The Stormberg series occurs in the mountainous 
regions of the Stormberg and Drakensberg. The Molteno beds 
contain several workable seams of coal. The most remarkable 
feature of the series is the evidence of volcanic activity on an 
extensive scale. The greater part of the volcanic series is formed 
by lava streams of great thickness. Dykes and intrusive sheets, 
most of which end at the folded belt, are also numerous. The age 
of the intrusive sheets met with in the Beaufort series is usually 
attributed to the Stormberg period. They form the kopjes, or 
characteristic flat-topped hills of the Great Karroo. The Storm- 
berg series contains the remains of numerous reptiles. A true 
crocodile, Notochampsa, has been discovered in the Red Beds 
and Cave Sandstone. Among the plants, Thinnfeldia and 
Taeniopteris are common. Three genera of fossil fishes, Clei- 
throlepis, Semionotus and Ceratodus, ascend from the Beaufort 
series into the Cave Sandstone. 

Cretaceous rocks occur only near the coast. The plants of the 
Uitenhage beds bear a close resemblance to those of the Wealden. 
The marine fauna of Sunday river indicates a Neocomian age. 
The chief genera are Hamites, Baculites, Crioceras, Olcostephanus 
and certain Trigoniae. 

The superficial post-Cretaceous and Recent deposits are 
widely spread. High-level gravels occur from 600 to 2000 ft. 
above the sea. The remains of a gigantic ox, Bubalus Baini, 
have been obtained from the alluvium near the Modder river. 
The recent deposits indicate that the land has risen for a long 
period. (W. G.*) 

Fauna. — The fauna is very varied, but some of the wild animals 
common in the early days of the colony have been exterminated 
(e.g. quagga and blaauwbok), and others (e.g. the lion, rhinoceros, 
giraffe) driven beyond the confines of the Cape. Other game 
have been so reduced in numbers as to require special protection. 
This class includes the elephant (now found only in the Knysna 
and neighbouring forest regions), buffalo and zebra (strictly pre- 
served, and confined to much the same regions as the elephant), 



eland, oribi, koodoo, haartebeest and other kinds of antelope and 
gnu. The leopard is not protected, but lingers in the mountain- 
ous districts. Cheetahs are also found, including a rare woolly 
variety peculiar to the Karroo. Both the leopards and cheetahs 
are commonly spoken of in South Africa as tigers. Other 
carnivora more or less common to the colony are the spotted 
hyena, aard-wolf (or Proteles), silver jackal, the Otocyon or Cape 
wild dog, and various kinds of wild cats. Of ungulata, besides a 
few hundreds of rare varieties, there are the springbuck, of 
which great herds still wander on the open veld, the steinbok, a 
small and beautiful animal which is sometimes coursed like a 
hare, the klipspringer or " chamois of South Africa," common in 
the mountains, the wart-hog and the dassie or rock rabbit. 
There are two or three varieties of hares, and a species of jerboa 
and several genera of mongooses. The English rabbit has been 
introduced into Robben Island, but is excluded from the main- 
land. The ant-bear, with very long snout, tongue and ears, is 
found on the Karroo, where it makes inroads on the ant-heaps 
which dot the plain. There is also a scaly ant-eater and various 
species of pangolins, of arboreal habit, which live on ants. 
Baboons are found in the mountains and forests, otters in the 
rivers. Of reptiles there are the crocodile, confined to the 
Transkei rivers, several kinds of snakes, including the cobra di 
capello and puff adder, numerous lizards and various tortoises, 
including the leopard tortoise, the largest of the continental 
land forms. Of birds the ostrich may still be found wild in some 
regions. The great kori bustard is sometimes as much as 5 ft. 
high. Other game birds include the francolin, quail, guinea- 
fowl, sand-grouse, snipe, wild duck, wild goose, widgeon, teal, 
plover and rail. Birds of prey include the bearded vulture, 
aasvogel and several varieties of eagles, hawks, falcons and owls. 
Cranes, storks, flamingoes and pelicans are found in large variety. 

Parrots are rarely seen. The greater number of birds belong 
to the order Passeres; starlings, weavers and larks are very 
common, the Cape canary, long-tailed sugar bird, pipits and 
wagtails are fairly numerous. The English starling is stated to 
be the only European bird to have thoroughly established itself in 
the colony. The Cape sparrow has completely acclimatized itself 
to town life and prevented the Englishsparrow obtaining a footing. 

Large toads and frogs are common, as are scorpions, 
tarantula spiders, butterflies, hornets and stinging ants. In 
some districts the tsetse fly causes great havoc. The most 
interesting of the endemic insectivora is the Chrysochloris or 
" golden mole," so called from the brilliant yellow lustre of its 
fur. There are not many varieties of freshwater fish, the 
commonest being the baba or cat-fish and the yellow fish. Both 
are of large size, the baba weighing as much as 70 lb. The 
smallest variety is the culper or burrowing perch. In some of the 
vleis and streams in which the water is intermittent the fish 
preserve life by burrowing into the ooze. Trout have been 
introduced into several rivers and have become acclimatized. 
Of sea fish there are more than forty edible varieties. The snock, 
the steenbrass and geelbeck are common in the estuaries and 
bays. Seals and sharks are also common in the waters of the 
Cape. Whales visit the coast for the purpose of calving. 

Of the domestic animals, sheep, cattle and dogs were possessed 
by the natives when the country was discovered by Europeans. 
The various farm animals introduced by the whites have thriven 
well (see below, Agriculture). 

Flora. — The flora is rich and remarkably varied in the coast 
districts. On the Karroo and the interior plateau there is less 
variety. In all, some 10,000 different species have been noted 
in the colony, about 450 genera being peculiar to the Cape. 
The bush of the coast districts and lower hills consists largely 
of heaths, of which there are over 400 species. The heaths and 
the rhenoster or rhinoceros wood, a plant 1 to 2 ft. high 
resembling heather, form the characteristic features of the 
flora of the districts indicated. The prevailing bloom is pink 
coloured. The deciduous plants lose their foliage in the dry 
season but revive with the winter rains. Notable among the 
flowers are the arum lily and the iris. The pelargonium group, 
including many varieties of geranium, is widely represented. In 



POPULATION] 



CAPE COLONY 



231 



the eastern coast-lands the vegetation becomes distinctly sub- 
tropical. Of pod-bearing plants there are upwards of eighty 
genera: Cape " everlasting " flowers (generally species of 
Helichrysum) are in great numbers. Several species of aloe 
are indigenous to the Cape. The so-called American aloe has 
also been naturalized. The castor-oil plant and many other 
plants of great value in medicine are indigenous in great abund- 
ance. Among plants remarkable in their appearance and 
structure may be noted the cactus-like Euphorbiae or spurge 
plants, the Stapelia or carrion flower, and the elephant's foot 
or Hottentots' bread, a plant of the same order as the yam. 
Hooks, thorns and prickles are characteristic of many South 
African plants. 

Forests are confined to the seaward slopes of the coast ranges 
facing south. They cover between 500 and 600 sq. m. The 
forests contain a great variety of useful woods, affording excellent 
timber; among the commonest trees are the yellow wood, 
which is also one of the largest, belonging to the yew species; 
black iron wood; heavy, close-grained and durable stinkhout; 
melkhout, a white wood used for wheel work; nieshout; and 
the assegai or Cape lancewood. Forest trees rarely exceed 
30 ft. in height and scarcely any attain a greater height than 
60 ft. A characteristic Cape tree is Leucadendron argenteum 
or silver tree, so named from the silver-like lustre of stem and 
leaves. The so-called cedars, whence the Cedarberg got its name, 
exist no longer. Among trees introduced by the Dutch or 
British colonists the oak, poplar, various pines, the Australian 
blue-gum (eucalyptus) and wattle flourish. The silver wattle 
grows freely in shifting sands and by its means waste lands, 
e.g. the Cape Flats, have been reclaimed. The oak grows more 
rapidly and more luxuriantly than in Europe. There are few 
indigenous fruits; the kei apple is the fruit of a small tree or 
shrub found in Kaffraria and the eastern districts, where also 
the wild and Kaffir plums are common; hard pears, gourds, 
water melons and species of almond, chestnut and lemon are also 
native. Almost all the fruits of other countries have been 
introduced and flourish. On the Karroo the bush consists of 
dwarf mimosas, wax-heaths and other shrubs, which after the 
spring rains are gorgeous in blossom (see Karroo). The grass 
of the interior plains is of a coarse character and yellowish 
colour, very different from the meadow grasses of England. The 
" Indian " doab grass is also indigenous. 

With regard to mountain flora arborescent shrubs do not 
reach beyond about 4000 ft. Higher up the slopes are covered 
with small heath, Bruniaceae, Rutaceae, &c. All plants with per- 
manent foliage are thickly covered with hair. Above 6000 ft. over 
seventy species of plants of Alpine character have been found. 

Races and Population. — The first inhabitants of Cape Colony 
of whom there is any record were Bushmen and Hottentots 
(q.v.). The last-named were originally called Quaequaes, and 
received the name Hottentots from the Dutch. They dwelt 
chiefly in the south-west and north-west parts of the country; 
elsewhere the inhabitants were of Bantu negroid stock, and to 
them was applied the name Kaffir. When the Cape was dis- 
covered by Europeans, the population, except along the coast, was 
very scanty and it is so still. The advent of Dutch settlers 
and a few Huguenot families in the 17th century was followed 
in the 19th century by that of English and German immigrants. 
The Bushmen retreated before the white races and now few are 
to be found in the colony. These live chiefly in the districts 
bordering the Orange river. The tribal organization of the 
Hottentots has been broken up, and probably no pure bred 
representatives of the race survive in the colony. 

Half-breeds of mixed Hottentot, Dutch and Kaffir blood now 
form the bulk of the native population west of the Great Fish 
river. Of Kaffir tribes the most important living north of the 
Orange river are the Bechuanas, whilst in the eastern province 
and Kaffraria live the Fingoes, Tembus and Pondos. The 
Amaxosa are the principal Kaffir tribe in Cape Colony proper. 
The Griquas (or Bastaards) are descendants of Dutch-Hottentot 
half-castes. They give their name to two tracts of country. 
During the slavery period many thousands of negroes were 



imported, chiefly from the Guinea coast. The negroes have been 
largely assimilated by the Kaffir tribes. (For particulars of the 
native races see their separate articles.) Of the white races 
in the Colony the French element has been completely absorbed 
in the Dutch. They and the German settlers are mainly 
pastoral people. The Dutch, who have retained in a debased 
form their own language, also engage largely in agriculture 
and viticulture. Of fine physique and hardy constitution, 
they are of strongly independent character; patriarchal in 
their family life; shrewd, slim and courageous; in religion 
Protestants of a somewhat austere type. Education is somewhat 
neglected by them, and the percentage of illiteracy among adults 
is high. They are firm believers in the inferiority of the black 
races and regard servitude as their natural lot. The British 
settlers have developed few characteristics differing from the 
home type. The British element of the community is largely 
resident in the towns, and is generally engaged in trade or in 
professional pursuits; bet in the eastern provinces the bulk 
of the farmers are English or German; the German farmers 
being found in the district between King William's Town and 
East London, and on the Cape Peninsula. Numbers of them 
retain their own language. The term " Africander " is some- 
times applied to all white residents in Cape Colony and 
throughout British South Africa, but is often restricted to 
the Dutch-speaking colonists. " Boer," i.e. farmer, as a synonym 
for " Dutch," is not in general use in Cape Colony. 

Besides the black and white races there is a large colony of 
Malays in Cape Town and district, originally introduced by the 
Dutch as slaves. These people are largely leavened -with 
foreign elements and, professing Mahommedanism, religion rather 
than race is their bond of union. They add greatly by their 
picturesque dress to the gaiety of the street scenes. They are 
generally small traders, but many are wealthy. There are also 
a number of Indians in the colony. English is the language of 
the towns; elsewhere, except in the eastern provinces, the taal 
or vernacular Dutch is the tongue of the majority of the whites, 
as it is of the natives in the western provinces. 

The first census was taken in 1865 when the population of the 
colony, which then had an area of 195,000 sq. m., and did not 
include the comparatively densely-populated Native Territories, 
was 566,158. Of these the Europeans numbered 187,400 or 
about 33 % of the whole. Of the coloured races the Hottentots 
and Bushmen were estimated at 82,000, whilst the Kaffirs formed 
about 50% of the population. Since 1865 censuses have been 
taken — in 1875, 1891 and 1904. In 1875 Basutoland formed 
part of the colony; in 1891 Transkei, Tembuland, Griqualand 
East, Griqualand West and Walfish Bay had been incorporated, 
and Basutoland had been disannexed; and in 1904 Pondoland 
and British Bechuanaland had been added. The following 
table gives the area and population at each of the three periods. 



1875- . 


1891. 


1904. 


Area, 
sq. m. 


Pop. 


Area, 
sq. m. 


Pop. 


Area, 
sq. m. 


Pop. 


201,136 


849,160 


260,918 


1,527,224 


276,995 


2,409,804 



The 1875 census gave the population of the colony proper at 
720,984, and that of Basutoland at 128,176. The colony is 
officially divided into nine provinces, but is more conveniently 
treated as consisting of three regions, to which may be added the 
detached area of Walfish Bay and the islands along the coast of 
Namaqualand. The table on the next page shows the distribution 
of population in the various areas. 

The white population, which as stated was 187,400 in 1865 
and 579,741 in 1904, was at the intermediate censuses 236,783 
in 1875 and 376,987 in 1891. The proportion of Dutch descended 
whites to those of British origin is about 3 to 2. No exact 
comparison can be made showing the increase in the native 
population owing to the varying areas of the colony, but the 
natives have multiplied more rapidly than the whites; the 
increase in the numbers of the last-named being due, in consider- 
able measure, to immigration. The whites who form about 25 % 



232 



GAPE COLONY 



[POPULATION 



of the total population are in the proportion of 4 to 6 in the 
colony proper. The great bulk of the people inhabit the coast 
region. The population is densest in the south-west corner (which 
includes Cape Town, the capital) where the white outnumbers 





Population (1904). 


Area in 
sq. m. 


White. 


Coloured. 


Total. 


Per 

sq. m. 


Cape Colony Proper . 
British Bechuanaland. 
Native Territories 
Walfish Bay and Islands . 

Total 


206,613 

51,424 

18,310 

648 


553,452 
9,368 

16,777 
144 


936,239 

75,104 

817,867 

853 


1,489,691 

84,472 

834,644 

997 


7-21 

1-64 

45-5° 

i-5° 


276,995 


579,741 


1,830,063 


2,409,804 


870 



the coloured population. Here in an area of 171 1 sq. m. the 
inhabitants exceed 264,000, being 154 to the sq. m. The urban 
population, reckoning as such dwellers in the nine largest towns 
and their suburbs, exceeds 331,000, being nearly 25 % of the 
total population of the colony proper. Of the coloured inhabit- 
ants at the 1904 census 15,682 were returned as Malay, 8489 as 
Indians, 85,892 as Hottentots, 1 4168 as Bushmen and 6289 as 
Griquas. The Kaffir and Bechuana tribes numbered 1,114,067 
individuals, besides 310,720 Fingoes separately classified, while 
279,662 persons were described as of mixed race. Divided by 
sex (including white and black) the males numbered (1904) 
1,218,940, the females 1,190,864, females being in the proportion 
of 97-70 to 100 males. By race the proportion is: — whites, 
82-16 females to every 100 males (a decrease of 10 % compared 
with 189 1); coloured, 103-22 females to every 100 males. Of 
the total population over 14 years old — 1,409,975— the number 
married was 7 3 8 , 5 63 or over 50%. Among the white population 
this percentage was only reached in adults over 17. 

The professional, commercial and industrialoccupationsemploy 
about jth of the white population. In 1904 whites engaged 
in such pursuits numbered respectively only 32,202, 46,750 and 
67,278, whereas 99,319 were engaged in domestic employment, 
and 111,175 in agricultural employment, while 214,982 (mostly 
children) were dependants. The natives follow domestic and 
agricultural pursuits almost exclusively. 

Registration of births and deaths did not become compulsory 
till 1895. Among the European population the birth-rate is 
about 33-00 per thousand, and the death-rate 14-00 per thousand. 
The birth-rate among the coloured inhabitants is about the same 
as with the whites, but the death-rate is higher — about 25-00 
per thousand. 

Immigration and Emigration.— From 1873 to 1884 only 23,337 
persons availed themselves of the government aid to immigrants 
from England to the Cape, and in 1886 this aid was stopped. 
The total number of adult immigrants by sea, however, steadily 
increased from 11,559 in 1891 to 38,669 in 1896, while during the 
same period the number of departures by sea only increased from 
,8415 to 17,695, and most of this increase took place in the last 
year. But from 1896 onwards the uncertainty of the political 
position caused a falling off in the number of immigrants, while 
the emigration figures still continued to grow; thus in 1900 
there were 29,848 adult arrivals by sea, as compared with 21,163 
departures. Following the close of the Anglo-Boer War the 
immigration figures rose in 1903 to 61,870, whereas the departures 
numbered 29,615. This great increase proved transitory; in 
1904 and 1905 the immigrants numbered 32,282 and 33,775 
respectively, while in the same years the emigrants numbered 
33,651 and 34,533. At the census of 1904, 21-68 % of the Euro- 
pean population was born outside Africa, persons of Russian 
extraction constituting the strongest foreign element. 

Provinces. — The first division of the colony for the purposes 
of administration and election of members for the legislative 
council was into two provinces, a western and an eastern, the 
western being largely Dutch in sentiment, the eastern chiefly 
British. With the growth of the colony these provinces were 
found to be inconveniently large, and by an act of government, 

1 This is an overstatement. The director of the census estimated 
the true number of Hottentots at about 56,000. 



which became law in 1874, the country was portioned out into 
seven provinces; about the same time new fiscal divisions were 
formed within them by the reduction of those already existing. 
The seven provinces are named from their geographical position: 
western, north-western, south-western, 
eastern, north-eastern, south-eastern and 
midland. In general usage the distinction 
made is into western and eastern provinces, 
according to the area of the primary division. 
Griqualand West on its incorporation with 
the colony in 1880 became a separate pro- 
vince, and when the crown colony of British 
Bechuanaland was taken over by the Cape 
in 1895 it also became a separate province 
(see Griqualand and Bechuanaland). For electoral purposes 
the Native Territories (see Kaffraria) are included in the eastern 
province. 

Chief Towns.— -With the exception of Kimberley the principal 
towns (see separate notices) are on the coast. The capital, Cape 
Town, had a population (1904) of 77,668, or including the 
suburbs, 169,641. The most important of these suburbs, which 
form separate municipalities, are Woodstock (28,990), Wynberg 
(18,477), and Claremont (14,972). Kimberley, the centre of the 
diamond mining industry, 647 m. up country from Cape Town, 
had a pop. of 34,331, exclusive of the adjoining municipality of 
Beaconsfield (9378). Port Elizabeth, in Algoa Bay, had 32,959 
inhabitants, East London, at the mouth of the Buffalo river, 
25,220. Cambridge (pop. 3480) is a suburb of East London. 
Uitenhage (pop. 12,193) is 21 m. N.N.W. of Port Elizabeth. 
Of the other towns Somerset West (2613), Somerset West Strand 
(3059), Stellenbosch (4969), Paarl (11,293), Wellington (4881), 
Ceres (2410), Malmesbury (3811), Caledon (3508), Worcester 
(7885), Robertson (3244) and Swellendam (2406) are named 
in the order of proximity to Cape Town, from which Swellendam 
is distant 134 m. Other towns in the western half of the colony 
are Riversdale (2643), Oudtshoorn (8849), Beaufort West 
(5478), Victoria West (2762), De Aar (3271), and the ports of 
Mossel Bay (4206) and George (3506). Graaff Reinet (10,083), 
Middleburg (6137), Cradock (7762), Aberdeen (2553), Steyns- 
burg (2250) and Colesberg (2668) are more centrally situated, 
while in the east are Graham's Town (13,887), King William's 
Town (9506), Queenstown (9616), Molteno (2725), Burghersdorp 
(2894),' Tarkastad (2270), Dordrecht (2052), Aliwal North 
(5566), the largest town on the banks of the Orange, and Somerset 
East (5216). Simon's Town (6643) in False Bay is a station of 
the British navy. Maf eking (2713), in the extreme north of the 
colony near the Transvaal frontier, Taungs (2715) and Vryburg 
(2985) are in Bechuanaland. Kokstad (2903) is the capital of 
Griqualand East, Umtata (2342) the capital of Tembuland. 

Port Nolloth is the seaport for the Namaqualand copper mines, 
whose headquarters are at O'okiep (2106). Knysna, Port 
Alfred and Port St Johns are minor seaports. Barkly East and 
Barkly West are two widely separated towns, the first being 
E.S.E. of Aliwal North and Barkly West in Griqualand West. 
Hopetown and Prieska are on the south side of the middle course 
of the Orange river. Upington (2508) lies further west on the 
north bank of the Orange and is the largest town in the western 
part of Bechuanaland. Indwe (2608) is the centre of the coal- 
mining region in the east of the colony. The general plan of the 
small country towns is that of streets laid out at right angles, and 
a large central market square near which are the chief church, 
town hall and other public buildings. In several of the towns, 
notably those founded by the early Dutch settlers, the streets are 
tree-lined. Those towns for which no population figures are 
given had at the 1904 census fewer than 2000 inhabitants. 

Agriculture and Allied Industires.—Ovnxig to the scarcity of 
water over a large part of the country the area of land under 
cultivation is restricted. The farmers, in many instances, are 
pastoralists, whose wealth consists in their stock of cattle, sheep 
and goats, horses, and, in some cases, ostriches. In the lack of 
adequate irrigation much fertile soil is left untouched. 

The principal cereal crops are wheat, with a yield of 1,701,000 



INDUSTRY] 



CAPE COLONY 



233 



bushels in 1904, oats, barley, rye, mealies (Indian corn) and 
Kaffir corn (a kind of millet). The principal wheat-growing 
districts are in the south-western and eastern provinces. The 
yield per acre is fully up to the average of the world's yield, 
computed at twelve bushels to the acre. The quality of Cape 
wheat is stated to be unsurpassed. Rye gives its name to the 
Roggeveld, and is chiefly grown there and in the lower hills of 
Namaqualand. Mealies (extensively used as food for cattle and 
horses) are very largely grown by the coloured population and 
Kaffir corn almost exclusively so. Oats are grown over a wider 
area than any other crop, and next to mealies are the heaviest 
crop grown. They are often cut whilst still tender, dried and 
used as forage being known as oat hay (67,742,000 bundles of 
about 57 lb each were produced in 1904). The principal vege- 
tables cultivated are potatoes, onions, mangold and beet, beans 
and peas. Farms in tillage are comparatively small, whilst those 
devoted to the rearing of sheep are very large, ranging from 3000 
acres to 15,000 acres and more. For the most part the graziers 
own the farms they occupy. 

The rearing of sheep and other live-stock is one of the chief 
occupations followed. At the census of 1904 over 8,465,000 
woolled and 3,353,000 other sheep were enumerated. There 
were 2,775,000 angora and 4,386,000 other goats, some 2,000,000 
cattle, 250,000 horses and 100,000 asses. These figures showed 
in most cases a large decrease compared with those obtained in 
1 89 1, the cause being largely the ravages of rinderpest. Lucerne 
and clover are extensively grown for fodder. Ostrich farms are 
maintained in the Karroo and in other parts of the country, young 
birds having been first enclosed in 1857. A farm of 6000 acres 
supports about 300 ostriches. The number of domesticated 
ostriches in 1904 was 357,000, showing an increase of over 
200,000 since 1891. There are large mule-breeding establish- 
ments on the veld. 

Viticulture plays an important part in the life of the colony. 
It is doubtful whether or not a species of vine is indigenous to 
the Cape. The first Dutch settlers planted small vineyards, 
while the cuttings of French vines introduced by the Huguenots 
about 1688 have given rise to an extensive culture in the south- 
western districts of the colony. The grapes are among the finest 
in the world, whilst the fruit is produced in almost unrivalled 
abundance. It is computed that over 600 gallons of wine are 
■ produced from 1000 vines. The vines number about 80,000,000, 
and the annual output of wine is about 6,000,000 gallons, besides 
1,500,000 gallons of brandy. The Cape wines are chiefly those 
known as Hermitage, Muscadel, Pontac, Stein and Hanepoot. 
The high reputation which they had in the first half of the 19th 
century was afterwards lost to a large extent. Owing to greater 
care on the part of growers, and the introduction of French- 
American resistant stocks to replace vines attacked by the 
phylloxera, the wines in the early years of the 20th century again 
acquired a limited sale in England. By far the greater part 
of the vintage has been, however, always consumed in the 
colony. The chief wine-producing districts are those of the 
Paarl, Worcester, Robertson, Malmesbury, Stellenbosch and 
the Cape, all in the south-western regions. Beyond the 
colony proper there are promising vine stocks in the Gor- 
donia division of Bechuanaland and in the Umtata district of 
Tembuland. 

Fruit culture has become an important industry with the 
facilities afforded by rapid steamers for the sale of produce in 
Europe. The trees whose fruit reaches the greatest perfection 
and yield the largest harvest are the apricot, peach, orange and 
apple. Large quantities of table grapes are also grown. Many 
millions of each of the fruits named are produced annually. The 
pear, lemon, plum, fig and other trees likewise flourish. Cherry 
trees are scarce. The cultivation of the olive was begun in the 
western provinces, c. 1900. In the Oudtshoorn, Stockenstroom, 
Uniondale, Piquetberg and other districts tobacco is grown. 
The output for 1904 was 5,309,000 lb. 

Flour-milling is an industry second only in importance to 
that of diamond mining (see below). The chief milling centres 
are Port Elizabeth and the Cape district. In 1904 the output 



of the mills was valued at over £2,200,000, more than 7,000,000 
bushels of wheat being ground. 

Forestry is a growing industry. Most of the forests are crown 
property and are under the care of conservators. Fisheries 
were little developed before 1897 when government experiments 
were begun, which proved that large quantities of fish were 
easily procurable by trawling. Large quantities of soles are 
obtained from a trawling ground near Cape Agulhas. The collec- 
tion of guano from the islands near Walfish Bay is under govern- 
ment control. 

Mining. — The mineral wealth of the country is very great. 
The most valuable of the minerals is the diamond, found in 
Griqualand West and also at Hopetown, and other districts along 
the Orange river. The diamond-mining industry is almost 
entirely under the control of the De Beers Mining Company. 
From the De Beers mines at Kimberley have come larger numbers 
of diamonds than from all the other diamond mines of the world 
combined. Basing the calculation on the figures for the ten years 
1 896- 1 90 5, the average annual production is slightly over two and 
a half million carats, of the average annual value of £4,250,000, 
the average price per carat being £1 : 13 : 3. From the other 
districts alluvial diamonds are obtained of the average annual 
value of £2 5o,ooo-£40o,ooo. They are finer stones than the 
Kimberley diamonds, having an average value of £3:2:7 
per carat. 

Next in importance among mineral products are coal and 
copper. The collieries are in the Stormberg district and are of 
considerable extent. The Indwe mines are the most productive. 
The colonial output increased from 23,000 tons in 1891 to 188,000 
tons in 1904. The copper mines are in Namaqualand, an average 
of 50,000 to 70,000 tons of ore being mined yearly. Copper was 
the first metal worked by white men in the colony, queries
beginning in 1852. 

Gold is obtained from mines on the Madibi Reserve, near 
Mafeking — the outcrop extending about 30 m.— and, in small 
quantities, from mines in the Knysna district. In the Cape 
and Paarl districts are valuable stone and granite quarries. 
Asbestos is mined near Prieska, in which neighbourhood 
there are also nitrate beds. Salt is produced in several 
districts, there being large pans in the Prieska, Hopetown 
and Uitenhage divisions. Tin is obtained from Kuils river, near 
Cape Town. Many other minerals exist but are not put to 
industrial purposes. 

Trade. — The colony has not only a large trade in its own com- 
modities, but owes much of its commerce to the transit of goods 
to and from the Transvaal, Orange River Colony and Rhodesia. 
The staple exports are diamonds, gold (from the Witwatersrand 
mines), wool, copper ore, .ostrich feathers, mohair, hides and 
skins. The export of wool, over 23,000,000 lb in i860, had 
doubled by 1871, and was over 63,473,000 lb in 1905 when the 
export was valued at £1,887,459. In the same year (1905) 
471,024 ft) of ostrich feathers were exported valued at £1,081,187. 
The chief imports are textiles, food stuffs, wines and whisky, 
timber, hardware and machinery. The value of the total imports 
rose from £13,612,405 in 1895 to £33,761,831 in 1903, but dropped 
to £20,000,913 in 1905. The exports in 1895 were valued at 
£16,798,137 and rose to £23,247,258 in 1899. The dislocation 
of trade caused by the war with the Boer Republics brought 
down the exports in 1900 to £7,646,682 (in which year the 
value of the gold exported was only £336,795). They rose to 
£10,000,000 and £16,000,000 in 1901 and 1902 respectively, and 
in 1905 had reached £33,812,210. (This figure included raw gold 
valued at £20,731,159.) About 75 % of the imports come from 
the United Kingdom or British colonies, and nearly the whole of 
the exports go to the United Kingdom. The tonnage of ships 
entered and cleared at colonial ports rose from 10,175,903 in 1895 
to 22,518,286 in 1905. In that year x 9 rths of the tonnage was 
British. It is interesting to compare the figures already given with 
those of earlier days, as they illustrate the growth of the colony 
over a longer period. In 1836 the total trade of the country 
was under £1,000,000, in i860 it had risen to over £4,500,000, 
in 1874 it exceeded £10,500,000. It remained at about this 



234 



CAPE COLONY 



[COMMUNICATIONS 



figure until the development of the Witwatersrand gold mines. 
The consequent great increase in the carrying trade with the 
Transvaal led to some neglect of the internal resources of the 
colony. Trade depression following the war of 1899-1902 
turned attention to these resources, with satisfactory results. 
The value of imports for local consumption in 1906 was 
£12,847,188, the value of exports, the produce of the colony 
being £15,302,854. A " trade balance-sheet " for 1906 drawn up 
for the Cape Town chamber of commerce by its president showed, 
however, a debtor account of £18,751,000 compared with a credit 
account of £17,931,000, figures representing with fair accuracy 
the then economic condition of the country. 

Cape Colony is a member of the South African Customs Union. 
The tariff, revised in 1906, is protective with a general ad 
valorem rate of 15% on goods not specifically enumerated. On 
machinery generally there is a 3% ad valorem duty. Books, 
engravings, paintings, sculptures, &c, are on the free list. There 
is a rebate of 3 % on most goods from the United Kingdom, 
machinery from Great Britain thus entering free. 

Communications. — There is regular communication between 
Europe and the colony by several lines of steamships. The 
British mails are carried under contract with the colonial govern- 
ment by packets of the Union-Castle Steamship Co., which 
leave Southampton every Saturday and Cape Town every 
Wednesday. The distance varies from 5866 m. to 6146 m., 
according to the route followed, and the mail boats cover the 
distance in seventeen days. From Cape Town mail steamers 
sail once a week, or oftener, to Port Elizabeth (436 m., two days) 
East London (543 m., three days) and Durban (823 m., four 
or five days); Mossel Bay being called at once a fortnight. 
Steamers also leave Cape Town at frequent and stated intervals 
for Port Nolloth. 

Steamers of the D.O.A.L. {Deutsche Ost Afrika Linie), starting 
from Hamburg circumnavigate Africa, touching at the three 
chief Cape ports. The western route is via Dover to Cape Town, 
the eastern route is via the Suez Canal and Natal. Several lines 
of steamers ply between Cape Town and Australian ports, and 
others between Cape Colony and India. 

There are over 8000 m. of roads in the colony proper and rivers 
crossing main routes are bridged. The finest bridge in the 
colony is that which spans the Orange at Hopetown. It is 
1480 ft. long and cost £114,000. Of the roads in general it may 
be said that they are merely tracks across the veld made at the 
pleasure of the traveller. The ox is very generally used as a 
draught animal in country districts remote from railways; 
sixteen or eighteen oxen being harnessed to a wagon carrying 
3 to 4 tons. Traction-engines have in some places sup- 
planted the ox-wagon for bringing agricultural produce to 
market. The " Scotch cart," a light two-wheeled vehicle is also 
much used. 

Railways. — Railway construction began in 1859 when a private 
company built a line from Cape Town to Wellington. This line, 
64 m. long, was the only railway in the colony for nearly fifteen 
years. In 1871 parliament resolved to build railways at the 
public expense, and in 1873 (the year following the conferment 
of responsible government on the colony) a beginning was made 
with the work, £5,000,000 having been voted for the purpose. In 
the same year the Cape Town- Wellington line was bought by 
the state. Subsequently powers were again given to private 
companies to construct lines, these companies usually receiving 
subsidies from the government, which owns and works the 
greater part of the railways in the colony. 

The plan adopted in 1873 was to build independent lines 
from the seaports into the interior, and the great trunk lines 
then begun determined the development of the whole system. 
The standard gauge in South Africa is 3 ft., 6 in. and all railways 
mentioned are of that gauge unless otherwise stated. 

The railways, which have a mileage exceeding 4000, are classi- 
fied under three great systems: — the Western, the Midland and 
the Eastern. 

The Western system — the southern section of the Cape to 
Cairo route — starts from Cape Town and runs by Kimberley 



(647 m.) to Vryburg (774 m.), whence it is continued by the 
Rhodesia Railway Co. to Mafeking (870m.), Bulawayo (1360m.), 
the Victoria Falls on the Zambezi (1623 m.) and the Belgian 
Congo frontier, whilst a branch from Bulawayo runs via 
Salisbury to Beira, 2037 m. from Cape Town. From Fourteen 
Streams, a station 47 m. north of Kimberley, a line goes via 
Klerksdorp to Johannesburg and Pretoria, this being the most 
direct route between Cape Town and the Transvaal. (Distance 
from Cape Town to Johannesburg, 955 m.) 

The Midland system starts from Port Elizabeth, and the main 
line runs by Cradock and Naauwpoort to Norval's Pont on the 
Orange river, whence it is continued through the Orange River 
Colony and the Transvaal by Bloemfontein to Johannesburg 
(714 m. from Port Elizabeth) and Pretoria (741 m.). From 
Kroonstad, a station midway betweenBloemfontein and Johannes- 
burg, a railway, opened in 1906, goes via Ladysmith to Durban, 
and provides the shortest railway route between Cape Town and 
Port Elizabeth and Natal. From Port Elizabeth a second line 
(186 m.) runs by Uitenhage and Graaff Reinet, rejoining the 
main line at Rosmead, from which a junction line (83 m.) runs 
eastwards, connecting with the Eastern system at Stormberg. 
From Naauwpoort another junction line (69 m.) runs north-west, 
connecting the Midland with the Western system at De Aar, 
and affords an alternative route to that via Kimberley from 
Cape Town to the Transvaal. (Distance from Cape Town to 
Johannesburg via Naauwpoort, 1012 m.) 

The Eastern system starts from East London, and the principal 
line runs to Springfontein (314 m.) in the Orange River Colony, 
where it joins the line to Bloemfontein and the Transvaal. 
(Distance from East London to Johannesburg, 665 m.) From 
Albert junction (246 m. from East London) a branch, originally 
the main line, goes east to Aliwal North (280 m.). 

The west to east connexion is made by a series of railways 
running for the most part parallel with the coast. Starting 
from Worcester, 109 m. from Cape Town on the western main 
line a railway runs to Mossel Bay via Swellendam and Rivers- 
dale. From Mossel Bay another line runs by George, Oudt- 
shoorn and Willowmore to Klipplaat, a station on the line from 
Graaff Reinet to Port Elizabeth. (Distance from Cape Town 
666 m.) From Somerset East a line (164 m.) goes via King 
William's Town to Blaney junction on the eastern main line 
and 31m. from East London. The Somerset East line crosses, 
at Cookhouse station, the Midland main line from Port Elizabeth 
to the north, and by this route the distance between Port Elizabeth 
and East London is 307 m. Before the completion in 1905 of 
the Somerset East-King William's Town line, the nearest railway 
connexion between the two seaports was via Rosmead and 
Stormberg junction — a distance of 547 m. From Sterkstroom 
junction on the eastern main line a branch railway goes through 
the Transkei to connect at Riverside, the frontier station, with 
the Natal railways. It runs via the Indwe coal-mines (66 m. 
from Sterkstroom), Maclear (173 m.) and Kokstad. From 
Kokstad to Durban is 232 m. The eastern system is also 
connected with the Transkei by another railway. From Amabele, 
a station 51 m. from East London, a line goes east to Umtata 
(180 m. distant). Thence the line is continued to Port St Johns 
(307 m. from East London), whence another line 142 m. long 
goes to Kokstad. 

Besides the main lines there are many smaller lines. Thus all 
the towns within a 50 m. radius of Cape Town are linked 
to it by railway. Longer branches run from the capital S.E. 
to Caledon (87 m.) and N.W. via Malmesbury (47 m.), and 
Piquetberg (107 m.) to Graaf Water (176 m.). A line runs N.W. 
across the veld from Hutchinson on the western main line via 
Victoria West to Carnarvon (86 m.). From De Aar junction, 
a line (in m.) goes N.W. via Britstown to Prieska on the Orange 
river. From Port Elizabeth a line (35 m.) runs east to Grahams- 
town, whence another line (43 m.) goes south-east to Port 
Alfred at the mouth of the Kowie river. Another line (179 m.) 
on a two-foot gauge runs N.W. from Port Elizabeth via Humans- 
dorp to Avontuur. 

A line; unconnected with any other in the colony, runs from 



GOVERNMENT] 



CAPE COLONY 



235 



Port Nolloth on the west coast to the O'okiep copper mines 
(92 m.). It has a gauge of 2 ft. 6 in. 

The railways going north have to cross, within a comparatively 
short distance of the coast, the mountains which lead to the 
Karroo. The steepest gradient is on the western main line. 
Having entered the hilly district at Tulbagh Road, where the 
railway ascends 500 ft. in 9 m., the Hex River Pass is reached 
soon after leaving Worcester, 794 ft. above the sea. In the 
next 36 m. the line rises 2400 ft., over 20 m. of that distance 
being at gradients of 1 in 40 to 1 in 45. The eastern line is the 
most continuously steep in the colony. In the first 18 m. from 
East London the railway rises 1000 ft.; at Kei Road, 46 m. 
from its starting-point, it has reached an altitude of 2332 ft., 
at Cathcart (109 m.) it is 3906 ft. above the sea, and at Cypher- 
gat, where it pierces the Stormberg, 204 m. from East London, 
the rails are 5450 ft. above the sea. From Sterkstroom to 
Cyphergat, 15 m., the line rises 1044 ft. The highest railway 
station in the colony is Krom Hooghte, 5543 ft., in the Zuurberg, 
on the branch line connecting the Eastern and Western systems. 
The capital expended on government railways to the end of 
1905 was £29,973,024, showing a cost per mile of £10,034. The 
gross earnings in 1905 were £4,047,065 (as compared with 
£3,390,093 in 1895); the expenses £3,076,920 (as compared with 
£1,596,013 in 1895). Passengers conveyed in 1905 numbered 
20,611,384, and the tonnage of goods 1,836,946 (of 2000 lb). 

Posts and Telegraphs. — Direct telegraphic communication 
between London and Cape Town was established on Christmas 
day 1879. Cables connect the colony with Europe (1) via 
Loanda and Bathurst, (2) via St Helena, Ascension and 
St Vincent; with Europe and Asia (3) via Natal, Zanzibar 
and Aden, and with Australia (4) via Natal, Mauritius and 
Coces. 

An overland telegraph wire connects Cape Town and Ujiji, 
on Lake Tanganyika, via Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Other 
lines connect Cape Town with all other South African states, 
while within the colony there is a complete system of telegraphic 
communication, over 8000 m. of lines being open in 1906. 
The telephone service is largely developed in the chief towns. 
The telegraph lines are owned and have been almost entirely 
built, at a cost up to 1906 of £865,670, by the government, 
which in 1873 took over the then existing lines (781 m.). 

The postal service is well organized, and to places beyond the 
reach of the railway there is a service of mail carts, and in parts 
of Gordonia (Bechuanaland) camels are used to carry the mails. 
Since 1890 a yearly average of over 50,000,000 has passed 
through the post. Of these about four-fifths are letters. 

Constitution and Government. — Under the constitution estab- 
lished in 1872 Cape Colony enjoyed self-government. The legis- 
lature consisted of two chambers, a Legislative Council and a 
House of Assembly. Members of the Legislative Council or 
Upper House represented the provinces into which the colony 
was divided and were elected for seven years; members of the 
House of Assembly, a much more numerous body, elected for 
five years, represented the towns and divisions of the provinces. 
At the head of the executive was a governor appointed by the 
crown. By the South Africa Act 1909 this constitution was 
abolished as from the establishment of the Union of South Africa 
in 1910. Cape Colony entered the Union as an original province, 
being represented in the Union parliament by eight members in 
the Senate and fifty-one in the House of Assembly. The qualifi- 
cations of voters for the election of members of the House of 
Assembly are the same as those existing in Cape Colony at the 
establishment of the Union, and are as follows: — Voters must 
be born or naturalized British subjects residing in the Cape 
province at least twelve months, must be males aged 21 (no 
distinction being made as to race or colour) , must be in possession 
of property worth £75, or in receipt of salary or wages of not less 
than £50 a year. No one not an elector in 1892 can be registered 
as a voter unless he can sign his name and write his address and 
occupation. A share in tribal occupancy does not qualify for a 
vote. A voter of non-European descent is not qualified for 
election to parliament (see further South Africa) . The number 



of registered electors in 1907 was 152,135, of whom over 20,000 
were non-Europeans. 

For provincial purposes there is a provincial council consisting 
of the same number of members as are elected by the province 
to the House of Assembly. The qualifications of voters for the 
council are the same as for the House of Assembly. All voters, 
European and non-European, are eligible for seats on the 
council, but any councillor who becomes a member of parliament 
thereupon ceases to be a member of the provincial council. 
The council passes ordinances dealing with direct taxation 
within the province for purely local purposes, and generally 
controls all matters of a merely local or private nature in the 
province. The council was also given, for five years following 
the establishment of the Union, control of elementary education. 
All ordinances passed by the council must have the sanction of 
the Union government before coming into force. The council 
is elected for three years and is not subject to dissolution save 
by effluxion of time. The chief executive officer is an official 
appointed by the Union government and styled administrator 
of the province. The administrator holds his post for a period 
of five years. He is assisted by an executive committee consist- 
ing of four persons elected by the provincial council but not 
necessarily members of that body. 

To the provincial council is entrusted the oversight of the 
divisional and municipal councils of the province, but the powers 
of such subordinate bodies can also be varied or withdrawn 
by the Union parliament acting directly. Divisional councils, 
which are elected triennially, were established in 1855. In 
1908 they numbered eighty-one. The councils are presided 
over by a civil commissioner who is also usually resident 
magistrate. They have to maintain all roads in the division; 
can nominate field cornets (magistrates); may borrow money 
on the security of the rates for public works; and return 
three members yearly to the district licensing court. Their 
receipts in 1908 were £269,000; their expenditure in the same 
period was £283,000. The electors to the divisional councils are 
the owners or occupiers of immovable property. Members of 
the councils must be registered voters and owners of immovable 
property in the division valued at not less than £500. 

Municipalities at the Cape date from 1836, and are now, for 
the most part, subject to the provisions of the General Municipal 
Act of 1882. Certain municipalities have, however, obtained 
special acts for their governance. In 1907 there were 119 
municipalities in the province. Under the act of 1882 the 
municipalities were given power to levy annually an owner's 
rate assessed upon the capital value of rateable property, and 
a tenant's rate assessed upon the annual value of such property. 
No rate may exceed 2d. in the £ on the capital value or 8d. in 
the £ on the annual value. The receipts of the municipalities 
in 1907 amounted to £1,430,000. During the same period 
the expenditure amounted to £1,539,000. 

Law and Justice. — The basis of the judicial system is the 
Roman-Dutch law, which has been, however, modified by 
legislation of the Cape parliament. In each division of the 
province there is a resident magistrate with primary jurisdiction 
in civil and criminal matters. The South Africa Act 1909 
created a Supreme Court of South Africa, the supreme court of 
the Cape of Good Hope, which sits at Cape Town, becoming a 
provincial division of the new supreme court, presided over by a 
judge-president. The two other superior courts of Cape Colony, 
namely the eastern districts court which sits at Graham's 
Town, and the high court of Griqualand which sits at Kimberley, 
became local divisions of the Supreme Court of South Africa. 
Each of these courts consists of a judge-president and two 
puisne judges. The provincial and local courts, besides their 
original powers, have jurisdiction in all matters in which the 
government of the Union is a party and in all matters in which 
the validity of any provincial ordinance shall come into 
question. From the decisions of these courts appeals may 
be made to the appellate division of the Supreme Court. The 
judges of the divisional courts go on circuit twice a year. 
In addition, since 1888 a special court has been held at 



23 6 



CAPE COLONY 



[FINANCE 



Kimberley for trying cases relating to illicit diamond 
buying (" I.D.B."). This court consists of two judges of the 
supreme court and one other member, hitherto the civil com- 
missioner or the resident magistrate of Kimberley. The Trans- 
keian territories, which fall under the jurisdiction of the eastern 
district court, are subject to a Native Territories Penal Code, 
which came into force in 1887. Besides the usual magistrates 
in these territories, there is a chief magistrate, resident at Cape 
Town, with two assistants in the territories. 

Religion. — Up to the year 1876 government provided an 
annual grant for ecclesiastical purposes which was divided 
among the various churches, Congregationalists alone declining 
to receive state aid. From that date, in accordance with the 
provisions of the Voluntary Act of 1875, grants were only con- 
tinued to the then holders of office. The Dutch Reformed 
Church, as might be anticipated from the early history of the 
country, is by far the most numerous community. Next in 
number of adherents among the white community come the 
Anglicans — Cape Colony forming part of the Province of South 
Africa. In 1847 a bishop of Cape Town was appointed to preside 
over this church, whose diocese extended not only over Cape 
Colony and Natal, but also over the Island of St Helena. Later, 
however, separate bishops were appointed for the eastern 
province (with the seat at Graham's Town) and for Natal. 
Subsequently another bishopric, St John's, Kaffraria, was created 
and the Cape Town diocesan raised to the rank of archbishop. 
Of other Protestant bodies the Methodists outnumber the 
Anglicans, eight-ninths of their members being coloured people. 
The Roman Catholics have bishops in Cape Town and Graham's 
Town, but are comparatively few. There are, besides, several 
foreign missions in the colony, the most important being the 
Moravian, London and Rhenish missionary societies. The 
Moravians have been established since 1732. 

The following figures are extracted from the census returns 
of 1904: — Protestants, 1,305,453; Roman Catholics, 38,118; 
Jews, 19,537; Mahommedans, 22,623; other sects, 4297; "no 
religion," 1,016,255. In this last category are placed the pagan 
natives. The figures for the chief Protestant sects were: — 
Dutch Reformed Church, 399,487; Gereformeerde Kerk, 6209; 
Lutherans, 80,902; Anglicans, 281,433; Presbyterians, 88,660; 
Congregationalists, 112,202; Wesleyan and other Methodists, 
290,264; Baptists, 14,105. Of the Hottentots 77%, of the 
Fingoes 50%, of the mixed races 89%, and of the Kaffirs and 
Bechuanas 26% were returned as Christians. 

Education. — There is a state system of primary education 
controlled by a superintendent-general of education and the 
education department which administers the parliamentary 
grants. As early as 1839 a scheme of public schools, drawn up 
by Sir John Herschel, the astronomer, came into operation, 
and was continued until 1865, when a more comprehensive 
scheme was adopted. In 1905 an act was passed dividing the 
colony into school districts under the control of popularly elected 
school boards, which were established during 1905-1906. These 
boards levy, through municipal or divisional councils, a rate 
for school purposes and supervise all public and poor schools. 
The schools are divided into public undenominational elementary 
schools; day schools and industrial institutions for the natives; 
mission schools to which government aid for secular instruction 
is granted; private farm schools, district boarding schools, 
training schools for teachers, industrial schools for poor whites, 
&c. In 1905 2930 primary schools of various classes were open. 
Education is not compulsory, but at the 1904 census 95% of 
the white population over fourteen years old could read and write. 
In the same year 186,000 natives could read and write, and 
53,000 could read but not write. There are also numbers of 
private schools receiving no government aid. These include 
schools maintained by the German community, in which the 
medium of instruction is German. 

The university of the Cape of Good Hope, modelled on that of 
London, stands at the head of the educational system of the 
colony. It arose out of and superseded the board of public 
examiners (which had been constituted in 1858), was established 



in 1874 and was granted a royal charter in 1877. It is governed 
by a chancellor, a vice-chancellor (who is chairman of the 
university council) and a council consisting (1909) of 38 members, 
including representatives of Natal. The university is empowered 
to grant degrees ranking equally with those of any university in 
Great Britain. Originally only B.A., M.A., LL.B., LL.D., M.B., 
and M.D. degrees were conferred, but degrees in literature, 
science and music and (in 1908) in divinity were added. The 
number of students who matriculated rose from 34 in 1875 
to 118 in 1885, 242 in 1895 and 539 in 1905. The examina- 
tions are open to candidates irrespective of where they 
have studied, but under the Higher Education Act grants 
are paid to seven colleges that specially devote themselves 
to preparing students for the graduation courses. These 
are the South African College at Cape Town (founded in 
1829), the Victoria College at Stellenbosch, the Diocesan 
College at Rondebosch, Rhodes University College, Graham's 
Town, Gill College at Somerset East, the School of Mines 
at Kimberley and the Huguenot Ladies' College at Welling- 
ton. Several denominational colleges, receiving no govern- 
ment aid, do the same work in a greater or less degree, the 
best known being St Aidan's (Roman Catholic) College and 
Kingswood (Wesleyan) College, both at Graham's Town. 
Graaff Reinet College, Dale College, King William's Town, and 
the Grey Institute, Port Elizabeth, occupy the place of high 
schools under the education department. The Theological 
Seminary at Stellenbosch prepares theological students for the 
ministry of the Dutch Church. At Cape Town is a Royal Observa- 
tory, founded in 1829, one of the most important institutions of 
its kind in the world. It is under the control of a royal astro- 
nomer and its expenses are defrayed by the British admiralty. 

Defence. — The Cape peninsula is fortified with a view to 
repelling attacks from the sea. Simon's Town, which is on the 
east side of the peninsula, is the headquarters of the Cape and 
West Coast naval squadron. It is strongly fortified, as is also 
Table Bay. Port Elizabeth is likewise fortified against naval 
attack. A strong garrison of the British army is stationed in the 
colony, with headquarters at Cape Town. The cost of this 
garrison is borne by the imperial government. For purposes of 
local defence a force named the Frontier Armed and Mounted 
Police was organized in 1853, and a permanent colonial force has 
been maintained since that date. It is now known as the Cape 
Mounted Riflemen and is about 700 strong. Its ordinary duty 
is to preserve order in the Transkeian territories. The Cape 
Mounted Police, over 1600 strong, are also available for the 
defence of the colony and are fully armed. There are numerous 
volunteer corps, which receive a capitation grant from the govern- 
ment. By a law passed in 1878 every able-bodied man between 
eighteen and fifty is liable to military service without as well as 
within the limits of the state. There is also a volunteer naval force. 

Revenue, Debt, &*c. — The following table shows the total receipts 
(including loans) and payments (including that under Loan Acts) 
of the colony in various financial years, from 1880 to 1905: — 



Year ending 
30th June. 


Receipts. 


Payments. 


Total. 


Loans 
(included in total). 


1880 
1885 
1890 

1895 
1900 

1905 


£3,55 
£3,814,947 

5,571,907 

5,416,611 

6,565,752 

13,856,247 


5,6oi 

£496,795 

i,Hl,857 

26,441 

128,376 

5,214,290 


£3,742,665 
4,211,832 
5,327,496 
5,388,157 
7-773,230 

10,914,784 



The colony had a public debt of £42,109,561 on the 31st of 
December 1905, including sums raised for corporate bodies, 
harbour boards, &c, but guaranteed in the general revenue. 
The greater part of the loans were issued at 3! or 4% interest. 
Nearly the whole of the loans raised have been spent on railways, 
harbours, irrigation and other public works. The value of 
assessed property for divisional council purposes was returned in 
1905 at £87,078,268. The total revenue of the divisional councils 
increased from £160,558 in 1901 to £273,543 in 1905, and the 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



237 



expenditure from £170,892 in 1901 to £243,241 in 1905. The 
receipts from municipal rates and taxes rose from £520,587 in 
1901 to £700,103 in 1905; the total municipal receipts in the 
same period from £978,867 to £1,752,105. At the end of 1905 
the total indebtedness of the municipalities was £5,775,420, and 
the value of assessed property within the municipal bounds 
£53,948,224. 

Banks.-— The following table gives statistics of the banks under 
trust laws: — 



31st 

December. 


Including Head Offices. 


Circulation, 
Colony only. 


Assets and 

Liabilities, 

Colony only. 


Capital 
Subscribed. 


Capital 
Paid up. 


Reserve. 


1890 

1895 
1900 

1905 


£5,780,610 

7,189,090 

12,166,800 

11,510,900 


£1,558,612 
2,382,003 
6,508,308 
4,456,925 


£850,489 
1,008,837 
1,810,621 
2,948,428 


£740,210 
612,266 

1, 3 6 i,637 
1,065,251 


£9,221,661 
11,864,152 

20,537,343 
20,749,988 



Standard Time, Money, Weights and Measures. — Since 1903 a 
standard time has been adopted throughout South Africa, being 
that of 30 or two hours east of Greenwich. In other words 
noon in South Africa corresponds to 10.0 a.m. in London. The 
actual difference between the meridians of Greenwich and Cape 
Town is one hour fourteen minutes. The monetary system is 
that of Great Britain and the coins in circulation are exclusively 
British. Though all the standard weights and measures are 
British, the following old Dutch measures are still used: — 
Liquid Measure: Leaguer = about 128 imperial gallons; half 
aum=i5^ imperial gallons; anker =75 imperial gallons. Cap- 
acity: Muid = 3 bushels. The general surface measure is the old 
Amsterdam Morgen, reckoned equal to 2-11654 acres; 1000 
Cape lineal feet are equal to 1033 British imperial feet. The Cape 
ton is 2000 lb. 

The Press. — The first newspaper of the colony, written in 
Dutch and English, was published in 1824, and its appearance 
marked an era not only in the literary but in the political 
history of the colony, since it drew to a crisis the disputes which 
had arisen between the colonists and the governor, Lord Charles 
Somerset, who had issued a decree prohibiting all persons from 
convening or attending public meetings. Its criticisms on 
public affairs soon led to its suppression by the governor, and a 
memorial from the colonists to the king petitioning for a free 
press was the result. This boon was secured to the colony in 1828, 
and the press soon became a powerful agent, characterized by 
public spirit and literary ability. In politics the newspapers are 
divided, principally on racial lines, appealing either' to the 
British or the Dutch section of the community, rarely to both 
sides. There are about one hundred newspapers in English or 
Dutch published in the colony. 

The chief papers are the Cape Times, Cape Argus, South 
African News (Bond), both daily and weekly; the Diamond 
Fields Advertiser (Kimberley) and the Eastern Province Herald 
(Port Elizabeth). Ons Land and Het Dagblad are Dutch papers 
published at Cape Town. (F. R. C.) 

History 

Discovery and Settlement. — Bartholomew Diaz, the Portuguese 
navigator, discovered the Cape of Good Hope in 1488, and 
Vasco da Gama in 1497 sailed along the whole coast of South 
Africa on his way to India. The Portuguese, attracted by the 
riches of the East, made no permanent settlement at the Cape. 
But the Dutch, who, on the decline of the Portuguese power, 
established themselves in the East, early saw the importance of 
the place as a station where their vessels might take in water and 
provisions. They did not, however, establish any post at the 
Cape until 1652, when a small garrison under Jan van Riebeek 
were sent there by the Dutch East India Company. Riebeek 
landed at Table Bay and founded Cape Town. In 1671 the first 
purchase of land from the Hottentots beyond the limits of the 
fort built by Riebeek marked the beginning of the Colony proper. 
The earliest colonists were for the most part people of low station 
or indifferent character, but as the result of the investigations 



of a commissioner sent out in 1685 a better class of immigrants 
was introduced. About 1686 the European population was 
increased by a number of the French refugees who left their 
country on the revocation of the edict of Nantes. The influence 
of this small body of immigrants on the character of the Dutch 
settlers was marked. The Huguenots, however, owing to the 
policy of the Company, which in 1701 directed that Dutch only 
should be taught in the schools, ceased by the middle of the 18th 
century to be a distinct body, and the knowledge of French 
disappeared. Advancing north and 
east from their base at Cape Town 
the colonists gradually acquired — 
partly by so-called contracts, partly 
by force — all the land of the Hot- 
tentots, large numbers of whom they 
slew. Besides those who died in 
warfare, whole tribes of Hottentots 
were destroyed by epidemics of 
smallpox in 1713 and in 1755. Straggling remnants still main- 
tained their independence, but the mass of the Hottentots took 
service with the colonists as herdsmen, while others became 
hangers-on about the company's posts and grazing-farms or 
roamed about the country. In 1 7 8 7 the Dutch government passed 
a law subjecting these wanderers to certain restrictions. The 
effect of this law was to place the Hottentots in more immediate 
dependence upon the farmers, or to compel them to migrate 
northward beyond the colonial border. Those who chose the 
latter alternative had to encounter the hostility of their old foes, 
the Bushmen, who were widely spread over the plains from the 
Nieuwveld and Sneeuwberg mountains to the Orange river. 
The colonists also, pressing forward to those territories, came in 
contact with these Ishmaelites — the farmers' cattle and sheep, 
guarded only by a Hottentot herdsman, offering the strongest 
temptation to the Bushman. Reprisals followed; and the 
position became so desperate that the extermination of the 
Bushmen appeared to the government the only safe alternative^ 
" Commandoes " or war-bands were sent out against them, and 
they were hunted down like wild beasts. Within a period of six 
years, it is said, upwards of 3000 were either killed or captured. 
Out of the organization of these commandoes, with their field- 
commandants and field-cornets, has grown the common system 
of local government in the Dutch-settled districts of South Africa. 
It was not to the hostility of the natives, nor to the hard 
struggle with nature necessary to make agriculture profitable 
on Karroo or veld, that the slow progress made by the colonists 
was due, so much as to the narrow and tyrannical policy adopted 
by the East India Company, which closed the colony against free 
immigration, kept the whole of the trade in its own hands, 
combined the administrative, legislative and judicial powers in 
one body, prescribed to the farmers the nature of the crops they 
were to grow, demanded from them a large part of their produce, 
and harassed them with other exactions tending to discourage 
industry and enterprise. (See further South Africa, where 
the methods and results of Dutch colonial government are 
considered in their broader aspects.) To this mischievous policy 
is ascribed that dislike to orderly government, and that desire 
to escape from its control, which characterized for many genera- 
tions the " boer " or farmer class of Dutch settlers — qualities 
utterly at variance with the character of the Dutch in their 
native country. It was largely to escape oppression that the 
farmers trekked farther and farther from the seat of government. 
The company, to control the emigrants, established a magistracy 
at Swellendam in 1745 and another at Graaff Reinet in 1786. 
The Gamtoos river had been declared, c. 1740, the eastern 
frontier of the colony, but it was soon passed. In 1 780, however, 
the Dutch, to avoid collision with the warlike Kaffir tribes 
advancing south and west from east central Africa, agreed with 
them to make the Great Fish river the common boundary. In 
1795 the heavily taxed burghers of the frontier districts, who 
were afforded no protection against the Kaffirs, expelled the 
officials of the East India Company, and set up independent 
governments at Swellendam and Graaff Reinet. In the same 



2 3 8 



CAPE COLONY 



[HISTORY 



year, Holland having fallen under the revolutionary government 
of France, a British force under General Sir James Craig was sent 
to Cape Town to secure the colony for the prince of Orange — a 
refugee in England — against the French. The governor of Cape 
Town at first refused to obey the instructions from the prince, 
but on the British proceeding to take forcible possession he 
capitulated. 1 His action was hastened by the fact that the 
Hottentots, deserting their former masters, flocked to the British 
standard. The burghers of Graaff Reinet did not surrender until 
a force had been sent against them, while in 1799 and again in 
1801 they rose in revolt. In February 1803, as a result of the 
peace of Amiens, the colony was handed over to the Batavian 
Republic, which introduced many needful reforms, as had the 
British during their eight years' rule. (One of the first acts of 
General Craig had been to abolish torture in the administration 
of justice.) War having again broken out, a British force was 
once more sent to the Cape. After an engagement (Jan. 1806) 
on the shores of Table Bay the Dutch garrison of Cape Castle sur- 
rendered to the British under Sir David Baird, and in 1814 the 
colony was ceded outright by Holland to the British crown. 
At that time the colony extended to the line of mountains guard- 
ing the vast central plateau, then called Bushmansland, and had 
an area of about 1 20,000 sq. m. and a population of some 60,000, 
of whom 27,000 were whites, 17,000 free Hottentots and the rest 
slaves. These slaves were mostly imported negroes and Malays. 
Their introduction was the chief cause leading the white settlers 
to despise manual labour. 

The First and Second Kafir Wars. — At the time of the 
cession to Great Britain the first of several wars with the Kaffirs 
had been fought. (The numerous minor conflicts which since 
1789 had taken place between the colonists and the Kaffirs — the 
latter sometimes aided by Hottentot allies — are not reckoned 
in the usual enumeration of the Kaffir wars.) The Kaffirs, who 
had crossed the colonial frontier, had been expelled from the 
district between the Sunday and Great Fish rivers known as 
the Zuurveld, which became a sort of neutral ground. For some 
time previous to 181 1 the Kaffirs, however, had taken possession 
of the neutral ground and committed depredations on the 
colonists. In order to expel them from the Zuurveld, Colonel 
John Graham took the field with a mixed force in December 181 1, 
and in the end the Kaffirs were driven beyond the Fish river. 
On the site of Colonel Graham's headquarters arose the town 
which bears his name. In 1817 further trouble arose with the 
Kaffirs, the immediate cause of quarrel being an attempt by the 
colonial authorities to enforce the restitution of some stolen 
cattle. Routed in 1818 the Kaffirs rallied, and in the early part 
of 1819 poured into the colony in vast hordes. Led by a prophet- 
chief named Makana, they attacked Graham's Town on the 
22nd of April, then held by a handful of white troops. Help 
arrived in time and the enemy were beaten back. It was tfien 
arranged that the land between the Fish and Keiskamma rivers 
should be neutral territory. 

The British Settlers of 1820. — The war of 1817-19 led to the 
first introduction of English settlers on a considerable scale, 
an event fraught with far-reaching consequences. The then 
governor, Lord Charles Somerset, whose treaty arrangements 
with the Kaffir chiefs had proved unfortunate, desired to erect 
a barrier against the Kaffirs by settling white colonists in the 
border district. In 1820, on the advice of Lord Charles, parlia- 
ment voted £50,000 to promote emigration to the Cape, and 
4000 British were sent out. These people formed what was 
known as the Albany settlement, founding Port Elizabeth and 
making Graham's Town their headquarters. Intended primarily 
as a measure to secure the safety of the frontier, and regarded by 
the British government chiefly as a better means of affording a 
livelihood to a few thousands of the surplus population, this 
emigration scheme accomplished a far greater work than its 
authors contemplated. The new settlers, drawn from every part 
of the British Isles and from almost every grade of society, 

1 It is stated that Colonel R. J. Gordon (the explorer of the Orange 
river), who commanded the Dutch forces at the Cape, chagrined 
by the occupation of the country by the British, committed suicide. 



retained, and their descendants retain, strong sympathy with 
their native land. In course of time they formed a valuable 
counterpoise to the Dutch colonists, and they now constitute the 
most progressive element in the colony. The advent of these 
immigrants was also the means of introducing the English 
language at the Cape. In 1825, for the first time, ordinances 
were issued in English, and in 1827 its use was extended to 
the conduct of judicial proceedings. Dutch was not, however, 
ousted, the colonists becoming to a large extent bilingual. 

Dislike of British Rule. — Although the colony was fairly 
prosperous, many of the Dutch farmers were as dissatisfied 
with British rule as they had been with that of the Dutch East 
India Company, though their ground of complaint was not the 
same. In 1792 Moravian missions had been established for the 
benefit of the Hottentots, 2 and in 1799 the London Missionary 
Society began work among both Hottentots and Kaffirs. The 
championship of Hottentot grievances by the missionaries caused 
much dissatisfaction among the majority of the colonists, whose 
views, it may be noted, temporarily prevailed, for in 181 2 an ordin- 
ance was issued which empowered magistrates to bind Hottentot 
children as apprentices under conditions differing little from that 
of slavery. Meantime, however, the movement for the abolition 
of slavery was gaining strength in England, and the missionaries 
at length appealed from the colonists to the mother country. 
An incident which occurred in 1815-1816 did much to make 
permanent the hostility of the frontiersmen to the British. 
A farmer named Bezuidenhout refused to obey a summons issued 
on the complaint of a Hottentot, and firing on the party sent to 
arrest him, was himself killed by the return fire. This caused a 
miniature rebellion, and on its suppression five ringleaders were 
publicly hanged at the spot — Slachters Nek — where they had 
sworn to expel " the English tyrants." The feeling caused 
by the hanging of these men was deepened by the circumstances 
of the execution — for the scaffold on which the rebels were 
simultaneously swung, broke down from their united weight and 
the men were afterwards hanged one by one. An ordinance 
passed in 1827, abolishing the old Dutch courts of landroost 
and heemraden (resident magistrates being substituted) and 
decreeing that henceforth all legal proceedings should be con- 
ducted in English; the granting in 1828, as a result of the 
representations of the missionaries, of equal rights with 
whites to the Hottentots and other free coloured people; the 
imposition (1830) of heavy penalties for harsh treatment of 
slaves, and finally the emancipation of the slaves in 1834, 3 — all 
these things increased the dislike of the farmers to the government. 
Moreover, the inadequate compensation awarded to slave- 
owners, and the suspicions engendered by the method of payment, 
caused much resentment, and in 1835 the trekking of farmers 
into unknown country in order to escape from an unloved govern- 
ment, which had characterized the 18th century, recommenced. 
Emigration beyond the colonial border had in fact been con- 
tinuous for 150 years, but it now took on larger proportions. 

The Third Kaffir War. — On the eastern border further trouble 
arose with the Kaffirs, towards whom the policy of the Cape 
government was marked by much vacillation. On the nth of 
December 1834 a chief of high rank was killed while resisting 
a commando party. This set the whole of the Kaffir tribes 
in a blaze. A force of 10,000 fighting men, led by Macomo, 
a brother of the chief who was killed, swept across the frontier, 
pillaged and burned the homesteads and murdered all who 
dared to resist. Among the worst sufferers were a colony of 
freed Hottentots who, in 1829, had been settled in the Kat 
river valley by the British authorities. The fighting power 
of the colony was scanty, but the governor, Sir Benjamin 
D'Urban (<?.».), acted with promptitude, and all available forces 
were mustered under Colonel (afterwards Sir Harry) Smith, 
who reached Graham's Town on the 6th of January 183 5, six days 
after news of the rising reached Cape Town. The enemy's 

2 From 1737 to 1744 George Schmidt, "The apostle to the 
Hottentots," had a mission at Genadendal — " The Vale of Grace." 

' Masters were allowed to keep their ex-slaves as " apprentices " 
until the 1st of December 1838. 



HISTORY] 



CAPE COLONY 



2 39 



territory was invaded, and after nine months' fighting the Kaffirs 
were completely subdued, and a new treaty of peace concluded 
(on the 17th of September). By this treaty all the country 
as far as the river Kei was acknowledged to be British, and its 
inhabitants declared British subjects. A site for the seat of 
government was selected and named King Wiliam's Town. 

The Great Trek. — The action of Sir Benjamin D'Urban was not 
approved by the home government, and on the instruction of 
Lord Glenelg, secretary for the colonies, who declared that 
" the great evil of the Cape Colony consists in its magnitude," 
the colonial boundary was moved back to the Great Fish 
river, and eventually (in 1837) Sir Benjamin was dismissed from 
office. "The Kaffirs," in the opinion of Lord Glenelg, " had 
an ample justification for war; they had to resent, and endeav- 
oured justly, though impotently, to avenge a series of encroach- 
ments " (despatch of the 26th of December 1835). This attitude 
towards the Kaffirs was one of the many reasons given by the 
Trek Boers for leaving Cape Colony. The Great Trek, as it is 
called, lasted from 1836 to 1840, the trekkers, who numbered 
about 7000, founding communities with a republican form of 
government beyond the Orange and Vaal rivers, and in Natal, 
where they had been preceded, however, by British emigrants. 
From this time Cape Colony ceased to be the only civilized com- 
munity in South Africa, though for long it maintained its pre- 
dominance. Up to 1856 Natal was, in fact, a dependency of 
the Cape (see South Africa). Considerable trouble was 
caused by the emigrant Boers on either side of the Orange 
river, where the new comers, the Basutos and other Kaffir 
tribes, Bushmen and Griquas contended for mastery. The Cape 
government endeavoured to protect the rights of the natives. 
On the advice of the missionaries, who exercised great influence 
with all the non-Dutch races, a number of native states were 
recognized and subsidized by the Cape government, with the 
object — not realized — of obtaining peace on this northern 
frontier. The first of these " Treaty States " recognized was 
that of the Griquas of Griqualand West. Others were 
recognized in 1843 and 1844 — in the last-named year a treaty 
was made with the Pondoes on the eastern border. During 
this period the condition of affairs on the eastern frontier was 
deplorable, the government being unable or unwilling to afford 
protection to the farmers from the depredations of the Kaffirs. 
Elsewhere, however, the colony was making progress. The 
change from slave to free labour proved to be advantageous to 
the farmers in the western provinces; an efficient educational 
system, which owed its initiation to Sir John Herschel, the 
astronomer (who lived in Cape Colony from 1834 to 1838), 
was adopted; Road Boards were established and did much 
good work; to the staple industries — the growing of wheat, the 
rearing of cattle and the making of wine — was added sheep- 
raising; and by 1846 wool became the most valuable export 
from the country. The creation, in 1835, of a legislative council, 
on which unofficial members had seats, was the first step in 
giving the colonists a share in the government. 

The War of the Axe. — Another war with the Kaffirs broke out 
in 1846 and was known as the War of the Axe, from the murder 
of a Hottentot, to whom an old Kaffir thief was manacled, while 
being conveyed to Graham's Town for trial for stealing an axe. 
The escort was attacked by a party of Kaffirs and the Hottentot 
killed. The surrender of the murderer was refused, and war was 
declared in March 1846. The Gaikas were the chief tribe engaged 
in the war, assisted during the course of it by the Tambukies. 
After some reverses the Kaffirs were signally defeated on the 
7th of June by General Somerset on the Gwangu, a few miles 
from Fort Peddie. Still the war went on, till at length Sandili, 
the chief of the Gaikas, surrendered, followed gradually by the 
other chiefs; and by the beginning of 1848 the Kaffirs were again 
subdued, after twenty-one months' fighting. 

Extension of British Sovereignty. — In the last month of the 
war (December 1847) Sir Harry Smith reached Cape Town 
as governor of the colony, and with his arrival the Glenelg 
policy was reversed. By proclamation, on the 1 7th of December, 
he extended the frontier of the colony northward to the Orange 



river and eastward to the Keiskamma river, and on the 23rd, 
at a meeting of the Kaffir chiefs, announced the annexation of 
the country between the Keiskamma and the Kei rivers to the 
British crown, thus reabsorbing the territory abandoned by 
order of Lord Glenelg. It was not, however, incorporated with 
the Cape, but made a crown dependency under the name of 
British Kaffraria. For a time the Kaffirs accepted quietly the 
new order of things. The governor had other serious matters 
to contend with, including the assertion of British authority 
over the Boers beyond the Orange river, and the establishment 
of amicable relations with the Transvaal Boers. In the colony 
itself a crisis arose out of the proposal to make it a convict 
station. 

The Convict Agitation and Granting of a Constitution.- — In 1848 
a circular was sent by the 3rd Earl Grey, then colonial secretary, 
to the governor of the Cape (and to other colonial governors), 
asking him to ascertain the feelings of the colonists regarding the 
reception of a certain class of convicts, the intention being to 
send to South Africa Irish peasants who had been driven into 
crime by the famine of 1845. Owing to some misunderstanding, 
a vessel, the " Neptune, " was despatched to the Cape before the 
opinion of the colonists had been received, having on board 289 
convicts, among whom were John Mitchell, the Irish rebel, and 
his colleagues. When the news reached the Cape that this 
vessel was on her way, the people of the colony became violently 
excited; and they established an anti-convict association, by 
which they bound themselves to cease from all intercourse of 
every kind with persons in any way connected " with the landing, 
supplying or employing convicts." On the 19th of September 
1849 the " Neptune " arrived in Simon's Bay. Sir Harry Smith, 
confronted by a violent public agitation, agreed not to land the 
convicts, but to keep them on board ship in Simon's Bay till he 
received orders to send them elsewhere. When the home 
government became aware of the state of affairs orders were sent 
directing the " Neptune " to proceed to Tasmania, and it did so 
after having been in Simon's Bay for five months. The agitation 
did not, however, pass away without other important results, 
since it led to another movement, the object of which was to 
obtain a free representative government for the colony. This 
concession, which had been previously promised by Lord Grey, 
was granted by the British government, and, in 1854, a constitu- 
tion was established of almost unprecedented liberality. 

The Kaffir War of 1850-1853.— The anti-convict agitation had 
scarcely ceased when the colony was once again involved in war. 
The Kaffirs bitterly resented their loss of independence, and ever 
since the last war had been secretly preparing to renew the 
struggle. Sir Harry Smith, informed of the threatening attitude 
of the natives, proceeded to the frontier, and summoned Sandili 
and the other chiefs to an interview. Sandili refused obedience; 
upon which, at an assembly of other chiefs (October 1850), the 
governor declared him deposed from his chiefship, and appointed 
an Englishman, Mr Brownlee, a magistrate, to be temporary 
chief of the Gaika tribe. The governor appears to have believed 
that the measures he took would prevent a war and that Sandili 
could be arrested without armed resistance. On the 24th of 
December Col. Geo. Mackinnon, being sent with a small force with 
the object of securing the chief, was attacked in a narrow defile 
by a large body of Kaffirs, and compelled to retreat with some 
loss. This was the signal for a general rising of the Gaika tribe. 
The settlers in the military villages, which had been established 
along the frontier, assembled in fancied security to celebrate 
Christmas Day, were surprised, many of them murdered, and 
their houses given to the flames. Other disasters followed in 
quick succession. A small patrol of military was cut off to a man. 
The greater part of the Kaffir police deserted, many of them 
carrying off their arms and accoutrements. Emboldened by 
success, the enemy in immense force surrounded and attacked 
Fort Cox, where the governor was stationed with an inconsider- 
able force. More than one unsuccessful attempt was made to 
relieve Sir Harry; but his dauntless spirit was equal to the 
occasion. At the head of 150 mounted riflemen, accom- 
panied by Colonel Mackinnon, he dashed out of the fort, 



240 



CAPE COLONY 



[HISTORY 



and, through a heavy fire of the enemy, rode to King William's 
Town — a distance of 1 2 m. Meantime, a new enemy appeared. 
Some 900 of the Kat river Hottentots, who had in former wars 
been firm allies of the British, threw in their lot with their 
hereditary enemies — the Kaffirs. They were not without 
excuses. They complained that while doing burgher duty in 
former wars — the Cape Mounted Rifles consisted largely of 
Hottentot levies — they had not received the same treatment as 
others serving in defence of the colony, that they got no com- 
pensation for the losses they had sustained, and that they were 
in various ways made to feel they were a wronged and injured 
race. A secret combination was formed with the Kaffirs to take 
up arms to sweep the Europeans away and establish a Hottentot 
republic. Within a fortnight of the attack on Colonel Mackinnon 
the Kat river Hottentots were also in arms. Their revolt was 
followed by that of the Hottentots at other missionary stations; 
and part of the Hottentots of the Cape Mounted Rifles followed 
their example, including the very men who had escorted the 
governor from Fort Cox. But numbers of Hottentots remained 
loyal and the Fingo Kaffirs likewise sided with the British. 
