" The Life of Barlaam and Josaphat." The discovery of the 
Syriac version reopened the question of the date of the work. 
For although its title there corresponds to that given by the 
Armenian fragment and by Eusebius, it begins with a formal 
inscription to " the emperor Titus Hadrianus Antoninus 
Augustus Pius "; and Dr R. Harris is followed by Harnack and 
others in supposing that it was only through a careless reading 
of this inscription that the work was supposed to have been 
addressed to Hadrian. If this be the case, it must be placed 
somewhere in the long reign of Antoninus Pius (138-161). 
There are, however, no internal grounds for rejecting the thrice- 
attested dedication to Hadrian his predecessor, and the picture of 
primitive Christian life which is here found points to the earlier 
rather than to the later date. It is possible that the Apology was 
read to Hadrian in person when he visited Athens, and that the 
Syriac inscription was prefixed by a scribe on the analogy of 
Justin's Apology, a mistake being made in the amplification of 
Hadrian's name. 

The Apology opens thus: "I, king, by the providence of 
God came into the world; and having beheld the heaven, and 
the earth, and the sea, the sun and moon, and all besides, I 

1 Codex Venet. ann., 981, and Codex Etchmlaz. of the nth century. 



49 6 



ARISTIDES 



marvelled at their orderly disposition; and seeing the world and 
all things in it, that it is moved by compulsion, I understood that 
He that moveth and governeth it is God. For whatsoever 
moveth is stronger than that which is moved, and whatsoever 
governeth is stronger than that which is governed." Having 
briefly spoken of the divine nature in the terms of Greek philo- 
sophy, Aristides proceeds to ask which of all the races of men 
have at all partaken of the truth about God. Here we have the 
first attempt at a systematic comparison of ancient religions. 
For the purpose of his inquiry he adopts an obvious threefold 
division into idolaters, Jews and Christians. Idolaters, or, as he 
more gently terms them in addressing the emperor, " those who 
worship what among you are said to be gods," he subdivides 
into the three great world-civilizations — Chaldeans, Greeks and 
Egyptians. He chooses this order so as to work up to a climax 
of error and absurdity in heathen worship. The direct nature- 
worship of the Chaldeans is shown to be false because its objects 
are works of the Creator, fashioned for the use of men. They obey 
fixed laws and have no power over themselves. " The Greeks 
have erred worse than the Chaldeans . . . calling those gods who 
are no gods, according to their evil lusts, in order that having 
these as advocates of their wickedness they may commit adultery, 
and plunder and kill, and do the worst of deeds." The gods of 
Olympus are challenged one by one, and shown to be either vile or 
helpless, or both at once. A heaven of quarrelling divinities 
cannot inspire a reasonable worship. These gods are not even 
respectable; how can they be adorable ? " The Egyptians have 
erred worse than all the nations; for they were not content with 
the worships of the Chaldeans and Greeks, but introduced, 
moreover, as gods even brute beasts of the dry land and of the 
waters, and plants and herbs. . . . Though they see their gods 
eaten by others and by men, and burned, and slain, and rotting, 
they do not understand concerning them that they are no 
gods." 

Throughout the whole of the argument there is strong common- 
sense and a stern severity unrelieved by conscious humour. 
Aristides is engaged in a real contest; he strikes hard blows, and 
gives no quarter. He cannot see, as Justin and Clement see, 
a striving after truth, a feeling after God, in the older religions, 
or even in the philosophies of Greece. He has no patience with 
attempts to find a deeper meaning in the stories of the gods. 
" Do they say that one nature underlies these diverse forms ? 
Then why does god hate god, or god kill god ? Do they say 
that the histories are mythical ? Then the gods themselves 
are myths, and nothing more." 

The Jews are briefly treated. After a reference to their 
descent from Abraham and their sojourn in Egypt, Aristides 
praises them for their worship of the one God, the Almighty 
Creator; but blames them as worshipping angels, and observing 
" sabbaths and new moons, and the unleavened bread, and the 
great fast, and circumcision, and cleanness of meats." He then 
proceeds to the description of the Christians. He begins with a 
statement which, when purged of glosses by a comparison of 
the three forms in which it survives, reads thus: " Now the 
Christians reckon their race from the Lord Jesus Christ; and 
He is confessed to be the Son of God Most High. Having by the 
Holy Spirit come down from heaven, and having been born of 
a Hebrew virgin, He took flesh and appeared unto men, to call 
them back from their error of many gods ; and having completed 
His wonderful dispensation, He was pierced by the Jews, and 
after three days He revived and went up to heaven. And the 
glory of His coming thou canst learn, O king, from that which 
is called among them the evangelic scripture, if thou wilt read it. 
He had twelve disciples, who after His ascent into heaven went 
forth into the provinces of the world and taught His greatness; 
whence they who at this day believe their preaching are called 
Christians." This passage contains striking correspondences 
with the second section of the Apostles' Creed. The attribution 
of the Crucifixion to the Jews appears in several 2nd-century 
documents; Justin actually uses the words " He was pierced 
by you " in his dialogue with Trypho the Jew. 

" These are they," he proceeds, " who beyond all the nations 



of the earth have found the truth: for they know God as Creator 
and Maker of all things, and they worship no other god beside 
Him; for they have His commandments graven on their hearts, 

and these they keep in expectation of the world to come 

Whatsoever they would not should be done unto them, they do 
not to another. . . . He that hath supplieth him that hath not 
without grudging: if they see a stranger they bring him under 
their roof, and rejoice over him, as over a brother indeed, for they 
call not one another brethren after the flesh, but after the spirit. 
They are ready for Christ's sake to give up their own lives; for 
His commandments they securely keep, living holily and right- 
eously, according as the Lord their God hath commanded them, 
giving thanks to Him at all hours, over all their food and drink, 
and the rest of their good things." This simple description is 
fuller in the Syriac, but the additional details must be accepted 
with caution: for while it is likely that the monk who appro- 
priated the Greek may have cut it down to meet the exigencies 
of his romance, it is the habit of certain Syriac translators to 
elaborate their originals. After asserting that " this is the way 
of truth," and again referring for further information to " the 
writings of the Christians," he says: " And truly this is a new 
race, and there is something divine mingled with it." At the 
close we have a passage which is found only in the Syriac, but 
which is shown by internal evidence to contain original elements: 
" The Greeks, because they practise foul things . . . turn the 
ridicule of their foulness upon the Christians. " This is an allusion 
to the charges of Thyestean banquets and other immoralities, 
which the early apologists constantly rebut. "But the Christians 
offer up prayers for them, that they may turn from their error; 
and when one of them turns, he is ashamed before the Christians 
of the deeds that were done by him, and he confesses to God 
saying: ' In ignorance I did these things '; and he cleanses his 
heart, and his sins are forgiven him, because he did them in 
ignorance in former time, when he was blaspheming the true 
knowledge of the Christians." 

These last words point to the use in the composition of this 
Apology of a lost apocryphal work of very early date, The Preach- 
ing of Peter. This book is known to us chiefly by quotations 
in Clement of Alexandria: it was widely circulated, and at one 
time claimed a place within the Canon. It was used by the 
Gnostic Heracleon and probably by the unknown writer of the 
epistle to Diognetus. From the fragments which survive we 
see that it contained: (i) a description of the nature of God, 
which closely corresponds with Arist. i., followed by (2) a warning 
not to worship according to the Greeks, with an exposure of 
various forms of idolatry; (3) a warning not to worship according 
to the Jews — although they alone think they know the true God 
— for they worship angels and are superstitious about moons 
and sabbaths, and feasts, comp. Arist. xiv.; (4) a description 
of the Christians as being " a third race," and worshipping God 
in " a new way " through Christ; (5) a proof of Christianity 
from Jewish prophecy; (6) a promise of forgiveness to Jews 
and Gentiles who should turn to Christ, because they had sinned 
" in ignorance " in the former time. Now all these points, except 
the proof from Jewish prophecy, are taken up and worked out 
by Aristides with a frequent use of the actual language of 
The Preaching of Peter. A criterion is thus given us for the 
reconstruction of the Apology, where the Greek which we have 
has been abbreviated, and we are enabled to claim with certainty- 
some passages of the Syriac which might otherwise be suspected 
as interpolations. 

The style of the Apology is exceedingly simple. It is curiously 
misdescribed by Jerome, who never can have seen it, as " Apolo- 
geticum pro Christianis contextum philosophorum sententiis." 
Its merits are its recognition of the helplessness of the old 
heathenism to satisfy human aspiration after the divine, and 
the impressive simplicity with which it presents the unfailing 
argument of the lives of Christians. 

The student may consult The Apology of Aristides, Syriac text 
and translation (J. R. Harris), with an appendix containing the 
Greek text, Texts and Studies, i. 1 (1891), and a critical discussion 
by R. Seeberg in Zahn's Forschungen, v. 2 (1893) ; also, brief 



ARISTIPPUS— ARISTOCRACY 



497 



discussions by A. Harnack, Altchristl. Litteratur, i. 96 ff., Chronologie, 
i. 271 ff., where references to other writers may be found. The 
Epistola ad omnes philosophos and the Homily on the Penitent Thief, 
ascribed by Armenian tradition to Aristides, are really of 5th-century 
origin. Trans, of Apology by W. S. Walford (1909). (J. A. R.) 

ARISTIPPUS (c. 435-356 B.C.), Greek philosopher, the founder 
of the Cyrenaic school, was the son of Aritadas, a merchant of 
Cyrene. At an early age he came to Athens, and was induced 
to remain by the fame of Socrates, whose pupil he became. 
Subsequently he travelled through a number of Grecian cities, 
and finally settled in Cyrene, where he founded his school. 
His philosophy was eminently practical (see Cyrenaics). 
Starting from the two Socratic principles of virtue and happiness, 
he emphasized the second, and made pleasure the criterion 
of life. That he held to be good which gives the maximum 
of pleasure. In pursuance of this he indulged in all forms of 
external luxury. At the same time he remained thoroughly 
master of himself and had the self-control to refrain or to enjoy. 
Diogenes Laertius (ii. 65), quoting Phanias the peripatetic, says 
that he received money for his teaching, and Aristotle (Met. ii. 2) 
expressly calls him a sophist. Diogenes further states that he 
wrote several treatises, but none have survived. The five 
letters attributed to him are undoubtedly spurious. His 
daughter Arete, and her son Aristippus (urirpoSidaKTOS, " pupil 
of his mother "), carried on the school after his death. A 
cosmopolitan on principle, and a convinced disbeliever in the 
ethics of his day, he comes very near to modern empiricism and 
especially to the modern Hedonist school. 

ARISTO or Ariston, of Chios (c. 250 B.C.), a Stoic philosopher 
and pupil of Zeno. He differed from Zeno on many points, 
and approximated more closely to the Cynic school. He was 
eloquent (hence his nickname " the Siren ") but controversial 
in tone. He despised logic, and rejected the philosophy of nature 
as beyond the powers of man. Ethics alone he considered 
worthy of study, and in that only general and theoretical ques- 
tions. He rejected Zeno's doctrine of desirable things, inter- 
mediate between virtue and vice. There is only one virtue — ■ 
a clear, intelligent, healthy state of mind (hygeia). Aristo is 
frequently confounded with another philosopher of the same 
name, Ariston of Iulis, in Ceos, who, about 230 B.C., succeeded 
Lyco as scholarch of the Peripatetics. (See Stoics.) 

ARISTO, of Pella, a Jewish Christian writer of the middle of 
the 2nd century, who like Hegesippus (q.v.) represents a school 
of thought more liberal than that of the Pharisaic and Essene 
Ebionites to which the decline of Jewish Christianity mainly 
led. Aristo is cited by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl. iv. 6. 3) for a decree 
of Hadrian respecting the Jews, but he is best known as the 
writer of a Dialogue (between Papiscus, an Alexandrian Jew, 
and Jason, who represents the author) on the witness of prophecy 
to Jesus Christ, which was approvingly defended by Origen 
against the reproaches of Celsus. The little book was perhaps 
used by Justin Martyr in his own Dialogue with Trypho, and 
probably also by Tertullian and Cyprian, but it has not been 
preserved. 

The literature is cited in G. Kriiger's Early Christian Literature, 
pp. 104 f. 

ARISTOBULUS, of Cassandreia, Greek historian, accompanied 
Alexander the Great on his campaigns, of which he wrote an 
account, mainly geographical and ethnological. His work was 
largely used by Arrian. 

Miiller, Historicorum Graecorum Fragmenta; Schone, De Rerum 
Alexandri Magni Scriptoribus (1870). 

ARISTOBULUS, of Paneas (c. 160 B.C.), a Jewish philosopher 
of the Peripatetic school. Gercke places him in the time of 
Ptolemy X. Philometor (end of 2nd century), Anatolius in that 
of Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, but the middle of the 2nd century 
is more probable. He was among the earliest of the Jewish- 
Alexandrian philosophers whose aim was to reconcile and 
identify Greek philosophical conceptions with the Jewish religion. 
Only a few fragments of his work, apparently entitled Comment- 
aries on the Writings of Moses, are quoted by Clement, Eusebius 
and other theological writers, but they suffice to show its object. 
He endeavoured to prove that early Greek philosophers had 



borrowed largely from certain parts of Scripture, and quoted 
from Linus, Orpheus, Musaeus and others, passages which 
strongly resemble the Mosaic writings. These passages, however, 
were obvious forgeries. It is suggested that the name Aristo- 
bulus was taken from 2 Mace. i. 10. The hypothesis (Schlatter, 
Das neugefundene hebraische Stuck des Sirach) that it was from 
Aristobulus that the philosophy of Ecclesiasticus was derived 
is not generally accepted. 

See E. Schiirer, History of the Jewish People (Eng. trans., 1890- 
1891), ii. 237 seq. ; article Alexandrian School: Philosophy; 
and s.v. " Aristobulus " in Jewish Encyclopedia (Paul Wendland). 

ARISTOCRACY (Gr. apio-ros, best; Kparia, government), 
etymologically, the " rule of the best," a form of government 
variously defined and appreciated at different times and by 
different authorities. In Greek political philosophy, aristocracy 
is the government of those who most nearly attain to the ideal 
of human perfection. Thus Plato in the Republic advocates 
the rule of the " philosopher-king " who, in the social scheme, 
is analogous to Reason in the intellectual, and alone is qualified 
to control the active principles, i.e. the fighting population and 
the artisans or workers. Aristocracy is thus the government 
by those who are superior both morally and intellectually, and, 
therefore, govern directly in the interests of the governed, as 
a good doctor works for the good of his patient. Aristotle 
classified good governments under three heads — monarchy, 
aristocracy and commonwealth (xoXireia), to which he opposed 
the three perverted forms — tyranny or absolutism, oligarchy 
and democracy or mob-rule. The distinction between aristocracy 
and oligarchy, which are both necessarily the rule of the few, 
is that whereas the few apiaroi will govern unselfishly, the 
oligarchs, being the few wealthy ("plutocracy" in modern 
terminology), will allow their personal interests to predominate. 
While Plato's aristocracy might be the rule of the wise and 
benevolent despot, Aristotle's is necessarily the rule of the few. 

Historically aristocracy develops from primitive monarchy 
by the gradual progressive limitation of the regal authority. 
This process is effected primarily by the nobles who have hitherto 
formed the council of the king (an excellent example will be found 
in Athenian politics, see Archon), whose triple prerogative — 
religious, military and judicial— is vested, e.g., in a magistracy of 
three. These are either members of the royal house or the heads 
of noble families, and are elected for life or periodically by their 
peers, i.e. by the old royal council (cf. the Areopagus at Athens, 
the Senate at Rome), now the sovereign power. In practice 
this council depends primarily on a birth qualification, and thus 
has always been more or less inferior to the Aristotelian ideal; 
it is, by definition, an " oligarchy " of birth, and is recruited 
from the noble families, generally by the addition of emeritus 
magistrates. From the earliest times, therefore, the word 
" aristocracy " became practically synonymous with " oligarchy," 
and as such it is now generally used in opposition to democracy 
(which similarly took the place of Aristotle's 7ro\tT«ta), in which 
the ultimate sovereignty resides in the whole citizen body. 

The aristocracy of which we know most in ancient Greece 
was that of Athens prior to the reforms of Cleisthenes, but all 
the Greek city-states passed through a period of aristocratic 
or oligarchic government. Rome, between the regal and the 
imperial periods, was always more or less under the aristocratic 
government of the senate, in spite of the gradual growth of 
democratic institutions (the Lat. optimates is the equivalent 
of aptorot). There is, however, one feature which distinguishes 
these aristocracies from those of modern states, namely, that 
they were all slave-owning. The original relation of the slave- 
population, which in many cases outnumbered the free citizens, 
cannot always be discovered. But in some cases we know that 
the slaves were the original inhabitants who had been overcome 
by an influx of racially different invaders (cf. Sparta with its 
Helots) ; in others they were captives taken in war. Hence even 
the- most democratic states of antiquity were so far aristocratic 
that the larger proportion of the inhabitants had no voice in the 
government. In the second place this relation gave rise to a 
philosophic doctrine, held even by Aristotle, that there were 



4.98 



ARISTODEMUS— ARISTOMENES 



peoples who were inferior by nature and adapted to submission 
(4>bou dov\oi); such people had no "virtue" in the technical 
civic sense, and were properly occupied in performing the menial 
functions of society, under the control of the apicrrw. Thus, 
combined with the criteria of descent, civic status and the 
ownership of the land, there was the further idea of intellectual 
and social superiority. These qualifications were naturally, in 
course of time, shared by an increasingly large number of the 
lower class who broke down the barriers of wealth and education. 
From this stage the transition is easy to the aristocracy of 
wealth, such as we find at Carthage and later at Venice, in periods 
when the importance of commerce was paramount and mercantile 
pursuits had cast off the stigma of inferiority (in Gr. fiavavaia). 

It is important at this stage to distinguish between aristocracy 
and the feudal governments of medieval Europe. In these it is 
true that certain power was exercised by a small number of 
families, at the expense of the majority. But under this system 
each noble governed in a particular area and within strict 
limitations imposed by his sovereign; no sovereign authority 
was vested in the nobles collectively. 

Under the conditions of the present day the distinction 
of aristocracy, democracy and monarchy cannot be rigidly 
maintained from a purely governmental point of view. In no 
case does the sovereign power in a state reside any longer in an 
aristocracy, and the word has acquired a social rather than a 
political sense as practically equivalent to " nobility," though 
the distinction is sometimes drawn between the " aristocracy 
of birth " and the " aristocracy of wealth." Modern history, 
however, furnishes many examples of government in the hands 
of an aristocracy. Such were the aristocratic republics of Venice, 
Genoa and the Dutch Netherlands, and those of the free imperial 
cities in Germany, Such, too, in practice though not in theory, 
was the government of Great Britain from the Revolution of 
1689 to the Reform Bill of 1832. The French nobles of the 
Ancien Regime, denounced as " aristocrats " by the Revolution- 
ists, had no share as such in government, but enjoyed exceptional 
privileges (e.g. exemption from taxation). This privileged posi- 
tion is still enjoyed by the heads of the German mediatized 
families of the " High Nobility." In Great Britain, on the other 
hand, though the aristocratic principle is still represented in the 
constitution by the House of Lords, the "aristocracy" generally, 
apart from the peers, has no special privileges. 

ARISTODEMUS (8th century B.C.), semi-legendary ruler of 
Messenia in the time of the first Messenian War. Tradition 
relates that, after some six years' fighting, the Messenians were 
forced to retire to the fortified summit of Ithome. The Delphic 
oracle bade them sacrifice a virgin of the house of Aepytus. 
Aristodemus offered his own daughter, and when her lover, 
hoping to save her life, declared that she was no longer a maiden, 
he slew her with his own hand to prove the assertion false. 
In the thirteenth year of the war, Euphaes, the Messenian king, 
died. As he left no children, popular election was resorted 
to, and Aristodemus was chosen as his successor, though the 
national soothsayers objected to him as the murderer of his 
daughter. As a ruler he was mild and conciliatory. He was 
victorious in the pitched battle fought at the foot of Ithome 
in the fifth year of his reign, a battle in which the Messenians, 
reinforced by the entire Arcadian levy and picked contingents 
from Argos and Sicyon, defeated the combined Spartan and 
Corinthian forces. Shortly afterwards, however, led by unfavour- 
able omens to despair of final success, he killed himself on his 
daughter's tomb. Though little is known of his life and the 
chronology is uncertain, yet Aristodemus may fairly be regarded 
as a historical character. His reign is dated 731-724 B.C. by 
Pausanias, and this may be taken as approximately correct, 
though Duncker (History of Greece, Eng. trans., ii. p. 69) inclines 
to place it eight years later. 

Pausanias iv. 9-13 is practically our only authority. He followed 
as his chief source the prose history of Myron of Priene, an untrust- 
worthy writer, probably of the 2nd century B.C. ; hence a good deal of 
his story must be regarded as fanciful, though we cannot distinguish 
accurately between the true and the fictitious. (M. N. T.) 



ARISTOLOCHIA (Gr. apurros, best, Xoxeto, child-birth, in 
allusion to its repute in promoting child-birth), a genus of shrubs 
or herbs of the natural order Aristolochiaceae, often with climb- 
ing stems, found chiefly in the tropics. The flower forms a tube 
inflated at the base. A. Clematitis, birthwort, is a central and 
southern European species, found sometimes in England appar- 
ently wild on ruins and similar places, but not a native. A. 
Sipho, Dutchman's pipe, or pipe vine, is a climber, native in 
the woods of the Atlantic United States, and grown in Europe 
as a garden plant. The flower is bent like a pipe. 

A member of the same order is the asarabacca (Asarum euro- 
paeum), a small creeping herb with kidney-shaped leaves and 
small purplish bell-shaped flowers. It is a native of the woods 
of Europe and north temperate Asia, and occurs wild in some 
English counties. It was formerly grown for medicinal pur- 
poses, the underground stem having cathartic and emetic 
properties. An allied species, A. canadense, is the Canadian 
snake-root, a native of Canada and the Atlantic United States. 

ARISTOMENES, of Andania, the semi-legendary hero of the 
second Messenian war. He was a member of the Aepytid family, 
the son of Nicomedes (or, according to another version, of 
Pyrrhus) and Nicoteleia, and took a prominent part in stirring 
up the revolt against Sparta and securing the co-operation of 
Argos and Arcadia. He showed such heroism in the first en- 
counter, at Derae, that the crown was offered him, but he would 
accept only the title of commander-in-chief. His daring is 
illustrated by the story that he came by night to the temple of 
Athene " of the Brazen House " at Sparta, and there set up his 
shield with the inscription, "Dedicated to the goddess by 
Aristomenes from the Spartans." His prowess contributed 
largely to the Messenian victory over the Spartan and Corinthian 
forces at " The Boar's Barrow " in the plain of Stenyclarus, 
but in the following year the treachery of the Arcadian king 
Aristocrates caused the Messenians to suffer a crushing defeat 
at " The Great Trench." Aristomenes and the survivors retired 
to the mountain stronghold of Eira, where they defied the 
Spartans for eleven years. On one of his raids he and fifty of his 
companions were captured and thrown into the Caeadas, the 
chasm on Mt. Taygetus into which criminals were cast. Aristo- 
menes alone was saved, and soon reappeared at Eira: legend 
told how he was upheld in his fall by an eagle and escaped by 
grasping the tail of a fox, which led him to the hole by which 
it had entered. On another occasion he was captured during 
a truce by some Cretan auxiliaries of the Spartans, and was 
released only by the devotion of a Messenian girl who afterwards 
became his daughter-in-law. At length Eira was betrayed 
to the Spartans (668 B.C. according to Pausanias), and after a 
heroic resistance Aristomenes and his followers had to evacuate 
Messenia and seek a temporary refuge with their Arcadian 
allies. A desperate plan to seize Sparta itself was foiled by 
Aristocrates, who paid with his life for his treachery. Aristo- 
menes retired to Ialysus in Rhodes, where Damagetus, his 
son-in-law, was king, and died there while planning a journey 
to Sardis and Ecbatana to seek aid from the Lydian and Median 
sovereigns (Pausanias iv. 14-24). Another tradition represents 
him as captured and slain by the Spartans during the war 
(Pliny, Nat. Hist. xi. 187; Val. Maximus i. 8, 15; Steph. 
Byzant. s.v. 'Kvhavia). Though there seems to be no conclusive 
reason for doubting the existence of Aristomenes, his history, 
as related by Pausanias, following mainly the Messeniaca of 
the Cretan epic poet Rhianus (about 230 B.C.), is evidently 
largely interwoven with fictions. These probably arose after 
the foundation of Messene in 369 B.C. Aristomenes' statue 
was set up in the stadium there: his bones were fetched from 
Rhodes and placed in a tomb surmounted by a column (Paus. iv. 
32. 3, 6); and more than five centuries later we still find heroic 
honours paid to him, and his exploits a popular subject of song 
(ib. iv. 14. 7; 16. 6). 

For further details see Pausanias iv. ; Polyaenus ii. 31; G. Grote, 
History of Greece, pt. ii. chap. vii. ; M. Duncker, History of Greece, 
Eng. trans., book iv. chap, viii.; A. Holm, History of Greece, 
Eng. trans., vol. i. chap. xvi. (M. N. T.) 



ARISTONICUS— ARISTOPHANES 



499 



ARISTONICUS, of Alexandria, Greek grammarian, lived during 
the reigns of Augustus and Tiberius. He taught at Rome and 
wrote commentaries and grammatical treatises. His chief work 
was Hepl ~Zrmtuav 'Onrjpov, in which he gave an account of the 
" critical marks " inserted by Aristarchus in the margin of his 
recension of the text of the Iliad and Odyssey. Important frag- 
ments are preserved in the scholia of the Venetian Codex A of 
the Iliad. 

Friedlander, Aristonici TItpl "Z-qntiwr 'Wiabos reliquiae (1853) ; 
Carnuth, A ristonici Ilepi Sij/xetcov '0&vootia.s reliquiae (1869). 

ARISTOPHANES (c. 448-385 B.C. 1 ), the great comic dramatist 
and poet of Athens. His birth-year is uncertain. He is known 
to have been about the same age as Eupolis, and is said to have 
been " almost a boy " when his first comedy ( The Banqueters) 
was brought out in 427 B.C. His father Philippus was a land- 
owner in Aegina. Aristophanes was an Athenian citizen of the tribe 
Pandionis, and the deme Cydathene. The stories which made 
him a native ot Camirus in Rhodes* or of the Egyptian Naucratis, 
had probably no other foundation than an indictment for usur- 
pation of civic rights (£evlas ypacpri) which appears to have been 
more than once laid against him by Cleon. His three sons — ■ 
Philippus, Araros and Nicostratus — were all comic poets. 
Philippus, the eldest, was a rival of Eubulus, who began to ex- 
hibit in 376 B.C. Araros brought out two of his father's latest 
comedies — the Cocalus and the Aeolosicon, and in 375 began to 
exhibit works of his own. Nicostratus, the youngest, is assigned 
by Athenaeus to the Middle Comedy, but belongs, as is shown by 
some of the names and characters of his pieces, to the New 
Comedy also. 

Although tragedy and comedy had their common origin in 
the festivals of Dionysus, the regular establishment of tragedy 
at Athens preceded by half a century that of comedy. The Old 
Comedy may be said to have lasted about eighty years (470- 
390 B.C.), and to have flourished about fifty-six (460-404 B.C.). 
Of the forty poets who are named as having illustrated it the 
chief were Cratinus, Eupolis and Aristophanes. The Middle 
Comedy covers a period of about seventy years (390-320 B.C.), 
its chief poets being Antiphanes, Alexis, Theopompus and 
Strattis. The New Comedy was in vigour for about seventy years 
(320-250 B.C.) , having for its foremost representatives Menander, 
Philemon and Diphilus. The Old Comedy was possible only for 
a thorough democracy. Its essence was a satirical censorship, 
unsparing in personalities, of public and of private life — of 
morality, of statesmanship, of education, of literature, of social 
usage — in a word, of everything which had an interest for the 
city or which could amuse the citizens. Preserving all the free- 
dom of banter and of riotous fun to which its origin gave it an 
historical right, it aimed at associating with this a strong practical 
purpose — the expression of a democratic public opinion in such 
a form that no misconduct or folly could altogether disregard it. 
That licentiousness, that grossness of allusion which too often 
disfigures it, was, it should be remembered, exacted by the 
sentiment of the Dionysiac festivals, as much as a decorous 
cheerfulness is expected at the holiday times of other worships. 
This was the popular element. Without this the entertainment 
would have been found flat and unseasonable. But for a comic 
poet of the higher calibre the consciousness of a recognized power 
which he could exert, and the desire to use this power for the 
good of the city, must always have been the uppermost feelings. 
At Athens the poet of the Old Comedy had an influence analogous, 
perhaps, rather to that of the journalist than to that of the 
modern dramatist. But the established type of Dionysiac 
comedy gave him an instrument such as no public satirist has 
ever wielded. When Moliere wished to brand hypocrisy he 
could only make his Tartuffe the central figure of a regular 
drama, developed by a regular process to a just catastrophe. 
He had no choice between touching too lightly and using sus- 
tained force to make a profound impression. The Athenian 
dramatist of the Old Comedy worked under no such limitations 

1 [The dates in the text, as given by Jebb, are retained. 
According to R. G. Kent, Classical Review (April 1905, April 1906), 
Aristophanes was born in 455, and died in 375 B.C.] 



' of form. The wildest flights of extravagance were permitted 
to him. Nothing bound him to a dangerous emphasis or a 
wearisome insistence. He could deal the keenest thrust, or 
make the most earnest appeal, and at the next moment — if his 
instinct told him that it was time to change the subject — vary 
the serious strain by burlesque. He had, in short, an incom- 
parable scope for trenchant satire directed by sure tact. 

Aristophanes is for us the representative of the Old Comedy. 
But his genius, while it includes, also transcends the genius of 
the Old Comedy. He can denounce the frauds of a Cleon, he can 
vindicate the duty of Athens to herself and to her allies, with 
a stinging scorn and a force of patriotic indignation which 
makes the poet almost forgotten in the citizen. He can banter 
Euripides with an ingenuity of light mockery which makes it 
seem for the time as if the leading Aristophanic trait was the 
art of seeing all things from their prosaic side. Yet it is neither 
in the denunciation nor in the mockery that he is most individual. 
His truest and highest faculty is revealed by those wonderful 
bits of lyric writing in which he soars above everything that can 
move laughter or tears, and makes the clear air thrill with the 
notes of a song as free, as musical and as wild as that of the 
nightingale invoked by his own chorus in the Birds. The speech 
of Dikaios Logos in the Clouds, the praises of country life in the 
Peace, the serenade in the Ecclesiazusae, the songs of the Spartan 
and Athenian maidens in the Lysistrata, above all, perhaps, the 
chorus in the Frogs, the beautiful chant of the Initiated, — these 
passages, and such as these, are the true glories of Aristophanes. 
They are the strains, not of an artist, but of one who warbles for 
pure gladness of heart in some place made bright by the presence 
of a god. Nothing else in Greek poetry has quite this wild 
sweetness of the woods. Of modern poets Shakespeare alone, 
perhaps, has it in combination with a like richness and fertility 
of fancy. 

Fifty-four 2 comedies were ascribed to Aristophanes. Forty- 
three of these are allowed as genuine by Bergk. Eleven only 
are extant. These eleven form a running commentary on the 
outer and the inner life of Athens during thirty -six years. They 
may be ranged under three periods. The first, extending to 
420 B.C., includes those plays in which Aristophanes uses an 
absolutely unrestrained freedom of political satire. The second 
ends with the year 405. Its productions are distinguished from 
those of the earlier time by a certain degree of reticence and 
caution. The third period, down to 388 B.C., comprises two 
plays in which the transition to the character of the Middle 
Comedy is well marked, not merely by disuse of the parabasis, 
but by general self-restraint. 

I. First Period. (1) 425 B.C. The Acharnians. — Since the 
defeat in Boeotia the peace party at Athens had gained ground, 
and in this play Aristophanes seeks to strengthen their hands. 
Dicaeopolis, an honest countryman, is determined to make 
peace with Sparta on his own account, not deterred by the angry 
men of Acharnae, who crave vengeance for the devastation of 
their vineyards. He sends to Sparta for samples of peace ; and 
he is so much pleased with the flavour of the Thirty Years' 
sample that he at once concludes a treaty for himself and his 
family. All the blessings of life descend on him ; while Lamachus, 
the leader of the war party, is smarting from cold, snow and 
wounds. 

(2) 424 B.C. The Knights. — Three years before, in his Baby- 
lonians, Aristophanes had assailed Cleon as the typical dema- 
gogue. In this play he continues the attack. The Demos, or 
State, is represented by an old man who has put himself and 
his household into the Bands of a rascally Paphlagonian steward. 
Nicias and Demosthenes, slaves of Demos, contrive that the 
Paphlagonian shall be supplanted in their master's favour by 
a sausage-seller. No sooner has Demos been thus rescued than 
his youthfulness and his good sense return together. 

(3) 423 B.C. The Clouds (the first edition; a second edition 
was brought out in 422 B.C.). — This play would be correctly 
described as an attack on the new spirit of intellectual inquiry 
and culture rather than on a school or class. Two classes of 

2 [Or " forty-four " (reading p&' for v&' in Suidas).] 



5°° 



ARISTOPHANES 



thinkers or teachers are, however, specially satirized under the 
general name of " Sophist " (v. 331)—!. The Physical Philo- 
sophers — indicated by allusions to the doctrines of Anaxagoras, 
Heraclitus and Diogenes of Apollonia. 2. The professed 
teachers of rhetoric, belles lettres, &c, such as Protagoras and 
Prodicus. Socrates is taken as the type of the entire tendency. 
A youth named Pheidippides— obviously meant for Alcibiades 
— is sent by his father to Socrates to be cured of his dissolute 
propensities. Under the discipline of Socrates the youth becomes 
accomplished in dishonesty and impiety. The conclusion of the 
play shows the indignant father preparing to burn up the 
philosopher and his hall of contemplation. 

(4) 422 B.C. The Wasps. — This comedy, which suggested Les 
Plaideurs to Racine, is a satire on the Athenian love of litigation. 
The strength of demagogy, while it lay chiefly in the ecclesia, 
lay partly also in the paid dicasteries. From this point of 
view the Wasps may be regarded as supplementing the Knights. 
Philocleon (admirer of Cleon), an old man, has a passion for law- 
suits—a passion which his son, Bdelycleon (detester of Cleon) 
fails to check, until he hits upon the device of turning the house 
into a law-court, and paying his father for absence from the 
public suits. The house-dog steals a Sicilian cheese; the old 
man is enabled to gratify his taste by trying the case, and, by an 
oversight, acquits the defendant. In the second half of the 
play a change comes over the dream of Philocleon; from liti- 
gation he turns to literature and music, and is congratulated 
by the chorus on his happy conversion. 

(5) 421 B.C. 1 The Peace. — In its advocacy of peace with Sparta, 
this play, acted at the Great Dionysia shortly before the con- 
clusion of the treaty, continues the purpose of the Acharnians. 
Trygaeus, a distressed Athenian, soars to the sky on a beetle's 
back. There he finds the gods engaged in pounding the Greek 
states in a mortar. In order to stop this, he frees the goddess 
Peace from a well in which she is imprisoned. The pestle and 
mortar are laid aside by the gods, and Trygaeus marries one of 
the handmaids of Peace. 

II. Second Period. (6) 414 B.C. The Birds. — Peisthetaerus, an 
enterprising Athenian, and his friend Euelpides persuade the 
birds to build a city — •" Cloud-Cuckoo-borough " — in mid-air, 
so as to cut off the gods from men. The plan succeeds; the 
gods send envoys to treat with the birds; and Peisthetaerus 
marries Basileia, daughter of Zeus. Some have found in the 
Birds a complete historical allegory of the Sicilian expedition; 
others, a general satire on the prevalence at Athens of head- 
strong caprice over law and order; others, merely an aspiration 
towards a new and purified Athens— a dream to which the poet 
had turned from his hope for a revival of the Athens of the past. 
In another view, the piece is mainly a protest against the religious 
fanaticism which the incident of the Hermae had called forth. 

(7) 411 B.C. The Lysistrata. — This play was brought out during 
the earlier stages of those intrigues which led to the revolution 
of the Four Hundred. It appeared shortly before Peisander 
had arrived in Athens from the camp at Samos for the purpose 
of organizing the oligarchic policy. The Lysistrata expresses 
the popular desire for peace at any cost. As the men can do 
nothing, the women take the question into their own hands, 
occupy the citadel, and bring the citizens to surrender. 

(8) 41 1 B.C. The Thesmophoriazusae (Priestesses of Demeter). — 
This came out three months later than the Lysistrata, during 
the reign of terror established by the oligarchic conspirators, 
but before their blow had been struck. The political meaning 
of the play lies in the absence of political allusion. Fear silences 
even comedy. Only women and Euripides are satirized. Euri- 
pides is accused and condemned at the female festival of the 
Thesmophoria. 

(9) 405 B.C. The Frogs. — This piece was brought out just 
when Athens had made her last effort in the Peloponnesian War, 
eight months before the battle of Aegospotami, and about fifteen 
months before the taking of Athens by Lysander. It may be 
considered as an attempt to distract men's minds from public 
affairs. It is a literary criticism. Aeschylus and Euripides 

1 SeeE. Curtius, Hist, of Greece, iii. (Eng. trans, p. 275). 



were both lately dead. Athens is beggared of poets; and Diony- 
sus goes down to Hades to bring back a poet. Aeschylus and 
Euripides contend in the under-world for the throne of tragedy; 
and the victory is at last awarded to Aeschylus. 

III. Third Period. 2 (10) 393 B.C. 2 The Ecclesiazusde (women 
in parliament).— The women, disguised as men, steal into the 
ecclesia, and succeed in decreeing a new constitution. At this 
time the demagogue Agyrrhius led the assembly; and the play 
is, in fact, a satire on the general demoralization of public life. 

(11) 388 B.C. The Plutus (Wealth).— The first edition of 
the play had appeared in 408 B.C., being a symbolical represen- 
tation of the fact that the victories won by Alcibiades in the 
Hellespont had brought back the god of wealth to the treasure- 
chamber of the Parthenon. In its extant form the Plutus is 
simply a moral allegory. Chremylus, a worthy but poor man, 
falls in with a blind and aged wanderer, who proves to be the god 
of wealth. Asclepius restores eyesight to Plutus; whereupon 
all the just are made rich ahd all the unjust are reduced to 
poverty. 

Among the lost plays, the following are the chief of which anything 
is known:— 

1. The Banqueters (AairaXets), 427 B.C. — A satire on young 
Athens. A father has two sons; one is brought up in the good old 
school, another in the tricky subtleties of the new; and the contrast 
of results is the chief theme. 

2. The Babylonians, 426 B.C. — Under this name the subject -allies 
of Athens are represented as " Babylonians " — barbarian slaves, 
employed to grind in the mill. The oppression of the allies by the 
demagogues — a topic often touched elsewhere — was, then, the main 
subject of the piece, in which Aristophanes is said to have attacked 
especially the system of appointing to offices by lot. The comedy 
is memorable as opening that Aristophanic war upon Cleon which 
was continued in the Knights and the Wasps. 

The Merchantmen, The Farmers, The Preliminary Contest (Proagon), 
and possibly the Old Age {Geras), belonged to the First Period. The 
Geras is assigned by Silvern to 422 B.C., and is supposed to have been 
a picture of dotage similar to that in the Knights. A comedy called 
The Islands is conjectured to have dealt with the sufferings imposed 
by the war on the insular tributaries. The Triphales was probably 
a satire on Alcibiades; the Storks, on the tragic poet Patrocles. 

In the Aeolosicon — produced by his son Araros in 387 B.C.— 
Aristophanes probably parodied the Aeolus of Euripides. The 
Cocalus is thought to have been a parody of the legend, according 
to which a Sicilian king of that name slew Minos. 

A sympathetic reader of Aristophanes can hardly fail to per- 
ceive that, while his political and intellectual tendencies are well 
marked, his opinions, in so far as they colour his comedies, are 
too indefinite to reward, or indeed to tolerate, analysis. Aristo- 
phanes was a natural conservative. His ideal was the Athens 
of the Persian wars. He disapproved the policy which had made 
Athenian empire irksome to the allies and formidable to Greece ; 
he detested the vulgarity and the violence of mob-rule; he clave 
to the old worship of the gods; he regarded the new ideas of 
education as a tissue of imposture and impiety. How far he 
was from clearness or precision of view in regard to the intellectual 
revolution which was going forward, appears from the Clouds, 
in which thinkers and literary workers who had absolutely 
nothing in common are treated with sweeping ridicule as prophets 
of a common heresy. Aristophanes is one of the men for whom 
opinion is mainly a matter of feeling, not of reason. His imagina- 
tive susceptibility gave him a warm and loyal love for the 
traditional glories of Athens, however dim the past to which 
they belonged; a horror of what was ugly or ignoble in the 
present; a keen perception of what was offensive or absurd in 
pretension. The broad preferences and dislikes thus generated 
were enough not only to point the moral of comedy, but to make 
hint, in many cases, a really useful censor for the city. The 
service which he could render in this way was, however, only 
negative. He could hardly be, in any positive sense, a political 
or a moral teacher for Athens. His rooted antipathy to in- 
tellectual progress, while it affords easy and wide scope for his 
wit, must after all, lower his intellectual rank. The great minds 
are not the enemies of ideas. But as a mocker — to use the word 
which seems most closely to describe him on this side — he is 
incomparable for the union of subtlety with riot of the comic 
2 [The date is uncertain; others give 392 and 389.] 



ARISTOPHANES— ARISTOTLE 



501 



imagination. As a poet, he is immortal. And, among Athenian 
poets, he has it for his distinctive characteristic that he is inspired 
less by that Greek genius which never allows fancy to escape 
from the control of defining, though spiritualizing, reason, than 
by such ethereal rapture of the unfettered fancy as lifts Shake- 
speare or Shelley above it, — 

" Pouring his full heart 
In profuse strains of unpremeditated art.' 

Bibliography. — Editio princeps (Aldine, Venice, 1498), by 
Marcus Musurus (not including the Lysistrata and Thesmophoria- 
zusae); S. Bergler (ed. P. Burmann, 1760); Invernizi-Beck- 
Dindorf (1794-1834); I. Bekker (1829); H. A. Holden (expurgated 
text, 1868), with Onomasticon (new ed., 1902); F. H. M. Blaydes 
(1880-1893), and critical edition (1886); J. van Leeuwen (1893 
foil.); F. \V. Hall and E. M. Geldart (text, 1900-1901), with the 
fragment (from the Oxyrhynchus papyri) of a dialogue between two 
women concerning a leathern phallus, perhaps from Aristophanes. 
There is a complete edition of the valuable scholia by F. Diibner 
(1842, Didot series), with the anonymous biographies of the poet; 
of the Ravenna MS. by A. Martin (1883), and W. G. Rutherford 
(1896-1905). Among English translations mention may be made 
of those of \Y. J. Hickie (prose, in Bohn's Classical Library) ; (verse) 
J. Hookham Frere, five plays; T. Mitchell, four plays; and, above 
all, B. B. Rogers, a brilliant work of exceptional merit., There 
is a concordance to the plays and fragments by H. Dunbar (1883). 
On Aristophanes generally see H. Miiller-Strubing, Aristophanes 
und die historische Kritik (1873); the article by G. Kaibel in Pauly- 
Wissowa's Realencyclopiidie, ii. 1 (1896); A. Couat, Aristophane et 
I'ancienne comidie attique (1889); E. Deschanel, Etudes sur Aristo- 
phane (3rd ed., 1892) ; G. Dantu, Opinions et critiques a" Aristophane 
sur le mouvcment politique et intellectual a Athenes (Paris, 1907). 
For the numerous editions and translations of separate plays in 
English and other languages see the introductions to Blaydes's 
edition, and, for the literature, the introduction to W. J. M. Starkie's 
edition of the Wasps (1897) ; W. Engelmann, Scriptores Graeci (1880) ; 
and " Bericht iiber die Literatur der griechischen Komodie aus den 
Jahren 1892-1901 " in C. Bursian's Jahresbericht iiber die Fortschritte 
der classischen Altertumswissenschaft, cxvi. (1904). (R. C. J.) 

ARISTOPHANES, of Byzantium, Greek critic and grammarian, 
was born about 257 B.C. He removed early to Alexandria, where 
he studied under Zenodotus and Callimachus. At the age of 
sixty he was appointed chief librarian of the museum. He died 
about 185-180 B.C. Aristophanes chiefly devoted himself to 
the poets, especially Homer, who had already been edited by 
his master Zenodotus. He also edited Hesiod, the chief lyric, 
tragic and comic poets, arranged Plato's dialogues in trilogies, 
and abridged Aristotle's Nature of Animals. His arguments 
to the plays of Aristophanes and the tragedians are in great part 
preserved. His works on Athenian courtesans, masks and 
proverbs were the results of his study of Attic comedy. He 
further commented on the HLpaKes of Callimachus, a sort 
of history of Greek literature. As a lexicographer, Aristophanes 
compiled collections of foreign and unusual words and expressions, 
and special lists (words denoting relationship, modes of address). 
As a grammarian, he founded a scientific school, and in his 
Analogy systematically explained the various forms. He 
introduced critical signs — except the obelus; punctuation 
prosodiacal, and accentual marks were probably already in 
use. The foundation of the so-called Alexandrian " canon " 
was also due to his impulse*(Sandys, Hist. Class. Schol., ed. 1906, 
i. 129 f.). 

Nauck, Aristophanis Byzantii Grammatici Fragmenta (1848). 

ARISTOTLE (384-322 B.C.), the great Greek philosopher, was 
born at Stagira, on the Strymonic Gulf, and hence called " the 
Stagirite." Dionysius of Halicarnassus, in his Epistle on Demo- 
sthenes and Aristotle (chap. 5), gives the following sketch of his 
life: — Aristotle ('Apwtot£\t;s) was the son of Nicomachus, who 
traced back his descent and his art to Machaon,son of Aesculapius ; 
his mother being Phaestis, a descendant of one of those who carried 
the colony from Chalcis to Stagira. He was born in the 99th 
Olympiad in the archonship at Athens of Diotrephes (384-383), 
three years before Demosthenes. In the archonship of Polyzelus 
(367-366), after the death of his father, in his eighteenth year, he 
came to Athens, and having joined Plato spent twenty years with 
him. On the death of Plato (May 347) in the archonship of 
Theophilus (348-347) he departed to Hermias, tyrant of Atarneus, 
and, after three years' stay, during the archonship of Eubulus 



(345-344) he moved to Mitylene, whence he went to Philip of 
Macedon in the archonship of Pythodotus (343-342), and spent 
eight years with him as tutor of Alexander. After the death 
of Philip (336), in the archonship of Euaenetus (335-334), he 
returned to Athens and kept a school in the Lyceum for twelve 
years. In the thirteenth, after the death of Alexander (June 323) 
in the archonship of Cephisodorus (323-322), having departed to 
Chalcis, he died of disease (322), after a life of three-and-sixty 
years. 

I. Aristotle's Life 

This account is practically repeated by Diogenes Laertius in his 
Life of Aristotle, on the authority of the Chronicles of Apollodorus, 
who lived in the 2nd century B.C. Starting then from this 
tradition, near enough to the time, we can confidently divide 
Aristotle's career into four periods: his youth under his parents 
till his eighteenth year; his philosophical education under Plato 
at Athens till his thirty-eighth year; his travels in the Greek 
world till his fiftieth year; and his philosophical teaching in the 
Lyceum till his departure to Chalcis and his death in his sixty- 
third year. But when we descend from generals to particulars, 
we become less certain, and must here content ourselves with 
few details. 

Aristotle from the first profited by having a father who, being 
physician to Amyntas II., king of Macedon, and one of the 
Asclepiads who, according to Galen, practised their sons in dis- 
section, both prepared the way for his son's influence at the 
Macedonian court, and gave him a bias to medicine and biology, 
which certainly led to his belief in nature and natural science, 
and perhaps induced him to practise medicine, as he did, accord- 
ing to his enemies, Timaeus and Epicurus, when he first went to 
Athens. At Athens in his second period for some twenty years he 
acquired the further advantage of balancing natural science by 
metaphysics and morals in the course of reading Plato's writings 
and of hearing Plato's unwritten dogmas (cf. h> rots Xeyo/xkvois 
ayp&4>ois Soynaaiv, At. Physics, iv. 2, 209 b 15, Berlin ed.). 
He was an earnest, appreciative, independent student. The 
master is said to have called his pupil the intellect of the school 
and his house a reader's. He is also said to have complained 
that his pupil spurned him as colts do their mothers. Aristotle, 
however, always revered Plato's memory (Nic. Ethics, i. 6), 
and even in criticizing his master counted himself enough of a 
Platonist to cite Plato's doctrines as what "we say" (cf. {fraub, 
Metaphysics, i. 9, 990 b 16). At the same time, he must have 
learnt much from other contemporaries at Athens, especially from 
astronomers such as Eudoxus and Callippus, and from orators 
such as Isocrates and Demosthenes. He also attacked Isocrates, 
according to Cicero, and perhaps even set up a rival school of 
rhetoric. At any rate he had pupils of his own, such as Eudemus 
of Cyprus, Theodectes and Hermias, books of his own, especially 
dialogues, and even to some extent his own philosophy, while he 
was still a pupil of Plato. 

Well grounded in his boyhood, and thoroughly educated in his 
manhood, Aristotle, after Plato's death, had the further advan- 
tage of travel in his third period, when he was in his prime. The 
appointment of Plato's nephew, Speusippus, to succeed his uncle 
in the Academy induced Aristotle and Xenocrates to leave 
Athens together and repair to the court of Hermias. Aristotle 
admired Hermias, and married his friend's sister or niece, Pythias, 
by whom he had his daughter Pythias. After the tragic death of 
Hermias, he retired for a time to Mitylene, and in 343-342 was 
summoned to Macedon by Philip to teach Alexander, who was 
then a boy of thirteen. According to Cicero (De Oratore, iii. 41), 
Philip wished his son, then a boy of thirteen, to receive from 
Aristotle " agendi praecepta et eloquendi." Aristotle is said to 
have written on monarchy and on colonies for Alexander; and 
the pupil is said to have slept with his master's edition of Homer 
under his pillow, and to have respected him, until from hatred of 
Aristotle's tactless relative, Callisthenes, who was done to death 
in 328, he turned at last against Aristotle himself. Aristotle 
had power to teach, and Alexander to learn. Still we must not 
exaggerate the result. Dionysius must have spoken too strongly 



502 



ARISTOTLE 



when he says that Aristotle was tutor of Alexander for eight 
years; for in 340, when Philip went to war with Byzantium, 
Alexander became regent at home, at the age of sixteen. From 
this date Aristotle probably spent much time at his paternal house 
in his native city at Stagira as a patriotic citizen. Philip had 
sacked it in 348 : Aristotle induced him or his son to restore it, 
made for it a new constitution, and in return was celebrated in 
a festival after his death. All these vicissitudes made him a man 
of the world, drew him out of the philosophical circle at Athens, 
and gave him leisure to develop his philosophy. Besides 
Alexander he had other pupils: Callisthenes, Cassander, Marsyas, 
Phanias, and Theophrastus of Eresus, who is said to have had 
land at Stagira. He also continued the writings begun in his 
second period; and the Macedonian kings have the glory of 
having assisted the Stagirite philosopher with the means of 
conducting his researches in the History of Animals. 

At last, in his fourth period, after the accession of Alexander, 
Aristotle at fifty returned to Athens and became the head of 
his own school in the Lyceum, a gymnasium near the temple of 
Apollo Lyceius in the suburbs. The master and his scholars were 
called Peripatetics (ol e<c tov ivepi.ira.TOv), certainly from meet- 
ing, like other philosophical schools, in a walk (irepiiraTOs), and 
perhaps also, on the authority of Hermippus of Smyrna, from 
walking and talking there, like Protagoras and his followers as 
described in Plato's Protagoras (314 e, 315 c). Indeed, according 
to Ammonius, Plato too had talked as he walked in the Academy; 
and all his followers were called Peripatetics, until, while the 
pupils of Xenocrates took the name " Academics," those of 
Aristotle retained the general name. Aristotle also formed his 
Peripatetic school into a kind of college with common meals 
under a president (apxw) changing every ten days; while the 
philosopher himself delivered lectures, in which his practice, as his 
pupil Aristoxenus tells us (Harmonics, ii. init.), was, avoiding the 
generalities of Plato, to prepare his audience by explaining the 
subject of investigation and its nature. But Aristotle was an 
author as well as a lecturer; for the hypothesis that the Aris- 
totelian writings are notes of his lectures taken down by his pupils 
is contradicted by the tradition of their learning while walking, 
and disproved by the impossibility of taking down such compli- 
cated discourses from dictation. Moreover, it is clear that 
Aristotle addressed himself to readers as well as hearers, as in 
concluding his whole theory of syllogisms he says, " There would 
remain for all of you or for our hearers (■ko.vtwv iifiuv 77 tG>v 
r\Kpoap.kvuiv) a duty of according to the defects of the investiga- 
tion consideration, to its discoveries much gratitude " (Sophisti- 
cal Elenchi, 34, 184 b 6) . In short, Aristotle was at once a student, 
a reader, a lecturer, a writer and a book collector. He was, says 
Strabo (608), the first we knew who collected books and taught 
the kings in Egypt the arrangement of a library. In his library 
no doubt were books of others, but also his own. There we must 
figure to ourselves the philosopher, constantly referring to his 
autograph rolls; entering references and cross-references; cor- 
recting, rewriting, collecting and arranging them according to 
their subjects; showing as well as reading them to his pupils; 
with little thought of publication, but with his whole soul con- 
centrated on being and truth. 

On his first visit to Athens, during which occurred the fatal 
battle of Mantineia (362 B.C.), Aristotle had seen the confusion of 
Greece becoming the opportunity of Macedon under Philip; and 
on his second visit he was supported at Athens by the complete 
domination of Macedon under Alexander. Having witnessed the 
unjust exactions of a democracy at Athens, the dwindling 
population of an oligarchy at Sparta, and the oppressive selfish- 
ness of new tyrannies throughout the Greek world, he condemned 
the actual constitutions of the Greek states as deviations (irapeic- 
/Mereis) directed merely to the good of the government; and 
he contemplated a right constitution (opdi) iroXtreta), which 
might be either a commonwealth, an aristocracy or a monarchy, 
directed to the general good; but he preferred the monarchy of 
one man, pre-eminent in virtue above the rest, as the best of all 
governments (Nicomachean Ethics, viii. 10; Politics, T 14-18). 
Moreover, by adding (Politics, H 7, 1327 b 29-33) that the Greek 



race could govern the world by obtaining one constitution (fjuas 
Tvyx a - vov xoXireios), he indicated some leaning to a universal 
monarchy under such a king as Alexander. On the whole, 
however, he adhered to the Greek city-state (7ro\ts), partly 
perhaps out of patriotism to his own Stagira. Averse at all 
events to the Athenian democracy, leaning towards Macedonian 
monarchy, and resting on Macedonian power, he maintained 
himself in his school at Athens, so long as he was supported by the 
friendship of Antipater,,the Macedonian regent in Alexander's 
absence. But on Alexander's sudden death in 323, when Athens 
in the Lamian war tried to reassert her freedom against Antipater, 
Aristotle found himself in danger. He was accused of impiety 
on the absurd charge of deifying the tyrant Hermias; and, 
remembering the fate of Socrates, he retired to Chalcis in Euboea. 
There, away from his school, in 3 2 2 he died. (A tomb has been 
found in our time inscribed with the name of Biote, daughter of 
Aristotle. But is this our Aristotle ?) 

Such is our scanty knowledge of Aristotle's life, which seems 
to have been prosperous by inheritance and position, and happy 
by work and philosophy. His will, which was quoted by Her- 
mippus, and, as afterwards quoted by Diogenes Laertius, has 
come down to us, though perhaps not complete, supplies some 
further details, as follows: — Antipater is to be executor with 
others. Nicanor is to marry Pythias, Aristotle's daughter, and 
to take charge of Nicomachus his son. Theophrastus is to be one 
of the executors if he will and can, and if Nicanor should die to 
act instead, if he will, in reference to Pythias. The executors and 
Nicanor are to take charge of Herpyllis, " because," in the words 
of the testator, " she has been good to me," and to allow her to 
reside either in the lodging by the garden at Chalcis or in the 
paternal house at Stagira. They are to provide for the slaves, 
who in some cases are to be freed. They are to see after the 
dedication of four images by Gryllion of Nicanor, Proxenus, 
Nicanor's mother and Arimnestus. They are to dedicate an 
image of Aristotle's mother, and to see that the bones of his wife 
Pythias are, as she ordered, taken up and buried with him. On 
this will we may remark that Proxenus is said to have been 
Aristotle's guardian after the death of his father, and to have 
been the father of Nicanor;: that Herpyllis of Stagira was the 
mother of Nicomachus by Aristotle; and that Arimnestus was 
the brother of Aristotle, who also had a sister, Arimneste. Every 
clause breathes the philosopher's humanity. 

II. Development prom Platonism 

Turning now from the man to the philosopher as we know him 
best in his extant writings (see Aristoteles, ed. Bekker, Berlin, 
1 83 1, the pages of which we use for our quotations), we find, 
instead of the general dialogues of Plato, special didactic treatises, 
and a fundamental difference of philosophy, so great as to have 
divided philosophers into opposite camps, and made Coleridge 
say that everybody is born either a Platonist or an Aristotelian. 
Platonism is the doctrine that the individuals we call things only 
become, but a thing is always.one universal form beyond many 
individuals, e.g. one good beyond seeming goods; and that 
without supernatural forms, which are models of individuals, 
there is nothing, no being, no knowing, no good. Aristotelianism 
is the contrary doctrine: a thing is always a separate individual, 
a substance (owia), natural such as earth or supernatural such 
as God; and without these individual substances, which have 
attributes and universals belonging to them, there is nothing, to 
be, to know, to be good. Philosophic differences are best felt by 
their practical effects: philosophically, Platonism is a philosophy 
of universal forms, Aristotelianism a philosophy of individual 
substances: practically, Plato makes us think first of the super- 
natural and the kingdom of heaven, Aristotle of the natural and 
the whole world. 

So diametrical a difference could not have arisen at once. 
For, though Aristotle was different from Plato, and brought with 
him from Stagira a Greek and Ionic but colonial origin, a medical 
descent and tendency, and a matter-of-fact worldly kind of 
character, nevertheless on coming to Athens as pupil of Plato he 
must have begun with his master's philosophy. What then in 



ARISTOTLE 



5°3 



more detail was the philosophy which the pupil learnt from the 
master? When Aristotle at the age of eighteen came to Athens, 
Plato, at the age of sixty-two, had probably written all his 
dialogues except the Laws; and in the course of the remaining 
twenty years of his life and teaching, he expounded " the so- 
called unwritten dogmas " in his lectures on the Good. There 
was therefore a written Platonism for Aristotle to read, and an 
unwritten Platonism which he actually heard. 

To begin with the written philosophy of the Dialogues. 
Individual so-called things neither are nor are not, but become: 
the real thing is always one universal form beyond the many in- 
dividuals, e.g. the one beautiful beyond all beautiful individuals; 
and each form (i5ea) is a model which causes individuals by par- 
ticipation to become like, but not the same as, itself. Above 
all forms stands the form of the good, which is the cause of all 
other forms being, and through them of all individuals becoming. 
The creator, or the divine intellect, with a view to the form of the 
good, and taking all forms as models, creates in a receptacle 
(vtoSoxV, Plato, Timaeus, 49 a) individual impressions which 
are called things but really change and become without attaining 
the permanence of being. Knowledge resides not in sense but 
in reason, which, on the suggestion of sensations of changing 
individuals, apprehends, or (to be precise) is reminded of, real 
universal forms, and, by first ascending from less to more general 
until it arrives at the form of good and then descending from this 
unconditional principle to the less general, becomes science and 
philosophy, using as its method the dialectic which gives and 
receives questions and answers between man and man. Happi- 
ness in this world consists proximately in virtue as a harmony 
between the three parts, rational, spirited and appetitive, of our 
souls, and ultimately in living according to the form of the good; 
but there is a far higher happiness, when the immortal soul, 
divesting itself of body and passions and senses, rises from earth 
to heaven and contemplates pure forms by pure reason. Such 
in brief is the Platonism of the written dialogues; where the 
main doctrine of forms is confessedly advanced never as a dogma 
but always as a hypothesis, in which there are difficulties, but 
without which Plato can explain neither being, nor truth nor 
goodness, because throughout he denies the being of individual 
things. In the unwritten lectures of his old age, he developed 
this formal into a mathematical metaphysics. In order to 
explain the unity and variety of the world, the one universal form 
and the many individuals, and how the one good is the main 
cause of everything, he placed as it were at the back of his own 
doctrine of forms a Pythagorean mathematical philosophy. He 
supposed that the one and the two, which is indeterminate, and is 
the great and little, are opposite principles or causes. Identifying 
the form of the good with the one, he supposed that the one, by 
combining with the indeterminate two, causes a plurality of forms, 
which like every combination of one and two are numbers but 
peculiar in being incommensurate with one another, so that each 
form is not a mathematical number ((ia9iHia.Tt.Kds apiQuos), 
but a formal number (ei5?jTiK6s apidfios). Further he sup- 
posed that in its turn each form, or formal number, is a limited 
one which, by combining again with the indeterminate two, 
causes a plurality of individuals. Hence finally he concluded 
that the good as the one combining with the indeterminate 
two is directly the cause of all forms as formal numbers, and 
indirectly through them all of the multitude of individuals in 
the world. 

Aristotle knew Plato, was present at his lectures on the Good, 
wrote a report of them (7rept rayadov), and described this latter 
philosophy of Plato in his Metaphysics. Modern critics, who 
were not present and knew neither, often accuse Aristotle of mis- 
representing Plato. But Heracleides and Hestiacus, Speusippus 
and Xenocrates were also present and wrote similar reports. 
What is more, both Speusippus and Xenocrates founded their 
own philosophies on this very Pythagoreanism of Plato. Speu- 
sippus as president of the Academy from 347 to 339 taught that 
the one and the many are principles, while abolishing forms and 
reducing the good from cause to effect. Xenocrates as president 
from 339 onwards taught that the one and many are principles, 



only without distinguishing mathematical from formal numbers. 
Aristotle's critics hardly realize that for the rest of his life he 
had to live and to struggle with a formal and a mathematical 
Platonism, which exaggerated first universals and attributes 
and afterwards the quantitative attributes, one and many, into 
substantial things and real causes. 

Aristotle had no sympathy with the unwritten dogmas of 
Plato. But with the written dialogues of Plato he always 
continued to agree almost as much as he disagreed. Like Plato, 
he believed in real universals, real essences, real causes; he 
believed in the unity of the universal, and in the immateriality 
of essences; he believed in the good, and that there is a good of 
the universe; he believed that God is a living being, eternal and 
best, who is a supernatural cause of the motions and changes of 
the natural world, and that essences and matter are also necessary 
causes; he believed in the divine intelligence and in the immor- 
tality of our intelligent souls; he believed in knowledge going 
from sense to reason, that science requires ascent to principles 
and is descent from principles, and that dialectic is useful to 
science; he believed in happiness involving virtue, and in moral 
virtue being a control of passions by reason, while the highest 
happiness is speculative wisdom. All these inspiring meta- ' 
physical and moral doctrines the pupil accepted from his master's 
dialogues, and throughout his life adhered to the general spirit of 
realism without materialism pervading the Platonic philosophy. 
But what he refused to believe with Plato was that reality is not 
here, but only above; and what he maintained against Plato was 
that it is both, and that universals and forms, one and many, the 
good, are real but not separate realities. This deep metaphysical 
divergence was the prime cause of the transition from Platonism 
to Aristotelianism. 

Fragmenta Aristotelis. — Aristotle's originality soon asserted 
itself in early writings, of which fragments have come down to 
us, and have been collected by Rose (see the Berlin edition of 
Aristotle's works, or more readily in the Teubner series, which 
we shall use for our quotations). Many, no doubt, are spurious; 
but some are genuine, and a few perhaps cited in Aristotle's 
extant works. Some are dialogues, others didactic worksi A 
special interest attaches to the dialogues written after the manner 
of Plato but with Aristotle as principal interlocutor; and some 
of these, e.g. the wepl woii\tuiv and the Eudemus, seem to have 
been published. It is not always certain which were dialogues, 
which didactic like Aristotle's later works; but by comparing 
those which were certainly dialogues with their companions in 
the list of Aristotle's books as given by Diogenes Laertius, we 
may conclude with Bernays that the books occurring first in that 
list were dialogues. Hence we may perhaps accept as genuine 
the following: — 

1. Dialogues: — 

■Kepi bucaioovvqs : On justice. 

wepl woiiituiv. On poets (perhaps cited in Poetics, 15, 

1454 b 18, ev tois eic5e5op.evois Xoyois). 
wepl cJK\o(TO(j)las: On philosophy (perhaps cited in Physics, 

ii ; 2, 194 a 35-36). 
wepl iro~hiTiKov: A politician. 
wepl pTiTopi.Krjs fj TpvXKos: On rhetoric. 
wporptwriKov. An exhortation to philosophy (probably 

in dialogue, because it is the model of Cicero's dialogue 

Hortensivs). 
EuSjj/uos rj wepl tyvxvs'- On soul (perhaps cited in Be 

Anima, i. 4, 407 b 29, ical tois ev kolv<3 yevofxe.vQi.% 

X6"yoi.s). 

2. Didactic writings: — 

(1) Metaphysical: — : 

■Kepi rayadov: On the good (probably not a dialogue 

but a report of Plato's lectures). 
7rept iSe&v: On forms. 

(2) Political:— ' 

wepl fHa<n\eias: On monarchy. 
'A\e^avSpos rj vwep airo'uuav: On colonies. 



5°4 



ARISTOTLE 



(3) Rhetorical: — 

t«x^s tt)s QeodiKTov avvayoryv'- The Theodectea (cited 

in the Preface to the Rhetoric to Alexander (chap. i.)i 

and as to. 9eo5«weta in the Rhetoric (iii. 9, 1410 b2), 

rexy&v avvayaiyv'- A historical collection of arts of 

rhetoric. 

Difficult as it is to determine when Aristotle wrote all these 
various works, some of them indicate their dates. Gryllus, 
celebrated in the dialogue on rhetoric, was Xenophon's son 
who fell at Mantineia in 362; and Eudemus of Cyprus, lamented 
in the dialogue on soul, died in Sicily in 352. These then were 
probably written before Plato died in 347 ; and so probably were 
most of the dialogues, precisely because they were imitations of 
the dialogues of Plato. Among the didactic writings, the rapt 
rayadov would probably belong to the same time, because it was 
Aristotle's report of Plato's lectures. On the other hand, the 
two political works, if written for Alexander, would be after 
343-342 when Philip made Aristotle his tutor. So probably 
were the rhetorical works, especially the Theodectea; since both 
politics and oratory were the subjects which the father wanted 
the tutor to teach his son, and, when Alexander came to Phaselis, 
he is said by Plutarch (Alexander, 17) to have decorated the 
statue of Theodectes in honour of his association with the man 
through Aristotle and philosophy. On the whole, then, it seems 
as if Aristotle began with dialogues during his second period 
under Plato, but gradually came to prefer writing didactic 
works, especially in the third period after Plato's death, and 
in connexion with Alexander. 

These early writings show clearly how Aristotle came to depart 
from Plato. In the first place as regards style, though the 
Stagirite pupil Aristotle could never rival his Attic master in 
literary form, yet he did a signal service to philosophy in 
gradually passing from the vague generalities of the dialogue to 
the scientific precision of the didactic treatise. The philosophy 
of Plato is dialogue trying to become science; that of Aristotle 
science retaining traces of dialectic. Secondly as regards subject- 
matter, even in his early writings Aristotle tends to widen the 
scope of philosophic inquiry, so as not only to embrace meta- 
physics and politics, but also to encourage rhetoric and poetics, 
which Plato tended to discourage or limit. Thirdly as regards doc- 
trines, the surpassing interest of these early writings is that they 
show the pupil partly agreeing, partly disagreeing, with his master. 
The Eudemus and Protrepticus are with Plato; the dialogues 
on Philosophy and the treatise on Forms are against Plato. 

The Eudemus, on the soul (Fragmenta, 37 seq.), must have been in 
style and thought the most Platonic of all the Aristotelian writings. 
Plato's theory of the soul and its immortality was not the ordinary 
Greek view derived from Homer, who regarded the body as the self, 
the soul as a shade having a future state but an obscure existence, 
and stamped that view on the hearts of his countrymen, and affected 
Aristotle himself. After Homer there had come to Greece the new 
view that the soul is more real than the body, that it is imprisoned in 
the carcase as a prison-house, that it is capable of enjoying a happier 
life freed from the body, and that it can transmigrate from body to 
body. This strange, exotic, ascetic view was adopted by some 
philosophers, and especially by the Pythagoreans, and so transmitted 
to Plato. Aristotle in the Eudemus, written about 352, when he was 
thirty-two, also believed in it. Accordingly, the soul of Eudemus, 
when it left his body, is said to be returning home: the soul is made 
subject to the casting of lots, and in coming from the other world to 
this it is supposed to forget its former visions: but its disembodied 
life is regarded as its natural life in a better world. The Eudemus 
also contained a celebrated passage, preserved by Plutarch (Consolat. 
ad Apoll. 27; Fragm. 44). Here we can read the young Aristotle, 
writing in the form of the dialogue like Plato, avoiding hiatus like 
Isocrates, and justifying the praises accorded to his style by Cicero, 
Quintilian and Dionysius. It shows how nearly the pupil could 
imitate his master's dialogues, and still more how exactly he at first 
embraced his master's doctrines. It makes Silenus, captured by 
Midas, say that the best of all things is not to have been born, and 
the next best, having been born, to die as soon as possible. Nothing 
could be more like Plato's Phaedo, or more unlike Aristotle's later 
work on the Soul, which entirely rejects transmigration and allows 
the next life to sink into the background. 

Hardly less Platonic is the Protrepticus (Fragm. 50 seq.), an 
exhortation to philosophy which, according to Zeno the Stoic, was 
studied by his master Crates. It is an exhortation, whose point is 
that the chief good is philosophy, the contemplation of the universe 
by divine and immortal intellect. This is indeed a doctrine of 



Platonic ethics from which Aristotle in his later days never swerved. 
But in the Protrepticus he goes on to say that seeming goods, such 
as strength, size, beauty, honours, opinions, are iriere illusion 
(<riuay pa<j>ta), worthless and ridiculous, as we should know if we 
had Lyncean eyes to compare them with the vision of the eternal. 
This indifference to goods of body and estate is quite Platonic, but is 
very different from Aristotle's later ethical doctrine that such goods, 
though not the essence, are nevertheless necessary conditions of 
happiness. Finally, in the spirit of Plato's Phaedo and the dialogue 
Eudemus, the Protrepticus holds that the soul is bound to the sentient 
members of the body as prisoners in Etruria are bound face to face 
with corpses ; whereas the later view of the De Anima is that the soul 
is the vital principle of the body and the body the necessary organ of 
the soul. 

Thus we find that at first, under the influence of his master, 
Aristotle held somewhat ascetic views on soul and body and on goods 
of body and estate, entirely opposed both in psychology and in ethics 
to the moderate doctrines of his later writings. This perhaps is one 
reason why Cicero, who had Aristotle's early writings, saw no differ- 
ence between the Academy and the Peripatetics (A cad. Post, i. 4, 
17-18). 

On the other hand, the dialogue on Philosophy (wepl <j>i\oao4>ias, 
Fragm. I seq.) strikingly exhibits the origin of Aristotle's divergence 
from Platonism, and that too in Plato's lifetime. The young son 
of a doctor from the colonies proved too fond of this world to 
stomach his Athenian master's philosophy of the supernatural. 
Accordingly in this dialogue he attacked Plato's fundamental 
position, both in its written and in its unwritten presentment, as a 
hypothesis both of forms and of formal numbers. First, he attacked 
the hypothesis of forms (rf/v tQv iSt&v vroB&nv, Fragm. 8) , exclaiming 
in his dialogues, according to Proclus, that he could not sympathize 
with the dogma even if it should be thought that he was opposing 
it out of contentiousness; while Plutarch says that his attacks on 
the forms by means of his exoteric dialogues were thought by some 
persons more contentious than philosophical, as presuming to disdain 
Plato's philosophy : so far was he, says Plutarch, from following it. 
Secondly, in the same dialogue (Fragm. 9), according to Syrianus, 
he disagreed with the hypothesis of formal numbers (toU eldriTucoU 
&pt0noU). If, wrote Aristotle, the forms are another sort of 
number, not mathematical, there would be no understanding of it. 
Lastly, in the same dialogue (Fragm. 18 seq.) he revealed his 
emphasis on nature by contending that the universe is uncreate and 
indestructible. According to Plato, God caused the natural world to 
become: according to Aristotle it is eternal. This eternity of the 
world became one of his characteristic doctrines, and subsequently 
enabled him to explain how essences can be eternal without being 
separate from this world which is also eternal (cf. Metaph. Z 8), 
Thus early did Aristotle begin, even in Plato's lifetime, to oppose 
Plato's hypothesis of supernatural forms, and advance his own 
hypothesis of the eternity of the world. 

He made another attack on Platonism in the didactic work vtpl 
IS(Qv) (Fragm. 185 seq.), contending that the Platonic arguments 
prove not forms (ISiai) but only things common (tA. naiva): 
Here, according to Alexander the commentator, he first brought 
against Plato the argument of" the third man " (6 rpiros fij/tfp&nros) ; 
that, if there is the form, one man beyond many men, there will be 
a third man predicated of both man and men, and a fourth predi- 
cated of all three, and so on to infinity (Fragm. 188). Here, too, he 
examined the hypothesis of Eudoxus that things are caused by 
mixture of forms, a hypothesis which formed a kind of transition to 
his own later views, but failed to satisfy him on account of its diffi- 
culties. Lastly, in the didactic work vtpiT&yadov (Fragm. 27 seq.), 
containing his report of Plato's lectures on the Good, he was dealing 
with the same mathematical metaphysics which in his dialogue on 
Philosophy he criticized for converting forms into formal numbers. 
Aristoxenus, at the beginning of the second book of the Harmonics, 
gives a graphic account of the astonishment caused by these lectures 
of Plato, and of their effect oh the lectures of Aristotle. In contend- 
ing, as Aristotle's pupil, that a teacher should begin by proposing his 
subject, he tells us how Aristotle used to relate that most of Plato's 
hearers came expecting to get something about human goods and 
happiness, but that when the discourses turned out to be all about 
mathematics, with the conclusion that good is one, it appeared to 
them a paradox, which some despised and others condemned. The 
reason, he adds, was that they were not informed by Plato before- 
hand; and for this very reason, Aristotle, as he told Aristoxenus 
himself, used to prepare his hearers by informing them of the nature 
of the subject. From this rare personal reminiscence we see at a 
glance that the mind of Plato and the mind of Aristotle were so 
different, that their philosophies must diverge ; the one towards the 
supernatural, the abstract, the discursive, and the other towards the 
natural, the substantial, the scientific. 

Aristotle then even in the second period of his life, while Plato 
was still alive, began to differ from him in metaphysics. He rejected 
the Platonic hypothesis of forms, and affirmed that they are not 
separate but common, without however as yet having advanced to a 
constructive metaphysics of his own; while at the same time, after 
having at first adopted his master's dialectical treatment of meta- 
physical problems, he soon passed from dialogues to didactic works, 
which had the result of separating metaphysics from dialectic. The 



ARISTOTLE 



505 



all-important consequence of this first departure from Platonism 
was that Aristotle became and remained primarily a metaphysician. 
After Plato's death, coming to his third period he made a further 
departure from Platonism in his didactic works on politics and 
rhetoric, written in connexion with Alexander and Theodectes. Those 
on politics (Fragm. 646-648) were designed to instruct Alexander 
on monarchy and on colonization; and in them Aristotle agreed 
with Plato in assigning a moral object to the state, but departed from 
him by saying that a king need not be a philosopher, as Plato had 
said in the Republic, but does need to listen to philosophers. Still 
more marked was his departure from Plato as regards rhetoric. 
Plato in the Gorgias, (501 a) had contended that rhetoric is not an 
art but an empirical practice (rpi/Sij «ai epireipla) ; Aristotle in the 
Gryllus (Fragm. 68-69), written in his second period, took according 
to Quintilian a similar view. But in his third period, in the 
Theodectea (Fragm. 125 seq.), rhetoric is treated as an art, and is 
laid out somewhat in the manner of his later Art of Rhetoric ; while 
he also showed his interest in the subject by writing a history of 
other arts of rhetoric called rexv&v o-vvayoiyri (Fragm. 136 seq.). 
Further, in treating rhetoric as an art in the Theodectea he was forced 
into a conclusion, which carried him far beyond Plato's rigid notions 
of proof and of passion : he concluded that it is the work of an orator 
to use persuasion, and to arouse the passions (to to ira$i)8tayeipaL'), 
e.g. anger and pity (ib. 133-134). Nor could he treat poetry as he is 
said to have done without the same result. 

On the whole then, in his early dialectical and didactic writings, 
of which mere fragments remain, Aristotle had already diverged 
from Plato, and first of all in metaphysics. During his master's 
life, in the second period of his own life, he protested against 
the Platonic hypothesis of forms, formal numbers and the 
one as the good, and tended to separate metaphysics from 
dialectic by beginning to pass from dialogues to didactic works. 
After his master's death, in the third period of his own life, and 
during his connexion with Alexander, but before the final con- 
struction of his philosophy into a system, he was tending to write 
more and more in the didactic style; to separate from dialectic, 
not only metaphysics, but also politics, rhetoric and poetry; to 
admit by the side of philosophy the arts of persuasive language; 
to think it part of their legitimate work to rouse the passions; and 
in all these ways to depart from the ascetic rigidity of the philo- 
sophy of Plato, so as to prepare for the tolerant spirit of his own, 
and especially for his ethical doctrine that virtue consists not in 
suppressing but in moderating almost all human passions. In 
both periods, too, as we shall find in the sequel, he was already 
occupied in composing some of the extant writings which were 
afterwards to form parts of his final philosophical system. But 
as yet he had given no sign of system, and — what is surprising — 
no trace of logic. Aristotle was primarily a metaphysician 
against Plato; a metaphysician before he was a logician; a 
metaphysician who made what he called primary philosophy 
(■KpoiTT) <\>Cko<io4>ia.) the starting-point of his philosophical 
development, and ultimately of his philosophical system. 

III. Composition or his Extant Works 
The system which was taught by Aristotle at Athens in the 
fourth period of his life, and which is now known as the Aristo- 
telian philosophy, is contained not in fragments but in extant 
books. It will be best then to give at once a list of these extant 
works, following the traditional order in which they have long 
been arranged, and marking with a dagger (t) those which are 
now usually considered not to be genuine, though not always 
with sufficient reason. 

A. Logical 

1. Ka-r^yopiai: Categoriae: On simple expressions signifying 
different kinds of things and capable of predication [probably an 
early work of Aristotle, accepting species and genera as "secondary 
substances " in deference to Plato's teaching]. 

2. irepl 'EpM'ji'tias: De interpretations. On language as 
expression of mind, and especially on the enunciation or assertion 
(a-Kixftavait, iTa/xicTucds X670S) [rejected by Andronicus according 
to Alexander; but probably an early work of Aristotle, based on 
Plato's analysis of the sentence into noun and verb]. 

3. 'AvaXuriKo irporepa : Analytica Priora: On syllogism, with 
a view to demonstration. 

4. 'KvaKvTiKa. vartpa.: Analytica Posteriora: On demonstration, 
or demonstrative or scientific syllogism ( air6Sei£is, avoSeiKTiKos ij 
tTUOTijuovLKos auWoyt.o-p.6s). 

5. Totiko: Topica: On dialectical syllogism (SioXe/cTiicos 
<n>X\o7«rMos), so called from consisting mainly of commonplaces 
(riiroi, loci), or general sources of argument. 



6. 2o#io-TiKo2 eXeYx ' : Sophistici Elenchi: On sophistic 
(o-o0io-tik6s) or eristic syllogism (ipioTiKos trvWoyurtios), so called 
from the fallacies used by sophists in refutation (eXeYx°s) of 
their opponents. 

[Numbers 1-6 were afterwards grouped together as the Organon.] 

B'. Physical 

1. *L>(TtKT> d/cpdao-ts: Physica Auscultaiio: On Nature as cause 
of change, and the general principles of natural science. 

2. wept obpavov : De coelo: On astronomy, &c. 

3. irepl ytvkaeois Kal <p$opas: De generalione et corruptione: 
On generation and destruction in general. 

4. MereapoXoyiKa : Meteorologica : On sublunary changes. 

5.f irepl Kotrpov: De mundo: On the universe. [Supposed by Zeller 
to belong to the latter half of the 1st century B.C.] 

6. irepl \pvxns- De anima: On soul, conjoined with organic 
body. 

7. irepl aiaBrjaeus Kal aiadifT&v. De sensu et sensili: On sense 
and objects of sense. 

8. irepl p,vr)pris Kal avapvqaeas: De memoria et reminiscentia: 
On memory and recollection. 

9. irtpl Bxvou k<h kypi]y6patuss : De somno et vigilia : On sleep 
and waking. 

10. irepl 'evvirvlwv : De insomniis : On dreams. 

11. irepl ttjs Ka$' virvov pavriKijs, or Irepl paVTIKTJS T7JS ev TOtS 

virvois: De divinatione per somnum : On prophecy in sleep. 

12. Tepl pLaKpofiioTrjTos not (3paxvpi6rijTos: De longitudine et brevitate 
vitae: On length and shortness of life. 

13. irepl peoTrjTos Kal yijpais Kal irepl ^oitjs Kal Gavarov: De juventute et 
seneclute et de vita et morte: On youth and age, and on life and death. 

14. irtpl avairmijs: De respiratione: On respiration. 
[Numbers 7-14 are grouped together as Parva naluralia.] 

I5.f?rep£ irvebparos: De spiritu: On innate spirit (spiritus 
vitalis). 

16. irepl ra £t£a Itrropiai: Historia animalium: Description of 
facts about animals, i.e. their organs, &c. 

17. irepl fawn iiopiwv. De partibus animalium: Philosophy of 
the causes of the facts about animals, i.e. their functions. 

18. f irepl tyuv Kivqoews: De animalium motione: On the motion 
of animals. [Ascribed to the school of Theophrastus and Strato 
by Zeller.] 

19. irepl f^wK iropeias : De animalium incessu : On the going of 
animals. 

20. TrepJ f<jScoc yeveo-ews: De animalium generations: On the 
generation of animals. 

2l.f irepl xpup-bToiv : De coloribus: On colours. [Ascribed to the 
school of Theophrastus and Strato by Zeller.] 

22.f irepl aKovoTur: De audibilibus. [Ascribed to the school of 
Theophrastus and Strato by Zeller.] 

23. f &vo-ioyvwpoviKa : Physiognomonica: On physiognomy, and 
the sympathy of body and soul. 

24.| irepl <j>vTtiv : De plantis : On plants. [Not Aristotle's work 
on this subject.] 

25. t irepl Bavpaaiav aKovapaToiv : De mirabilibus auscultationibus : 
On phenomena chiefly connected with natural history. 

26.f "illrixapiKa: Quaestiones mechanicae: Mechanical questions. 

C. Miscellaneous 

I.f IIpo/3Xi7Mo.Ta : Problemata: Problems on various subjects 
[gradually collected by the Peripatetics from partly Aristotelian 
materials, according to Zeller]. 

2.f irepl aropLuv ypap.y.&v: De insecabilibus lineis: On indivisible 
lines. [Ascribed to Theophrastus, or his time, by Zeller.] 

3.f avepuv diveis Kal irpoai)yoplai: Ventorum situs et appella- 
tiones : A fragment on the winds. 

4-| irepl 'B.evotpavovs, irepl Zijycavos, irepl Topyiov: De Xenophane y 
Zenone et Gorgia : On Xenophanes, Zeno and Gorgias. 

D. Primary Philosophy or Theology or Wisdom 

Ta peri, to 0wnKa: Metaphysica: On being as being and its 
properties, its causes and principles, and on God as the motive motor 
of the world. 

E. Practical 

1. 'H0ikA NiKopaxeia : Ethica Nicomachea: On the good of the 
individual. 

2.f 'HOiKa peyaXa : Magna Moralia: On the same subject. 
[According to Zeller, an abstract of the Nicomachean and the 
Eudemian Ethics, tending to follow the latter, but possibly an early 
draft of the Nicomachean Ethics.] 

3.f 'H$iKa TSiSiipLa or irpds J&iiS-qpov : Ethica ad Eudentum : On 
the same subject. [Usually supposed to be written by Eudemus, but 
possibly an early draft of the Nicomachean Ethics.] 

4.| irepl aperdv Kal Kauav : De virtutibus et vitiis : On virtues 
and vices. [An eclectic work of the 1st century B.C., half Academic 
and half Peripatetic, according to Zeller.] 

5. IloXiriKd: De re publica: Politics, on the good of the state. 

6.f OUovoptKa : De cura rei familiaris : Economics, on the good 
of the family. [The first book a work of the school of Theophrastus 
or Eudemus, the second later Peripatetic, according to Zeller.] 



506 



ARISTOTLE 



F. Art 



i. rkx v n 'Tiyropudi: Ars rhetorical On the art of oratory. 

2. f 'y-nropiKri irpbs : 'AXefapSpop : Rhetorica ad Alexandrum : On 
the same subject. [Ascribed to Anaximenes of Lampsacus (fl. 365, 
Diodorus xv. 76) by Petrus Victorius, and Spengel, but possibly an 
earlier rhetoric by Aristotle.] 

3. ntpl UoiriTiKTjs: De poetica: On the art of poetry [fragmentary]. 

G. Historical 
'k8i\valav ToXirela: De republica Atheniensium : On the Con- 
stitution of Athens. [One of the HoKirtiai, said to have been 
158 at least, the genuineness of which is attested by the defence 
which Polybius (xii.) makes of Aristotle's history of the Epizephyrian 
Locrians against Timaeus, Aristotle's contemporary and critic. 
Hitherto, only fragments have come down to us (cf. Fragm. 381-603). 
The present treatise, without however its beginning and end, written 
on a papyrus discovered in Egypt and now in the British Museum, 
was first edited by F. G. Kenyon 1890-1891.] (See the article 
Constitution of Athens.) 

The Difficulty. — The genuineness of the Aristotelian works, as 
Leibnitz truly said {De Stilo Phil. Nizolii, xxx.), is ascertained 
by the conspicuous harmony of their theories, and by their 
uniform method of swift subtlety. Nevertheless difficulties lurk 
beneath their general unity of thought and style. In style they 
are not quite the same: now they are brief and now diffuse: 
sometimes they are carelessly written, sometimes so carefully as 
to avoid hiatus, e.g. the Metaphysics A, and parts of the De 
Coelo and Parva Naturalia, which in this respect resemble the 
fragment quoted by Plutarch from the early dialogue Eudemus 
(Fragm. 44). They aiso appear to contain displacements, 
interpolations, prefaces such as that to the Meteor ologica, and 
appendices such as that to the Sophistical Elenchi, which may 
have been added. An Aristotelian work often goes on continu- 
ously at first, and then becomes disappointing by suddenly 
introducing discussions which break the connexion or are even 
inconsistent with the beginning; as in the Posterior Analytics, 
which, after developing a theory of demonstration from necessary 
principles, suddenly makes the admission, which is also the main 
theory of science in the Metaphysics, that demonstration is about 
either the necessary or the contingent, from principles either 
necessary or contingent, only not accidental. At times order is 
followed by disorder, as in the Politics. Again, there are re- 
petitions and double versions, e.g. these of the Physics, vii., 
and those of the De Anima, ii., discovered by Torstrik; or two 
discussions of the same subject, e.g. of pleasure in the Nico- 
machean Ethics, vii. and x.; or several treatises on the same 
subject very like one another, viz. the Nicomachean Ethics, the 
Eudemian Ethics and the Magna Moralia; or, strangest of all, 
a consecutive treatise and other discourses amalgamated, e.g. in 
the Metaphysics, where a systematic theory of being running 
through several books (B, T, E, Z, H, G) is preceded, interrupted 
and followed by other discussions of the subject. Further, there 
are frequently several titles of the same work or of different 
parts of it. Sometimes diagrams (8iay pa<f>al or VTroypatpai) are 
mentioned, and sometimes given (e.g. in De Interp. 13, 22 a 22; 
Nicomachean Ethics, ii. 7; Eudemian Ethics, ii. 3), but sometimes 
only implied (e.g. in Hist. An. i. 17, 497 a 32; iii. 1, 510 a 30; 
iv. 1, 525 a 9). The different works are more or less connected by 
a system of references, which give rise to difficulties, especially 
when they are cross-references: for example, the Analytics and 
Topics quote one another: so do the Physics and the Meta- 
physics; the De Vita and De Respiratione and the De Partibus 
Animalium; this latter treatise and the De Animalium Incessu; 
the De Interpretation and the De Anima. A late work may 
quote an earlier; but how, it may be asked, can the earlier 
reciprocally quote the later ? 

Besides these difficulties in and between the works there are 
others beyond them. On the one hand, there is the curious story 
given partly by Strabo (608-609) and partly in Plutarch's Sulla 
(c. 26), that Aristotle's successor Theophrastus left the books 
of both to their joint pupil, Neleus of Scepsis, where they were 
hidden in a cellar, till in Sulla's time they were sold to Apellicon, 
who made new copies, transferred after Apellicon's death by 
Sulla to Rome, and there edited and published by Tyrannio and 
Andronicus. On the other hand, there are the curious and 



puzzling catalogues of Aristotelian books, one given by Diogenes 
Laertius, another by an anonymous commentator (perhaps 
Hesychius of Miletus) quoted in the notes of Gilles Menage on 
Diogenes Laertius, and known as " Anonymus Menagii," and a 
third copied by two Arabian writers from Ptolemy, perhaps King 
Ptolemy Philadelphus, son of the founder of the library at 
Alexandria. (See Rose, Fragm. pp. 1-22.) But the extraordinary 
thing is that, without exactly agreeing among themselves, the 
catalogues give titles which do not agree well with the Aristotelian 
works as we have them. A title in some cases suits a given work 
or a part of it; but in other cases there are no titles for works 
which exist, or titles for works which do not exist. 

These difficulties are complicated by various hypotheses 
concerning the composition of the Aristotelian works. Zeller 
supposes that, though Aristotle may have made preparations for 
his philosophical system beforehand, still the properly didactic 
treatises composing it almost all belong to the last period of his 
life, i.e. from 335-334 to 322; and from the references of one 
work to another Zeller has further suggested a chronological 
order of composition during this period of twelve years, beginning 
with the treatises on Logic and Physics, and ending with that on 
Metaphysics. There is a further hypothesis that the Aristotelian 
works were not originally treatises, but notes of lectures either 
for or by his pupils. This easily passes into the further and still 
more sceptical hypothesis that the works, as we have them, under 
Aristotle's name, are rather the works of the Peripatetic school, 
from Aristotle, Theophrastus and Eudemus downwards. " We 
cannot assert with certainty," says R. Shute in his History of the 
Aristotelian Writings (p. 1 76), " that we have even got throughout 
a treatise in the exact words of Aristotle, though we may be 
pretty clear that we have a fair representation of his thought. 
The unity of style observable may belong quite as much to the 
school and the method as to the individual." This sceptical 
conclusion, the contrary of that drawn by Leibnitz from the 
harmony of thought and style pervading the works, shows us 
that the Homeric question has been followed by the Aristotelian 
question. 

The Solution. — Such hypotheses attend to Aristotle's philo- 
sophy to the neglect of his life. He was really, as we have seen, 
a prolific writer from the time when he was a young man under 
Plato's guidance at Athens; beginning with dialogues in the 
manner of his master, but afterwards preferring to write didactic 
works during the prime of his own life between thirty-eight and 
fifty (347-335-334), and with the further advantage of leisure 
at Atarneus and Mitylene, in Macedonia and at home in Stagira. 
When at fifty he returned to Athens, as head of the Peripatetic 
school, he no doubt wrote much of his extant philosophy during 
the twelve remaining years of his life (335-322). But he was 
then a busy teacher, was growing old, and suffered from a disease 
in the stomach for a considerable time before it proved fatal at 
the age of sixty-three. It is therefore improbable that he could 
between fifty and sixty-three have written almost the whole 
of the many books on many subjects constituting that grand 
philosophical system which is one of the most wonderful works of 
man. It is far more probable that he was previously composing 
them at his leisure and in the vigour of manhood, precisely as his 
contemporary Demosthenes composed all his great speeches 
except the De Corona before he was fifty. 

Turning to Aristotle's own works, we immediately light upon 
a surprise: Aristotle began his extant scientific works during 
Plato's lifetime. By a curious coincidence, in two different 
works he mentions two different events as contemporary with 
the time of writing, one in 357 and the other in 356. In the 
Politics (E 10, 1312 b 10), he mentions as now (vvv) Dion's 
expedition to Sicily which occurred in 357. In the Meteorologica 
(iii. 1, 371 a 30), he mentions as now (vvv) the burning of the 
temple at Ephesus, which occurred in 356. To save his hypo- 
thesis of late composition, Zeller resorts to the vagueness of 
the word " now " (vvv). But Aristotle is graphically describing 
isolated events, and could hardly speak of events of 357 and 356 
as happening " now " in or near 335. Moreover, these two works 
contain further proofs that they were both begun earlier than this 



ARISTOTLE 



507 



date. The Politics (B 10) mentions as having happened lately 
(recoo-Ti) the expedition of Phalaecus to Crete, which occurred 
towards the end of the Sacred War in 346. The Meteorologica 
(T 7) mentions the comet of 341. It is true that the Politics 
also mentions much later events, e.g. the assassination of Philip 
which took place in 336 (E 10, 1311 b 1-3). Indeed, the whole 
truth about this great work is that it remained unfinished at 
Aristotle's death. But what of that ? The logical conclusion is 
that Aristotle began writing it as early as 357, and continued 
writing it in 346, in 336, and so on till he died. Similarly, he 
began the Meteorologica as early as 356 and was still writing it 
in 341. Both books were commenced some years before Plato's 
death: both were works of many years: both were destined to 
form parts of the Aristotelian system of philosophy. It follows 
that Aristotle, from early manhood, not only wrote dialogues 
and didactic works, surviving only in fragments, but also began 
some of the philosophical works which are still parts of his extant 
writings. He continued these and no doubt began others during 
the prime of his life. Having thus slowly matured his separate 
writings, he was the better able to combine them more and more 
into a system, in his last years. No doubt, however, he went on 
writing and rewriting well into the last period of his life; for 
example, the recently discovered 'Adrivaiwv iroXtreia mentions 
on the one hand (c. 54) the archonship of Cephisophon (329-328), 
on the other hand (c. 46) triremes and quadriremes but without 
quinqueremes, which first appeared at Athens in 325-324; and 
as it mentions nothing later it probably received its final touches 
between 329 and 324. But it may have been begun long before, 
and received additions and changes. However early Aristotle 
began a book, so long as he kept the manuscript, he could always 
change it. Finally he died without completing some of his 
works, such as the Politics, and notably that work of his whole 
philosophic career and foundation of his whole philosophy — the 
Metaphysics — which, projected in his early criticism of Plato's 
philosophy of universal forms, gradually developed into his 
positive philosophy of individual substances, but remained 
unfinished after all. * 

On the whole, then, Aristotle was writing his extant works very 
gradually for some thirty-five years (357-322), like Herodotus 
(iv. 30) contemplated additions, continued writing them more or 
less together, not so much successively as simultaneously, and 
had not finished writing at his death. 

There is a curious characteristic connected with this gradual 
composition. An Aristotelian treatise frequently has the appear- 
ance of being a collection of smaller discourses (X6701), as, e.g., 
K. L. Michelet has remarked. 

This is obvious enough in the Metaphysics: it has two open- 
ings (Books A and a) ; then comes a nearly consecutive theory 
of being ( B, T, E, Z, H, 0), but interrupted by a philosophical 
lexicon A; afterwards follows a theory of unity (1); then a 
summary of previous books and of doctrines from the Physics (K) ; 
next a new beginning about being, and, what is wanted to com- 
plete the system, a theory of God in relation to the world (A) ; 
finally a criticism of mathematical metaphysics (M, N), in which 
the argument against Plato (A 9) is repeated almost word for 
word (M 4-5). The Metaphysics is clearly a compilation formed 
from essays or discourses; and it illustrates another character- 
istic of Aristotle's gradual method of composition. It refers 
back to passages "in the first discourses" {tv rots irpcorois \6ym.s) 
— an expression not uncommon in Aristotelian writings. Some- 
times the reference is to the beginning of the whole treatise; 
e.g. Met. B 2,997 b 3 _ 5> referring back to A 6 and 9 about Platonic 
forms. Sometimes, on the other hand, the reference only goes 
back to a previous part of a given topic, e.g. Met. 61, 1045 b 
27-32, referring back to Z 1, or at the earliest to T 2. On 
either alternative, however, " the first discourses " mentioned 
may have originally been a separate discourse; for Book T 
begins quite fresh with the definition of the science of being, 
long afterwards called " Metaphysics," and Book Z begins 
Aristotle's fundamental doctrine of substance. 

Another indication of a treatise having arisen out of separate 
discourses is its consistingof different parts imperfectly connected. 



Thus the Niconiachean Ethics begins by identifying the good with 
happiness {ev5a.ifj.ovLa), and happiness with virtuous action. 
But when it comes to the moral virtues (Book iii. 6), a new 
motive of the " honourable " (rod koXoO eveKa) is suddenly 
introduced without preparation, where one would expect the 
original motive of happiness. Then at the end of the moral 
virtues justice is treated at inordinate length, and in a different 
manner from the others, which are regarded as means between 
two vices, whereas justice appears as a mean only because it is 
of the middle between too much and too little. Later, the 
discussion on friendship (Books viii.-ix.) is again inordinate in 
length, and it stands alone. Lastly, pleasure, after having been 
first defined (Book vii.) as an activity, is treated over again 
(Book x.) as an end beyond activity, with a warning against 
confusing activity and pleasure. The probability is that the 
Nicomachean Ethics is a collection of separate discourses worked 
up into a tolerably systematic treatise; and the interesting point 
is that these discourses correspond to separate titles in the list of 
Diogenes Laertius (irepl Ka\ov, irepl dacaiwv, irepl <j>i\las, irepl 
rjdovrjs, and irepl rjbovuiv). The same list also refers to tentative 
notes (v-Kop.vqp.aT a einx ei P r lt iaTiK h); an d the commentators 
speak of ethical notes (i7#ik& into pvrj para). Indeed, they some- 
times divide Aristotle's works into notes (viropvqparuia) and 
compilations (cvvray pariKa) . How can it be doubted that in the 
gradual composition of his works Aristotle began with notes 
(viropvqpaTa) and discourses (X6701), and proceeded to treatises 
{■w pay pardai) ? He would even be drawn into this process by 
his writing materials, which were papyrus rolls of some magni- 
tude; he would tend to write discourses on separate rolls, and 
then fasten them together in a bundle into a treatise. 

If then Aristotle was for some thirty-five years gradually and 
simultaneously composing manuscript discourses into treatises 
and treatises into a system, he was pursuing a process which 
solves beforehand the very difficulties which have since been 
found in his writings. He could very easily write in different 
styles at different times, now avoiding hiatus and now not, some- 
times writing diffusely and sometimes briefly, partly polishing 
and partly leaving in the rough, according to the subject, his own 
state of health or humour, his age, and the degree to which he had 
developed a given topic; and all this even in the same manu- 
script as well as in different manuscripts, so that a difference 
of style between different parts of a work or between different 
works, explicable by one being earlier than another, does not 
prove either to be not genuine. As he might write, so might he 
think differently in his long career. To put one extreme case, 
about the soul he could think at first in the Endemus like Plato 
that it is imprisoned in the body, and long afterwards in the De 
Anima like himself that it is the immateriate essence of the 
material bodily organism. Again, he might be inconsistent; 
now, for example, calling a universal a substance in deference 
to Plato, and now denying that a universal can be a substance 
in consequence of his own doctrine that every substance is 
an individual; and so as to contradict himself in the same 
treatise, though not in the same breath or at the same moment 
of thinking. Again, in developing his discourses into larger 
treatises he might fall into dislocations; although it must be 
remembered that these are often inventions of critics who do not 
understand the argument, as when they make out that the treat- 
ment of reciprocal justice in the Ethics (v. 5-6) needs rearrange- 
ment through their not noticing that, according to Aristotle, 
reciprocal justice, being the fairness of a commercial bargain, is 
not part of absolute or political justice, but is part of analogical 
or economical justice. Or he might make repetitions, as in the 
same book, where he twice applies the principle, that so far as the 
agent does the patient suffers, first to the corrective justice of the 
law court (Eth. v. 4) in order to prove that in a wrong the injurer 
gains as much as the injured loses, and immediately afterwards 
to the reciprocal justice of commerce (ib. 5) in order to prove 
that in a bargain a house must be exchanged for as many shoes as 
equal it in value. Or he might himself, without double versions, 
repeat the same argument with a different shade of meaning; 
as when in the Nic. Ethics (vii. 4) he first argues that incontinence 



508 



ARISTOTLE 



about such natural pleasures as that of gain is only modified 
incontinence, a sign (as causa cognoscendi) of which is that it is not 
so bad as incontinence about carnal pleasures, and then argues 
that, because (as causa essendi) it is only modified incontinence, 
therefore it is not so bad. Or he might return again and again 
to the same point with a difference: there is a good instance in 
his conclusion that the speculative life is the highest happiness; 
which he first infers because it is the life of man's highest and 
divine faculty, intelligence (ii76b-ii78a8),then after an interval 
infers a second time because our speculative life is an imitation of 
that of God ( 1 1 78 b 7-3 2) , and finally after another interval infers 
a third time, because it will make man most dear to God (1179 a 
22-32). Or, extending himself as it were still more, he might 
write two drafts, or double versions of his own, on the same 
subject; e.g. Physics, vii. and De Anima, ii. Or he might, going 
still further, in his long literary career write two or more treatises 
on the same subject, different and even more or less inconsistent 
with each other, as we shall find in the sequel. Finally, having 
a great number of discourses and treatises, containing all those 
small blemishes, around him in his library, and determined to 
collect, consolidate and connect them into a philosophical system, 
Ae would naturally be often taking them down from their places 
to consult and compare one with another, and as naturally enter 
in them references one to the other, and cross-references between 
one another. Thus he would enter in the Metaphysics a reference 
to the Physics, and in the Physics a reference to the Metaphysics, 
precisely because both were manuscripts in his library. For the 
same purpose of connexion he would be tempted to add a preface 
to a book like the Meteor ologica. In order to refer back to the 
Physics, the De Coelo, and the De Generatione, this work begins by 
stating that the first causes of all nature and all natural motion, 
the stars ordered according to celestial motion and the bodily 
elements with their transmutations, and generation and corrup- 
tion have all been discussed; and by adding that there remains 
to complete this investigation, what previous investigators called 
meteorology. To suppose this preface, presupposing many 
sciences, to have been written in 356, when the Meteorologica had 
been already commenced, would be absurd; but equally absurd 
would it be to reject that date on account of the preface, which 
even a modern author often writes long after his book. Nor is it 
at all absurd to suppose that,long after he began the Meteorologica, 
Aristotle himself added the preface in the process of gathering his 
general treatises on natural science into a system. So he might 
afterwards add the preface to the De Interpretation, in order to 
connect it with the De Anima, though written afterwards, in order 
to connect his treatises on mind and on its expression. So also 
he might add the appendix to the Sophistical Elenchi, long after 
he had written that book, and perhaps, to judge from its being a 
general claim to have discovered the syllogism, when the founder 
of logic had more or less realized that he had written a number 
of connected treatises on reasoning. 

The Question of Publication. — There is still another point which 
would facilitate Aristotle's gradual composition of discourses into 
treatises and treatises into a system; there was no occasion for 
him to publish his manuscripts beyond his school. Printing has 
accustomed us to publication, and misled us into applying to 
ancient times the modern method of bringing out one book after 
another at definite dates by the same author. But Greek authors 
contemplated works rather than books. Some of the greatest 
authors were not even writers: Homer, Aesop, Thales, Socrates. 
Some who were writers were driven to publish by the occasion; 
and after the orders of government, which were occasionally 
published to be obeyed; occasional poems, such as the poems of 
Solon, the odes of Pindar and the plays of the dramatists, which 
all had a political significance, were probably the first writings 
to be published or, rather, recited and acted, from written 
copies. With them came philosophical poems, such as those of 
Xenophanes and Empedocles; the epical history of Herodotus; 
the dramatic philosophy of Plato. On a larger scale speeches 
written by orators to be delivered by litigants were published 
and encouraged publication; and, as the Attic orators were his 
contemporaries, publication had become pretty common in the 



time of Aristotle, who speaks of many bundles (Setr/ms) of 
judicial speeches by Isocrates being hawked about by the book- 
sellers {Fragm. 140). 

No doubt then Aristotle's library contained published copies of 
the works of other authors, as well as the autographs of his own. 
It does not follow that his own works went beyond his library 
and his school. Publication to the world is designed for readers, 
who at all times have demanded popular literature rather than 
serious philosophy such as that of Aristotle. Accordingly it 
becomes a difficult question, how far Aristotle's works were 
published in his lifetime. In answering it we must be careful 
to exclude any evidence which refers to Aristotle as a man, not 
as a writer, or refers to him as a writer but does not prove 
publication while he was alive. 

Beginning then with his early writings, which are now lost, the 
dialogues On Poetry and the Eudemus were probably the pub- 
lished discourses to which Aristotle himself refers {Poetics, 15; De 
Anima, i. 4); and the dialogue Protrepticus was known to the 
Cynic Crates, pupil of Diogenes and master of Zeno {Fragm. 50), 
but not necessarily in Aristotle's lifetime, as Crates was still 
alive in 307. Again, Aristotle's early rhetorical instructions 
and perhaps writings, as well as his opinion that a collection of 
proverbs is not worth while, must have been known outside 
Aristotle's rhetorical school to the orator Cephisodorus, pupil of 
Isocrates and master of Demosthenes, for him to be able to write 
in his Replies to Aristotle {ev reus irpos ' ApioToreXrjv avriypaQais) 
an admired defence of Isocrates (Dionys. H. De Isoc. 18). But 
this early dialectic and rhetoric, being popular, would tend to be 
published. History comes nearer to philosophy; and Aristotle's 
Constitutions were known to his enemy Timaeus, who attacked 
him for disparaging the descent of the Locrians of Italy, according 
to Polybius (xii.), who defended Aristotle. But as Timaeus 
brought his history down to 264 B.C. (Polyb. i. 5), and therefore 
might have got his information after Aristotle's death, we cannot 
be sure that any of the Constitutions were published in the author's 
lifetime. We are equally at a loss to prove that Aristotle pub- 
lished his philosophy. He had, like all the great, many enemies, 
personal and philosophical; but in his lifetime they attacked the 
man, not his philosophy. In the Megarian school, first Eubulides 
quarrelled with him and calumniated him (Diog. Laert. ii. 109) 
in his lifetime; but the attack was on his life, not on his writings: 
afterwards Stilpo wrote a dialogue ('Apio-rortAqs), which may 
have been a criticism of the Aristotelian philosophy from the 
Megarian point of view; but he outlived Aristotle thirty years. 
In the absence of any confirmation, " the current philosophe- 
mata " {to. hyKvic\ia <£tXo<jo</»7;uaTa), mentioned in the De Coelo 
(i. 9,279 a 30), are sometimes supposed to be Aristotle's published 
philosophy, to which he is referring his readers. But the example 
there given, that the divine is unchangeable, is precisely such a 
religious commonplace as might easily be a current philosopheme 
of Aristotle's day, not of Aristotle; and this interpretation suits 
the parallel passage in the Nic. Ethics (i. 5, 1096 a 3) where 
opinions about the happiness of political life are said to have been 
sufficiently treated " even in current discussions " {koX 'ev rots 
tyicvicXLois). 

There is therefore no contemporary proof that Aristotle 
published any part of his mature philosophical system in his life- 
time. It is true that a book of Andronicus, as reported by Aulus 
Gellius (xx. 5), contained a correspondence between Alexander 
and Aristotle in which the pupil complained that his master 
had published his " acroatic discourses " {tovs aKpoanKovs twp 
\6ywv). But ancient letters are proverbially forgeries, and in the 
three hundred years which elapsed between the supposed corre^ 
spondence and the time of Andronicus there was plenty of time 
for the forgery of these letters. But even if the correspondence 
is genuine, " acroatic discourses " must be taken to mean what 
Alexander would mean by them in the time of Aristotle, and not 
what they had come to mean by the time of Andronicus. 
Alexander meant those discourses which Aristotle, when he was 
his tutor, intended for the ears of himself and his fellow-pupils; 
such as the early political works on Monarchy and on Colonies, 
and the early rhetorical works, the Theodectea, the Collection oj 



ARISTOTLE 



509 



Arts, and possibly the Rhetoric to Alexander, in the preface to 
which the writer actually says to Alexander : " You wrote to me 
that nobody else should receive this book." These few early 
works may have been published, and contrary to the wishes 
of Alexander, without affecting Aristotle's later system. But 
even so, Alexander's complaint would not justify writers three 
centuries later in taking Alexander to have referred to mature 
scientific writings, which were not addressed, and not much 
known, to him, the conqueror of Asia; although by the times 
of Andronicus and Aulus Gellius, Aristotle's scientific writings 
were all called acroatic, or acroamatic, or sometimes esoteric, 
in distinction from exoteric— a distinction altogether unknown 
to Aristotle, and therefore to Alexander. In the absence of any 
contemporary evidence, we cannot believe that Aristotle in his 
lifetime published any, much less all, of his scientific books. The 
conclusion then is that Aristotle on the one hand to some extent 
published his early dialectical and rhetorical writings, because 
they were popular, though now they are lost, but on the other 
hand did not publish any of the extant historical and philosophical 
works which belong to his mature system, because they were best 
adapted to his philosophical pupils in the Peripatetic school. 
The object of the philosopher was not the applause of the public 
but the truth of things. Now this conclusion has an important 
bearing on the composition of Aristotle's writings and on the 
difficulties which have been found in them. If he had like a 
modern author brought out each of his extant philosophical 
works on a definite day of publication, he would not have been 
able to change them without a second edition, which in the case 
of serious writings so little in demand would not be worth while. 
But as he did not publish them, but kept the unpublished manu- 
scripts together in his library and used them in his school, he was 
able to do with them as he pleased down to the very end of his 
life, and so gradually to consolidate his many works into one 
system. 

While Aristotle did not publish his philosophical works to the 
world, he freely communicated them to the Peripatetic school. 
They are not mere lectures ; but he used them for lectures: he 
allowed his pupils to read them in his library, and probably to 
take copies from them. He also used diagrams, which are 
sometimes incorporated in his works, but sometimes are only 
mentioned, and were no doubt used for purposes of teaching. 
He also availed himself of his pupils' co-operation, as we may 
judge from his description in the Ethics (x. 7) of the speculative 
philosopher who, though he is self-sufficing, is better having 
co-operators ((rvvtpyovs txoiv). From an early time he had a 
tendency to address his writings to his friends. For example, 
he addressed the Theodectea to his pupil Theodectes; and even 
in ancient times a doubt arose whether it was a work of the 
master or the pupil. It was certainly by Aristotle, because it 
contained the triple grammatical division of words into noun, 
verb and conjunction, which the history of grammar recognized 
as his discovery. But we may explain the share of Theodectes 
by supposing that he had a hand in the work (cf. Dionys. H. 
De Comp. Verb. 2; Quintilian i. 4. 18). Similarly in astronomy, 
Aristotle used the assistance of Eudoxus and Callippus. Indeed, 
throughout his writings he shows a constant wish to avail himself 
of what is true in the opinions of others, whether they are 
philosophers, or poets or ordinary people expressing their 
thoughts in sayings and proverbs. AVith one of his pupils in 
particular, Theophrastus, who was born about 370 and therefore 
was some fifteen years younger than himself, he had a long and 
intimate connexion; and the work of the pupil bears so close a 
resemblance to that of his master, that, even when he questions 
Aristotle's opinions (as he often does) , he seems to be writing in an 
Aristotelian atmosphere; while he shows the same acuteness in 
raising difficulties, and has caught something of the same encyclo- 
paedic genius. Another pupil, Eudemus of Rhodes, wrote and 
thought so like his master as to induce Simplicius to call him the 
most genuine of Aristotle's companions (6 yvriaiwraTOS r&v 
'AptoToreXow tTtdpwv) . It is probable that this extraordinary 
resemblance is due to the pupils having actually assisted their 
master; and this supposition enables Us to surmount a diffi- 



culty we feel in reading Aristotle's works. How otherwise, we 
wonder, could one man writing alone and with so few predecessors 
compose the first systematic treatises on the psychology of the 
mental powers and on the logic of reasoning, the first natural 
history of animals, and the first civil history of one hundred and 
fifty-eight constitutions, in addition to authoritative treatises on 
metaphysics, biology, ethics, politics, rhetoric and poetry; in all 
penetrating to the very essence of the subject, and, what is most 
wonderful, describing more facts than any other man has ever 
done on so many subjects ? 

The Uncompleted Works.— Such then was the method of 
composition by which Aristotle began in early manhood to 
write his philosophical works, continued them gradually and 
simultaneously, combined shorter discourses into longer treatises, 
compared and connected them, kept them together in his library 
without publishing them, communicated them to his school, used 
the co-operation of his best pupils, and finally succeeded in 
combining many mature writings into one harmonious system. 
Nevertheless, being a man, he did not quite succeed. He left 
some unfinished; such as the Categories, in which the main part 
on categories is not finished, while the last part, afterwards called 
postpredicaments, is probably not his, the Politics and the 
Poetics. He left others imperfectly arranged, and some of the 
most important, the Metaphysics, the Politics and the logical 
writings. Of the imperfect arrangement of the Metaphysics we 
have already spoken; and we shall speak of that of his logical 
writings when we come to the order of his whole system. At 
present the Politics will supply us with a conspicuous example 
of the imperfect arrangement of some, as well as of the gradual 
composition of all, of Aristotle's extant writings. 

The Politics was begun as early as 357, yet not finished in 322. 
It betrays its origin from separate discourses. First comes a 
general theory of constitutions, right and wrong (Books A,B,r); 
and this part is afterwards referred to as " the first discourses " 
h rdls irp&Tois X67ots). Then follows the treatment of oli- 
garchy, democracy, commonwealth and tyranny, and of the 
various powers of government (A), and independent investiga- 
tion of revolution, and of the means of preserving states (E), and 
a further treatment of democracy and oligarchy, and of the 
different offices of the state (Z), and finally a return to the dis- 
cussion of the right form of constitution (H, 9). But A and Z 
are a group interrupted by E, and H and 9 are another group 
unconnected with the previous group and with E, and are also 
distinguished in style by avoiding hiatus. Further, the group 
(A, Z) and the group (H, 9) are both unfinished. Finally the 
group (A, Z), the book (E) and the group (H, 9), though 
unconnected with one another, are all connected though im- 
perfectly with " the first discourses " (A,B,r). This complicated 
arrangement may be represented in the following diagram: — 



a, b, r, 



A, Z 



E 



H, 9 



The simplest explanation is that Aristotle began by writing 
separate discourses, four at least, on political subjects; that he 
continued to write them and perhaps tried to combine them: 
but that in the end he failed* and left the Politics unfinished and 
in disorder. But modern commentators, possessed by the fallacy 
that Aristotle like a modern author must from the first have 
comtemplated a whole treatise in a regular order for definite 
publication, lose themselves in vain disputes as to whether to go 
by the traditional order of books indicated by their letters and 
known to have existed as early as the abstract (given in Stobaeus, 
Eel. ii. 7) ascribed to Didymus (1st century a.d.), or to put the 
group H, 9, as more connected with A, B, V, before the group 
A, Z, and this group before the book E. It is agreed, says Zeller, 
that the traditional order contradicts the original plan. But 
what right have we to say that Aristotle had an original plan? 

The incomplete state in which Aristotle left the Metaphysics, 
the Politics and his logical works, brings us to the hard question 
how much he did, and how much his Peripatetic followers did 



5 J ° 



ARISTOTLE 



to his writings after his death. To answer it we should have 
to go far beyond Aristotle. But two corollaries follow from our 
present investigation of his extant writings; the first, that it was 
the long continuance of the Peripatetic school which gradually 
caused the publication, and in some cases the forgery, of the 
separate writings; and the second, that his Peripatetic successors 
arranged and edited some of Aristotle's writings, and gradually 
arrived by the time of Andronicus, the eleventh from Aristotle, 
at an order of the whole body of writings forming the system. 
Now, it is probable that the arrangement of the works which we 
are considering was done by the Peripatetic successors of Aristotle. 
There is nothing indeed in the Metaphysics to show whether he 
left it in isolated treatises or in its present disorder; and nothing 
in the Politics. On the other hand, in the case of Jogic, it is 
certain that he did not combine his works on the subject into one 
whole, but that the Peripatetics afterwards put them together as 
organic, and made them the parts of logic as an organon, as they 
are treated by An,dronicus. Perhaps something similar occurred 
to the Metaphysics, as Alexander imputed its redaction to 
Eudemus, and the majority of ancient commentators attributed 
its second opening (Book a) to Pasicles, nephew of Eudemus. 
Again, it is not unlikely that the Politics was arranged in the 
traditional order of books by Theophrastus, and that this is the 
meaning of the curious title occurring in the list of Aristotle's 
works as given by Diogenes Laertius, ttoXitiktjs &Kpo&<r«os cos 
ij Qeo4>paarov a'ji'y'S'e's'^'ri', which agrees with the Politics 
in having eight books. Although, however, we may concede 
that such great works as the Metaphysics, the Politics and the 
logical writings did not receive their present form from Aristotle 
himself, that concession does not deprive Aristotle of the author- 
ship, but only of the arrangement of those works. On the 
contrary, Theophrastus and Eudemus, his immediate followers, 
both wrote works presupposing Aristotle's Metaphysics and his 
logical works, and Dicaearchus, their contemporary, used his 
Politics for his own Tripoliticus. It was Aristotle himself then 
who wrote these works, whether he arranged them or not; and 
if he wrote the incomplete works, then a fortiori he wrote the 
completed works except those which are proved spurious, and 
practically consummated the Aristotelian system, which, as 
Leibnitz said, by its unity of thought and style evinces its 
own genuineness and individuality. We must not exaggerate 
the school and underrate the individual, especially such an 
individual. What he mainly wanted was the time, the leisure 
and the labour, which we have supposed to have been given 
to the gradual composition of the extant Aristotelian writings. 
Aristotle, asked where dwell the Muses, answered, " In the souls 
of those who love work." 

IV. Earlier and Later Writings 

Aristotle's quotations of his other books and of historical 
facts only inform us at best of the dates of isolated passages, 
and cannot decide the dates and sequences of whole philosophical 
books which occupied him for many years. Is there then any 
way of discriminating between early and late works ? There is 
the evidence of the influences under which the books were written. 
This evidence applies to the whole Aristotelian literature includ- 
ing the fragments. As to the fragments, we are safe in saying 
that the early dialogues in the manner of Plato were written 
under the influence of Plato, and that the subsequent didactic 
writings connected with Alexander were written more under 
the influence of Philip and Alexander. Turning to the extant 
writings, we find that some are more under the influence of Plato, 
while others are more original and Aristotelian. Also some 
writings are more rudimentary than others on the same subject; 
and some have the appearance of being first drafts of others. 
By these differences we can do something to distinguish between 
earlier and later philosophical works; and also vindicate as 
genuine some works , which have been considered spurious because 
they do not agree in style or in matter with his most mature 
philosophy. In thirty-five years of literary composition, Aristotle 
had plenty of time to change, because any man can differ from 
himself at different times. 



On these principles, we regard as early genuine philosophical 
works of Aristotle, (i) the Categories; (2) the De Inter pretatione; 
(3) the Eudemian Ethics and Magna Moralia; (4) the Rhetoric to 
Alexander, 

1. The Categories (Karrffopiai). — This short discourse turns on 
Aristotle's fundamental doctrine of individual substances, with- 
out which there is nothing. He arrives at it from a classification 
of categories, by which he here means " things stated in no 
combination " (ra Kara fji.ri5tp.Lav ovpnfhoKriv \ey6fitva.) or what 
we should call " names," capable of becoming predicates 
(KaTrjyopovneva, Karriyopiai,). " Every name," says he (chap. 4), 
" signifies either substance or something quantitative, or quali- 
tative, or relative, or somewhere, or sometimes, or that 
it is in a position, or in a condition, or active or passive." 
He immediately adds that, by the combination of these 
names with one another, affirmation or negation arises. The 
categories then are names signifying things capable of becoming 
predicates in a proposition. Next he proceeds to substances 
(omlai), which he divides into primary (xpeorat) and secondary 
(Sevrepcu). " Substance," says he (chap. 5), " which is properly, 
primarily and especially so called, is that which is neither a 
predicate of a subject nor inherent in a subject; for example, 
a particular man, or a particular horse. Secondary substances 
so called are the species in which are the primarily called 
substances, and the genera of these species: for example, a 
particular man is in a species, man, the genus of which is animal: 
these then are called secondary substances, man and animal." 
Having made these subdivisions of substance, he thereupon 
reduces secondary substances and all the rest of the categories 
to belongings of individual or primary substances. " All other 
things," says he, " are either predicates of primary substances as 
subjects " (k.o.6' inroKapivoiv t&v irparrwp owi&v) " or inherent in 
them as subjects " {kv vroKHnkvcus avrais). He explains that 
species and genus are predicates of, and that other categories 
(e.g. the quality of colour) are inherent in, some individual 
substance such as a particular man. Then follows his conclusion : 
" without primary substances it is impossible for anything to be " 
(ju.17 ovcrSiv ovv t&v wpwroiv ovcruhv adbvarov to>v ixWuv n elvai. 
Cat. s, 2 b 5-6). 

Things are individual substances, without which there is 
nothing — this is the fundamental point of Aristotelianism, as 
against Platonism, of which the fundamental point is that things 
are universal forms without which there becomes nothing. The 
world, according to Aristotle, consists of substances, each of 
which is a separate individual, this man, this horse, this animal, 
this plant, this earth, this water, this air, this fire; in the 
heavens that moon, that sun, those stars; above all, God. On 
the other hand, a universal species or genus of substances is a 
predicate which, as well as everything else in all the other cate- 
gories, always belongs to some individual substance or other as 
subject, and has no separate being. In full, then, a substance is 
a separate individual, having universals, and things in all other 
categories, inseparably belonging to it. The individual substance 
Socrates, for example, is a man and an animal (omla), tall, 
(irocov), white (ttolov), a husband (irpos ti), in the market (iroO), 
yesterday (ivore), sitting (KtiadaC), armed (execv), talking 
(iroieiv), listening (7rd<7xeti'). Aristotelianism is this philosophy 
of substantial things. 

The doctrine that all things are substances which are separate 
individuals, stated in the Categories, is expanded in the Metaphysics. 
Both works arrive at it from the classification of categories, which 
is the same in both ; except that in the former the categories are 
treated rather as a logical classification of names signifying things, 
in the latter rather as a metaphysical classification of things. In 
neither, however, are they a grammatical classification of words by 
their structure ; and in neither are they a psychological classification 
of notions or general conceptions (vornj-ara) , such as they after- 
wards became in Kant's Critique and the post-Kantian idealism. 
Moreover, even in the Categories as names signifying distinct things 
they imply distinct things; and hence the Categories, as well as the 
Metaphysics, draws the metaphysical conclusion that individual 
substances are the things without which there is nothing else, and 
thereby lays the positive foundation of the philosophy running 
through all the extant Aristotelian writings. 

Again, according to both works, an individual substance is a 



ARISTOTLE 



5ii 



subject, a universal its predicate; and they have in common the 
Aristotelian metaphysics, which differs greatly from the modern 
logic of subject and predicate. Subject {inronelnti>ov) originally 
meant a real thing which is the basis of something, and was used 
by Aristotle both for a thing to which something belongs and for 
a name of which another is asserted: accordingly " predicate " 
(KtkT7\yopoi>ntvov) came with him to mean something really belonging 
(mapx° v ) to a substance as real subject, as well as a name capable of 
being asserted of a name as a nominal subject. In other words, to 
him subject meant real as well as nominal subject, and predicate 
meant real as well as nominal predicate; whereas modern logic 
has gradually reduced both to the nominal terms of a proposition. 
Accordingly, when he said that a substance is a subject, he meant a 
real subject; and when he said that a universal species or genus 
is a predicate, he meant that it is a real predicate belonging to a 
real subject, which is always some individual substance of the 
kind. It follows that Aristotelianism in the Categories and in the 
Metaphysics is a realism both of individuals and of universals; 
of individual substances as real subjects, and of universals as 
real predicates. 

Lastly, the two works agree in reducing the Categories to substance 
and its belongings (for a.pxovra) . According u> both, it is always 
some substance, such as Socrates, which is quantitative, qualitative, 
relative, somewhere, some time, placed, conditioned, active, passive; 
so that all things in all other categories are attributes which are 
belongings of substances. There are therefore two kinds of belonging's, 
universals and attributes; and in both cases belonging in the sense 
of having no being but the being of the substance. 

In brief then the common ground of the Categories and the Meta- 
physics is the fundamental position that all things are substances 
having belonging to them universals and attributes, which have no 
separate being as Plato falsely supposed. 

This essential agreement suffices to show that the Categories and 
the Metaphysics are the result of one mind. Nevertheless, there is a 
deep difference between them in detail, which may be expressed by 
saying that the Categories is nearer to Platonism. We have seen how 
anxious Aristotle was to be considered one of the Platonists, how 
reluctant he was to depart from Plato's hypothesis of forms, and 
how, in denying the separability, he retained the Platonic belief in the 
reality and even in the unity of the universal. We have now to see 
that, in writing the Categories, on the one hand he carried his differ- 
ences from his master further than he had done in his early criticisms 
by insisting that individual substances are not only real, but are the 
very things which sustain the universal; but on the other hand, he 
clung to further relics of the Platonic theory, and it is those which 
differentiate the Categories and the Metaphysics. 

In the first place, in the Categories the belonging of things in other 
categories to individual substances in the first category is not so 
well developed. A distinction (chap. 2) is drawn between things 
which are predicates of a subject («o8' virondp.tvov) and things which 
inhere in a subject {iv Won.ti.ij.tvi>>) ; and, while universals are called 
predicates of a subject, things in a subordinate category, i.e. attri- 
butes such as colour (xpdiia) in the qualitative, are said to inhere in 
a subject. It is true that the work gives only a negative definition of 
the inherent, namely, that it does not inhere as a part and cannot 
exist apart from that in which it inheres (1 a 24-25), and it admits that 
what is inheren t may sometimes also be a predicate (chap. 5,2 a 27-34) • 
The commentators explain this to mean that an attribute as indi- 
vidual is inherent, as universal is a predicate. But even so the 
Categories concludes that everything is either a predicate of, or 
inherent in, a substance; and the view that this colour belongs to 
this substance only in the sense of being in it, not of it, leaves the 
impression that, like a Platonic form, it is an entity rather in than of 
an individual substance, though even in the Categories Aristotle is 
careful to deny its separability. The hypothesis of inherence gives 
an inadequate account of the dependence of an attribute on a sub- 
stance, and is a kind of half-way house between separation and 
predication. 

On the other hand, in the Metaphysics, the distinction between 
inherence and predication disappears; and what is mere, the relation 
of an attribute to a substance is regarded as so close that an attribute 
is merely the substance modified. " The thing itself and the thing 
affected," says Aristotle, " are in a way the same; e.g. Socrates and 
Socrates musical " {Met. A 29, 1024 b 30-31). Consequently, all 
attributes, as well as universals, belong as predicates of individual 
substances as subjects, according to the Metaphysics, and also accord- 
ing to the most authoritative works of Aristotle, such as the Posterior 
Analytics, where (cf. i. 4, 22) an attribute (<ruju/3e|8i)K6s) is said to be 
only by being the substance possessing it, and any separation of an 
attribute from a substance is held to be entirely a work of human 
abstraction (a<£(upe<rts). At this point, Plato and Aristotle have 
become very far apart : to the master beauty appears to be an 
independent thing, and really separate, to the pupil at his best only 
something beautiful, an attribute which is only mentally separable 
from an individual substance. The first difference then between 
the Categories and the Metaphysics is in the nature of an attribute ; 
and the theory of inherence in the Categories is nearer to Plato and 
more rudimentary than the theory of predication in the Metaphysics. 
The second difference is still nearer to Plato and more rudimentary, 
and is in the nature of substance. For though both works rest on 



the reality of individual substances, the Categories (chap. 5) admits 
that universal species and genera can be called substances, whereas 
the Metaphysics (Z 13) denies that a universal can be a substance 
at all. 

It is evident that in the category of substance, as Aristotle per- 
ceived, substance is predicate of substance, e.g. Socrates {oiiaia) is a 
man {oiiaia), and an animal {oiala). The question then arises, 
what sort of substance can be predicate; and in the Categories 
Aristotle gave an answer, which would have been impossible, if he 
had not, under Plato's influence, accepted both the unity and the 
substantiality of the universal. What he said in consequence was 
that the substance in the predicate is not an individual substance, 
e.g. this man or this animal, because such a primary substance is not 
a predicate; but that the species man or the genus animal is the 
substance which is the predicate of Socrates the subject {Cat. 5, 3 a 
36 seq.). Finding then that substances are real predicates, and 
supposing that in that case they must be species or genera, he could 
not avoid the conclusion that some substances are species or genera, 
which were therefore called by him " secondary substances," and by 
his Latin followers substantiae univer sales. It is true that this con- 
clusion gave him some misgivings, because he recognized that it is 
a characteristic of a substance to signify an individual {rb&t n), 
which a species or a genus does not signify {ib. 5, 3 b 10-21). Never- 
theless, in the Categories, he did not venture to deny that in the 
category of substance a universal species {e.g. man), or genus {e.g. 
animal), is itself a substance. On the other hand, in the Metaphysics 
(Z 13), he distinctly denies that any universal can be a substance, 
on the ground that a substance is a subject, whereas a universal is 
a predicate and a belonging of a subject, from which it follows as 
he says that no universal is a substance, and no substance universal. 
Here again the Categories forms a kind of transition from Platonism to 
the Metaphysics which is the reverse: to call universals " secondary 
substances " is half way between Plato's calling them the only 
substances and Aristotle's denial in the Metaphysics that they are 
substances at all. 

What conclusion are we to draw from these differences between the 
Categories and the Metaphysics ? The only logical conclusion is that 
the Categories, being nearer to Plato on the nature of attributes, and 
still nearer on the relation of universals to substances, is earlier than 
the Metaphysics. There are difficulties no doubt in drawing this 
conclusion; because the Metaphysics, though it denies that uni- 
versals can be substances, and does not allow species and genera to be 
called " secondary substances," nevertheless falls itself into calling 
a universal essence {to rl fjv elvai) a substance — and that too in 
the very book where it is proved that no universal can be a sub- 
stance. But this lapse only shows how powerful a dominion Plato 
exercised over Aristotle's soul to the last; for it arises out of the 
pupil still accepting from his master the unity of the universal though 
now applying it, not to classes, but to essences. The argument about 
essences in the Metaphysics is as follows : — Since a separate individual, 
e.g. Socrates, is a substance, and he is essentially a rational animal, 
then his essence, being what he is, is a substance; for we cannot 
affirm that Socrates is a substance and then deny that this rational 
animal is a substance {Met. Z 3). Now, according to the unity of a 
universal asserted by Plato and accepted by Aristotle, the universal 
essence of species, being one and the same for all individuals of the 
kind, is the same as the essence of each individual: e.g. the rational 
animal in the human species and in Socrates is one and the same; 
"for the essence is indivisible" {aro/xov yap to e'Sos, Met. Z 8, 
1034 a 8)- It follows that we must call this selfsame essence, at once 
individual and universal, substance — a conclusion, however, which 
Aristotle never drew in so many words, though he continued always 
to call essence substance, and definition a knowledge of substance. 

There is therefore a history of Aristotle's metaphysical views, 
corresponding to his gradual method of composition. It is as 
follows : — 

(i) Negative rejection of Plato's hypothesis of forms and formal 
numbers, and reduction of forms to the common in the early 
dialogue irtpl #iXo<ro(£las and in the early work irtpi l5tG>v. 

(2) Positive assertion of the doctrine that things are individual 
substances in the Categories, but with the admission that attributes 
sometimes inhere in substance without being predicates of it, and 
that universal species and genera are " secondary substances." 

(3) Expansion of the doctrine that things are individual substances 
in the Metaphysics, coupled with the reduction of all attributes to 
predicates, and the direct denial of universal substances; but never- 
theless calling the universal essence of a species of substances 
substance, because the individual essence of an individual substance 
really is that substance, and the universal essence of the whole species 
is supposed to be indivisible and therefore identical with the in- 
dividual essence of any individual of the species. 

2. The De Inter pretatione. — Another example of Aristotle's 
gradual desertion of Plato is exhibited by the De Inter pretatione 
as compared with the Prior Analytics, and it shows another 
gradual history in Aristotle's philosophy, namely, the develop- 
ment of subject, predicate and copula, in his logic. 

The short discourse on the expression of thought by language 
{irepl 'Epjmjvetas, De Inter pretatione) is based on the Platonic 



512 



ARISTOTLE 



division of the sentence (\A70s) into noun and verb (bvoixa and 
prj/xa). Its point is to separate the enunciative sentence, or that 
in which there is truth or falsity, from other sentences; and then, 
dismissing the rest to rhetoric or poetry (where we should say 
grammar) , to discuss the enunciative sentence(d-7ro<^ai'TtK6s \6yos), 
or enunciation (avo^a-wis) , or what we should call the proposi- 
tion (De Int. chap. 4). Here Aristotle, starting from the previous 
grammar of sentences in general, proceeded, for the first time in 
philosophical literature, to disengage the logic of the proposition, 
or that sentence which can alone be true or false, whereby it alorie 
enters into reasoning. But in spite of this great logical achieve- 
ment, he continued throughout the discourse to accept Plato's 
grammatical analysis of all sentences into noun and verb, which 
indeed applies to the proposition as a sentence but does not give 
its particular elements. The first part of the work confines itself 
strictly to noun and verb, or the form of proposition called 
secundi adjacentis. Afterwards (chap. 10) proceeding to the 
opposition of propositions, he adds the form called lertii 
adjacentis, in a passage which is the first appearance, or rather 
adumbration, of the verb of being as a copula. In the 
form secundi adjacentis we only get oppositions, such as the 
following: — 

man is — man is not 

not-man is— not-man is not 

In the form lertii adjacentis the oppositions, becoming more 
complex, are doubled, as follows: — 

man is just — man is not just 

man is non-just — man is not non-just 

not-man is just — not-man is not just 

not-man is non-j ust— not-man is not non-just. 

The words introducing this form (orav 51 to ecm rplrov 
■KpocKarriyoprJTa.1, chap. 10, 19 b 19), which are the origin of the 
phrase lertii adjacentis, disengage the verb of being (&rn) partially 
but not entirely, because they still treat it as an extra part of the 
predicate, and not as a distinct copula. Nor does the work get 
further than the analysis of some propositions into noun and verb 
with " is " added to the predicated verb; an analysis, however, 
which was a great logical discovery and led Aristotle further to 
the remark that "is" does not mean "exists"; e.g. "Homer is 
a poet " does not mean " Homer exists " (De Int. chap. n). 

How then did Aristotle get further in the logical analysis of 
the proposition? Not in the De Interpretation, but in the Prior 
Analytics. The first adumbration was forced upon him in the 
former work by his theory of opposition; the complete appear- 
ance in the latter work by his theory of syllogism. In analysing 
the syllogism, he first says that a premiss is an affirmative or 
negative sentence, and then that a term is that into which a 
premiss is dissolved, i.e. predicate and subject, combined or 
divided by being and not being (Pr. An.i. 1). Here, for the first 
time in logical literature, subject and predicate suddenly appear 
as terms, or extremes, with the verb of being (to etvai) or not 
being (to ^17 etv(u) completely disengaged from both, but con- 
necting them as a copula. Why here? Because the crossing of 
terms in a syllogism requires it. In the syllogism " Every man 
is mortal and Socrates is a man," if in the minor premiss the 
copula " is " were not disengaged from the predicate " man," 
there would not be one middle term " man " in the two premisses. 
It is not necessary in every proposition, but it is necessary in the 
arrangement of a syllogism, to extricate the terms of its proposi- 
tions from the copula; e.g. mortal — man — Socrates. 

This important difference between the De Interpretation and 
the Prior A nalytics can only be explained by supposing that the 
former is the earlier treatise. It is nearer to Plato's analysis of 
the sentence, and no logician would have gone back to it, after 
the Prior Analytics. It is not spurious, as some have supposed, 
nor later than the De Anima, as Zeller thought, but Aristotle 
in an earlier frame of mind. 

Moreover we can make a history of Aristotle's thought and 
gradual composition thus: 

(1) Earlier acceptance in the De Interpretation of Plato's 
grammatical analysis of the sentence into noun and verb (secundi 
adjacentis) but gradually disengaging the proposition, and after- 



wards introducing the verb of being as a third thing added 
(tertium adjacens) to the predicated verb, for the purpose of 
opposition. 

(2) Later logical analysis in the Prior Analytics of the proposi- 
tion as premiss into subject, predicate and copula, for the purpose 
of syllogism; but without insisting that the original form is 
illogical. 

3. The Eudemian Ethics and Magna M or alia in relation to 
the Nicomachean Ethics.— Under the name of Aristotle, three 
treatises on the good of man have come down to us, 'Hduca 
NtKo/^dxew (irpos NiKojuaxcw, Porphyry), 'IWiko. Ei>5ijjiuci (irpos 
'Evdrj/Mv, Porphyry), and 'H0i/c& /xe'ya.'Ka; so like one another 
that there seems no tenable hypothesis except that they are the 
manuscript writings of one man. Nevertheless, the most usual 
hypothesis is that, while the Nicomachean Ethics (E.N.) was 
written by Aristotle to Nicomachus, the Eudemian (E.E.) was 
written, not to, but by, Eudemus, and the Magna Moralia (M.M.) 
was written by some early disciple before the introduction of 
Stoic and Academic elements into the Peripatetic school. The 
question is further complicated by the fact that three Nico- 
machean books (E.N. v.-vii.) and three Eudemian (E. E. A-Z) 
are common to the two treatises, and by the consequent question 
whether, on the hypothesis of different authorship, the common 
books, as we may style them, were written for the Nicomachean 
by Aristotle, or for the Eudemian Ethics by Eudemus, or some by 
one and some by the other author. Against the " Chorizontes," 
who have advanced various hypotheses on all these points with- 
out convincing one another, it may be objected that they have 
not considered Aristotle's method of gradual and simultaneous 
composition of manuscripts within the Peripatetic school. We 
have to remember the traces of his separate discourses, and his 
own double versions; and that, as in ancient times Simplicius, 
who had two versions of the Physics, Book vii., suggested that 
both were early versions of Book viii. on the same subject, so 
in modern times Torstrik, having discovered that there were two 
versions of the De Anima, Book ii., suggested that both were by 
Aristotle. Above all, we must consider our present point that 
Platonic influence is a sign of earliness in an Aristotelian work; 
and generally, the same man may both think and write differently 
at different times, especially if, like Aristotle, he has been a 
prolific author. 

These considerations make it probable that the author of all 
three treatises was Aristotle himself; while the analysis of the 
treatises favours the hypothesis that he wrote the Eudemian 
Ethics and the Magna Moralia more or less together as the 
rudimentary first drafts of the mature Nicomachean Ethics. 

As the Platonic philosophy was primarily moral, and its meta- 
physics a theory of the moral order of the universe, Aristotle from 
the first must have mastered the Platonic ethics. At first he 
adopted the somewhat ascetic views of his master about soul and 
body, and about goods of body and estate; but before Plato's 
death he had rejected the hypothesis of forms, formal numbers 
and the form of the good identified with the one, by which Plato 
tried to explain moral phenomena; while his studies and teach- 
ing on rhetoric and poetry soon began to make him take a more 
tolerant view than Plato did of men's passions. Throughout his 
whole subsequent life, however, he retained the fundamental 
doctrine, which he had learnt from Plato, and Plato from 
Socrates, that virtue is essential to happiness. Twice over this 
tenet, which makes Socrates, Plato and Aristotle one ethical 
school, inspired Aristotle to attempt poetry: first, in the Elegy 
to Eudemus of Cyprus, in which, referring to either Socrates or 
Plato, he praises the man who first showed clearly that a good and 
happy man are the same (Fragm. 673); and secondly, in the 
Hymn in memory of Hermias, beginning " Virtue, difficult to 
the human race, noblest pursuit in life " (ib. 675). Moreover, the 
successors of Plato in the Academy, Speusippus and Xenocrates, 
showed the same belief in the essentiality of virtue. The question 
which divided them was what the good is. Speusippus took the 
ascetic view that the good is a perfect condition of neutrality 
between two contrary evils, pain and pleasure. Xenocrates 
took the tolerant view that it is the possession of appropriate 



ARISTOTLE 



5i3 



virtue and noble actions, requiring as conditions bodily and 
external goods. Aristotle was opposed to Speusippus, and nearly 
agreed with Xenocrates. According to him, the good is activity 
of soul in accordance with virtue in a mature life, requiring as 
conditions bodily and external goods of fortune; and virtue is a 
mean state of the passions. It is probable that when, after 
Plato's death and the accession of Speusippus in 347, Aristotle 
with Xenocrates left Athens to visit his former pupil Hermias, 
the three discussed this moderate system of Ethics in which the 
two philosophers nearly agreed. At any rate, it was adopted in 
each of the three moral treatises which pass under the name of 
Aristotle. 

The three treatises are in very close agreement throughout, and 
in the following details. The good of Ethics is human good; and 
human good is happiness, not the universal good or form of the 
good to which Plato subordinated human happiness. Happiness is 
activity of soul according to virtue in a mature life : it requires other 
goods only as conditions. The soul is partly irrational, partly 
rational; and therefore there are two kinds of virtue. Moral virtue, 
which is that of the irrational desires so far as they are obedient to 
reason, is a purposive habit in the mean. The motive of the moral 
virtues is the honourable (to koKov, honestum). As the rational is 
either deliberative or scientific, either practical or speculative 
intellect, there are two virtues of the intellect — prudence of the 
deliberative or practical, and wisdom of the scientific or speculative, 
intellect. The right reason by which moral virtue is determined is 
prudence, which is determined in its turn by wisdom. Pleasure is a 
psychical state, and is not a generation in the body supplying a defect 
and establishing a natural condition, but an activity of a natural 
condition of the soul. It should be specially noted that this doctrine 
like the rest is common to the three treatises: in Book vii. of the 
Nicomachean, which is Z of the Eudemian, pleasure is defined as 
ivkpytia -njs Kara <j>boiv c£eo>s a.vepnrob'KTTOs (chap. 12, 1153 a I 4" I 5) » 
and in the Magna Moralia as 1) nivqais avrov Kai 17 evkpyua. 
(ii. 7, 1204 b 28; cf. 1205 b 20-28). It is plain from the context 
that in the former definition " the natural condition " (r/ /caret 
<t>b<rti> *£«) refers to the soul which, while the body is regenerated, 
remains unimpaired (cf. 1152 b 35 seq., 1 154 b 15 seq.) ; and in the 
latter definition the thing (avrov), whose " motion, that is activity " 
is spoken of, is the part of the soul with which we feel pleased. 

Down then to their common definition of pleasure as activity the 
three treatises present a harmonious system of morals, consistently 
with one another, and with the general philosophy of Aristotle. 
In particular, the theory that pleasure is activity (ivipyeia) is the 
theory of two of his most authoritative works. In the De Anima 
(iii. 7, 431 a 10-12), being pleased and pained are defined by him as 
acting to (hvepyeiv) by a sensitive mean" in relation to good or evil 
as such. In the Metaphysics (A 7, 1072 b 16), in discussing the occu- 
pation of God, he says " his pleasure is activity," or " his activity 
is pleasure," according to a difference of readings which makes no 
difference to the identification of pleasure and activity (evipyaa). 
As then we find this identification of pleasure with activity in the 
Metaphysics and in the De Anima, as well as in the Nicomachean 
Ethics, the Eudemian Ethics and the Magna Moralia, the only logical 
conclusion, from which there is no escape, is that, so far as the treat- 
ment of pleasure goes, any Aristotelian treatise which defines it as 
activity is genuine. There is no reason for doubting that the Nico- 
machean Ethics to the end of Book vii., the Eudemian Ethics to the 
end of Book Z, and the Magna Moralia as far as Book ii. chap. 7, 
were all three written by Aristotle. 

Why then doubt at all ? It is because the Nicomachean Ethics 
contains a second discourse on pleasure (x. 1-5), in which the author, 
while agreeing with the previous treatment of the subject that 
pleasure is not a bodily generation, even when accompanied by it, 
but something psychical, nevertheless defines it (x. 4, 1174 b 31-33) 
not as an activity, but as a supervening end (kin.y^yvbp.tvbv ti reXos) 
perfecting an activity (reXeiot tt\v ivipytiav). He allows indeed 
that activity and pleasure are very closely related; that a 
pleasure of sense or thought perfects an act of sensation or of think- 
ing, depends on it, and is so inseparably conjoined with it as to raise 
a doubt whether pleasure is end of life or life end of pleasure, and even 
whether the activity is the same as the pleasure. But he disposes 
of this doubt in a very emphatic and significant manner. " Pleasure," 
says he, " does not seem to be thinking or perceiving ; for it is absurd : 
but on account of not being separated from them, it appears to some 
persons to be the same." Now it is not likely that Aristotle either, 
after having so often identified pleasure with activity, would say that 
the identification is absurd though it appears true to some persons, of 
whom he would in that case be one, or, having once disengaged the 
pleasure of perceiving and thinking from the acts of perceiving and 
thinking, would go backwards and confuse them. It is more likely 
that Aristotle identified pleasure with activity in the De Anima, the 
Metaphysics and the three moral treatises, as we have seen; but 
that afterwards some subsequent Peripatetic, considering that the 
pleasure of perceiving or thinking is not the same as perceiving or 
thinking, declared the previous identification of pleasure with activity 
absurd. At any rate, if we are to choose, it is the identification that, 

11. 17 



is Aristotle's, and the distinction not Aristotle's. Moreover, the 
distinction between activity and pleasure in the tenth book is really 
fatal to the consistency of the whole Nicomachean Ethics, which 
started in the first book with the identification of happiness and 
virtuous activity. For if the pleasure of virtuous activity is a super- 
vening end beyond the activity, it becomes a supervening end beyond 
the happiness of virtuous activity, which thus ceases to be the final 
end. Nevertheless, the distinction between activity and pleasure 
is true. Some unknown Peripatetic detected a flaw in the Nico- 
machean Ethics when he said that pleasure is a supervening end 
beyond activity, and, if he had gone on to add that happiness is also 
a supervening end beyond the virtuous activities which are necessary 
to produce it, he would have destroyed the foundation of his own 
founder's Ethics. 

It is further remarkable that the Nicomachean Ethics proceeds to a 
different conclusion. After the intrusion of this second discourse on 
pleasure, it goes on (E.N. x. 6-fin.) to the famous theory that the 
highest happiness is the speculative life of intellect or wisdom as 
divine, but that happiness as human also includes the practical life 
of combining prudence and moral virtue ; and that, while both lives 
need external goods as necessaries, the practical life also requires 
them as instruments of moral action. The treatise concludes with 
the means of making men virtuous ; contending that virtue requires 
habituation, habituation law, law legislative art, and legislative art 
politics: Ethics thus passes into Politics. The Eudemian Ethics 
proceeds to its conclusion (E.E. H 13-15) differently, with the 
consideration of (1) good fortune (tbrvxia), and (2) gentlemanliness 
(KaXonayaBla). Good fortune it divides into two kinds, both 
irrational; one divine, according to impulse, and more continuous; 
the other contrary to impulse and not continuous. Gentlemanliness 
it regards as perfect virtue, containing all particular virtues, and all 
goods for the sake of the honourable. Finally, it concludes with the 
limit (opos) of goods. First it finds the limit of goods of fortune in 
that desire ana possession of them which will conduce to the con- 
templation of God, whereas that which prevents the service and 
contemplation of God is bad. Then it adds that the best limit of the 
soul is as little as possible to perceive the other part of the soul (i.e. 
desire). Finally, the treatise concludes with saying that the limit 
of gentlemanliness has thus been stated, meaning that its limit is 
the service and contemplation of God and the control of desire by 
reason. The Magna Moralia (M.M. ii. 8-10) on these points is 
unlike the Nicomachean, and like the Eudemian Ethics in discussing 
good fortune and gentlemanliness, but it discusses them in a more 
worldly way. On good fortune (ii. 8), after recognizing the neces- 
sity of external goods to happiness, it denies that fortune is due to 
divine grace, and simply defines it as irrational nature (0X070* 
0&o-ts). Gentlemanliness (ii. 9) it regards as perfect virtue, and 
defines the gentleman as the man to whom really good things are 
good and really honourable things honourable. It then adds (ii. 10) 
that acting according to right reason is when the irrational part of 
the soul does not hinder the rational part of intellect from doing its 
work. Thereupon it proceeds to a discourse on friendship, which in 
the Nicomachean and Eudemian Ethics is discussed in an earlier 
position, but breaks off unfinished. 

On the whole, the three moral treatises proceed on very similar 
lines down to the common identification of pleasure with activity, 
and then diverge. From this point the Eudemian Ethics and the 
Magna Moralia become more like one another than like the Nico- 
machean Ethics. They also become less like one another than before : 
for the treatment of good fortune, gentlemanliness, and their limit 
is more theological in the Eudemian Ethics than in the Magna 
Moralia. 

How are the resemblances and differences of the three to be 
explained? By Aristotle's gradual method of composition. All 
three are great works, contributing to the origin of the independent 
science of Ethics. But the Eudemian Ethics and the Magna Moralia 
are more rudimentary than the Nicomachean Ethics, which as it were 
seems to absorb them except in the conclusion. They are, in short, 
neither independent works, nor mere commentaries, but Aristotle's 
first drafts of his Ethics. 

In the Ethics to Eudemus, as Porphyry properly called the 
Eudemian Ethics, Aristotle in the first four books successively investi- 
gates happiness, virtue, the voluntary and the particular moral 
virtues, in the same order and in the same letter and spirit as in his 
Ethics to Nicomachus. But the investigations are never so good. 
They are all such rudiments as Aristotle might well polish into the 
more developed expositions in the first four books of the Nico- 
machean Ethics. On the other hand, nobody would have gone back 
afterwards on his masterly treatment of happiness, in the first book, 
or of virtue in the second, or of the voluntary in the third, or of the 
particular virtues in the third and fourth* to write the sketchy 
accounts of the Eudemian Ethics. 

Again, these sketches are rough preparations for the subsequent 
books common to the two treatises. It is true, as Dr Henry Jackson 
has pointed out, though with some exaggeration, that the Eudemian 
agrees in detail rather better than the Nicomachean treatment of the 
voluntary with the subsequent discussion of injury (E.E. A = E.N. 
v. 8)_; and, as Th. H. Fritzsche remarks, the distinction between 
politics, and economics, and prudence in the Eudemian Ethics (A 8) 
is a closer anticipation of the subsequent triple distinction oi 

II 



5H 



ARISTOTLE 



practical science (E.E. E = E.N. vi 8). On the other hand, there 
are still more fundamental points in which the first three books of 
the Eudemian Ethics are a very inadequate preparation for the 
common books. Notably its treatment of prudence ((j>p6vr)<ri.s) is a 
chaos. At first, prudence appears as the operation of the philo- 
sophical life and connected with the speculative philosophy of 
Anaxagoras (E.E. A 1-5): then it is brought into connexion with 
the practical philosophy of Socrates (ib. 5) and co-ordinated with 
politics and economics (ib. 8) : then it is intruded into the diagram 
of moral virtues as a mean between villainy (travovpyia) and sim- 
plicity (eirriBua.) (E.E. B 33, 1221 a 12) : finally, a distinction 
between virtue by nature and virtue with prudence (pitra <t>poi/ii<rews) 
is promised (E.E. T 7, 1234 a 4). In addition to all this confusion 
of speculative and practical knowledge, prudence is absent when it 
ought to be present ; e.g. from the division of virtues into moral and 
intellectual (E.E. B 1, 1220 a 4-13), and from the definition of 
moral virtue (ib. 5, 10); while, in a passage (B 11) anticipating the 
subsequent discussion of the relation between prudence and moral 
virtue (E.E. E = E.N. vi. 12-13), it is stated that in purpose the end 
is made right by moral virtue, the means by another power, reason, 
without this right reason being stated to be prudence. After this, 
it can never be said that the earlier books of the Eudemian Ethics are 
so good a preparation as those of the Nicomachean Ethics for the 
distinction between prudence (<j>pbvqai.t) and wisdom (<7o<j>La), which 
is the main point of the common books, and one of Aristotle's main 
points against Plato's philosophy. 

Curiously enough, although little is made of it, this distinction, 
absent from the earlier books, is present in the final book H of the 
Eudemian Ethics (cf. 1246 b 4 seq., 1248 a 35, 1249 b 14) ; and probably 
therefore this part was a separate discourse. Meanwhile, however, 
the truth about the Eudemian Ethics in general is that it was an 
earlier rudimentary sketch written by Aristotle, when he was still 
struggling, without quite succeeding, to get over Plato's view that 
there is one philosophical knowledge of universal good, by which 
not only the dialectician and mathematician must explain the being 
and becoming of the world, but also the individual and the statesman 
guide the life of man. Indeed, the final proof that the Eudemian 
Ethics is earlier than the Nicomachean is the very fact that it 
is more under Platonic influence. In the first place, the reason 
why the account of prudence begins by confusing the speculative 
with the practical is that the Eudemian Ethics starts from Plato's 
Philebus, where, without differentiating speculative and practical 
knowledge, Plato asks how far good is prudence ((frpovnais) , how 
far pleasure (r/Sovri) ; and in the Eudemian Ethics Aristotle asks 
the same question, adding virtue (dperij) in order to correct the 
Socratic confusion of virtue with prudence. Secondly, the Eudemian 
Ethics, while not agreeing with Plato's Republic that the just can 
be happy by justice alone, does not assign to the external goods of 
good fortune (evrvxia) the prominence accorded to them in the 
Nicomachean Ethics as the necessary conditions of all virtue, and 
the instruments of moral virtue. Thirdly, the emphasis of the 
Eudemian Ethics on the perfect virtue of gentlemanliness 
(ka)*>Kaya0ia.) is a decidedly old-fashioned trait, which descended 
to Aristotle from the Greek notion of a gentleman who does his 
duty to his state (cf. Herodotus i. 30, Thucydides iv. 40) and 
to his God (Xenophon, Symp. iv. 49) through Plato, who in the 
Gorgias (470 e) says that the gentleman is happy, and in the Republic 
(489 e) imputes to him the love of truth essential to philosophy. 
Moreover, when Plato goes on (ib. 505 b) to identify the form of 
good, without which nothing is good, with the gentlemanly thing 
(KaKbv ko.1 ayaddp), without which any possession is worthless, he 
inspired into the author of the Eudemian Ethics the very limit (opos) 
of good fortune and gentlemanliness with which it concludes, only 
without Plato's elevation of the good into the form of the good. 
In the Nicomachean Ethics the old notion, we gladly see, survives 
(cf. i. 8) : virtuous actions are gentlemanly actions, and happiness 
accordingly is being at our best and noblest and pleasantest (apurrov 
ko.1 KaWurrov ko.1 ijdKTTov). But gentlemanliness is no longer called 
perfect virtue, as in the Eudemian Ethics : its place has been taken 
by justice, which is perfect virtue to one's neighbour, by prudence 
which unites all the moral virtues, and by wisdom which is the highest 
virtue. Accordingly, in the end the old ideal of gentlemanliness is 
displaced by the new ideal of the speculative and practical life. 

Lastly, the Eudemian Ethics derives from Platonism a strong 
theological bias, especially in its conclusion (H 14-15). The opposi- 
tion of divine good fortune according to impulse to that which is 
contrary to impulse reminds us of Plato's point in the Phaedrus that 
there is a divine as well as a diseased madness. The determination of 
the limit of good fortune and of gentlemanliness by looking to the 
ruler, God, who governs as the end for which prudence gives its 
orders, and the conclusion that the best limit is the most conducive 
to the service and contemplation of God, presents the Deity and 
man's relation to him as a final and objective standard more 
definitely in the Eudemian than in the Nicomachean Ethics, which 
only goes so far as to say that man's highest end is the speculative 
wisdom which is divine, like God, dearest to God. 

Because, then, it is very like, but more rudimentary and more 
Platonic, we conclude that the Eudemian is an earlier draft of the 
Nicomachean Ethics, written by Aristotle when he was still in process 
of transition from Plato's ethics to his own. 



The Magna Moralia contains similar evidence of being earlier than 
the Nicomachean Ethics. It treats the same subjects, but always in 
a m'ore rudimentary manner; and its remarks are always such as 
would precede rather than follow the masterly expositions, of the 
Nicomachean Ethics. This inferiority applies also to its treatment 
not only of the early part (i. 1-33 corresponding to E.N. i.-iv.), but 
also of the middle part (i. 34-ii. 7 corresponding to E.N. v.-vii. = 
E.E. A-Z). In dealing with justice, it does not make it clear, as the 
Nicomachean Ethics (Book v.) does, that even universal justice is 
virtue towards another (M.M. i. 34, 1193 b 1-15), and it omits 
altogether the division into distributive and corrective justice. In 
dealing with what the Nicomachean. Ethics (Book vi.) calls intelr 
lectual virtues, but the Magna Moralia (i. 5, 35) virtues of the 
rational part of the soul, and right reason, it distinguishes (i. 35, 
1 196 b 34-36) science, prudence, intelligence, wisdom, apprehension 
(vw6\y4/i.s) , in a rough manner very inferior to the classification 
of science, art, prudence, intelligence, wisdom, all of which are co- 
ordinate states of attaining truth, in the Nicomachean Ethics (vi. 3). 
It distinguishes prudence (tfrpbvriois) and wisdom (ao<j>ia) as the 
respective virtues of deliberative and scientific reason; and on the 
whole its account of prudence (cf. M.M. i. 5) is more consistent than 
that of the Eudemian Ethics. In these points it is a better prepara- 
tion for the Nicomachean Ethics. But it falls into the confusion of 
first saying that praise is for moral virtues, and not for virtues of the 
reason, whether prudence or wisdom (M.M. i. 5, 1185 b 8-12), and 
afterwards arguing that prudence is a virtue, precisely because it is 
praised (i. 35, 1197 a 16-18). In dealing with continence and incontin- 
ence, the same doubts and solutions occur as in the Nicomachean 
Ethics (Book vii. =E.E. Z), but sometimes confusing doubts and 
solutions together, instead of first proposing all the doubts and then 
supplying the solutions as in the Nicomachean Ethics. Such rudi- 
mentary and imperfect sketches would be quite excusable in a first 
draft, but inexcusable and incredible after the Nicomachean Ethics 
had been written. 

It has another characteristic which points to its being an early work 
of Aristotle, when he was still under the influence of Plato's style; 
namely its approximation to dialogue. It asks direct questions 
(e.g. 5td ri; M.M. i. 1 repeatedly, 12; ii. 6, 7), incorporates direct 
statements of others (e.g. <S>i\ai, i. 12, 13; ii. 3, 6, 7), alternates 
direct objections and answers (i. 34), and introduces conversations 
between the author and others, expressed interrogatively, indicatively 
and even imperatively(dXX' Ipet pot, t& ?roTa Siatrafacrov iyieiva hoTiv: 
i- 35, 1 196 b 10; cf. ii. 10, 1208 a 20-22). The whole treatise 
inclines to run into dialogue. It is also Platonic, like the Endemian 
Ethics, in making little of external goods in the account of good 
fortune (ii. 8), and inemphasizing the perfect virtue of gentlemanli- 
ness (ii. _9)- Indeed, in some respects it is more like the Eudemian, 
though in the main more like the Nicomachean Ethics. In the first 
book, it has the Eudemian distinction between prudence, virtue and 
pleasure (i. 3, 1184 b 5-6);' but does not make so much of it as the 
distinction between prudence and wisdom blurred in the Eudemian 
but defined in the Nicomachean Ethics. In the second book, it runs 
parallel to the Eudemian Ethics in placing good fortune and gentle- 
manliness (ii. 8-9), where the Nicomachean Ethics places the specu- 
lative and the practical life; but it omits the theological element 
by denying that good fortune is divine grace, and by submitting 
gentlemanliness to no standard but that of right reason, when the 
irrational part of the soul does not hinder the rational part, or 
intellect (vovs), from doing its work. 

Because, then, the Magna Moralia is very like the Nicomachean 
Ethics, but more rudimentary, nearer to the Platonic dialogues in 
style and. to a less degree in matter, and also like the Eudemian 
Ethics, we conclude that it is also like that treatise in having been 
written as an earlier draft Of the Nicomachean Ethics by Aristotle 
himself. 

The hypothesis that the Eudemian Ethics, and by consequence the 
Magna Moralia, ar.e later than Aristotle has arisen from a simple 
misconception, continued in a Scholium attributed to Aspasius, who 
lived in the 2nd century a.d. Nicomachean means " addressed to 
Nicomachus," and Eudemian "addressed to Eudemus "; but, as 
Cicero thought that the Nicomachean Ethics was written by Nico- 
machus, so the author of the Scholium thought that the Eudemian 
Ethics, at least so far as the first account of pleasure goes, was written 
by Eudemus. He only thought so, however, because Aristotle 
could not have written both accounts of pleasure; and, taking for 
granted that Aristotle had written the second account of pleasure in 
the Nicomachean Ethics (Book x.), he concluded that the first 
account (Book vii.) was not the work of Aristotle, but of Eudemus 
(Comm. in Ar. (Berlin) xix. p. 151). We have seen reason to reverse 
this argument: Aristotle did write the first account in Book vii., 
because it contains his usual theory; and, if we must choose, he did 
not write the second account in Book x. In this way, too, we get a 
historical development of the theory of pleasure : Plato and Speu- 
sippus said it is generation (cf. Plato's Philebus) : Aristotle said it is 
psychical activity sometimes requiring bodily generation, sometimes 
not (E.N. vn.=E.E.Z): Aristotle, or some Aristotelian, afterwards 
said that it is a supervening end completing an activity (E.N. x.). 
Secondly, some modern commentators, starting from the false conclu- 
sion that the definition of pleasure as activity (E.N. vii. = E.E.Z) is 
by Eudemus, and supposing without proof that he was also author of 



ARISTOTLE 



5i5 



the first three books of the Eudemian Ethics, have further asserted 
that these are a better introduction than the first four books of 
the Nicomachean Ethics to the books common to both treatises 
(E.N. Books v.-vii.=E.£. Books A-Z), and have concluded that 
Eudemus wrote these common books. But we have seen that 
Aristotle wrote the first three books of the Eudemian as an 
earlier draft of the Nicomachean Ethics; so that, even so far as 
they form a better introduction, this will not prove the common 
books to be by Eudemus. Again, those first three books are a 
better introduction only in details; whereas in regard to the 
all-important subject of prudence as distinct from wisdom, they 
are so bad an introduction that the common book which discusses 
that subject at large (E.N. Book vi. =E.E. Book E) must be rather 
founded on the first four books of Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics. 
Further, as Aristotle wrote both the first three Eudemian and the 
first four Nicomachean books, there is no reason why sometimes one, 
sometimes the other, should not be the best introduction to the 
common books by the same author. Finally, the common books are 
so integral a part of the Aristotelian system of philosophy that they 
cannot be disengaged from it : the book on justice (E.N. v.) quotes 
and is quoted in the Politics (cf. 1 130 b 28, 1280 a 16, 1261 a 30) ; the 
book on intellectual virtues (E.N. vi.) quotes (vi. 3) the Posterior 
Analytics, i. 2, and is quoted in the Metaphysics (A 1) ; and we have 
seen that the book (E.N. vii.) which defines pleasure as activity 
is simply stating an Aristotelian commonplace. Thirdly, in order to 
prove that the Eudemian Ethics was by Eudemus, it is said that in 
its first part it contemplates that there must be a limit (opos) for 
virtue as a mean (E.E. B 5, 1222 b 7-8), in its middle part it criticizes 
the Nicomachean Ethics for not being clear about this limit (E.E. E 1), 
and in the end it alone assigns this limit, in the service and contem- 
plation of God (E.E H 15, 1249 b 16 seq.). This argument is subtle, 
but over-subtle. The Eudemian and the Nicomachean treatments 
of this subject do not really differ. In the Nicomachean as in the 
Eudemian Ethics the limit above moral virtue is right reason, or 
prudence, which is right reason on such matters ; and above prudence 
wisdom, for which prudence gives its orders; while wisdom is the 
intelligence and science of the most venerable objects, of the most 
divine, and of God. After this agreement, there is a shade of differ- 
ence. While the Eudemian Ethics in a more theological vein empha- 
sizes God, the object of wisdom as the end for which prudence gives 
its orders, the Nicomachean Ethics in a more humanizing spirit 
emphasizes wisdom itself, the speculative activity, as that end, and 
afterwards as the highest happiness, because activity of the divine 
power of intellect, because an imitation of the activity of God, 
because most dear to God. This is too fine a distinction to found a 
difference of authorship. Beneath it, and behind the curious hesita- 
tion which in dealing with mysteries Aristotle shows between the 
divine and the human, his three moral treatises agree that wisdom 
is a science of things divine, which the Nicomachean Ethics (vi. 7) 
defines as science and intelligence of the most venerable things, the 
Magna Moralia (i. 35) regards as that which is concerned with the 
eternal and the divine, and the Eudemian Ethics (H 15) elevates into 
the service and contemplation of God. 

Aristotle then wrote three moral treatises, which agree in the 
fundamental doctrines that happiness requires external fortune, 
but is activity of soul according to virtue, rising from morality 
through prudence to wisdom, or that science of the divine which 
constitutes the theology of his Metaphysics. Surely, the harmony 
of these three moral gospels proves that Aristotle wrote them, 
and wrote the Eudemian Ethics and the Magna Moralia as pre- 
ludes to the Nicomachean Ethics. When did he begin? We do 
not know; but there is a pathetic suggestiveness in a passage in 
the Magna Moralia (i. 35), where he says, "Clever even a bad 
man is called; as Mentor was thought clever, but prudent he 
was not." Mentor was the treacherous contriver of the death of 
Hermias (345-344 B.C.). Was this passage written when Aristotle 
was mourning for his friend? 

4. The Rhetoric to Alexander. — This is one of a series of works 
emanating from Aristotle's early studies in rhetoric, beginning 
with the Gryllus, continuing in the Theodectea and the Collection 
of Arts, all of which are lost except some fragments; while 
among the extant Aristotelian writings as they stand we still 
possess the Rhetoric to Alexander ('Ptjtopikj) irpbs 'WkfavSpov) 
and the Rhetoric (T«x>"? 'PyTopuci)). But the Rhetoric to Alexander 
was considered spurious by Erasmus, for the inadequate reasons 
that it has a preface and is not mentioned in the list of Diogenes 
Laertius, and was assigned by Petrus Victorius, in his preface to 
the Rhetoric, to Anaximenes. It remained for Spengel to entitle 
the work Anaximenis Ars Rhetorica in his edition of 1847, and 
thus substitute for the name of the philosopher Aristotle that of 
the sophist Anaximenes on his title-page. We have therefore to 
ask, first who was the author, and secondly what is the relation 



of the Rhetoric to Alexander to the Rhetoric, which nowadays alone 
passes for genuine. 

After a dedicatory epistle to Alexander (chap. 1) the opening of 
the treatise itself (chap. 2) is as follows : — " There are three genera 
of political speeches; one deliberative, one declamatory, one 
forensic: their species are seven; hortative, dissuasive, laudatory, 
vituperative, accusatory, defensive, critical." This brief sentence 
is enough to prove the work genuine, because it was Aristotle 
who first distinguished the three genera (cf. Rhet. i. 3; Quintilian 
iii. 4, 1. 7, 1), by separating the declamatory (k-wv&tixruibv) 
from the deliberative (dri firry opiKop, avufiovKtvnKbv) and 
judicial (diicavucbv) ; whereas his rival Isocrates had con- 
sidered that laudation and vituperation, which Aristotle elevated 
into species of declamation, run through every kind (Quintilian 
iv. 4), and Anaximenes recognized only the deliberative and the 
judicial (Dionys. H. de Isaeo, 19). In order, however, to impute 
the whole work to Anaximenes, Spengel took one of the most 
inexcusable steps ever taken in the history of scholarship. With- 
out any manuscript authority he altered the very first words 
" three genera " (rpla yevrf) into " two genera " (8vo ykvr}), and 
omitted the words "one declamatory" (rb 8e~ eKiZtiKTiiibv). 
Quintilian (iii. 4) imputes to Anaximenes two genera, deliberative 
and judicial, and seven species, " hortandi, dehortandi, laudandi, 
vituperandi, accusandi, defendendi, exquirendi, quod i^erao-riKov 
dicit." But the author of this rhetoric most certainly recognized 
three genera (rpla yevrj), since, besides the deliberative and 
judicial, the declamatory genus constantly appears in the work 
(chaps. 2 init., 4, 7, 18, 36, cf. ovk ay&vos dXX' kiriSei^toss evena 
1440 613); and, if the terms for it are not always the same, this is 
just what one would expect in a new discovery. Moreover, he 
could recognize seven species in the Rhetoric to Alexander, though 
he recognized only six in the Rhetoric, provided the two works 
were not written at the same time; and as a matter of fact 
even in the Rhetoric to Alexander the seventh or critical species 
(k^traanKov) is in process of disappearing (cf. chap. 37). As 
then Anaximenes did not, but Aristotle did, recognize three 
genera, and as Aristotle could as well as Anaximenes recognize 
seven species, the evidence is overwhelming that the Rhetoric to 
Alexander is the work not of Anaximenes, but of Aristotle; on 
the condition that its date is not that of Aristotle's confessedly 
genuine Rhetoric. 

There is a second and even stronger evidence that the Rhetoric 
to Alexander is a genuine work of Aristotle. It divides (chap. 8) 
evidences (irioreis) into two kinds (1) evidence from arguments, 
actions and men (at fiiv hi- abroiv roiv \bywv ical r&v irpa£ea)v kcu 
twv avdpinraiv) ; (2) adventitious evidences (at 5' ewideroi rdis 
Xeyofievois Kal rots •Kpo.rrop.kvois). The former are immediately 
enumerated as probabilities (eUoTa), examples (irapaSdyfiara), 
proofs (reic(ir)pid) , considerations (evdvixr)nara) , maxims (yv£>nai.), 
signs (arnma), refutations (e\e7xoi); the latter as opinion of 
the speaker (86£a rod \eyopros), witnesses (/mprupiai), tortures 
(fHacavoi), oaths (opkol). It is confessed by Spengel himself 
that these two kinds of evidences are the two kinds recognized 
in Aristotle's Rhetoric as (1) artificial (ivrexvot. irioreis) and 
(2) inartificial (arexvoi Tricrreis). Now, from the outset of his 
Rhetoric Aristotle himself claims to be the first to distinguish 
between artificial evidences from arguments and other evidences 
which he regards as mere additions; and he complains that the 
composers of arts of speaking had neglected the former for the 
latter. In particular, rhetoricians appeared to him to have 
neglected argument in comparison with passion. No doubt, 
rational evidences had appeared in books of rhetoric, as we see 
from Plato's Phaedrus, 266-267,where we find proofs,probabilities, 
refutation and maxim, but mixed up with other evidences. Xhe 
point of Aristotle was to draw a line between rational and other 
evidences, to insist on the former, and in fact to found a logic of 
rhetoric. But if in the Rhetoric to Alexander, not he, but Anaxi- 
menes, had already performed this great achievement, Aristotle 
would have been the meanest of mankind; for the logic of 
rhetoric would have been really the work of Anaximenes the 
sophist, but falsely claimed by Aristotle the philosopher. As we 
cannot without a tittle of evidence accept such a consequence, 



5 i6 



ARISTOTLE 



we conclude that Aristotle formulated the distinction between 
argumentative and adventitious, artificial and inartificial evi- 
dences, both in the Rhetoric to Alexander and in the Rhetoric; 
and that the former as well as the latter is a genuine work of 
Aristotle, the founder of the logic of rhetoric. 

What is the relation between these two genuine Rhetorics? The 
last event mentioned in the Rhetoric to Alexander occurred in 340, 
the last in the Rhetoric is the common peace (xoihij tip-hvn) made 
between Alexander and the Greeks in 336 (Rhet. ii. 23, 1399 b 12). 
The former treatise (chap. 9), under the head of examples 
(wapaSdy /jiara), gives historical examples of the unexpected in war 
for the years 403, 371, 358, concluding with the yeaf 340, in which 
the Corinthians, coming with nine triremes to the assistance of 
the Syracusans, defeated the Carthaginians who were blockading 
Syracuse with 150 ships. Spengel, indeed, tries to bring the latest 
date in the book down to 330 ; but it is by absurdly supposing that 
the author could not have got the commonplace, " one ought to 
criticize not bitterly but gently," except from Demosthenes, De 
Corona (§ 265). We may take it then that the last date in the 
Rhetoric to Alexander is 340; and by a curious coincidence 340 was 
the year when, on Philip's marching against Byzantium, Alexander 
was left behind as regent and keeper of the seal, and distinguished 
himself so greatly that Philip was only too glad that the Macedonians 
called Alexander king (Plutarch, Alexander, 9). It is possible then 
that Aristotle may have written the dedication to Alexander about 
340 and treated him as if he were king in the dedicatory epistle. 
At the same time, as such prefaces are often forgeries, not prejudic- 
ing the body of the treatise, it does not really matter whether 
Aristotle actually dedicated his work to Alexander in that epistle 
about that year or not. If he did, then the Rhetoric to Alexander in 
340 was at least four years prior to the Rhetoric, which was as late as 
336. If he did not, the question still remains, what is the internal 
relation between these two genuine Rhetorics ? It will turn out 
most important. 

The relation between the two Rhetorics turns on their treatment 
of rational, argumentative, artificial evidences. Each of them, the 
probability (chap. 8), the example (chap. 9), the proof (chap. 10), the 
consideration (chap, n), the maxim (chap. 12), the sign (chap. 13), 
the refutation (chap. 14), though very like what it is in the Rhetoric, 
receives in the Rhetoric to Alexander a definition slightly different 
from the definition in the Rhetoric, which it must be remembered is 
also the definition in the Prior Analytics. Strange as this point is, it 
is still stranger that not one of these internal evidences is brought 
into relation with induction and deduction. Example (irapadeiyna) 
is not called rhetorical induction, and consideration (kvBiinrina) is 
not called rhetorical syllogism, as they are in the Rhetoric, and in 
the Analytics. Induction {tTrayuyii) and syllogism {ovWcy icr/ibs) , the 
general forms of inference, do not occur in the Rhetoric to Alexander. 
In fact, this interesting treatise contains a rudimentary treatment of 
rational evidences in rhetoric and is therefore earlier than the 
Rhetoric, which exhibits a developed analysis of these rational 
evidences as special logical forms. Together, the earlier and the later 
Rhetoric show us the logic of rhetoric in the making, going on about 
340, the last date of the Rhetoric to Alexander, and more developed 
in or after 336 B.C., the last date of the Rhetoric. 

Nor is this all: the earlier Rhetoric to Alexander and the later 
Rhetoric show us logic itself in the making. We have already said 
that Aristotle was primarily a metaphysician. He gradually became 
a logician out of his previous studies : out of metaphysics, for with 
him being is always the basis of thinking, and common. principles, 
such as that of contradiction, are axioms of things before axioms of 
thought, while categories are primarily things signified by names; 
out of the mathematics of the Pythagoreans and the Platbnists, 
which taught him the nature of demonstration; out of the physics, 
of which he imbibed the first draughts from his father, which taught 
him induction from sense and the modification of strict demonstra- 
tion to suit facts ; out of the dialectic between man and man which 
provided him with beautiful examples of inference in the Socratic 
dialogues of Xenophon and Plato; out of the rhetoric addressed to 
large audiences, which with dialectic called his attention to probable 
inferences; out of the grammar taught with rhetoric and poetics 
which led him to the logic of the proposition. We cannot write a 
history of the varied origin of logic, beyond putting the rudimentary 
logic of the proposition in the De Interpretations before the less 
rudimentary theory of categories as significant names capable of 
becoming predicates in the Categories, and before the maturer analysis 
of the syllogism in the Analytics. But at any rate the process was 
gradual; and Aristotle was advanced in metaphysics, mathematics, 
physics, dialectics, rhetoric and poetics, before he became the founder 
of logic. 

V. Order of the Philosophical Writings 
Some of Aristotle's philosophical writings then are earlier than 
other:,; because they show more Platonic influence, and are 
more rudimentary; e.g. the Categories earlier than some parts of 
the Metaphysics, because under the influence of Platonic forms 
it talks of inherent attributes, and allows secondary substances 



which are universal; the De Interpretatione earlier than the 
Analytics, because in it the Platonic analysis of the sentence into 
noun and verb is retained for the proposition; the Eudemian 
Ethics and the Magna Moralia earlier than the Nicomachean 
Ethics, because they are rudimentary sketches of it, and the one 
written rather in the theological spirit, the other rather in the 
dialectical style, of Plato; and the Rhetoric to Alexander earlier 
than the Rhetoric, because it contains a rudimentary theory of 
the rational evidences afterwards developed into a logic of 
rhetoric in the Rhetoric and Analytics. 

It is tempting to think that we can carry out the chronological 
order of the philosophical writings in detail. But in the gradual 
process of composition, by which a work once begun was kept 
going with the rest, although a work such as the Politics (begun 
in 357) was begun early, and some works more rudimentary came 
earlier than others, the general body of writings was so kept 
together in Aristotle's library, and so simultaneously elaborated 
and consolidated into a system that it soen becomes impossible 
to put one before another. 

Zeller, indeed, has attempted an exact order of succession: — 

1 . The logical treatises. 

2. The Physics, De Coelo, De Generatione et Corruptione, 

Meteorologica. 

3. Historia Animalium, De Anima, Parva Naturalia, De Partibus 

Animalium, De Animalium Incessu, De Generatione 
Animalium. 

4. Ethics and Politics. 

5. Poetics and Rhetoric. 

6. Metaphysics (unfinished). 

But Zeller does not give enough weight either to the evidence of 
early composition contained in the Politics and Meteorology, or to the 
evidence of subsequent contemporaneous composition contained in 
the cross-references, e.g between the Physics and the Metaphysics. 
On the other hand he gives too much weight to the references from 
one book to another, which Aristotle could have entered into his 
manuscripts at any time before his death. Moreover, the arrange- 
ment sometimes breaks down: for example, though on the whole 
the logical books are quoted without quoting the rest, the De Inter- 
pretatione (chap. 1) quotes the.De Anima, and therefore is falsely taken 
by Zeller against its own internal evidence to be subsequent to it and 
consequently to the other logical books. Again, the Meteorologica 
(iii. 2, 372 b 9) quotes the De Sensu (c. 3), and therefore, on Zeller's 
arguments, ought to follow one of the Parva Naturalia. Lastly, 
though the Metaphysics often quotes the Physics, and is therefore 
regarded as being subsequent, it is itself quoted in the Physics (i. 8, 
191 b 29), and therefore ought to be regarded as antecedent. Zeller 
tries to get over this difficulty of cross-reference by detaching Meta- 
physics, Book A, from the rest and placing it before the Physics. 
But this violent and arbitrary remedy is only partial. The truth is 
that the Metaphysics both precedes and follows the Physics, because 
it had been all along occupying Aristotle ever since he began to 
differ from Plato's metaphysical views and indeed forms a kind of 

Cresupposed basis of his whole system. So generally, the references 
ackwards and forwards, and the cross-references, are really evidences 
that Aristotle mainly wrote his works not successively but simul- 
taneously, and entered references as and when he pleased, because 
he had not published them. 

. There are two kinds of quotations in Aristotle's extant works, the 
quotation of another book, and the quotation of a historical fact. 
While the former is useless to determine the sequence of books written 
simultaneously, the latter is insufficient to determine a complete 
chronological order. When Aristotle, e.g. in the Politics, quotes an 
event as now («/»), he was writing about it at that, time; and when 
he quotes another event as lately (veuari) he was writing about it 
shortly after that time; but he might have been writing the rest of 
the Politics both before and after either event. When he quotes the 
last event mentioned in the book, e.g. in the Rhetoric (ii. 23, 1399 b 
I2)_ the " common peace " of Greece under Alexander in 336, he was 
writing as late as that date, but he might also have been writing the 
Rhetoric both before it and after it. When he quotes what persons 
used to say in the past, e.g. Plato and Speusippus in the' Ethics, 
Eudoxus and Callippus in the Metaphysics, he was writing these 
passages after the deaths of these -persons; but he might have been 
also writing the Ethics and the Metaphysics both beforehand and 
afterwards. Lastly, when he is silent about a historical fact, the 
argument from silence is evidence only when he could not have failed 
to mention it; as, for example, in the Constitution of Athens, when 
he could not have failed to mention quinqueremes and other facts 
after 325-324. But this is in a historical work; whereas the argu- 
ment from silence about historical facts in a philosophical work can 
seldom apply. 

The chronological order therefore is not sufficiently detailed to 
be the real order of Aristotelian writings. Secondly, the traditional 
order, which for nearly 2000 years has descended from the edition 
of Andronicus to the Berlin edition, is satisfactory in details, but 



ARISTOTLE 



517 



unsatisfactory in system. It gives too much weight to Aristotle's 
logic, and too little to his metaphysics, on account of two prejudices 
of the commentators which led them to place both logic and physics 
before metaphysics. Aristotle rightly used all the sciences of his day, 
and especially his own physics, as a basis of his metaphysics. For 
example, at the very outset he refers to the Physics (ii. 2) for his use 
of the four causes, material, efficient, formal and final, in the Mela- 
physics (A 2). This and other applications of the science of nature to 
the science of all being induced the commentators to adopt this order, 
and entitle the science of being the Sequel to the Physics (ri /xeri. 
tA <j>vt7i.Ka). But Aristotle knew nothing of this title, the first known 
use of which was by Nicolaus Damascenus, a younger contemporary 
of Andronicus, the editor of the Aristotelian writings, and Andronicus 
was probably the originator of the title, and of the order. On the 
other hand, Aristotle entitles the science of all being " Primary 
Philosophy " (tp&tt) <t>i\o<ro<t>ia) , and the science of physical being 
" Secondary Philosophy " (Sevrepa <f>i\o<ro<j>la) , which suggests that 
his order is from Metaphysics to Physics, the reverse of his editor's 
order from Physics to Metaphysics. Thus the traditional order puts 
Physics before Metaphysics without Aristotle's authority. With 
some more. show of authority it puts Logic before Metaphysics. 
Aristotle, on introducing the principle of contradiction (Met. V 3), 
which belongs to Metaphysics as an axiom of being, says that those 
who attempt to discuss the question of accepting this axiom, do so on 
account of their ignorance of Analytics, which they ought to know 
beforehand (irpotiriaTafiivovs}. He means that the logical analysis 
of demonstration in the Analytics would teach them beforehand that 
there cannot be demonstration, though there must be induction, of an 
axiom, or any other principle; whereas, if they are not logically pre- 
pared for metaphysics, they will expect a demonstration of the axiom, 
as Heraclitus, the Heraclitean Cratylus and the Sophist Protagoras 
actually did, — and in vain. Acting on this hint, not Aristotle but the 
Peripatetics inferred that all logic is an instrument (ipyavov) of all 
sciences; and by the time of Andronicus, who was one of them and 
sometimes called " the eleventh from Aristotle," the order, Logic- 
Physics-Metaphysics, had become established pretty much as we have 
it now. It is, however, not the real order for studying the philosophy 
of Aristotle, because there is more Metaphysics in his Physics than 
Physics in his Metaphysics, and more Metaphysics in his Logic than 
Logic in his Metaphysics. The commentators themselves were doubt- 
ful about the order: Boethus proposed to begin with Physics, and some 
of the Platonists with Ethics or Mathematics; while Andronicus pre- 
ferred to put Logic first as Organon (Scholia, 25 b 34 seq.). None of 
the parties to the dispute had the authority of Aristotle. What do we 
find in his works? Primary philosophy, Metaphysics, the science of 
being, is the solid foundation of all parts of his philosophical system ; 
not only in the Physics, but also in the De Coelo (i. 8, 277 b 10), in the 
De Generatione (i. 3, 318 a 6; ii. 10, 336 b 29), in the De Aninta (i. 1, 
403 a 28, cf. b 16), in the De ParlibusAnimalium (i. 1, 641 a 35), in the 
Nicotnachean Ethics (i. 6, 1096 b 30), in the De Interpretation (5, 17 a 
14); and in short throughout his extant works. The reason is that 
Aristotle was primarily a metaphysician half for and half against 
Plato, occupied himself with metaphysics all his philosophical 
life, made the science of things the universal basis of all sciences 
without destroying their independence, and so gradually brought 
round philosophy from universal forms to individual substances. 
The traditional order of the Aristotelian writings, still continued in 
the Berlin edition, beginning with the logical writings on page 1, 
proceeding to the physical writings on page 184, and postponing 
the Metaphysics to page 980, is not the real order of Aristotle's 
philosophy. 

The real order of Aristotle's philosophy is that of Aristotle's 
mind, revealed in his writings, and by the general view of think- 
ing, science, philosophy and all learning therein contained. He 
classified thinking (Met. E 1) and science (Topics, vi. 6) by the 
three queries of speculation (deuipia), practice (-n-paijis) and
production (woiqcns} , and made the following subdivisions: — 

I. Speculative: about things; subdivided (Met. E 1; 
De An. i. 1) into: — 

i. Primary Philosophy, Theology, also called 

Wisdom, about things as things, 
ii. Mathematical Philosophy, about quantitative 

things in the abstract, 
iii. Physical Philosophy, about things as changing, 
and therefore about natural substances or 
bodies, composed of matter and essence. 

II. Practical or Political Philosophy, or philosophy of things 
human (cf. E.N. x. 9-fin.): about human good; sub- 
divided (E.N. vi. 8, cf. E.E. A 8, 1218 b 13) into:— 
i. Ethics, about the good of the individual, 
ii. Economics, about the good of the family, 
iii. Politics, about the general good of the state. 



III. Productive, or Art (t^x^): about works produced; sub- 
divided (Met. A. i, 981 b 17-20) into: — 

1. Necessary (irpos ravaykai a), e.g. medicine. 

ii. Fine (irpos 5ia.ywyqv) , e.g. poetry. 

Aristotle calls all these investigations sciences (exwrrij/iat) : 

but he' also uses the term " sciences " in a narrower sense in 

consequence of a classification of their objects, which pervades his 

writings, into things necessary and things contingent, as follows . — 

(A) The necessary (to ^17 kv8ex°t>w'ov a\\ws ex £ «0. what 

must be; subdivided into: — 

(1) Absolutely (dirX&) : , e.g. the mathematical. 

(2) Hypothetieally (e£ wroOkcrtois) , e.g. matter neces- 

sary as means to an end. 

(B) The contingent (to ev5exonevov a\\o>s extw), what may 

be; subdivided into:— 

(1) The usual (to o>s kirl to tto\v) or natural (t6 

4>vo-ikov), e.g. a man grows grey. 

(2) The accidental (to KarAavfjijiefiriKos), e.g. a man 

sits or not. 

Now, according to Aristotle, science in the narrow sense is 
concerned only with the absolutely necessary (E.N. iii. 3), and in 
the classification would stop at mathematics, which we still call 
exact science: in the wide sense, on the other hand, it extends 
to the whole of the necessary and to the usual contingent, but 
excludes the accidental (Met. E 2), and would in the classification 
include not only metaphysics and mathematics, but also physics, 
ethics, economics, politics, necessary and fine art; or in short 
all speculative, practical and productive thinking of a system- 
atic kind. Hence the Posterior Analytics, which is Aristotle's 
authoritative logic of science, is of peculiar interest because, after 
beginning by defining science as investigating necessary objects 
from necessary principles (i. 4), it proceeds to say that it is either 
of the necessary qr of the usual though not of the accidental 
(i. 29), and' to admit that its principles are some necessary and 
some contingent (i. 32, 88 b 7). Philosophy (<pi\oo-o(pia) also is 
used by him in a similar manner. Though occasionally he means 
by it primary philosophy (Met. T 2-3, K.3), more frequently he 
extends it to all three speculative philosophies (E 1, 1026 a 18, 
Tpeis av dev <£iXo<7o</>i'cu dewp-qTUiai, nadrifxaTiKr], (pvmKri, deo- 
\oyucfi), and, to all three practical philosophies, as we see from 
the constant use of the phrase " political philosopher " in the 
Ethics; and in short applies it to all sciences except productive 
science or art. With him, as with the Greeks generally, the 
problems of philosophy are the nature and origin of being and of 
good: it is not as with too many of us a mere science of mind. - 

Aristotle's view of thinking in science and philosophy is essen- 
tially comprehensive; but it is not so wide as to become indefinite. 
According to him, science at its widest selects a special subject, 
e.g. number in arithmetic, magnitude in geometry, stars in 
astronomy, a man's good in ethics; concentrates itself on the 
causes and appropriate principles of its subject, especially the 
definition of the subject and its species by their essences or formal 
causes; and after an inductive intelligence of those principles 
proceeds by a deductive demonstration from definitions to 
consequences: philosophy is simply a desire of this definite 
knowledge of causes and effects. Beyond philosophy, not 
beyond science, there is art; and beyond philosophy and science 
there is history, the description of facts preparatory to philosophy, 
the investigation of causes (cf. Pr. An. i. 30); and this may 
be natural history, preparatory to natural philosophy, as in the 
History of Animals preparatory to the De Partibus Animalium, 
or what we call civil history, preparatory to political philosophy, 
as in the 158 Constitutions more or less preparatory to the 
Politics. 

Wide as is all his knowledge of facts and causes, it does not 
appear to Aristotle to be the whole of learning and the show of it. 
Beyond knowledge lies opinion, beyond discovery disputation, 
beyond philosophy and science dialectic between man and man, 
which was much practised by the Greeks in the dialogues of 
Socrates, Plato, the Megarians and Aristotle himself in his early 
manhood. With Plato, who thought that the interrogation of 



5 .8 



ARISTOTLE 



man is the best instrument of truth, dialectic was exaggerated 
into a universal science of everything that is. Aristotle, on 
the other hand, learnt to distinguish dialectic (SiaXeKTuoi) from 
science (forwr^/Mj); in that it has no definite subject, else it 
would not ask questions (Post. An. i. n, 77 a 31-33); in that for 
appropriate principles it substitutes the probabilities of authority 
(to. evdo^a) which are the opinions of all, or of the majority, or of 
the wise (Top. i. 1, 100 b 21-23) ; and in that it is not like science a 
deduction from true and primary principles of a definite subject 
to true consequences, but a deduction from opinion to opinion, 
which may be true or false. Sophistry appeared to him to be like 
it, except that it is a fallacious deduction either from merely 
apparent probabilities in its matter or itself merely apparently 
syllogistic in its form '(cf. Topics, i. 1). Moreover, he compared 
dialectic and sophistry, on account of their generality, with 
primary philosophy in the Metaphysics (T 2, 1004 b 17-26); to 
the effect that ail three concern themselves with all things, 
but that about everything metaphysics is scientific, dialectic 
tentative, sophistry apparent, not real. He means that a sophist 
like Protagoras will teach superficially anything as wisdom for 
money; and that even a dialectician like Plato will write a 
dialogue, such as the Republic, nominally about justice, but really 
about all things from the generality 6f the form of good, instead 
of from appropriate moral principles; but that a primary philo- 
sopher selects as a definite subject all things as such without 
interfering with the special sciences of different things each in 
its kind (Met. T 1), and investigates the axioms or common 
principles of things as things (ib. 3), without pretending, like 
Plato, to deduce from any common principle the special principles 
of each science (Post. An. i. 9, 32). Aristotle at once maintains 
the primacy of metaphysics and vindicates the independence of 
the special sciences. He is at the same time the only Greek 
philosopher who clearly discriminated discovery and disputation, 
science and dialectic, the knowledge of a definite subject from its 
appropriate principles and the discussion of anything whatever 
from opinions and authority. On one side he places science and 
philosophy, on the other dialectic and, sophistry. 

Such is the great mind of Aristotle manifested in the large map 
of learning, by which we have now to determine the order of his 
extant philosophical writings, with a view to studying them in 
their real order, which is neither chronological nor traditional, 
but philosophical and scientific. Turning over the pages of the 
Berlin edition, but passing over works which are perhaps spurious, 
we should put first and foremost speculative philosophy, and 
therein the primary philosophy of his Metaphysics (980 a 21- 
1093 b 29); then the secondary philosophy of his Physics, 
followed by his other physical works, general and biological, 
including among the latter the Historia Animalium as prepara- 
tory to the De Partibus Animalium, and the De Anima and Parva 
Naturalia, which he called " physical " but we call " psycho- 
logical " (184 a 10-967 b 27) ; next, the practical philosophy of the 
Ethics, including the Eudemian Ethics and the Magna Moralia 
as earlier and the Nicomachean Ethics as later (1094-1249 b 25), 
and of the Politics (1252-1342), with the addition of the newly 
discovered Athenian Constitution as ancillary to it; finally, the 
productive science, or art, of the Rhetoric, including the earlier 
Rhetoric to Alexander and the later Rhetorical Art, and of the 
Poetics, which was unfinished (1354-end). This is the real order 
of Aristotle's system, based on his own theory and classification 
of sciences. 

But what has become of Logic, with which the traditional 
order of Andronicus begins Aristotle's works (1-148 b 8)? So far 
from coming first, Logic comes nowhere in his classification of 
science. Aristotle was the founder of Logic; because, though 
others, and especially Plato, had made occasional remarks about 
reason (\670s); Aristotle \Wls the first to conceive it as a definite 
subject of investigation. As he says at the end of the Sophistical 
Elenchi on the syllogism, he had no predecessor, but took pains 
and laboured a long time in investigating it. Nobody, not even 
Plato, had discovered that the process of deduction is a combina- 
tion of premisses (eruXXiryur/ios) to produce a new conclusion. 
Aristotle, who made this great discovery, must have had great 



difficulty in developing the new investigation of reasoning pro- 
cesses out of dialectic, rhetoric, poetics, grammar, metaphysics, 
mathematics, physics and ethics; and in disengaging it from 
other kinds of learning. He got so far as gradually to write short 
discourses and long treatises, which we, not he, now arrange in 
the order of the Categories or names; the De Interpretatione 
on propositions; the Analytics, Prior on syllogism, Posterior 
on scientific syllogism; the Topics on dialectical syllogism; the 
Sophistici Elenchi on eristical or sophistical syllogism; and, 
except that he had hardly a logic of induction, he covered the 
ground. But after all this original research he got no further. 
First, he did not combine all these works into a system. He 
may have laid out the sequence of syllogisms from the 
Analytics onwards; but how about the Categories and the De 
Interpretatione ? Secondly, he made no division of logic. In the 
Categories he distinguished names and propositions for the sake 
of the classification of names; in the De Interpretatione he 
distinguished nouns and verbs from sentences with a view to the 
enunciative sentence: in the Analytics he analysed the syllogism 
into premisses and premisses into terms and copula, for the 
purpose of syllogism. But he never called any of these a division 
of all logic. Thirdly, he had no one name for logic. In the 
Posterior Analytics (i. 22, 84 a 7-8) he distinguishes two modes 
of investigation, analytically (avdXvrui&s) and logically (X070C&). 
But " analytical " means scientific inference from appropriate 
principles, and " logical " means dialectical inference from general 
considerations; and the former gives its name to the Analytics, 
the latter suits the Topics, while neither analytic nor logic is a 
name for all the works afterwards called logic. Fourthly, and 
consequently, he gave no place to any science embracing the 
whole of those works in his classification of science, but merely 
threw out the hint that we should know analytics before 
questioning the acceptance of the axioms of being (Met. V 3). 

It is a commentator's blunder to suppose that the founder 
of logic elaborated it into a system, and then applied it to the 
sciences. He really left the Peripatetics to combine his scattered 
discourses and treatises into a system, to call it logic, and logic 
Organon, and to put it first as the instrument of sciences; and 
it was the Stoics who first called logic a science, and assigned it 
the first place in their triple classification of science into logic, 
physics, ethics. Would Aristotle have consented? Would he 
not rather have given the first place to primary philosophy? 

Dialectic was distinguished from science by Aristotle. Is logic, 
then, according to him, not science but dialectic ? The word logic- 
ally (Xo-yocSs) means the same as dialectically (SiaXeKrixas). But 
the general discussion of opinions, signified by both words, is only a 
subordinate part of Aristotle's profound investigation of the whole 
process of reasoning. The Analytics, the most important part, so far 
from being dialectic or logic in that narrow sense, is called by him not 
logic but analytic science (avaXuriKri iiri<rri)ii-ri, Rhet. 1.4, 1359 b 10; cf, 
1356 b 9, 1357 a 30, b 25) ; and in the Metaphysics he evidently refers to 
it as " the science which considers demonstration and science," which 
he distinguishes from the three speculative sciences, mathematics, 
physics and primary philosophy (Met. K I, 1059 b 9-21). The 
Analytics then, which from the beginning claims to deal with science, 
is a science of sciences, without however forming any part of the 
classification. On the other hand, it does not follow that Aristotle 
would have regarded the Topics, which he calls " the investigation " 
and "the investigation of dialectic" (17 irpaynarda, Top, i. T, ij 
TpayfiareLa i) wtpi rijv SiaXeKrut^, Pr. An. i. 30, 46330), orthe De Inter- 
pretatione, which he calls "the present theory " (-rijs vvv Oeapias, De Int. 
6, 17 a 7), as science. In fact, as to the Categories as well as the De Inter- 
pretatione, we are at a complete loss. But about the Topics we may 
venture to make the suggestion that, as in describing consciousness . 
Aristotle says we perceive that we perceive, and understand that we 
understand, and as he calls Analytics a science of sciences, so he 
might have called the Topics a dialectical investigation of dialectic. 
Now, this suggestion derives support from his own description of the 
allied art of Rhetoric. " Rhetoric is counterpart to dialectic " is the 
first sentence of the Rhetoric; and the reason is that both are con- 
cerned with common objects of no definite science. Afterwards dia- 
lectic and rhetoric are said to differ from other arts in taking either 
side of a question (i. 1, 1355 a 33-35) ; rhetoric, since its artificial evi- 
dences involve characters, passions and reasoning, is called a kind of 
offshoot of dialectic and morals, and a copy of dialectic, because 
neither is a science of anything definite, but both faculties (bvvhpitis) 
of providing arguments (i. 2, 1356 a 33) ; and, since rhetorical argu- 
ments are examples and enthymemes analysed in the Analytics, 
rhetoric is finally regarded as a compound of analytic science and of 



ARISTOTLE 



5i9 



morals, while it is like dialectical and sophistic arguments (i. 4, 1359 b 
2-17). 

As then Aristotle himself regarded rhetoric as partly science and 
partly dialectic, perhaps he would have said that his works on reason- 
ing are some science and others not, and that, while the investigation 
of syllogism with a view to scientific syllogism in the Analytics is 
analytic science, the investigation of dialectical syllogism, in the 
Topics, with its abuse, eristical syllogism, in the Sophistici Elenchi, is 
dialectic. At any rate, these miscellaneous works on reasoning have 
no right to stand first in Aristotle's writings under any one name, 
logic or Organon. As he neither put them together, nor on any one 
definite plan, we are left to convenience; and the most convenient 
place is with the psychology of the De Anima. 

As for dialectic itself, it would have been represented by Aristotle's 
early dialogues, had they not been lost except a few fragments* But 
none of his extant writings is so much dialectic, like a Platonic dia- 
logue. They contain however many relics of dialectic. The Rhetoric 
is declared by him to be partly dialectic. The Topics is at least an 
investigation of dialectic, which has had an immense influence on the 
method of argument. The Magna Moralia almost runs into dialogue. 
Besides, all the extant works, though apparently didactic, are full of 
dialectical matter in the way of opinions (\tybp.tva) , difficulties and 
doubts {tt.Troprnia.Ta, airopiou), solutions (\io-eis), and of dialectical 
style in the way of conversational expressions. It is probable also 
that the "extraneous discourses " (01 i^wrepiKol Xo-yoi) sometimes 
mentioned in them here mean dialectical discussions of a subject from 
opinions extraneous to its nature, as opposed to scientific deduction 
from its appropriate principles. From the eight passages, which refer 
to the extraneous discourses, we find (1) that Platonic forms were 
made by them matters of common talk (retfptXTrrat, Met. M 1, 1076 a 
28) ; (2) that time was made by them matter of doubts, which in this 
case are Aristotle's own doubts (Phys. iv. 10, 217 b 31-218 a 30) ; (3) 
that the discussions of Platonic forms in them and in philosophical 
discourses were different (E.E. i. 8, 1217 b 22) ; (4) that the ordinary 
distinction between goods of mind, body and estate is one which we 
make (itatpovptBa) in them (E.E. ii. 1, 1218 b 34) ; (5) that in them 
appeared the division of soul into irrational and rational, used by 
Aristotle (E.N. i. 13, 1 102 a 26), and attributed to Plato; (6) that the 
distinction between action and production accepted by Aristotle ap- 
peared in them (E.N. vi. 4, 1 140 a 3) ; (7) that a distinction between 
certain kinds of rule is one which we make often (5ioptf6,ue0a . . . 
toXXoms) in them (Pol. T6, 1278 b 31); (8) that a discussion about 
the best life, used by Aristotle, was made in them (Pol. H 1, 1323 a 
22). On the whole, the interpretation which best suits all the pas- 
sages is that extraneous discourses mean any extra-scientific dia- 
lectical discussions, oral or written, occurring in dialogues by Plato, or 
by Aristotle, or by anybody else, or in ordinary conversation, on any 
subject under the sun. 

Among all the eight passages mentioned above, the most valuable 
is that from the Eudemian Ethics (A 8), which discriminates extrane- 
ous discourses and philosophical («u iv tois tfwTepucois X6701S icai 
iv rots Kara <t>i\oac<t>iav, 1217 b 22-23); an d it is preceded (A 6, 
>2i6 b 35-37 a 17), by a similar distinction between foreign discourses 
(aWorpioi X6701) and discourses appropriate to the thing (oUttoi Xoyot 
toO Trpa.ypa.Tos), which marks even better the opposition intended 
between dialectic and philosophy. Now, as in all eight passages 
Aristotle speaks, somewhat disparagingly, of " even (k<h) extraneous 
discourses," and as these include his own early dialogues, they must 
be taken to mean that though he might quote them, he no longer 
wished to be judged by his early views, and therefore drew a strong 
line of demarcation between his early dialogues and the mature treat- 
ises of his later philosophical system. Now, both were in the hands of 
his readers in the time of Andronicus. Therefore his contemporary, 
Cicero, who knew the early dialogues on Philosophy, the Eudemus 
and the Protrepticus, and also among the mature scientific writings 
the Topics, Rhetoric, Politics, Physics and De Coelo, to some extent, 
was justified by Aristotle's example and precept in drawing the line 
between two kinds of books, one written popularly, called exoteric, the 
other more accurately (Cic. De Finibus, v. 5). But there was no doubt 
a tendency to extend the term " exoteric " from the dialectical to the 
more popular of the scientific writings of Aristotle, to make a new dis- 
tinction between exoteric and acroamatic or esoteric, and even to 
make out that Aristotle was in the habit of teaching both exoteric- 
ally and acroamatically day by day as head of the Peripatetic school 
at Athens. Aulus Gellius in the 2nd century a.d. supplies the best 
proof of this growth of tradition in his Nodes Atticae (xx. 5). He 
says that Aristotle (1) divided his commentationes and arts taught to 
his pupils into ffurepi/cd and d/tpoariKa; (2) taught the latter in 
the morning walk (kodivdv TrtpliraTov), the former in the evening 
walk (&cCKlv6v -rtp'nraTov) ; (3) divided his books in the same 
manner; (4) defended himself against Alexander's letter, complain- 
ing that it was not right to his pupils to have published his acroa- 
matic works, by replying in a letter that they were published and not 
published, because they are intelligible only to those who heard them. 
Gellius then quotes this correspondence, also given by Plutarch, and 
quotes it ex Andronici philosophi libro. The answer to the first three 
points is that Aristotle did not make any distinction between exoteric 
and acroamatic, and was not likely to have any longer taught his 
exoteric dialogues when he was teaching his mature philosophy at 
Athens, but may have alternated the teaching of the latter between 



the more abstruse and the more popular parts which had gradually 
come to be called "exoteric." As regards the last point, the authority 
of Andronicus proves that he at all events did not exaggerate his own 
share in publishing Aristotle's works; but it does not prove either 
that this correspondence between Alexander and Aristotle took place, 
or that Aristotle called his philosophical writings acroamatic, or that 
he had published them wholesale to the world. 

The . literary career of Aristotle falls into three periods. 
(1) The early period; when he was writing and publishing 
exoteric dialogues, but also tending to write didactic works, and 
beginning his scientific writings, e.g. the Politics in 357, the 
Meleorologica in 356. (2) The immature period; when he was 
continuing his didactic and scientific works, and composing first 
drafts, e.g. the Categories, the Eudemian Ethics, the Magna 
Moralia, the Rhetoric to Alexander. (3) The mature period; 
when he was finishing his scientific works, completing his system, 
and not publishing it but teaching it in the Peripatetic school; 
when he would teach not his early dialogues, nor his immature 
writings and first drafts, but mature works, e.g. the Metaphysics, 
the Nicomachean Ethics, the Rhetoric; and above all teach his 
whole system as far as possible in the real order of his classifica- 
tion of science. 

VI. The Aristotelian Philosophy 
We have now (1) sketched the life of Aristotle as a reader and a 
writer from early manhood; (2) have watched him as a Platonist, 
partly imitating but gradually emancipating himself from his 
master to form a philosophy of his own; (3) have traced the 
gradual composition of his writings from Plato's time onwards; 
(4) have distinguished earlier, more Platonic and rudimentary, 
from later, more independent and mature, writings; (5) have 
founded the real order of his writings, not on chronology, nor 
on tradition, but on his classification of science and learning. It 
remains to answer the final question:— What is the Aristotelian 
philosophy, which its author gradually formed with so much 
labour? Here we have only room for its spirit, which we shall 
try to give as if he were himself speaking to us, as head of the 
Peripatetic school at Athens, and holding no longer the early 
views of his dialogues, or the immature views of such treatises as 
the Categories, but only his mature views, such as he expresses 
in the Metaphysics. Aristotle was primarily a metaphysician, a 
philosopher of things, who uses the objective method of proceed- 
ing from being to thinking. We shall begin therefore with that 
primary philosophy which is the real basis of his philosophy, and 
proceed in the order of his classification of science to give his chief 
doctrines on: — 

(1) Speculative philosophy, metaphysical and physical, 

including his psychology, and with it his logic. 

(2) Practical philosophy, ethics and politics. 

(3) Productive science, or art. 

Things are substances (ovcriai), each of which is a separate 
individual (xupiarov, roSe tl, koM' 'hiao-rov) and is variously 
affected as quantified, qualified, related, active, passive and so 
forth, in categories of things which are attributes (o-vufitfiiiKtrra.), 
different from the category of substance, but real only as predi- 
cates belonging to some substance, and are in fact only the 
substance itself affected (avro ireirov96s). The essence of each 
substance, being what it is (t6 tL eon, to t'i r\v dvai), is that 
substance; e.g. this rational animal, Socrates. Substances are 
so similar that the individuals of a species are even the same in 
essence or substance, e.g. Callias and Socrates differ in matter but 
are the same in essence, as rational animals. The universal (rd 
nadokov) is real only as one predicate belonging to many 
individual substances: it is therefore not a substance. There 
are then no separate universal forms, as Plato supposed. There 
are attributes and universals, real as belonging to individual 
substances, whose being is their being. The mind, especially 
in mathematics, abstracts numbers, motions, relations, causes, 
essences, ends, kinds; and it over-abstracts things mentally 
separate into things really separate. But reality consists only 
of individual substances, numerous, moving, related, active as 
efficient causes, passive as material causes, essences as formal 
causes, ends as final causes, and in classes which are real 



520 



ARISTOTLE 



universals only as real predicates of individual substances. 
Such is Aristotle's realism of individuals and universals, con- 
tained in his primary philosophy, as expressed in the Metaphysics, 
especially in Book Z, his authoritative pronouncement on 
being and substance. 

The individual substances, of which the universe is composed, 
fall into three great irreducible kinds : nature, God, man. 

I. Nature. — The obvious substances are natural substances 
or bodies (cfrvaiKai ovaiai, aw par a) , e.g. animals, plants, water, 
earth, moon, sun, stars. Each natural substance is a compound 
(oijvderov, avvdtn) ovala) of essence and matter; its essence 
(el&os, nop<t>v, to tL «m, to tL t\v elvai) being its actual substance, 
its matter (v\ri) not; its essence being determinate, its matter 
not; its essence being immateriate, its matter conjoined with the 
essence; its essence being one in all individuals of a species, its 
matter different in each individual; its essence being cause of 
uniformity, its matter cause of accident. At the same time, 
matter is not nothing, but something, which, though not sub- 
stance, is potentially substance; and it is either proximate to 
the substance, or primary; proximate, as a substance which is 
potentially different, e.g. wood potentially a table; primary, as 
an indeterminate something which is a substratum capable of 
becoming natural substances, of which it is always one; and it is 
primarily the matter of earth, water, air, fire, the four simple 
bodies (cbrXa awp-ara) with natural rectilineal motions in the 
terrestrial world (De Gen. et Cor. ii. i seq.); while aether (aiBfjp) 
is a fifth simple body, with natural circular motion, being the 
element of the stars (to tCsv aarpwv crovxfiov) in the celestial 
world. Each natural substance is a formal cause, as being what 
it is; a material cause, as having passive power to be changed; 
an efficient cause, as having active power to change, by com- 
municating the selfsame essence into different matter so as to 
produce therein a homogeneous effect in the same species; and 
a final cause, as an end to be realized. Moreover, though each 
natural substance is corruptible (<j£apr6v), species is eternal 
(&l5lov), because there was always some individual of it to con- 
tinue its original essence (expressed by the imperfect tense in 
t6 tI f/v tlvai), which is ungenerated and incorruptible; the 
natural world therefore is eternal; and nature is for ever aiming 
at an eternal propagation, by efficient acting on matter, of 
essence as end. For even nature does nothing in vain, but aims 
at final causes, which she uniformly realizes, except so far as 
matter by its spontaneity (airo tov avTop.arov) causes accidental 
effects ; and the ends of nature are no form of good, nor everi the 
good of man, but the essences of natural substances themselves,' 
and, above them all, the good God Himself. Such is Aristotle's 
natural realism, pervading his metaphysical and physical 
writings. 

II. God. — Nature is but one kind of being (iv yap ti ykvos rod 
ovtos ■/) (/>iwis, Mel. r 3, 1005 a 34). Above all natural sub- 
stances, the objects of natural science, there stands a super- 
natural substance, the object of metaphysics as theology. 
Nature's boundary is the outer sphere of the fixed stars, which 
is eternally moved day after day in a uniform circle round the 
earth. Now, an actual cause is required for an actual effect. 
Therefore, there must be a prime mover of that prime movable, 
and equally eternal and uniform. That prime mover is God, 
who is not the creator, but the mover directly of the heavens, 
and indirectly through the planets of sublunary substances. But 
God is no mechanical mover. He moves as motive (mm 5^ 
us kpiipjtvov, Met. A 7, 1072 b 3) ; He is the efficient only as the 
final cause of nature. For God is a living being, eternal, very 
good (fciJov atdiov apurrov, ib. 1072 b 29). While nature aims at 
Him as design, as an end, a motive, a final cause, God's occupa- 
tion (Siayoiyrj) is intelligence (vbt]ois) ; and since essence, not 
indeed in all being, but in being understood, becomes identical 
with intelligence, God in understanding essence is understanding 
Himself; and in short, God's intelligence is at once intelligence 
of Himself, of essence and of intelligence, — /ecu iarw y voytris 
votjeyeois vbriois (Met. A 7, 1074 b 34). But at the same time the 
essence of good exists not only in God and God's intelligence on 
the one hand, but also on the other hand on a declining scale in 



nature, as both in a general and in his army; but rather in God, 
and more in some parts of nature than in others. Thus even 
God is a substance, a separate individual, whose differentiating 
essence is to be a living being, eternal and very good ; He is 
however the only substance whose essence is entirely without 
matter and unconjoined with matter; and therefore He is a 
substance, not because He has or is a substratum beneath 
attributes, but wholly because He is a separate individual, 
different both from nature and men, yet the final good of 
the whole universe. Such is Aristotle's theological realism 
without materialism and the oiigin of all spiritualistic realism, 
contained in his Metaphysics (A 6-end). 

III. Man. — There is a third kind of substance, combining 
something both of the natural and of the divine: we men are 
that privileged species. Each man is a substance, like any other, 
only because he is a separate individual. Like any natural 
substance, he is composed of matter and immateriate essence. 
But natural substances are inorganic and organic; and a man 
is an organic substance composed of an organic body (bpyavuibv 
0-Cip.a) as matter, and a soul (ipvxn) as essence, which is the primary 
actuality of an organic body capable of life (£0)17). Still a man is 
not the only organism; and every organism has a soul, whose 
immediate organ is the spirit (TeeD/m), a body which: — analogous 
to a body diviner than the four so-called elements, namely the 
aether, the element of the stars — gives to the organism its non- 
terrestrial vital heat, whether it be a plant or an animal. In an 
ascending scale, a plant is an organism with a nutritive soul; 
an animal is a higher organism with a nutritive, sensitive, 
orectic and locomotive soul; a man is the highest organism with 
a nutritive, sensitive, orectic, locomotive and rational soul. 
What differentiates man from other natural and organic sub- 
stances, and approximates him to a supernatural substance, God, 
is reason (X670S) , or intellect (vovs) . Now, though only one of the 
powers of the soul, intellect alone of these powers has no bodily 
organ; it alone is immortal: it alone is divine. While the soul 
is propagated, like any other essence, by the efficient, which is 
the seed, to the matter, which is the germ, of the embryo man, 
intellect alone enters from without (dvpadev), and is alone divine 
(Bttov, not deos), because its activity communicates with no 
bodily activity (De Gen. ii. 3, 736-737). A man then is a third 
kind of substance, like a natural substance in bodily matter, like 
a supernatural substance in divine reason or intellect. Such is 
Aristotle's dual, or rather triple, realism, continued in his De 
Anima and other biological writings, especially De Generatione 
Animalium, ii. . 

There are three points about a man's life which both connect 
him with, and distinguish him from, God. Gpd's occupation is 
speculative; man's is speculation, practice and production. 

I. Speculation (Btoipia). — Since things are individuals, and there 
is nothing, and nothing universal, beyond them, there are two 
kinds of knowledge (yiwis), sense (a'crffyoW) of individuals, intellect- 
(nods) of universals. Both powers know by being passively receptive 
of essence propagated by an efficient cause; but, while in sense the 
efficient cause is an external object (i£w0ev), in intelligence it is active 
intellect (vovs rcf woieii>) propagating its essence in passive intellect 
(vovs vadrinKos ). Nevertheless, without sense there is no knowledge. 
Sense receives from the external world an essence, e.g. of white, which 
is really universal as well as individual, but apprehends it only as 
individual, e.g. this white substance: intellect thereupon discovers 
the universal essence but only in the individuals of sense. This 
intellectual discovery requires sensation and retention of sensation; 
so that sense (a.?<r0i;cris) receives impressions, imagination (Qavraaia) 
retains them as images, intellect (coCs) generalizes the universal, and, 
when it is intelligence of essence, is always true. 

This is the origin of knowledge, psychologically regarded (in the De 
Anima). Logically regarded, the origin of all teaching and learning 
of an intellectual kind is a process of induction (evayuyii} from par- 
ticulars to universal, and of syllogism (o-uXXo-yicr^As) from universal 
to further particulars; induction, whenever it starts from sense, 
becomes the origin of scientific knowledge (liritrrv/uij) ; while there 
is also a third process of example (xapdSei7jna) from particular to 
particular, which produces only persuasion. In acquiring scientific 
knowledge, syllogism cannot start from universals without induction, 
nor induction acquireuniversals without sense. At the same time, 
there are three species of syllogism, scientific, dialectical and eristical 
or sophistical; and in consequence there are different ways of 
acquiring premisses. In order to acquire the knowledge of the true 
and primary principles of scientific knowledge, and especially the 



ARISTOTLE 



52i 



intelligence of the universal essence of the subject, which is always 
true, the process of knowledge consists of (1) sense (al<r8i)tns) , which 
receives the essence as individual, (2) memory {iiviiiiri) , which is a 
retention of sensible impression, (3) experience (kp.irapla) , which consists 
of a number of similar memories, (4) induction (eirayayii) , which infers 
the universal as a fact (t6 in) , (5) intellect (vous) , which apprehends the 
principle (apxn) '< because it is a true apprehension that the universal 
induced is the very essence and formal cause of the subject: there- 
upon, scientific syllogism (kirioTiinoviKm ovWoryujpbs), making the defi- 
nition (6pi(T[i6s) of this essence the middle term (t6 p.kaov), becomes a 
demonstration (Airofoifis) of the consequences which follow from 
the essence in the conclusion. Such then is science. In order to 
acquire the probabilities (xd lv&o£a) of opinion (W£a), which are the 
premisses of dialectical syllogism, the process is still induction, as in 
science, but dialectical induction by interrogation from the opinions 
of the answerers until the universal is conceded : thereupon the dia- 
lectical syllogism (5i<iXcktik6s ovWoyiofios) deduces consequent opinions 
in the conclusion. Nor does the process of acquiring the premisses 
of eristical syllogism, which is fallacious either in its premisses or 
in its process, differ, except that, when the premisses are fallacious, 
the dialectical interrogations must be such as to cause this fallacy. 
Hence, as science and dialectic are different, so scientific induction 
and syllogism must be distinguished from dialectical induction and 
syllogism. Dialectic is useful, for exercise, for conversation and for 
philosophical sciences, where by being critical it has a road to prin- 
ciples. But it is by a different process of sense, memory, experience, 
induction, intelligence, syllogism, that science becomes knowledge of 
real causes, of real effects, and especially of real essences from which 
follow real consequences, not beyond, but belonging to real sub- 
stances. So can we men, not, as Plato thought, by having in our 
souls universal principles innate but forgotten, but by acquiring uni- 
versal principles from sense, which is the origin of knowledge, arrive 
at judgments which are true, and true because they agree with the 
things which we know by sense, by inference and by science. Such 
is Aristotle's psychological and logical realism, contained in the Be 
Anitna and logical treatises. 

2. Practice (irpa^is). — In this natural world of real substances, 
human good is not an imitation of a supernatural universal form of 
the good, but is human happiness; and this good is the same both of 
the individual as a part and of the state as a whole. Ethics then is 
a kind of Politics. But in Ethics a man's individual good is his own 
happiness; and his happiness is no mere state, but an activity of soul 
according to virtue in a mature life, requiring as conditions moderate 
bodily and external goods of fortune; his virtue is (1) moxal virtue, 
which is acquired by habituation, and is a purposive habit of per- 
forming actions in the mean determined by right reason or prudence; 
requiring him, not to exclude, but to moderate his desires; and (2) 
intellectual virtue, which is either prudence of practical, or wisdom of 
speculative intellect; and his happiness is a kind of ascending scale 
of virtuous activities, in which moral virtue is limited by prudence, 
and prudence by wisdom; so that the speculative life of wisdom is 
the happiest and most divine, and the practical life of prudence and 
moral virtue secondary and human. Good fortune in moderation is 
also required as a condition of his happiness. Must we then, on ac- 
count of misfortunes, look with Solon at the end, and call no man 
happy till he is dead? Or is this altogether absurd for us who say 
that happiness is an activity? Virtuous activities determine happi- 
ness, and a virtuous man is happy in this life, in spite of misfortunes 
unless they be too great ; while after death he will not feel the mis- 
fortunes of the living so much as to change his happiness. Still, 
for perfect happiness a man should prefer the speculative life of 
divine intellect, and immortalize (iSavarl^av) as far as possible. For 
intellect is what mainly makes a man what he is, and is divine and 
immortal. 

To turn from Ethics to Politics, the good of the individual on a 

small scale becomes on a large scale the good of the citizen and the 

state, whose end should be no far-off form of good, and no- mere 

guarantee of rights, but the happiness of virtuous action, the life 

according to virtue, which is the general good of the citizen. Hence, 

the citizen of the best state is he who has the power and the purpose 

to be governed and govern for the sake of the life according to virtue. 

A right government is one which aims at the general good, whereas 

any government which aims at its own good is a deviation. Hence 

governments are to be arranged from best to worst in the following 

order :— 

I. Right governments (dpdal iroXiraai), aiming at the general 

good: — 

i. Monarchy, of one excelling in virtue: 
ii. Aristocracy, of a class excelling in virtue: 
iii. Commonwealth, of the majority excelling in virtue. 
II. Deviations (xapec/Jdo-eis). aiming at the good of the govern- 
ment: — 

i. Democracy, aiming at the good of the majority: 
ii. Oligarchy, aiming at the good of the few : 
iii. Tyranny, aiming at the good of one. 
Such is Aristotle's practical philosophy, contained in his matured 
Nicomachean Ethics, and his unfinished Politics. 

3. Production (ttoijjo-is) . — Production differs from practice in 
being an activity (evtpyiLa; e.g. building) which is always a means 
to a work (tpyov; e.g. a house) beyond itself. Productive science, 



or art, is an intellectual habit of true reasoning from appropriate 
principles, acquired from experiences, and applied to the production 
of the work which is the end of the art. All the arts are therefore at 
once rational and productive. They are either for necessity {e.g. 
medicine) or for occupation (e.g. poetry), the former being inferior 
to the latter. Rhetoric is a faculty on any subject of investigating 
what may be persuasive (inSavop), which is the work of no other 
art; its means are artificial and inartificial evidences (jrto-Teis), 
and, among artificial evidences, especially the logical arguments of 
example and enthymeme. Poetry is the art of producing represen- 
tations; (1) in words, rhythm and harmony (ip/jtovla, " hnrmony " in 
the original sense) ; (2) of men like ourselves, or better as in tragedy, 
or worse as in comedy; (3) by means of narrative as in epic, or by 
action as in the drama. The cause of poetry is man's instinct of re- 
presentation and his love of representations caused by the pleasure of 
learning. Comedy is representation of meninferiorin being ludicrous: 
epic is like tragedy a representation of superior men, but by means of 
narrative and unlimited in time: tragedy is a representation of an 
action superior and complete, in a day if possible, by means of action, 
and accomplishing by pity and fear the purgation of such passions 
(Poetics, 1449 b 24). Music is a part of moral education; and for 
this end we should use the most moral harmonies. But music has 
also other ends and uses, and on the whole four; namely amuse- 
ment, virtue, occupation and purgation of the affections; for some 
men are liable more than others to pity and fear and enthusiasm, but 
from sacred melodies we see them, when they have heard those which 
act orgiastically on the soul, becoming settled by a kind of medicine 
and purgation (ica8ap<n.s), and being relieved with pleasure. Finally^ 
art is not morality, because its end is always a work of art, not 
virtuous action: on the other hand, art is subordinate to morality, 
because all the ends of art are but means to the end of life, and there- 
fore a work of art which offends against morality is opposed to the 
happiness and the good of man. Such is Aristotle s productive 
science or art, contained in his Rhetoric and Poetics, compared with 
his Ethics and Politics. 

Aristotle, even in this sketch of his system, shows himself 
to be the philosopher of facts, who can best of all men bear 
criticism; and indeed it must be confessed that he retained 
many errors of Platonism and laid himself open to the following 
objections. Two substances, being individuals, e.g. Socrates and 
Callias, are in no way the same, but only similar, even in essence, 
e.g. Socrates is one rational animal, Callias another. A universal, 
e.g. the species man, is not predicate of many individuals 
(ei> Kara iroW&v, Post. An. i. 11), but a whole number oi 
similar individuals, e.g. all men; and not a whole species, 
but only an individual, is a predicate of such individual, e.g. 
Socrates is a man, not all men, and one white thing, not 
all white things. Consequently, a species or genus is not a 
substance, as Aristotle says it is in the Categories (incon- 
sistently with his own doctrine of substances), but a whole 
number of substances, e.g. all men, all animals. Similarly, 
the universal essence of a species is not one and the 
same as each individual essence, but is the whole number 
of similar individual essences of the similar individuals of the 
species, e.g. all rational animals. Consequently, the universal 
essence of a species of substances is not one and the same eternal 
essence in all the individuals of a species but only similar, and is 
not substance as Aristotle calls it in the Metaphysics, incon- 
sistently with his own doctrine- of substance, but is a whole 
number of similar substances, e.g. all rational animals which are 
what all men are. Hence again, the natural world of species and 
essences is not eternal, but only endures as long as there are 
individual substances. Hence, moreover, a natural substance or 
body as an efficient cause or force causes an effect on another, 
not by propagating one eternal essence of a species into the matter 
of the other, but so far as we really understand force, by their 
reciprocally preventing one another from occupying the same 
place at the same moment on account of the mutual resistance of 
any two bodies. The essence of a natural substance, e.g. wood, 
is not immateriate, but is the whole body as what it is. The 
matter of a natural substance is not a primary matter which is 
one indeterminate substratum of all natural substances, but is 
only one body as able to be changed by a force which is another 
substance able to change it, e.g. a seed becoming wood, wood 
becoming coal, &c. A natural substance or body, therefore, is 
not a heterogeneous compound of essence and matter, but is 
essence as what it is, matter as able passively to be changed, 
force as able actively to change. The simple bodies which are 
the matter of the rest are not terrestrial earth, water, air, fire, 



522 



ARISTOXENUS— ARISUGAWA 



and a different celestial aether, but whatever elementary bodies 
natural scienr.e, starting anew from mechanics and chemistry, 
may determine to be the matter of all other bodies whatever. 
Nature does not aim at God as end, but God, thinking and 
willing ends, produces and acts on nature. Soul is not an 
immateriate essence of an organic body capable, but an immateri- 
ate conscious substance within an organic body. Sensation is not 
the reception of the selfsame essence of an external body, but 
one's perception of one's sentient organism as affected, and 
especially of its organs resisting one another, e.g. one's lips, 
hands, &c, preventing one another from occupying the same 
place at the same moment within one's organism. Intelligence 
does not differ from sense by having no bodily organ, but the 
nervous system is the bodily organ of both. Intelligence is not 
active intellect propagating universal essence in passive intellect, 
but only logical inference starting from sense, and both requiring 
nervous body and conscious soul. It is not always a true appre- 
hension of essence, but often, especially in physical matter, such 
as sound or heat or light, takes superficial effects to be the 
essence of the thing. Aristotle did not altogether solve the 
question, What is, and scarcely solved at all the question, How 
do we know the external world? 

We might continue to object. But at bottom there remains 
the fundamental position of Aristotelianism, that all things are 
substances, individuals separate though related; that some 
things are attributes, real only as being some individual substance 
somehow affected, or, as we should say, modified or determined; 
and that without individual substances there is nothing, and 
nothing universal apart from individuals. There remains too 
the consequence that there are different substances, separate 
from but related to one another; and these substances of three 
irreducible kinds, natural, supernatural, human. Aristotelian- 
ism has to be considered against the philosophy which preceded 
it and against the philosophy which has since followed it. Platon- 
ism preceded it, and was the metaphysical doctrine that all things 
are supernatural — forms, gods, souls. Idealism has since followed 
it, and is the metaphysical doctrine that all things are mind and 
states of mind. Aristotelianism intervenes between ancient 
Platonism and modern Idealism, and is the metaphysical doctrine 
that all things are substances, natural and supernatural and 
human. It is a philosophy of substantial things, standing as a 
via media between a philosophy of the supernatural and a 
philosophy of mind. There are three alternatives, which may be 
put as questions which every thinker must ask himself. Are the 
things which surround me in what I call the environment, — the 
men, the animals, the plants, the ground, the stones, the water, 
the air, the moon, the sun, the stars and God — are they shadows, 
unsubstantial things, as formerly Platonism made all things to be 
except the supernatural world of forms, gods and souls? Or are 
they, as modern Idealism says, mind and states of mind? Or 
are they really substances separate from, though related to, 
myself, who am also a substance? The Aristotelian answer is 
— " Yes, all things are substances, but not all supernatural, nor 
all mental; for some are natural substances, or bodies "; and 
by that answer Aristotelianism stands or falls. 

Literature. — The Aristotelian philosophy is to be studied, first in 
Aristotle's works, which are the best commentaries on one another; 
the best complete edition is the Berlin edition (i83i-i87o),by Bekker 
and Brandis, in which also are the fragments collected by V. Rose, 
the scholia collected by Brandis, and the index compiled by Bonitz. 
After reading the remains of the Peripatetic school, the Greek 
commentators should be further studied in this edition. The Latin 
commentators, the Arabians and the schoolmen show how Aristotle 
has been the chief author of modern culture ; while the vindication 
of modern independence comes out in his critics, the greatest of whom 
were Roger and Francis Bacon. Since the modern discovery of the 
science of motion by Galileo which changed natural science, and the 
modern revolution of philosophy by Descartes Which changed meta- 
physics, the study of Aristotle has become less universal ; but it did 
not die out, and received a fresh stimulus especially from Julius Pacius, 
who going back through G. Zabarella to the Arabians, and himself 
gifted with great logical powers, always deserves study in his editions 
of the Organon and the Physics, and in his Doctrinae Peripateticae. 
In more recent times, as part of the growing conviction of the essen- 
tiality of everything Greek, Aristotle has received marked attention. 
In France there are the works of Cousin (1835), Felix Ravaisson, who 



wrote on the Metaphysics (1837-1846), and Barthelemy St Hilaire, 
who translated the O'ganon and other works (1844 seq.). In 
Germany there has been a host of commentaries, among which we 
may mention the Organon edited (1844-1846) by F. Th. Waitz (not 
so well as by Pacius), the De Anima edited (1833) by F. A. Trendelen- 
burg and later by A. Torstrik, the Historia Animalium by H. Aubert 
and F. Wimmer (1868), the Ethics by K. L. Michelet (1827), the 
Metaphysics by A. Schwegler (1847) and (best of all) by H. Bonitz 
(1848), who is the most faithful of all commentators, because to great 
industry and acumen he adds the rare gift of confessing when he does 
not understand, and when he does not know what Aristotle might 
have thought. With Aristotle s works before one, with the Index 
Aristotelicus, and the edition and translation of the Metaphysics by 
Bonitz on one side, and Zeller's Die Philosophic der Griechen, ii. 2, 
" Aristoteles " (trans, by Costelloe and Muirhead), on the other side, 
one can go a considerable way towards understanding the foundations 
of Aristotelianism. 

In England scholars tend to take up certain parts of Aristotle's 
philosophy. Grote indeed intended to write a general account of 
Aristotle like that of Plato; but his Aristotle went little further than 
the logical writings. From Cambridge we have J. W. Blakesley's 
Life of Aristotle, E. M. Cope's Rhetoric, Dr Henry Jackson's Nico- 
machean Ethics, v., S. H. Butcher's Poetics, Hicks's De Anima, 
J. E. Sandys's Athenian Constitution, Jebb's Rhetoric (ed. Sandys). 
Oxford in particular, since the beginning of the 19th century, has 
kept alive the study of Aristotle. E. Cardwell in his edition of 
the Nicomachean Ethics (1828) had the wisdom to found his text 
on the Laurentian Manuscript (Kb) ; E. Poste wrote translations 
of the Posterior Analytics and Sophistici Elenchi; R. Congreve 
edited the Politics; A. Grant edited the Nicomachean Ethics; 
E. Wallace translated and annotated the De Anima; B. Jowett 
translated the Politics; W. L. Newman has edited the Politics in 
four volumes; Dr Ogle has translated the De Partibus Animalium, 
with notes; R. Shute wrote a History of the Aristotelian Writings; 
Professor J A. Stewart has written Notes on the Nicomachean 
Ethics; Professor J. Burnet has issued an annotated edition of 
the Nicomachean Ethics, and W. D. Ross has translated the Meta- 
physics. All these are, or were, Oxford men; and it remains to 
mention two others: I. Bywater, who as an Aristotelian scholar has 
done much for the improvement of Bekker's text, especially of the 
Nicomachean Ethics and the Poetics; and F. G. Kenyon, who has 
the proud distinction of having been the first modern editor of the 
'A6i)vaioiv voXirela. (T. Ca.) 

ARISTOXENUS, of Tarentum (4th century B.C.), a Greek 
peripatetic philosopher, and writer on music and rhythm. He 
was taught first by his father Spintharus, a pupil of Socrates, 
and later by the Pythagoreans, Lamprus of Erythrae and Xeno- 
philus, from whom he learned the theory of music. Finally he 
studied under Aristotle at Athens, and was deeply annoyed, it is 
said, when Theophrastus was appointed head of the school on 
Aristotle's death. His writings, said to have numbered four 
hundred and fifty-three, were in the style of Aristotle, and dealt 
with philosophy, ethics and music. The empirical tendency of 
his thought is shown in his theory that the soul is related to the 
body as harmony to the parts of a musical instrument. We have 
no evidence as to the method by which he deduced this theory 
(cf. T. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Eng. trans. 1905, vol. iii. p. 43). 
In music he held that the notes of the scale are to be judged, not 
as the Pythagoreans held, by mathematical ratio, but by the ear. 
The only work of his that has come down to us is the three books 
of the Elements of Harmony (pvOfuKa oroix«ia)> an incomplete 
musical treatise. Grenfell and Hunt's Oxyrhynchus Papyri (vol. i., 
1898) contains' a five-column fragment of a treatise on metre ; 
probably this treatise of Aristoxenus. 

The best edition is by Paul Marquard, with German translation and 
full commentary, Die harmonischen Fragmentedes Aristoxenus (Berlin, 
1868). The fragments are also given in C.W. Miiller, Frag. Hist. Graec, 
ii. 269 sqq.; and R Westphal, Melik und Rhythmik d. klass. Helle- 
nenthums (2nd vol. edited by F. Saran, Leipzig, 1893). Eng. trans, 
by H. S. Macran (Oxford, 1902). See also W. L. Mahne, Diatribe de 
Aristoxeno (Amsterdam, 1793); B. Brill, Aristoxenus' rhythmische 
und metrische Messungen (1871) ; R. Westphal, Griechische Rhythmik 
und Harmonik (Leipzig, 1867); L. Laloy, AristoxenedeTarenteet la 
musique de Vanliquile (Paris,i904). See Peripatetics, Pythagoras 
{Music) and art. " Greek Music" in Grove's Diet, of Music (1904). 
For the Oxyrhynchus fragment see Classical Review (January 1898), 
and C. van Jan in Bursian's Jahresbericht, civ. (1901). 

ARISUGAWA, the name of one of the royal families of Japan, 
going back to the seventh son of the mikado Go-Yozei (d. 1638). 
After the revolution of 1868, when the mikado Mutsu-hito was 
restored, his uncle, Prince Taruhito Arisugawa (1835-1895), 
became commander-in-chief, and in 1875 president of the senate. 



ARITHMETIC 



5*3 



After his suppression of the Satsuma rebellion he was made a 
field-marshal, and he was chief of the staff in the war with China 
(1894-95). His younger brother, Prince Takehito Arisugawa 
(b. 1862), was from 1879 to 1882 in the British navy, serving 
in the Channel Squadron, and studied at the Naval College, 
Greenwich. In the Chino-Japanese War of 1894-95 ne was 
in command of a cruiser, and subsequently became admiral- 
superintendent at Yokosuka. Prince Arisugawa represented 
Japan in England together with Marquis Ito at the Diamond 
Jubilee (1897), and in 1905 was again received there as the 
king's guest. 

ARITHMETIC (Gr. apidfirfTinr), sc. rixvr\, the art of counting, 
from apiQuos, number), the art of dealing with numerical 
quantities in their numerical relations. 

1. Arithmetic is usually divided into Abstract Arithmetic and 
Concrete Arithmetic, the former dealing with numbers and the 
latter with concrete objects. This distinction, however, might 
be misleading. In stating that the sum of nd. and 9d. is is. 8d. 
we do not mean that nine pennies when added to eleven pennies 
produce a shilling and eight pennies. The sum of money corre- 
sponding to 1 id. may in fact be made up of coins in several 
different ways, so that the symbol " nd." cannot be taken as 
denoting any definite concrete objects. The arithmetical fact is 
that n and 9 may be regrouped as 12 and 8, and the statement 
" nd.+od. = is. 8d." is only an arithmetical statement in so far 
as each of the three expressions denotes a numerical quantity 

(§11). 

2. The various stages in the study of arithmetic may be 
arranged in different ways, and the arrangement adopted must 
be influenced by the purpose in view. There are three main 
purposes, the practical, the educational, and the scientific; i.e. 
the subject may be studied with a view to technical skill in deal- 
ing with the arithmetical problems that arise in actual life, or for 
the sake of its general influence on mental development, or as an 
elementary stage in mathematical study. 

3. The practical aspect is an important one. The daily 
activities of the great mass of the adult population, in countries 
where commodities are sold at definite prices for definite 
quantities, include calculations which have often to be per- 
formed rapidly, on data orally given, and leading in general to 
results which can only be approximate; and almost every branch 
of manufacture or commerce has its own range of applications 
of arithmetic. Arithmetic as a school subject has been largely 
regarded from this point of view. 

4. From the educational point of view, the value of arithmetic 
has usually been regarded as consisting in the stress it lays on 
accuracy. This aspect of the matter, however, belongs mainly 
to the period when arithmetic was studied almost entirely for 
commercial purposes; and even then accuracy was not found 
always to harmonize with actuality. The development of 
physical science has tended to emphasize an exactly opposite 
aspect, viz. the impossibility, outside a certain limited range of 
subjects, of ever obtaining absolute accuracy, and the consequent 
importance of not wasting time in attempting to obtain results 
beyond a certain degree of approximation. 

5. As a branch of mathematics, arithmetic may be treated 
logically, psychologically, or historically. All these aspects are 
of importance to the teacher: the logical, in order that he may 
know the end which he seeks to attain; the psychological, that 
he may know how best to attain this end ; and the historical, for 
the light that history throws on psychology. 

1 The logical arrangement of the subject is not the best for 
elementary study. The division into abstract and concrete, for 
instance, is logical, if the former is taken as relating to number 
and the latter to numerical quantity (§ 11). But the result of a 
rigid application of this principle would be that the calculation 
of the cost of 3 lb of tea at 2s. a lb would be deferred until 
after the study of logarithms. The psychological treatment 
recognizes the fact that the concrete precedes the abstract and 
that the abstract is based on the concrete; and it also recognizes 
the futility of attempting a strictly continuous development of 
the subject. 



On the other hand, logical analysis is necessary if the subject 
is to be understood. As an illustration, we may take the ele- 
mentary processes of addition, subtraction, multiplication and 
division. These are still called in text-books the " four simple 
rules "; but this name ignores certain essential differences, 
(i) If we consider that we are dealing- with numerical quantities, 
we must recognize the fact that, while addition and subtrac- 
tion might in the first instance be limited to such quantities, 
multiplication and division necessarily introduce the idea of 
pure number, (ii) If on the other hand we regard ourselves as 
dealing with pure number throughout, then, as multiplication is 
continued addition, we ought to include in our classification 
involution as continued multiplication. Or we might say that, 
since multiplication is a form of addition, and division a form 
of subtraction, there are really only two fundamental processes, 
viz. addition and subtraction, (iii) The inclusion of the four 
processes under one general head fails to indicate the essential 
difference between addition and multiplication, as direct pro- 
cesses, on the one hand, and subtraction and division, as inverse 
processes, on the other (§ 59). 

6. The present article deals mainly with the principles of the 
subject, for which a logical arrangement is on the whole the more 
convenient. It is not suggested that this is the proper order to be 
adopted by the teacher. 

I. Number 

7. Ordinal and Cardinal Numbers. — One of the primary dis- 
tinctions in the use of number is between ordinal and cardinal 
numbers, or rather between the ordinal and the cardinal aspects 
of number. The usual statement is that one, two, three, . . . are 
cardinal numbers, and first, second, third, . . . are ordinal 
numbers. This , however, is an incomplete statement ; the words 
one, two, three, . . . and the corresponding symbols 1, 2, 3, . . . 
or I, II, III, . . . are used sometimes as ordinals, i.e. to denote 
the place of an individual in a series, and sometimes as cardinals, 
i.e. to denote the total number since the commencement of the 
series. 

On the whole, the ordinal use is perhaps the more common. 
Thus " 100 " on a page of a book does not mean that the page is 
100 times the page numbered 1, but merely that it is the page 
after 99. Even in commercial transactions, in dealing with 
sums of money, the statement of an amount often has reference 
to the last item added rather than to a total; and geometrical 
measurements are practically ordinal (§ 26). 

For ordinal purposes we use, as symbols, not only figures, such 
as 1, 2, 3, . . . but also letters, as a,b,c, . . . Thus the pages of 
a book may be numbered 1, 2, 3, . . . and the chapters I, II, III, 
. . . but the sheets are lettered A, B, C, . . . . Figures and letters 
may even be used in combination; thus 16 may be followed by 
16a and 166, and these by 17, and in such a case the ordinal 
100 does not correspond with the total (cardinal) number up to 
this point. 

Arithmetic is supposed to deal with cardinal, not with ordinal 
numbers; but it will be found that actual numeration, beyond 
about three or four, is based on the ordinal aspect of number, 
and that a scientific treatment of the subject usually requires a 
return to this fundamental basis. 

One difference between the treatment of ordinal and of 
cardinal numbers may be noted. Where a number is expressed 
in terms of various denominations, a cardinal number usually 
begins with the largest denomination, and an ordinal number 
with the smallest. Thus we speak of one thousand eight hundred 
and seventy-six, and represent it by MDCCCLXXVI or 1876; 
but we should speak of the third day of August 1876, and repre- 
sent it by 3. 8. 1876. It might appear as if the writing of 1876 
was an exception to this rule; but in reality 1876, when used 
in this way, is partly cardinal and partly ordinal, the first three 
figures being cardinal and the last ordinal. To make the year 
completely ordinal, we should have to describe it as the 6th year 
of the 8th decade of the 9th century of the 2nd millennium; i.e. 
we should represent the date by 3. 8. 6. 8. 9. 2, the total number 
of years, months and days completed being 1875. 7. 2. 



5^4 



ARITHMETIC 



In using an ordinal we direct our attention to a term of a series, 
while in using a cardinal we direct our attention to the interval 
between two terms. The total number in the series is the sum 
of the two cardinal numbers obtained by counting up to any 
interval from the beginning and from the end respectively; but 
if we take the ordinal numbers from the beginning and from the 
end we count one term twice over. Hence, if there are 365 days 
in a year, the 100th day from the beginning is the 266th, not the 
265th, from the end. 

8. Meaning of Names of Numbers. — What do we mean by any 
particular number, e.g. by seven, or by two hundred and fifty- 
three ? We can define two as one and one, and three as one and one 
and one; but we obviously cannot continue this method for 
ever. For the definition of large numbers we may employ either 
of two methods, which will be ''called the grouping method and 
the counting method. 

(i) Method of Grouping. — The first method consists in defining 
the first few numbers, and forming larger numbers by groups 
or aggregates, formed partly by multiplication and partly by 
addition. Thus, on the denary system (§ 16) we can give inde- 
pendent definitions to the numbers up to ten, and then regard 
(e.g.) fifty-three as a composite number made up of five tens and 
three ones. Or, on the quinary -binary system, we need only give 
independent definitions to the numbers up to five; the numbers 
six, seven,. . . can then be regarded us five and one, five and two, 
. . . , a fresh series being started when we get to five and five 
or ten. The grouping method introduces multiplication into the 
definition of large numbers; but this, from the teacher's point 
of view, is not now such a serious objection as it was in the days 
when children were introduced to millions and billions before they 
had any idea of elementary arithmetical processes. 

(ii) Method of Counting. — The second method consists in taking 
a series of names or symbols for the first few numbers, and then 
repeating these according to a regular system for Successive 
numbers, so that each number is defined by reference to the 
number immediately preceding it in the series. Thus two still 
means one and one, but three means two and one, not one and one 
and one. Similarly two hundred and fifty-three does not mean two 
hundreds, five tens and three ones, but one more than two 
hundred and fifty-two; and the number which is called one 
hundred is not defined as ten tens, but as one more than ninety- 
nine. 

9. Concrete and Abstract Numbers. — Number is concrete or 
abstract according as it does or does not relate to particular 
objects. On the whole, the grouping method refers mainly to 
concrete numbers and the counting method to abstract numbers. 
If we sort objects into groups of ten, and find that there are five 
groups of ten with' three over, we regard the five and the three 
as names for the actual sets of groups or of individuals. The 
three, for instance, are regarded as a whole when we name them 
three. If, however, we count these three as one, two, three, then 
the number of times we count is an abstract number. Thus 
number in the abstract is the number of times that the act of 
counting is performed in any particular case. This, however, 
is a description, not a definition, and we still want a definition for 
" number " in the phrase " number of times." 

10. Definition of " Number."— Suppose we fix on a certain 
sequence of names " one," " two," " three," . . . , or symbols 
such as 1, 2, 3, . . . ; this sequence being always the same. If we 
take a set of concrete objects, and name them in succession " one," 
" two," " three," . . . , naming each once and once only, we shall 
not get beyond a certain name, e.g. " six." Then, in saying that 
the number of objects is six, what we mean is that the name of 
the last object named is six. We therefore only require a definite 
law for the formation of the successive names or symbols. The 
symbols 1, 2,. . .9,10, . . . , for instance, are formed according 
to a definite law; and in giving 253 as the number of a set of 
objects we mean that if we attach to them the symbols 1, 2, 3, 
. . . in succession, according to this law, the symbol attached 
to the last object will be 253. If we say that this act of attach- 
ing a symbol has been performed 253 times, then 253 is an 
abstract (or pure) number. 



Underlying this definition is a certain assumption, viz. that if 
we take the objects in a different order, the last symbol attached 
will still be 253. This, in an elementary treatment of the subject, 
must be regarded as axiomatic; but it is really a simple case of 
mathematical induction. (See Algebra.) If we take two objects 
A and B, it is obvious that whether we take them as A, B, or as 
B, A, we shall in each case get the sequence 1, 2. Suppose this 
were true for, say, eight objects, marked r to 8. Then, if we 
introduce another object anywhere in the series, all those coming 
after it will be displaced so that each will have the mark formerly 
attached to the next following; and the last will- therefore 
be 9 instead of 8. This is true, whatever the arrangement of the 
original objects may be, and wherever the new one is introduced; 
and therefore, if the theorem is true for 8, it is true for 9. But it 
is true for 2; therefore it is true for 3; therefore for 4, and so on. 

11. Numerical Quantities. — If the term number is confined to 
number in the abstract, then number in the concrete may be 
described as numerical quantity. Thus £3 denotes £1 taken 
3 times. The £1 is termed the unit, A numerical quantity, 
therefore, represents a certain unit, taken a certain number of 
times. If we take £3 twice, we get £6; and if we take 3s. twice, 
we get 6s., i.e. 6 times is. Thus arithmetical processes deal with 
numerical quantities by dealing with numbers, provided the unit 
is the same throughout. If we retain the unit, the arithmetic is> 
concrete; if we ignore it, the arithmetic is abstract. But in the 
latter case it must always be understood that there is some unit 
concerned, and the results have no meaning until the unit is 
reintroduced. 

II. Notation, Numeration and Number-Ideation 

12. Terms used. — The representation of numbers by spoken 
sounds is called numeration; their representation by written 
signs is called notation. The systems adopted for numeration and 
for notation do not always agree with one another; nor do they 
always correspond with the idea which the numbers subjectively 
present. This latter presentation may, in the absence of any 
accepted term, be called number-ideation; this word covering 
not only the perception or recognition of particular numbers; but 
also the formation of a number-concept. 

13. Notation of Numbers. — The system which is now almost 
universally in use amongst civilized nations for representing 
cardinal numbers is the Hindu, sometimes incorrectly called the 
Arabic, system. The essential features which distinguish this 
from other systems are (1) the limitation of the number of 
different symbols, only ten being used, however large the number 
to be represented may be; (2) the use of the zero to indicate the 
absence of number; and (3) the principle of local value, by which 
a symbol in effect represents different numbers, according to its 
position. The symbols denoting a number are called its digits. 

A brief account of the development of the system will be found 
under Numeral. Here we are concerned with the principle, 
the explanation of which is different according as we proceed on 
the grouping or the counting system. 

(i) On the grouping system we may in the first instance con- 
sider that we have separate symbols for numbers from " one " to 
" nine," but that when we reach ten objects we put them in a 
group and denote this group by the symbol used for " one," but 
printed in a different type or written of a different size or (in 
teaching) of a different colour. Similarly when we get to ten 
tens we denote them by a new representation of the figure denot- 
ing one. Thus we may have: 

ones 1 2345678 
tens 12345678 
hundreds, / 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
) &c 



&c. 



9 
9 
9 



&c. 



On this principle 24 would represent twenty-four, 24 two 
hundred and forty, and 24 two hundred and four. To prevent 
confusion the zero or " nought " is introduced, so that the succes-i 
sive figures, beginning from the right, may represent ones, tens, 
hundreds, . . . We then have, e.g., 240 to denote two hundreds 
and four tens; and we may now adopt a uniform type for all the 
figures, writing this 240. 



ARITHMETIC 



525 



(ii) On the counting system we may consider that we have a 

series of objects (represented in the adjoining diagram by dots), 

and that we attach to these objects in succession the 

1 J symbols 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, o, repeating this series 

, , indefinitely. There is as yet no distinction between 

: the first object marked 1 and the second object marked 

I 1. We can, however, attach to the o's the same sym- 

: bols, 1, 2, ... o in succession, in a separate column, 

° # repeating the series indefinitely ; then do the same with 

io • every o of this new series; and so on. Any particular 

1 • object is then defined completely by the combination 

2 • of the symbols last written down in each series; and 

3 * this combination of symbols can equally be used to 
: denote the number of objects up to and including the 
■ last one (§ 10). 

In writing down a number in excess of 1000 it is 
(except where the number represents a particular year) usual 
in England and America to group the figures in sets of three, 
starting from the right, and to mark off the sets by commas. 
On the continent of Europe the figures are taken in sets of 
three, but are merely spaced, the comma being used at the 
end of a number to denote the commencement of a decimal. 

The zero, called " nought," is of course a different thing from 
the letter O of the alphabet, but there may be a historical 
connexion between them (§ 79). It is perhaps interesting to 
note that the latter-day telephone operator calls 1907 " nineteen 
seven " instead of " nineteen nought seven." 

14. Direction of the Number-Series. — There is no settled 
convention as to the direction in which the series of symbols 
denoting the successive numbers one, two, three, ... is to be 
written. 

(i) If the numbers were written down in succession, they would 
naturally proceed from left to right, thus: — 1,2,3,. • • This 
system, however, would require that in passing to " double 
figures " the figure denoting tens should be written either above 
or below the figure denoting ones, e.g. 
1 

i, 2, . . . , 8, 9, o, 1, 2, . . . or 1, 2 8, 9, o, 1, 2, . . . 

1 
The placing of the tens-figure to the left of the ones-figure will not 
seem natural unless the number-series runs either up or down. 

(ii) In writing down any particular number, the successive 
powers of ten are written from right to left, e.g. 5,462,198 is 
(6) (5) (4) (3) (*) (1) (°) 
5 4 6 2 1 9 8 

the small figures in brackets indicating the successive powers. 
On the other hand, in writing decimals, the sequence (of negative 
powers) is from left to right. 

(iii) In making out lists, schedules, mathematical tables (e.g. 
a multiplication-table), statistical tables, &c, the numbers are 
written vertically downwards. In tbe case of lists and schedules 
the numbers are only ordinals; but in the case of mathematical 
or statistical tables they are usually regarded as cardinals, though, 
when they represent values of a continuous quantity, they must 
be regarded as ordinals (§§ 26, 93). 

(iv) In graphic representation measurements are usually made 
upwards; the adoption of this direction resting on certain 
deeply rooted ideas (§ 23). 

This question of direction is of importance in reference to the 
development of useful number-forms (§ 23); and the existence 
of the two methods mentioned under (iii) and (iv) above produces 
confusion in comparing numerical tabulation with graphical 
representation. It is generally accepted that the horizontal 
direction of increase, where a horizontal direction is necessary, 
should be from left to right; but uniformity as regards vertical 
direction could only be attained either by printing mathe- 
matical tables upwards or by taking " downwards," instead of 
" upwards," as the " positive " direction for graphical purposes. 
200 The downwards direction will be taken in this article as 
5° the normal one for succession of numbers (e.g. in multipli- 

t cation), and, where the arrangement is horizontal, it is to 

253 be understood that this is for convenience of printing. It 
^ should be noticed that, in writing the components of a 



number 253 as 200, 50 and 3, each component beneath the next 
larger one, we are really adopting the downwards principle, since 
the figures which make up 253 will on this principle be success- 
ively 2, 5 and 3 (§ 13 (ii) ). 

15. Roman Numerals. — Although the Roman numerals are 
no longer in use for representing cardinal numbers, except in 
certain special cases (e.g. clock-faces, milestones and chemists' 
prescriptions), they are still used for ordinals. 

The system differs completely from the Hindu system. There 
are no single symbols for two, three, &c; but numbers are 
represented by combinations of symbols for one, five, ten, fifty, 
one hundred, five hundred, &c, the numbers which have single 
symbols, viz. I, V, X, L, C, D, M, proceeding by multiples of five 
and two alternately. Thus 1878 is MDCCCLXXVIII, i.e. 
thousand five-hundred hundred hundred hundred fifty ten ten 
five one one one. 

The system is therefore essentially a cardinal and grouping 
one, i.e. it represents a number as the sum of sets of other 
numbers. It is therefore remarkable that it should now only 
be used for ordinal purposes, while the Hindu system, which is 
ordinal in its nature, since a single series is constantly repeated, 
is used almost exclusively for cardinal numbers. This fact 
seems to illustrate the truth that the counting principle is the 
fundamental one, to which the interpretation of grouped numbers 
must ultimately be referred. 

The normal process of writing the larger numbers on the left 
is in certain cases modified in the Roman system by writing a 
number in front of a larger one to denote subtraction. Thus four, 
originally written IIII, was later written IV. This may have 
been due to one or both of two causes; a primitive tendency 
to refer numbers, in numeration, to the nearest large number 
(§ 24 (iv) ), and the difficulty of perceiving the number of a group 
of objects beyond about three (§22). Similarly IX, XL and XC 
were written for nine, forty and ninety respectively. These, 
however, were later developments. 

16. Scales of Notation. — In the Hindu system the numbering 
proceeds by tens, tens of tens, &c; thus the figure in the fifth 
place; counting from the right, denotes the product of the corre- 
sponding number by four tens in succession. The notation is 
then said to be in the scale of which ten is the base, or in the 
denary scale. The Roman system, except for the use of symbols 
for five, fifty, &c, is also in the denary scale, though expressed 
in a different way. The introduction of these other symbols 
produces a compound scale, which may be called a quinary- 
binary, or, less correctly, a quinary-denary scale. 

The figures used in the Hindu notation might be used to express 
numbers in any other scale than the denary, provided new 
symbols were introduced if the base of the scale exceeded ten. 
Thus 1878 in the quinary -binary scale would be 1131213, and 
1828 would be 1130213; the meaning of these is seen at once 
by comparison with MDCCCLXXVIII and MDCCCXXVIII. 
Similarly the number which in the denary scale is 215 would in 
the quaternary scale (base 4) be 3 113, being equal to 3.4.4.4-+- 
I.4.4+I-4+3-. 

The use of the denary scale in notation is due to its use in 
numeration (§ 18); this again being due (as exemplified by the 
use of the word digit) to the primitive use of the fingers for count- 
ing. If mankind had had six fingers on each hand and six toes on 
each foot, we should be using a duodenary scale (base twelve), 
which would have been far more convenient. 

17. Notation of Numerical Quantities. — Over a large part of the 
civilized world the introduction of the metric system (§ 118) haS 
caused the notation of all numerical quantities to be in the denary 
scale. In Great Britain and her colonies, however, and in the 
United States, other systems of notation still survive, though 
there is none which is consistently in one scale, other than the 
denary. The method is to form quantities into groups, and these 
again into larger groups; but the number of groups making one 
of the next largest groups varies as we proceed along the scale. 
The successive groups or units thus formed are called denomina- 
tions. Thus twelve pennies make a shilling, and twenty shillings 
a pound, while the penny is itself divided into four farthings (or 



526 



ARITHMETIC 



two halfpennies). There are, therefore, four denominations, the 
bases for conversion of one denomination into the next being 
successively four (or two), twelve and twenty. Within each 
denomination, however, the denary notation is employed 
exclusively, e.g. " twelve shillings " is denoted by 1 2s. 

The diversity of scales appears to be due mainly to four 
causes: (i) the tendency to group into scores (§ 20); (ii) the 
tendency to subdivide into twelve; (iii) the tendency to sub- 
divide into two or four, with repetitions, making subdivision into 
sixteen or sixty-four; and (iv) the independent adoption of 
different units for measuring the same kind of magnitude. 

Where there is a division into sixteen parts, a binary scale may 
be formed by dividing into groups of two, four or eight. Thus 
the weights ordinarily in use for measuring from \ oz. up to 
2 lb give the basis for a binary scale up to not more than eight 
figures, only o and 1 being used. The points of the compass 
might similarly be expressed by numbers in a binary scale; but 
the numbers would be ordinal, and the expressions would be 
analogous to those of decimals rather than to those of whole 
numbers. 

In order to apply arithmetical processes to a quantity expressed 
in two or more denominations, we must first express it in terms of 

a single denomination by means of a varying scale of notation. 

(20) (12) 
Thus £254, 13s. 6d. may be written £254 « 13s. » 6d.; each of 
the numbers in brackets indicating the number of units in 
one denomination that go to form a unit in the next higher 
denomination. To express the quantity in terms of £, it ought 

(20) (12) ^ 

to be written £254 « 13 1 6; this would mean £254 -~^- or 

£(254+-^+ ), and therefore would involve a fractional 

number. 

A quantity expressed in two or more denominations is usually 
called a compound number or compound quantity. The former 
term is obviously incorrect, since a quantity is not a number; 
and the latter is not very suggestive. For agreement with the 
terminology of fractional numbers (§ 62) we shall describe such a 
quantity as a mixed quantity. The letters or symbols descriptive 
of each denomination are visually placed after or (in actual 
calculations) above the figures denoting the numbers of the 
corresponding units; but in a few cases, e.g. in the case of £, the 
symbol is placed before the figures. There would be great 
convenience in a general adoption of this latter method; the 
combination of the two methods in such an expression as 
£123, 1 6s. 4jd. is especially awkward. 

18. Numeration. — The names of numbers are almost wholly 
based on the denary scale; thus eighteen means eight and ten, 
and twenty-four means twice ten and four. The words eleven 
and twelve have been supposed to suggest etymologically a 
denary basis (see, however, Numeral). 

Two exceptions, however, may be noted. 

(i) The use of dozen, gross ( = dozen dozen), and great gross 
\ «= dozen gross) indicates an attempt at a duodenary basis. But 
the system has never spread; and the word " dozen " itself is 
based on the denary scale. 

(ii) The score (twenty) has been used as a basis, but to an even 
more limited extent. There is no essential difference, however, 
between this and the denary basis. As the latter is due to 
finger-reckoning, so the use of the fingers and the toes produced 
a vigesimal scale. Examples of this are given in § 20; it is 
worthy of notice that the vigesimal (or, rather, quinary-quater- 
nary) system was used by the Mayas of Yucatan, and also, in a 
more perfect form, by the Nahuatl (Aztecs) of Mexico. 

The number ten having been taken as the basis of numeration, 
there are various methods that might consistently be adopted for 
naming large numbers. 

(i) We might merely name the figures contained in the number. 
This method is often adopted in practical life, even as regards 
mixed quantities; thus £57,593, 16s. 4d. would be read as five 
seven, five nine three, sixteen and four pence. 

(ii) The word ten might be introduced, &.g. 593 would be five 
ten ten ninety ( = nine ten) and three. 



(iii) Names might be given to the successive powers of ten, up 
to the point to which numeration of ones is likely to go. Partial 
applications of this method are found in many languages. 

(iv) A compromise between the last two methods would be to 
have names for the series of numbers, beginning with ten, each of 
which is the " square " of the preceding one. This would in effect 
be analysing numbers into components of the form a. io 6 where 
a is less than 10, and the index b is expressed in the binary scale, 
e.g. 7,000,000 would be 7.io 4 .io 2 , and 700,000 would be 7.io 4 .io 1 . 

The British method is a mixture of the last two, but with an 
index-scale which is partly ternary and partly binary. There are 
separate names for ten, ten times ten ( = hundred) , and ten times 
ten times ten ( = thousand) ; but the next single name is million, 
representing a thousand times a thousand. The next name is 
billion, which in Great Britain properly means a million million, 
and in the United States (as in France) a thousand million. 

19. Discrepancies between Numeration and Notation. — Although 
numeration and notation are both ostensibly on the denary 
system, they are not always exactly parallel. The following 
are a few of the discrepancies. 

(i) A set of written symbols is sometimes read in more than 
one way, while on the other hand two different sets of symbols 
(at any rate if denoting numerical quantities) may be read in the 
same way. Thus 1820 might be read as one thousand eight 
hundred and twenty if it represented a number of men, but it 
would be read as eighteen hundred and twenty if it represented a 
year of the Christian era; while is. 6d. and i8d. might both be 
read as eighteenpence. As regards the first of these two examples, 
however, it would be more correct to write 1,820 for the former 
of the two meanings (cf. § 13). 

(ii) The symbols 11 and \i are read as eleven and twelve, not 
(except in elementary teaching) as ten-one and ten-two. 

(iii) The names of the numbers next following these, up to 
19 inclusive, only faintly suggest a ten. This difficulty is not 
always recognized by teachers, who forget that they themselves 
had to be told that eighteen means eight-and-ien. 

(iv) Even beyond twenty, up to a hundred, the word ten is not 
used in numeration, e.g. we say thirty-four, not three ten four. 

(v) The rule that the greater number comes first is not uni- 
versally observed in numeration. It is not observed, for instance, 
in the names of numbers from 13 to 19; nor was it in the names 
from which eleven and twelve are derived. Beyond twenty it is 
usually, but not always, observed; we sometimes instead of 
twenty-four say four and twenty. (This latter is the universal 
system in German, up to 100, and for any portion of 100 in 
numbers beyond 100.) 

20. Other Methods of Numeration and Notation. — It is only 
possible here to make a brief mention of systems other than those 
now ordinarily in use. 

(i) Vigesimal Scale.-~- The system of counting by twenties 
instead of by tens has existed itt many countries; and, though 
there is no corresponding notation, it still exhibits itself in the 
names of numbers. This is the case, for instance, in the Celtic 
languages; and the Breton or Gaulish names have affected the 
Latin system, so that the French names for some numbers are on 
the vigesimal system. This system also appears in the Danish 
numerals. In English the use of the word score to represent 
twenty — e.g. in " threescore and ten " for seventy — is super- 
imposed on the denary system, and has never formed an essential 
part of the language. The word, like dozen and couple, is still in 
use, but rather in a vague than in a precise sense. 

(ii) Roman System. — The Roman notation has been explained 
above (§ 15). Though convenient for exhibiting the composition 
of any particular number, it was inconvenient for purposes of 
calculation; and in fact calculation was entirely (or almost en- 
tirely) performed by means of the abacus (q.v.). The numeration 
was in the denary scale, so that it did not agree absolutely with 
the notation. The principle of subtraction from a higher number, 
which appeared in notation, also appeared in numeration, but not 
for exactly the same numbers or in exactly the same way; thus 
XVIII was two-from-twenty, and the next number was one- 
from-twenty, but it was written XIX, not IXX. 



ARITHMETIC 



527 



(iii) Other Systems of Antiquity. — The Egyptian notation was 
purely denary, the only separate signs being those for 1, 10, 100, 
&c. The ordinary notation of the Babylonians was denary, but 
they also used a sexagesimal scale, i.e. a scale whose base was 60. 
The Hebrews had a notation containing separate signs (the 
letters of the alphabet) for numbers from 1 to 10, thenfor multiplies 
of 10 up to 100, and then for multiples of 100 up to 400, and later 
up to 1000. 

The earliest Greek system of notation was similar to the 
Roman, except that the symbols for 50, 500, &c, were more 
complicated. Later, a system similar to the Hebrew was adopted, 
and extended by reproducing the first nine symbols of the series, 
preceded by accents, to denote multiplication by 1000. 

On the island of Ceylon there still exists, or existed till recently, 
a system which combines some of the characteristics of the later 
Greek (or Semitic) and the modern European notation; and it is 
conjectured that this was the original Hindu system. 

For a further account of the above systems see Numeral, and 
the authorities quoted at the end of the present article. 

21. The Number-Concept. — It is probable that very few people 
have any definite mental presentation of individual numbers 
(i.e. numbers proceeding by differences of one) beyond 100, or at 
any rate beyond 144. Larger numbers are grasped by forming 
numbers into groups or by treating some large number as a unit. 
A person would appreciate the difference between 93,000,000 m. 
and 94,000,000 m. as the distance of the centre of the sun from 
the centre of the earth at a particular moment; but he cer- 
tainly would not appreciate the relative difference between 
93,000,000 m. and 93,000 001 m. In order to get an idea of 
93,000,000, he must take a million as his unit. Similarly, in the 
metric system he cannot mentally compare two units, one of 
which is 1000 times the other. The metre and the kilometre, 
for instance, or the metre and the millimetre, are not directly 
comparable; but the metre can be conceived as containing 100 
centimetres. 

On the other hand, it would seem that, for most educated 
people, sixteen and seventeen or twenty-six and twenty-seven, 
and even eighty-six and eighty-seven, are single numbers, just 
as six and seven are, and are not made up of groups of tens and 
ones. In other words, the denary scale, though adopted in 
notation and in numeration, does not arise in the corresponding 
mental concept until we get beyond 100. 

Again, in the use of decimals, it is unusual to give less than 
two figures. Thus 3-142 or 3-14 would be quite intelligible; but 
3-1 does not convey such a good idea to most people as either 3 T V 
or 3- 10, i.e. as an expression denoting a fraction or a percentage.. 

There appears therefore to be a tendency to use some larger 
number than ten as a basis for grouping into new units or for 
subdivision into parts. The Babylonians adopted 60 for both 
these purposes, thus giving us the sexagesimal division of angles 
and of time. 

This view is supported, not only by the intelligibility of 
percentages to ordinary persons, but also by the tendency, noted 
above (§ 19), to group years into centuries, and to avoid the use 
of thousands. Thus 1876 is not 1 thousand, 8 hundred, 7 tens 
and 6, but 18 hundred and 76, each of the numbers 18 and 76 
being named as if it were a single number. It is also in accord- 
ance with what is so far known about number-forms ( § 23) . 

If there is this tendency to adopt 100 as a basis instead 
of 10, the teaching of decimals might sometimes be simplified 
by proceeding from percentages to percentages of percentages, 
i.e. by commencing with centesimals instead of with decimals. 

22. Perception of Number. — In using material objects as a 
basis for developing the number-concept, it must be remembered 
that it is only when there are a few objects that their number 
can be perceived without either counting or the performance of 
some arithmetical process such as addition. If four coins are laid 
on a table, close together, they can (by most adults) be seen to be 
four, without counting; but seven coins have to be separated 
mentally into two groups, the numbers of which are added, or 
one group has to be seen and the remaining objects counted, 
before the number is known to be seven. 



The actual limit of the number that can be " seen " — i.e. 
seen without counting or adding — depends for any individual on 
the shape and arrangement of the objects, but under similar 
conditions it is not the same for all individuals. It has been 
suggested that as many as six objects can be seen at once; but 
this is probably only the case with few people, and with them 
only when the objects have a certain geometrical arrangement. 
The limit for most adults, under favourable conditions, is about 
four. Under certain conditions it is less; thus IIII, the old 
Roman notation for four, is difficult to distinguish from III, and 
this may have been the main reason for replacing it by IV (§ 15). 

In the case of young children the limit is probably two. That 
this was also the limit in the case of primitive races, and that the 
classification of things was into one, two and many, before any 
definite process of counting (e.g. by the fingers) came to be 
adopted, is clear from the use of the " dual number " in language, 
and from the way in which the names for three and four are often 
based on those for one and two. With the individual, as with the 
race, the limit of the number that can be seen gradually increases 
up to four or five. 

The statement that a number of objects can be seen to be three 
or four is not to be taken as implying that there is a simultaneous 
perception of all the objects. The attention may be directed 
in succession to the different objects, so that the perception is 
rhythmical; the distinctive rhythm thus aiding the perception 
of the particular number. 

In consequence of this limitation of the power of perception of 
number, it is practically impossible to use a pure denary scale in 
elementary number-teaching. If a quinary-binary system (such 
as would naturally fit in with counting on the fingers) is not 
adopted, teachers unconsciously resort to a binary-quinary 
system. This is commonly done where cubes are used; thus 
seven is represented by three pairs of cubes, with a single cube 
at the top. 

23. Visualization of the Series. — A striking fact, in reference 
to ideas of number, is the existence of number-forms, i.e. of 
definite arrangements, on an imagined plane or in space, of the 
mental representations of the successive numbers from 1 onwards. 
The proportion of persons in whom number-forms exist has been 
variously estimated ; but there is reason to believe that the forms 
arise at a very early stage of childhood, and that they did at some 
time exist in many individuals who have afterwards forgotten 
them. Those persons who possess them are also apt to make 
spatial arrangements of days of the week or the month, months of 
the year, the letters of the alphabet, &c. ; and it is practically 
certain that only children would make such arrangements of 
letters of the alphabet. The forms seem to result from a general 
tendency to visualization as an aid to memory; the letter-forms 
may in the first instance be quite as frequent as the number- 
forms, but they vanish in early childhood, being of no practical 
value, while the number-forms continue as an aid to arithmetical 
work. 

The forms are varied, and have few points in common; but the 
following tendencies are indicated. 

(i) In the majority of cases the numbers lie on a continuous 
(but possibly zigzag) line. 

(ii) There is nearly always (at any rate in English cases) a break 
in direction at 12. From 1 to 12 the numbers sometimes lie in the 
circumference of a circle, an arrangement obviously suggested 
by a clock-face; in these cases the series usually mounts upwards 
from 12. In a large number of cases, however, the direction is 
steadily upwards from 1 to 12, then changing. In some cases the 
initial direction is from right to left or from left to right; but 
there are very few in which it is downwards. 

(iii) The multiples of 10 are usually strongly marked; but 
special stress is also laid on other important numbers, e.g. the 
multiples of 12. 

(iv) The series sometimes goes up to very high numbers, but 
sometimes stops at 100, or even earlier.. It is not stated, in most 
cases, whether all the numbers within the limits of the series 
have definite positions, or whether there are only certain numbers 
which form an essential part of the figure, while others only 



528 



ARITHMETIC 



exist potentially. Probably the latter is almost universally 
the case. 

These forms are developed spontaneously, without suggestion 
from outside. The possibility of replacing them by a standard 
form, which could be utilized for performing arithmetical opera- 
tions, is worthy of consideration; some of the difficulties in the 
way of standardization have already been indicated (§ 14). The 
general tendency to prefer an upward direction is important; and 
our current phraseology suggests that this is the direction which 
increase is naturally regarded as taking. Thus we speak of counting 
up to a certain number; and similarly mathematicians speak of 
high and ascending powers, while engineers speak of high pressure, 
high speed, high power, &c. This tendency is probably aided by 
the use of bricks or cubes in elementary number-teaching. 

24. Primitive Ideas of Number. — The names of numbers give 
an idea of the way in which the idea of number has developed. 
Where civilization is at all advanced, there are usually certain 
names, the origin of which cannot be traced; but, as we go 
farther back, these become fewer, and the names, are found to 
be composed on certain systems. The systems are varied, and 
it is impossible to lay down any absolute laws, but the following 
seem to be the main conclusions. 

(i) Amongst some of the lowest tribes, as (with a few excep- 
tions) amongst animals, the only differentiation is between one 
and many, or between one, two and many, or between one, two, 
three and many. As it becomes necessary to use higher but still 
small numbers, they are formed by combinations of one and two, 
or perhaps of three with one or two. Thus many of the Austral- 
asian and South American tribes use only one and two; seven, 
for instance, would be two two two one. 

(ii) Beyond ten, and in many cases beyond five, the names have 
reference to the use of the fingers, and sometimes of the toes, for 
counting; and the scale may be quinary, denary or vigesimal, 
according as one hand, the pair of hands, or the hands and feet, 
are taken as the new unit. Five may be signified by the word for 
hand; and either ten or twenty by the word for man. Or the 
words signifying these numbers may have reference to the com- 
pletion of some act of counting. Between five andten; or beyond 
ten, the names may be due to combinations, e.g. 16 may be 
10+5+1; or they may be the actual names of the fingers 'last 
counted. 

(iii) There are a few, but only a few, cases in which the number 
6 or 8 is named as twice 3 or twice 4; and there are also a few 
cases in which 7, 8 and 9 are named as 6+1, 6+2 and 6+3. 
In the large majority of cases the numbers 6, 7, 8 and 9 are 5+1, 
5+2, 5+3 and 5+4, being named either directly from their 
composition in this way or as the fingers on the second hand. 

(iv) There is a certain tendency to name 4, 9, 14 and 19 as being 
one short of 5, 10, 15 and 20 respectively; the principle being thus 
the same as that of the Roman IV, IX, &c. It is possible that 
at an early stage the number of the fingers on one hand or on 
the two hands together was only thought of vaguely as a large 
number in comparison with 2 or 3, and that the number did 
not attain definiteness until it was linked up with the smaller 
by insertion of the intermediate ones; and the Unking up might 
take place in both directions. 

(v) In a few cases the names of certain small numbers are 
the names of objects which present these numbers in some 
conspicuous way. Thus the word used by the Abipones to denote 
5 was the name of a certain hide of five colours. It has been 
suggested that names of this kind may have been the origin of 
the numeral words of different races; but it is improbable that 
direct visual perception would lead to a name for a number 
unless a name based on a process of counting had previously 
been given to it. 

25. Growth of the Number-Concept.— The general principle that 
the development of the individual follows the development of the 
race holds good to a certain extent in the. case of the number- 
concept, but it is modified by the existence of language dealing 
with concepts which are beyond the reach of the child, and also, 
of course, by the direct attempts at instruction. One result is 
the formation of a number-series as a mere succession of names 



without any corresponding ideas of number; the series not being 
necessarily correct. 

When numbering begins, the names of the successive numbers 
are attached to the individual objects; thus the numbers are 
originally ordinal, not cardinal. 

The conception of number as cardinal, i.e. as something belong- 
ing to a group of objects as a whole, is a comparatively late one, 
and does not arise until the idea of a whole consisting of its parts 
has been formed. This is the quantitative aspect of number. 

The development from the name-series to the quantitative 
conception is aided by the numbering of material objects and 
the performance of elementary processes of comparison, addition, 
&c, with them. It may also be aided, to a certain extent, by the 
tendency to find rhythms in sequences of sounds. This tendency 
is common in adults as well as in children; the strokes of a clock 
may, for instance, be grouped into fours, and thus eleven is 
represented as two fours and three. Finger-counting is of course 
natural to children, and leads to grouping into fives, and ulti- 
mately to an understanding of the denary system of notation. 

26. Representation of Geometrical Magnitude by Number. — 
The application of arithmetical methods to geometrical measure- 
ment presents some difficulty. In reality there is a transition 
from a cardinal to an ordinal system, but to an ordinal system 
which does not agree with the original ordinal system from which 
the cardinal system was derived. To see this, we may represent 
ordinal numbers by the ordinary numerals 1, 2, 3, . . . and 
cardinal numbers by the Roman I, II, III, . . . Then in the 
earliest stage each object counted is indivisible; either we are 
' counting it as a whole, or we are not 
, . . , counting it at all. The symbols 1, 2, 
„ 3, . . . then refer to the individual 

objects, as in fig. 1 ; this is the primary 
ordinal stage. Figs. 2 and 3 represent the cardinal stage; fig. 2 



I 




2 


3 


• 


I 


• 


11 • in 

1 1 





n 



Fig. 3. 



Hi 
Fig. 2. 



showing how the I, II, III, . . . denote the successively larger 
groups of objects, while fig. 3 shows how the name II of the 
whole is determined by the name 2 of the last one counted. 

When now we pass to geometrical measurement, each " one " 
is a thing which is itself divisible, and it cannot be said that at 
any moment we are counting it ; it is only when one is completed 
that we can count it. The names 1, 2, 3, . . . for the individual 
objects cease to have an intelligible meaning, and measurement 
is effected by the cardinal numbers I, II, III, . . . , as in fig. 4.' 



in 



Fig. 5. 



Fig. 4. 

These cardinal numbers have now, however, come to denote 
individual points in the line of measurement, i.e. the points of 
separation of the individual units of length. The point III in fig. 4 
does not include the point II in the same way that the number 
III includes the number II in fig. 2, and the points must therefore 
be denoted by the ordinal numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . as in fig. 5, 
the zero o falling into its natural place immediately before the 
commencement of the first unit. 

Thus, while arithmetical numbering refers to units, geometrical 
numbering does not refer to units but to the intervals between 
units. 

III. Arithmetic or Integral Numbers 

(i.) Preliminary < 

27. Equality and Identity.— There is a certain difference 
between the use of words referring to equality and identity in 



ARITHMETIC 



529 



arithmetic and in algebra respectively; what' is an equality in 
the former becoming an identity in the latter. Thus the state- 
ment that 4 times 3 is equal to 3 times 4, or, in abbreviated form, 
4X3 = 3X4(1 28), is a statement not of identity but of equality; 
i.e. 4X3 and 3X4 mean different things, but the queries
which they denote produce the same result. But in algebra a X b =*= 
bXa is called an identity, in the sense that it is true whatever a 
and b may be; while »XX=A is called an equation, as being 
true, when n and A are given, for one value only of X. Similarly 
the numbers represented by -^ and ^ are not identical, but are 
equal. 

28. Symbols of Operation. — The failure to observe the distinc- 
tion between an identity and an equality often leads to loose 
reasoning; and in order to prevent this it is important that 
definite meanings should be attached to all symbols of operation, 
and especially to those which represent elementary queries.
The symbols - and -5- mean respectively that the first quantity 
mentioned is to be reduced or divided by the second; but there 
is some vagueness about + and X. In the present article a+b 
will mean that a is taken first, and b added to it; but aXb will 
mean that b is taken first, and is then multiplied by a. In the 
case of numbers the X may be replaced by a dot; thus 4.3 
means 4 times 3. When it is necessary to write the multiplicand 
before the multiplier, the symbol x will be used, so that 
bxa will mean the same as aX&. 

29. Axioms. — There are certain statements that are some- 
times regarded as axiomatic; e.g. that if equals are added to 
equals the results are equal, or that if A is greater than B then 
A+X is greater than B+X. Such statements, however, are 
capableof logical proof , and are generalizations of results obtained 
empirically at an elementary stage; they therefore belong more 
properly to the laws of arithmetic (§ 58). 

(ii.) Sums and Differences. 

30. Addition and Subtraction. — Addition is the process of 
expressing (in numeration or notation) a whole, the parts of which 
have already been expressed; while, if a whole has been expressed 
and also a part or parts, subtraction is the process of expressing 
the remainder. 

Except with very small numbers, addition and subtraction, 
on the grouping system, involve analysis and rearrangement. 
Thus the sum of 8 and 7 cannot be expressed as ones; we can 
either form the whole, and regroup it as 10 and 5, or we can split 
up tjie 7 into 2 and 5, and add the 2 to the 8 to form 10, thus 
getting 8+ 7 = 8+ (2 + 5) = (8+2) +5=10+5=15. For larger 
numbers the rearrangement is more extensive; thus 24+31 = 
(20+4) + (30+1) = (20+30) + (4+1) = 50+5 =55, the process be- 
ing still more complicated when the ones together make more 
than ten. Similarly we cannot subtract 8 from 15, if 15 means 
1 ten + 5 ones; we must either write 15 — 8=(io+5) — 8 = 
(10— 8) + 5 = 2+5 = 7, or else resolve the 15 into an inexpressible 
number of ones, and then subtract 8 of them, leaving 7. 

Numerical quantities, to be added or subtracted, must be in 
the same denomination; we cannot, for instance, add 55 shillings 
and 100 pence, any more than we can add 3 yards and 2 metres. 

31. Relative Position in the Series. — The above method of 
dealing with addition and subtraction is synthetic, and is 
appropriate to the grouping method of dealing with number. 
We commence with processes, and see what they lead to; and 
thus get an idea of sums and differences. If we adopted the 
counting method, we should proceed in a different way, our 
method being analytic. 

One number is less or greater than another, according as the 
symbol (or ordinal) of the former comes earlier or later than that 
of the latter in the number-series. Thus (writing ordinals in 
light type, and cardinals in heavy type) 9 comes after 4, and 
therefore 9 is greater than 4. To find how much greater, we 
compare two series, in one of which we go up to 9, while in 
the other we stop at 4 and then recommence our counting. The 
series are shown below, the numbers being placed horizontally 
for convenience of printing, instead of vertically (§ 14) : — 
123456789 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 



This exhibits 9 as the sum of 4 and 5; it being understood that 
the sum of 4 and 5 means that we add 5 to 4. That this gives 
the same result as adding 4 to 5 may be seen by reckoning the 
series backwards. 

It is convenient to introduce the zero; thus 

0123456789 
012345 
indicates that after getting to 4 we make a fresh start from 4 
as our zero. 

To subtract, we may proceed in either of two ways. The 
subtraction of 4 from 9 may mean either " What has to be added 
to 4 in order to makeup a total of 9," or " To what has 4 to be 
added in order to make up a total of 9." For the former meaning 
we count forwards, till we get to 4, and then make a new count, 
parallel with the continuation of the old series, and see at what 
number we arrive when we get to 9. This corresponds to the 
concrete method, in which we have 9 objects, take away 4 of 
them, and recount the remainder. The alternative method is to 
retrace the steps of addition, i.e. to count backwards, treating 
9 of one (the standard) series as corresponding with 4 of the other, 
and finding which number of the former corresponds with o of 
the latter. This is a more advanced method, which leads easily 
to the idea of negative quantities, if the subtraction is such that 
we have to go behind the o of the standard series. 

32. Mixed Quantities. — The application of the above principles, 
and of similar principles with regard to multiplication and 
division, to numerical quantities expressed in any of the diverse 
British denominations, presents no theoretical difficulty if the 
successive denominations are regarded as constituting a varying 
scale of notation (§17). Thus the expression 2 ft. 3 in. implies 
that in counting inches we use o to eleven instead of o to 9 
as our first repeating series, so that we put down 1 for the next 
denomination when we get to twelve instead of when we get to 
ten. Similarly 3 yds. 2 ft. means 

yds. 01 2 3 

ft. 012012012012 
The practical difficulty, of course, is that the addition of two 
numbers produces different results according to the scale in 
which we are for the moment proceeding; thus the sum of 9 and 
8 is 17, 15, 13 or n according as we are dealing with shillings, 
pence, pounds (avoirdupois) or ounces. The difficulty may be 
minimized by using the notation explained in § 17. 

(iii.) Multiples, Submultiples and Quotients. 

33. Multiplication and Division are the names given to certain 
numerical processes which have to be performed in order to 
find the result of certain arithmetical queries. Each process
may arise out of either of two distinct queries; but the
terminology is based on the processes, not on the queries
to which they belong, and the latter are not always clearly 
understood. 

34. Repetition and Subdivision. — Multiplication occurs when a 
certain number or numerical quantity is treated as a unit (■§ 11), 
and is taken a certain number of times. It therefore arises in one 
or other of two ways, according as the unit or the number exists 
first in consciousness. If pennies are arranged in groups of five, 
the total amounts arranged are successively once 5d., twice sd., 
three times sd., . . .; which are written iXsd., 2Xsd., 3X5d., 
. . . (§ 28). This process is repetition, and the quantities 1 Xsd., 
2Xsd., 3X5d., . . . are the successive multiples of sd. If, on 
the other hand, we have a sum of 5s., and treat a shilling as being 
equivalent to twelve pence, the 5s. is equivalent to 5 X i2d.; 
here the multiplication arises out of a subdivision of the original 
unit is. into i2d. 

Although multiplication may arise in either of these two ways, 
the actual process in each case is performed by commencing with 
the unit and taking it the necessary number of times. In the 
above case of subdivision, for instance, each of the 5 shillings is 
separately converted into pence, so that we do in fact find in 
succession once i2d., twice i2d., . . . ; i.e. we find the multiples 
of 1 2d. up to 5 times. 

The result of the multiplication is called the product of the unit 
by the number of times it is taken. 



53° 



ARITHMETIC 



35. Diagram of Multiplication. — The process of multiplication 
is performed in order to obtain such results as the following: — 
If 1 boy receives 7 apples, 
then 3 boys receive 21 apples; 
or 

If is. is equivalent to I2d., 
then 5s. is equivalent to 6od. 
The essential portions of these statements, from the arith- 
metical point of view, may be exhibited in the form of the 
diagrams A and B : — 

A B 



1 boy 


7 apples 


3 boys 


21 apples 



is. 


I2d. 


Ss. 


6od. 



or more briefly, as in C or C and D or D': — 
C CD 

7 apples 



I 

■3 


7 apples 


21 apples 



21 apples 



I 


I2d. 


5 


6od. 



D' 
I2d. 



tod. 



the general arrangement of the diagram being as shown in E 
or E':— 

E E' 



Unit 



I 


Unit 


Number 


Product 



Number 



Product 



Multiplication is therefore equivalent to completion of the 
diagram by entry of the product. 

36. Multiple-Tables. — The diagram C or D of § 35 is part of a 
complete table giving the successive multiples of the particular 
unit. If we take several different units, and write down their 
successive multiples in parallel columns, preceded by the number- 
series, we obtain a multiple-table such as the following: — - 



' ' 


2 


9 


is. 5d. 


3 yds. 2 ft. 


17359 




2 


2 


4 


18 


2S. iod. 


7 yds. 1 ft. 


34718 




3 


3 


6 


27 


4s. 3d. 


1 1 yds. ft. 


52077 




4 


4 


8 


36 


5s. 8d. 


14 yds. 2 ft. 


69436 




5 


5 


10 


45 


7s. id. 


18 yds. 1 ft. 


86795 





















It is to be considered that each column may extend downwards 
indefinitely. 

37. Successive Multiplication. — In multiplication by repetition 
the unit is itself usually a multiple of some other unit, i.e. it is a 
product which is taken as a new unit. When this new unit has 
been multiplied by a number, we can again take the product as 
a unit for the purpose of another multiplication; and so on 
indefinitely. Similarly where multiplication has arisen out of the 
subdivision of a unit into smaller units, we can again subdivide 
these smaller units. Thus we get successive multiplication; but 
it represents quite different queries according as it is due to
repetition, in the sense of § 34, or to subdivision, and these 
queries will be exhibited by different diagrams. Of the two
diagrams below, A exhibits the successive multiplication of £3 by 
20, 12 and 4, and B the successive reduction of £3 to shillings, 
pence and farthings. The principle on which the diagrams are 
constructed is obvious from § 35. It should be noticed that in 
multiplying £3 by 20 we find the value of 20.3, but that in 



reducing £3 to shillings, since each £ becomes 20s., we find the 
value of 3.20. 

A S 







1 


£3 




1 


20 


£60 


I 


12 




£720 


4 






£2880 







id. 


4f. 




is. 


I2d. 




£1 


20s. 






£3 


60s. 


72od. 


288of. 



38. Submultiples. — The relation of a unit to its successive 
multiples as shown in a multiple-table is expressed by saying 
that it is a submultiple of the multiples, the successive sub- 
multiples being one-half, one-third, one-fourth, . . . Thus, in the 
diagram of §36, is. 5d. is one-half of 2s. iod., one-third of 4s. 3d., 
one-fourth of ss. 8d., . . . ; these being written " j of 2s. iod.," 
" i of 48. 3d.," " i of S s. 8d," . . . 

The relation of submultiple is the converse of that of multiple; 
thus if a is £ of b, then b is 5 times a. The determination of a sub- 
multiple is therefore equivalent to completion of the diagram E 
or E' of § 35 by entry of the unit, when the number of times it is 
taken, and the product, are given. The operation is the converse 
or repetition; it is usually called partition, as representing division 
into a number of equal shares. 

39. Quotients. — The converse of subdivision is the formation 
of units into groups, each constituting a larger unit; the number 
of the groups so formed out of a definite number of the original 
units is called a quotient. The determination of a quotient is 
equivalent to completion of the diagram by entry of the number 
when the unit and the product are given. There is no satisfactory 
name for the operation, as distinguished from partition; it is 
sometimes called measuring, but this implies an equality in 
the original units, which is not an essential feature of the 
operation. 

40. Division. — From the commutative law for multiplication, 
which shows that 3X4d. = 4X3d.= i2d., it follows that the 
number of pence in one-fourth of i2d. is equal to the quotient 
when 1 2 pence are formed into units of 4d. ; each of these numbers 
being said to be obtained by dividing 1 2 by 4. The term division 
is therefore used in text-books to describe the two processes 
described in §§ 38 and 39; the product mentioned in § 34 is the 
dividend, the number or the unit, whichever is given, is called the 
divisor, and the unit or number which is to be found is called the 
quotient. The symbol -4- is used to denote both kinds of division; 
thus A -r- n denotes the unit, n of which make up A,*and A-=-B 
denotes the number of times that B has to be taken to make up A. 
In the present article this confusion is avoided by writing the 

former as - of A. 

Methods of division are considered later (§§ 106-108). 

41. Diagrams of Division. — Since we write from left to right 
or downwards, it may be convenient for division to interchange 
the rows or the columns of the multiplication-diagram. Thus the 
uncompleted diagram for partition is F or G, while for measuring 
it is usually H; the vacant compartment being for the unit in 



F 


G 


H 




K 


1 




Number 


Product 


Unit 


1 


I2d. 


IS. 


Number 


Product 


1 




Product 




6od. 





F or G, and for the number in H. In some cases it may be con- 
venient in measuring to show both the units, as in K. 
. 42. Successive Division may be performed as the converse, of 
successive multiplication. The diagrams A and B below are the 
converse (with a slight alteration) of the corresponding diagrams 



ARITHMETIC 



53 1 



in § 37; A representing the determination of -fa of ^ of I of 
2880 farthings, and B the conversion of 2880 farthings into £. 
A B 







4 


288of. 




12 


1 


720f. 


20 


I 




6of. 


- 






3f- 







20s. 


£1 




I2d. 


IS. 




4f- 


id. 






288of. 


72od. 


60s. 


£3 



(iv.) Properties of Numbers. 
(A) Properties not depending on the Scale of Notation. 
43. Powers, Roots and Logarithms. — The standard series 1, 2, 3, 
... is obtained by successive additions of 1 to the number last 
found. If instead of commencing with 1 and making successive 
additions of 1 we commence with any number such as 3 and make 
successive multiplications by 3, we get a series 3, o, 27, . . . as 
shown below the line in the margin. The first mem- 



o i=3° nf> 



ber of the series is 3 ; the second is the product of 



1 3 = 3' n 1 two numbers, each equal to 3 ; the third is the pro- 

2 9=3 2 » 2 duct of three numbers, each equal to 3; and so on. 
3 « 7 = 3 < " 4 These are written 3 1 (or 3), 3*, 3 3 , 3 4 , . . . where 
. . . n p denotes the product of p numbers, each equal to 
] ] '. ', 11. If we write nP = n, then, if any two of the three 

numbers n, p, n are known, the third is determinate. 
If we know n and p, p is called the index, and n, » 2 , . . . n p 
are called the first power, second power, . . . pth power of n, the 
series itself being called the power-series. The second power and 
third power are usually called the square and cube respectively. 
If we know p and N, n is called the pth root of N,'so that n is the 
second (or square) root of n 1 , the third (or cube) root of n 3 , the 
fourth root of n 4 , . . . If we know » and N, then p is the logarithm 
of n to base n. 

The calculation of powers (i.e. of N when n and p are given) is 
involution; the calculation of roots (i.e. of n when p and N are 
given) is evolution; the calculation of logarithms (i.e. of p whenw 
and N are given) has no special name. 

Involution is a direct process, consisting of successive multipli- 
cations; the other two are inverse processes. The calculation of 
a logarithm can be performed by successive divisions; evolution 
requires special methods. 

The above definitions of logarithms, &c, relate to cases in which 
w and p are whole numbers, and are generalized later. 

44. Law of Indices. — If we multiply n" by ««, we multiply the 
product of p «'s by the product of q n's, and the result is therefore 
n T +°. Similarly, if we divide n" by n", where q is less than p, 
the result is n v - q . Thus multiplication and division in the 
power-series correspond to addition and subtraction in the 
index-series, and vice versa. 

If we divide n* by n p , the quotient is of course 1. This should 
be written «°. Thus we may make the power-series commence 
with 1 , if we make the index-series commence with o. The added 
terms are shown above the line in the diagram in § 43. 

45. Factors, Primes and Prime Factors. — If we take the suc- 
cessive multiples of 2, 3, . . . t 

as in § 36, and place each 2 2 

multiple opposite the same 3 3 

number in the original series, 4 4 4 

we get an arrangement as g ' 6 g ] ' _ ^ ' ' " ' 

in the adjoining diagram. If 7 7 . . 

any number N occurs in the 8 8 8 8 

vertical series commencing 9 9 

with a number n (other than IZ "' ". 

1) then n is said to be a factor 12 12 12 12 12 . . 

of N. Thus 2, 3 and 6 are 

factors of 6; and 2, 3, 4, 6 

and 12 are factors of 12. 
A number (other than 1) which has no factor except itself is 



called a prime number, or, more briefly, a prime. Thus 2, 3, 5, 7 
and 1 1 are primes, for each of these occurs twice only in the table. 
A number (other than 1) which is not a prime number is called a 
composite number. 

If a number is a factor of another number, it is a factor of any 
multiple of that number. Hence, if a number has factors, one at 
least of these must be a prime. Thus 12 has 6 for a factor; but 
6 is not a prime, one of its factors being 2 ; and therefore 2 must 
also be a factor of 12. Dividing 12 by 2, we get a submultiple 6, 
which again has a prime 2 as a factor. Thus any number which 
is not itself a prime is the product of several factors, each of which 
is a prime, e.g. 12 is the product of 2, 2 and 3. These are called 
prime factors. 

The following are the most important properties of numbers in 
reference to factors: — 

(i) If a number is a factor of another number, it is a factor of any 
multiple of that number. 

(ii) If a number is a factor of two numbers, it is a factor of their 
sum or (if they are unequal) of their difference. (The words in 
brackets are inserted to avoid the difficulty, at this stage, of 
saying that every number is a factor of o, though it is of course 
true that o. » = o, whatever n may be.) 

(iii) A number can be resolved into prime factors in one way 
only, no account being taken of their relative order. Thus 
12 = 2X2X3 = 2X3X2 = 3X2X2, but this is regarded as one 
way only. If any prime occurs more than once, it is usual to 
write the number of times of occurrence as an index; thus 

144=2X2X2X2X3X3 = 2*3- 

The number 1 is usually included amongst the primes; but, if 
this is done, the last paragraph requires modification, since 144 
could be expressed as 1. 2 4 . 3 2 , or as i 2 . 2*. 3 2 , or as i". 2*. 3 2 , 
where p might be anything. 

If two numbers have no factor in common (except 1) each is 
said to be prime to the other. 

The multiples of 2 (including 1.2) are called even numbers; 
other numbers are odd numbers. 

46. Greatest Common Divisor. — If we resolve two numbers into 
their prime factors, we can find their Greatest Common Divisor or 
Highest Common Factor (written G.C.D. or G.C.F. or H.C.F.), 
i.e. the greatest number which is a factor of both. Thus 
144= 2* 3 2 , and 756 = 2 2 3^ 7, and therefore the G.C.D. of 144 
and 7561s 2* 3 2 =36. If we require the G.C.D. of two numbers, 
and cannot resolve them into their prime factors, we use a pro- 
cess described in the text-books. The process depends on (ii) 
of § 45, in the extended form that, if x is a factor of a and b, it is 
a factor of pa-qb, where p and q are any integers. 

The G.C.D. of three or more numbers is found in the same way. 

47. Least Common Multiple.— The Least Common Multiple, or 
L.CiM., of tWo numbers, is the least number of which they are 
both factors. Thus, since 144=2'*. 3 2 , and 756 = 2* s 3 7, the 
L.C.M. of 144 and 756 is 2* 3'. 7. It is clear, from comparison 
with the last paragraph, that the product of the G.C.D. and the 
L.C.M. of two numbers is equal to the product of the numbers 
themselves. This gives a rule for finding the L.C.M. of two 
numbers. But we cannot apply it to finding the L.C.M. of three 
or more numbers; if we cannot resolve the numbers into their 
prime factors, we must find the L.C.M. of the first two, then the 
L.C.M. of this and the next number, and so on. 

(B) Properties depending on the Scale of Notation. 

48. Tests of Divisibility.— The following are the principal rules 
for testing whether particular numbers are factors of a given 
number. The number is divisible — 

(i) by 10 if it ends in o; 

(ii) by 5 if it ends in o or 5 ; 

(iii) by 2 if the last digit is even; 

(iv) by 4 if the number made up of the last two digits is 
divisible by 4; 

(v) by 8 if the number made up of the last three digits is 
divisible by 8; 

(vi) by 9 if the sum of the digits is divisible by 9; 

(vii) by 3 if the sum of the digits is divisible by 3 ; 



532 



ARITHMETIC 



(viii) by n if the difference between the sum of the ist, 3rd, 
5th, . . . digits and the sum at the 2nd, 4th, 6th, . . . is zero or 
divisible by 11. 

(ix) To find whether a number is divisible by 7, ij or 13, 
arrange the number in groups of three figures, beginning from the 
end, treat each group as a separate! number,, and then find the 
difference between the sum of the ist, 3rd, ... pf these numbers 
and the sum of the 2nd, 4th, , . . Then,. if this difference is 
zero or is divisible by 7, n or 13, the original number is also so 
divisible; and conversely. For example, 31521 gives 521—31 
"=490, and therefore is divisible by 7, but not by 11 or 13. 

49. Casting out Nines is a process based on (vi) of the last 
paragraph. The remainder when a number is divided by 19 is 
equal to the remainder when the sum of its> digits is divided by 9. 
Also, if the remainders when two numbers arq divided by 9 are 
respectively a and b, the remainder when their product is divided 
by 9 is the same as the remainder when a.b is divided by 9. This 
gives a rule for testing multiplication, .which is found in most 
text-books. It is doubtful, however, whether such a rule, giving 
a test which is necessarily incomplete, is of much educational 
value. 

(v.) Relative Magnitude. __ 

50. Fractions. — A fraction of a quantity is a suhmultiple, or a 
multiple of a submultiple, of that quantity. Thus, since 
3 X is. sd. =4S. 3d., is, sd. may be denoted by J of 4s. 3d. ; and 
any multiple of is. sd., denoted bywXis. sd.,:may also be 



denoted by - of 4s. 3d. 



We therefore use " - of A 



to mean that 
A, and then multiply 



we find a quantity X such that aXX 

Xbyn. 

n 
It must be noted (i) that this is a definition of "- of, "not a 

definition of " -,"' arid (ii) that it is not necessary that n should be 

less than a. 

5 1 . Subdivision of Submultiple. — By f of A we mean: 5 times the 
unit, 7 times which is A. If we regard this unit as being 4 times 
a lesser unit, then A_is 7.4 times this lesser unit, and 4 of A is 5.4 

times the lesser unit. Hence f of A is equal to "^ of A; and, 
conversely, $£ of A is equal to f oi A. Similarly each of 
these is equal to 5~ of A. Hence the value of a fraction is not 
altered by substituting for the numerator and denominator the 
corresponding numbers in any other column of a multiple-table 

(§ 36). If we write rqr in the form J^ we may say that the 
value of a fraction is not altered by multiplying or dividing the 
numerator and denominator by any number. 

52. Fraction of a Fraction. — To find V* of 4, of A we must 
convert f of A into 4 times some unit. This is done by the pre- 
ceding paragraph. For ^ of A==^ of A= ?~ of A; i.e. it is 
4 times a unit which is itself 5 times another unit, 7,4 times, which 
is A. Hence, taking the former unit 1 1 times instead of 4 times, 

Yof f of A=tU^of A. 1 

. 7-4 . 

A fraction of a fraction is sometimes called a compound 

fraction. 

53. Comparison, Addition and Subtraction of Fractions. — The 
quantities f of A and ^ of A are expressed in terma of different 
units. To compare them, or to add or subtract them, we must 
express them in terms of the same unit: Thus, taking ^ of A 
as the unit, we have (§51) 

I of A = |£of A; f of A = f| of" A. 
Hence the former is greater than the latter; their sum is.-f£of A; 
and their difference is -^g of A. 

Thus the fractions must be reduced to a common denominator. 
This denominator must, if the fractions are in their lowest terms 
(§ 54). he a multiple of each of the denominators; it is usually 
most convenient that it should be their L.C.M. (§47). 

54. Fraction in its Lowest Terms.— A fraction is said to be in its 
lowest terms when its numerator and denominator have no common 



I 


7 d. 


10 


5s. iod. 


24 


14s. 



factor; or to be reduced to its lowest terms when it is replaced by 
such a fraction. : Thus ^\ of A is said to be reduced to its lowest 
terms when it is replaced by T 4 T of A. It is important always to 
bear in mind that T \ of A is not the same as -fy of A, though 
it is equal to it. 
' 55. Diagram of Fractional Relation. — To find -j-f of 14s. we have 
to take 10 of the units, 24 of which make up 14s. Hence the 
required amount will, in the multiple-table of 
§ 36, be opposite 10 in the column in which 
the amount opposite 24 is 14s. ; the quantity 
at the head of this column, representing the 
unit, will be found to be 7d. The elements 
of the multiple-table with which we are 
concerned are shown in the diagram in the 
margin. This diagram serves equally for 
the two statements that (i) -|-jf of 14s. is 
5s. iod., (ii) If of 5s. iod! is 14s. The two statements are in fact 
merely different aspects of a single relation, considered in the 
next section. 

56. Ratio. — If we omit the two upper compartments of the 
diagram in the last section, • we obtain the diagram A. This 
^ diagram exhibits a relation between the two 

amounts 5s. rod. and 14s. on the one hand, 
and the numbers 10 and 24 of the standard 
series on the other, which is expressed by say- 
ing that 5s. iod. is to 14s. in the ratio of 10 
to 24, or that 14s. is to 5s. rod. in the ratio of 
24 to 10. If we had taken is. 2d. instead of 
7d. as the unit for the second column, we 
should have obtained the diagram B. Thus 
we must regard the ratio of a to b as being 
the same as the ratio of c to d, if the fractions 

are equal. For this reason the 
ratio of a to J is sometimes written T , but 



10 ' 


5s. iod. 


24 


; I4S. 


B 


5 


5s. iod. 


12 


14s. ; 



b and d 



2s. rod. 



8s. 6d. 



7 yds. 1 ft. 



22 yds. 



reason 
a 
b' 
the more correct method is to write it a: o. 

If two quantities or numbers P and Q are to each other in the 
ratio of p to q, it is clear from the diagram that p times Q= 

q times P, so that Q = p of P. 

57. Proportion. — If from any two columns in the table of § 36 
we remove the numbers or quantities in any two rows, we get 

a diagram such as that here shown. 
The pair of compartments on either 
side may, as here, contain numerical 
quantities, or may contain numbers. 
But the two pairs of compartments 
will correspond to a single pair of 
numbers, e.g> 2 and 6, in the standard series, so that,. denoting 
them by M, N and P, Q respectively, M w.ill be to N in the same 
ratio that P is to Q. This is expressed by saying 
that M is to N as P to Q, the relation being written 
M :N ::P :Q; the four quantities are .then said 
tobe in proportion ipr to be proportionals. 

This is the most general expression of the 
relative magnitude of two quantities; i.e. the 
relation expressed by proportion includes the relations expressed 
by multiple, submultiple, fraction and ratio. 

If M and N are respectively m and n times a unit, and P and Q 
are respectively p and q times a unit, then the quantities are in 
proportion if mq =t np ; and conversely. 

IV. Laws of Arithmetic 
, 58. Laws of Arithmetic. — The arithmetical processes which we 
have considered in reference to positive integral numbers are 
subject to the following laws: — 

(i) Equalities and Inequalities.— The following are sometimes 
called Axioms (§ 29), but their truth should be proved, even if at 
an early stage it is assumed- The symbols " > " and " < " 
mean respectively " is greater than " and "is less than." The 
numbers represented by a, b, c, x and m are all supposed to be 
positive. 



' M . 


P 


N . 


,Q 



ARITHMETIC 



533 



(a) If a = b, and b = c, then a = c; 

(b) If a — b, then a+x=b+x, and a—x — b—x; 

(c) If a> J, then a+ #>6+;c, and a— x>b— x; 

(d) If o<6, then a+x<b+x, and a— x<b~ x; 

(e) If a = &, then ma=mb, and a-i-m=b-i-m; 
(/) If a>6, then ma>mb, and a-j-»i>&-=-m; 
(g) If a<b, then ma<mb, and a-i-m<b-i-m. 

(ii) Associative Law for Additions and Subtractions. — This law 
includes the rule of signs, that a—(b—c) = a — b+c; and it states 
that, subject to this, successive queries of addition or sub-
traction may be grouped in sets in any way; e.g.a— b+c+d+e — f 
= a-{b-c) + {d+e-f). 

(iii) Commutative Law for Additions and Subtractions, that 
additions and subtractions may be performed in any order; e.g. 
a — b+c+d = a+c — b+d = a+d+c — b. 

(iv) Associative Law for Multiplications and Divisions. — This 
law includes a rule, similar to the rule of signs, to the effect that 
a-7-{b-i-c)=a J hbxc; and it states that, subject to this, successive 
queries of multiplication or division may be grouped in sets in
any way; e.g. a-i-bxcxdxe-i-f=a-i-{b- : rc)x(dxe-i-f). 

(v) Commutative Law for Multiplications and Divisions, that 
multiplications and divisions may be performed in any order: e.g. 
a-7-bxcxd = axc-r-bxd — axdxc-i-b. 

(vi) Distributive Law, that multiplications and divisions may 
be distributed over additions and subtractions, e.g. that 
m{a+b — c)=m.a+m.b — m.c, or that (a+b — e)-f- #=(a-h n)+ 
(J-s-!»)-(c-s-»). 

In the case of (ii), (iii) and (vi), the letters d, b,c, . . . may 
denote either numbers or numerical quantities, while m and n 
denote numbers; in the case of (iv) and (v) the letters denote 
numbers only. 

59. Results of Inverse Operations. — Addition, multiplication 
and involution are direct processes; and, if we start with 
positive integers, we continue with positive integers throughout. 
But, in attempting the inverse processes of subtraction, division, 
and either evolution or determination of index, the data may be 
such that a process cannot be performed. We can, however, 
denote the result of the process by a symbol, and deal with this 
symbol according to the laws of arithmetic. In this way we 
arrive at (i) negative numbers, (ii) fractional numbers, (iii) surds, 
(iv) logarithms (in the ordinary sense of the word). 

60. Simple Formulae. — The following are some simple 
formulae which follow from the laws stated in § 58. 

(i) (a + b+c+ . . . ) (p+q+r+ . . . )<={ap+aq+ar+ ...) + 
(bp+bq+br+ . . . ) + {cp+cq+cr+ . . . ) + . . . ; i.e. the' pro- 
duct of two or more numbers, each of which Consists of two 
or more parts, is the sum of the products of each part of the one 
with each part of the other. 

(ii) {a + b) (a — b) = a 2 — b 2 ; i.e. the product of the sum and the 
difference of two numbers is equal to the difference of their squares. 

(iii) (a + />) 2 = a 2 +2a6 + ft l = ^+(2a+&)&. 
V. Negative Numbers 

61. Negative Numbers may be regarded as resulting from the 
commutative law for addition and subtraction. According to this 
law, 10+3 + 6— 7= 10+3 — 7+6 = 3 + 6 — 7 + io = &c. But,ifwe 
write the expression as 3 — 7 + 6+10, this means that we must 
first subtract 7 from 3. This cannot be done; but the result of 
the subtraction, if it could be done, is something which, when 
6 is added to it, becomes 3 — 7+6 = 3+6 — 7 = 2. The result of 
3 — 7 is the same as that of 0—4; and we may write it " —4," 
and call it a negative number, if by this we mean something 
possessing the property that —4+4 = 0. 

This, of course, is unintelligible on the grouping system of 
treating number; on the counting system it merely means that 
we count backwards from o, just as we might count inches back- 
wards from a point marked o on a scale. It should be remembered 
that the counting is performed with something as unit. If this 
unit is A, then what we are really considering is — 4A; and this 
means, not that A is multiplied by —4, but that A is multiplied 
by 4, and the product is taken negatively. It would therefore 
be better, in some ways, to retain the unit throughout, and to 
describe — 4A as a negative quantity, in order to avoid confusion 



Ones. Sixths, 
o 



with the " negative numbers ": with which queries are per-
formed in formal algebra. 

The positive quantity or number obtained from a negative 
quantity or number by omitting the " — " is called its numerical 
value. 

VI. Fractional and Decimal Numbers 

62. Fractional Numbers. — According to the definition in § 50 
the quantity denoted by |- of A is made up of a number, 3, and a 

unit, which is one-sixth of A. Similarly -2 of A, -^of A, —'of A, 

■ ' J n ' n ' n ' 

. . . mean quantities which are respectively p times, q times 
r times, . . .the unit, n of which make up A. Thus any arith- 
metical processes which can be applied to the numbers p, q, r, 

. . . can be applied to £, 3., ^ . . . , the denominator tl 
remaining unaltered. 

If we denote the unit — of A by X, then A is n times X, and 

£ of n times X is * times X; i.e. £ of « times is * times. 

n ■ ■ .. n ' 

Hence, so long as the denominator remains unaltered, we can 

deal with *, $■, — , ... exactly as if they were numbers, any 

queries being performed on the numerators. The expressions

£ 1 L are then fractional numbers, their relation to 

n' n> n' J 

ordinary or integral numbers being that * times n times is equal 

to p times. , 

This relation is of exactly the same kind as the relation of the 

successive digits in numbers expressed in a scale of notation whose 
base is n. Hence we can treat the fractional 
numbers which have any one denominator as 

constituting a number-series, as shown in the 

2 adjoining diagram. The result of taking 13 sixths 

3 of A is, then seen to be the same as the result of 

4 taking twice A and one-sixth of A, so that we may 

5 regard Jg 3 - as being equal to 2 J. A fractional 

1 j number is called a proper fraction or an improper 

2 fraction according as the numerator is or is not 

3 less than the denominator; and an expression 
.4 S uch. as a£ is called a, mixed number. An im- 

2 q proper fraction is therefore equal either to an 

1 integer or to a mixed number. It will be seen 
from § 17 that ,a mixed number corresponds 
with what is there called a mixed quantity. 
Thus £3, 17s. is a mixed quantity, being ex- 
pressed in pounds and shillings; to express it in terms of pounds 
only we must write it £3^0- 

63. Fractional Numbers with different Denominators.— Ii we 
divided the unit into halves, and these new units into thirds, we 

should get sixths of the original unit, as 

A shown in A; while, if we divided the 

Ones. Halves. Sixths, unit into thirds, and these new units 

o o . into halves, we should again get sixths, 

1 but as shown in B. The series of halves 

in the one case, and of thirds in the 

1 other, are entirely different series of 

2 fractional numbers, but we can com- 

1 o o p are them by putting each in its proper 

position in relation to the seriesof sixths. 
\ Thus f is equal to |, and f is equal to V", 
and conversely; in other words, any 
fractional number is equivalent to the 
B fractional number obtained by multi- 

Ones. Thirds. Sixths, plying or dividing the numerator and 
o o o denominator by any integer. We can 

thus find fractional numbers equivalent 
to the sum or difference of any two 
fractional numbers. The process is the 
same as that of finding the sum or differ- 
ence of 3 sixpences and 5 fourpences; 
we cannot subtract 3 sixpenny-bits 
from 5 fourpenny-bits, but we can ex- 
press each as an equivalent number of 



534 



ARITHMETIC 



pence, and then perform the subtraction. Generally, to find the 
sum or difference of two or more fractional numbers, we must 
replace them by other fractional numbers having the same 
denominator; it is usually most convenient to take as this 
denominator the L.C.M. of the original fractional numbers (cf. 

§ S3)- 

64. Complex Fractions. — A fraction (or fractional number), 
the numerator or denominator of which is a fractional number, 
is called a complex fraction (or fractional number), to distinguish 
it from a simple fraction, which is a fraction having integers for 

numerator and denominator. Thus 777. of A means that we take 

a unit X such that 113 times X is equal to A, and then take sf 
times X. To simplify this, we take a new unit Y, which is § of X. 

Then A is 34 times Y, and •j L pT of A is 1 7 times Y, i.e. it is 5 of A. 

65. Multiplication of Fractional Numbers. — To multiply fbyf 
is to take f times |. It has already been explained (§ 62) that f 
times is an operation such that f times 7 times is equal to 5 times. 
Hence we must express $ , which itself means f times, as being 
7 times something. This is done by multiplying both numerator 

and denominator by 7 ; i.e. f is equal to ~, which is the same 

.8 - . 7-3 ■ 

thing as 7 times r-r 
8 5J3 '' A 



times 



Hence f times f = -f ' times 7 times T"7 = 5 

_ , 7 ,. The rule for multiplying a. fractional number 

by a fractional number is therefore the same as the rule for finding 
a fraction of a fraction. 

66. Division of Fractional Numbers.— To divide $ by f is to 
find a number {i.e. a fractional number) * such that f times x is 
equal to f . But £ times f times * is, by the last section, equal to 
x. Hence x is equal to £ times $ . Thus to divide by a fractional 
number we must multiply by the number obtained by inter- 
changing the numerator and the denominator, i.e. by the recipro- 
cal of the original number. 

If we divide 1 by { we obtain, by this rule, -J. Thus the 
reciprocal of a number may be defined as the number: obtained 
by dividing 1 by it. This definition applies whether the original 
number is integral or fractional. 

By means of the present and the preceding sections the rule 
given in § 63 can be extended to the statement that a fractional 
number is equal to the number obtained by multiplying its 
numerator and its denominator by any fractional number. 

67. Negative Fractional Numbers. — We can obtain negative 
fractional numbers in the same way that we obtain negative 
integral numbers ; thus — f or — f A means that f or 4 A is taken 
negatively. 

68. Genesis of Fractional Numbers. — A fractional number may 
be regarded as the result of a measuring division (§ 39) which 
cannot be performed exactly. Thus we cannot divide 3 in. by 
11 in. exactly, i.e. we cannot express 3 in. as an integral multiple 
of 11 in. ; but, by extending the meaning of" times " as in § 62, 
we can say that 3 in. is tV times 11 in., and therefore call T 3 r the 
quotient when 3 in. is divided by 1 1 in. Hence, if p and n are 

numbers, - is sometimes regarded as denoting the result of 
dividing p by n, whether p and n are integral or fractional 
(mixed numbers being included in fractional). 

The idea and properties of a fractional number having been 
explained, we' may now call it, for brevity, a fraction. Thus 
" I of A " no longer means two of the units, three of which make 
up A; it means that A is multiplied by the fraction \, i.e. it 
means the same thing as " \ times A." 

69. Percentage— In order to deal, by way of comparison or 
addition or subtraction, with fractions which have different 
denominators, it is necessary to reduce them to a common 
denominator. To avoid this difficulty, in practical life, it is usual 
to confine our queries to fractions which have a certain
standard denominator. Thus (§ 79) the Romans reckoned in 
twelfths, and the Babylonians in sixtieths; the former method 
supplied a basis for division by 2, 3, 4, 6 or 12, and the latter for 
division by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30, or 60. The modern 
method is to deal with fractions which have 100 as denominator; 



such fractions are called percentages. They only apply accurately 
to divisions by 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25 or 50; but they have the con- 
venience of fitting in with the denary scale of notation, and they 
can be extended to other divisions by using a mixed number 
as numerator. One-fortieth, for instance, can be expressed as 

y^Tj, which is called 25 per cent., and usually written 25 %. 
Similarly 35 % is equal to one-thirtieth. 

If the numerator is a multiple of 5, the fraction represents 
twentieths. This is convenient, e.g. for expressing rates in the 
pound; thus 15 % denotes the process of taking 3s. for every £1, 
i.e. a rate of 3s. in the £. 

In applications to money " per cent." sometimes means " per 
£100." Thus "£3, 17s. 6d. per cent." is really the complex 

fraction 20 . 
100 

70. Decimal Notation of Percentage. — An integral percentage, 
i.e. a simple fraction with 100 for denominator, can be expressed 
by writing the.two figures of the numerator (or, if there is only one 
figure, this figure preceded by o) with a dot or " point " before 
them; thus -76 means 76 %, or ^V If there is an integral 
number to be taken as well as a percentage, this number is 
written in front of the point; thus 23-76 X A means 23 times A, 
with 76 % of A. We might therefore denote 76 % by 0-76. 

If as our unit we take X= jo's of A = i % of A, the above 
quantity might equally be written 2376 X = Vov °f A; i.e. 
23-76 X A is equal to 2376 % of A. 

71. Approximate Expression by Percentage. — When a fraction 
cannot be expressed by an integral percentage, it can be so 
expressed approximately, by taking the nearest integer to the 
numerator of an equal fraction having 100 for its denominator. 

Thus 7 = 7^5, so that 1. is approximately equal to 14%; and 

7 = 75^, which is approximately equal to 29 %. The difference 

between this approximate percentage and the true value is less 
than \ %, i. e. is less than -j-J-j. 
If the numerator of the fraction consists of an integer and 

5— e.g. in the case of g = 757} — it is uncertain whether we should 
take the next lowest or the next highest integer. It is best in 
such cases to retain the 5; thus we can write f = 37f % = -375. 

72. Addition and Subtraction of Percentages. — The sum or 
difference of two percentages is expressed by the sum or difference 
of the numbers expressing the two percentages. 

73. Percentage of a Percentage. — Since 37 % of 1 is expressed by 
°'37> 37 % °f 1 % (i-C- of o-oi) might similarly be expressed by 
0-00-37. The second point, however, is omitted, so that we write 
it 0-0037 or 0037, this expression meaning -fife of tJt = tAV¥- 

On the same principle, since 37 % of 45 % is equal to -/oV of i 4 6 o 
= iVWV= iVV+CtoV of tot), we can express it by -1665; and 
3 % of 2 % can be expressed by -0006. Hence, to find a percent- 
age of a percentage, we multiply the two numbers, put o's in front 
if necessary to make up four figures (not counting fractions), 
and prefix the point. 

74. Decimal Fractions. — The percentage-notation can be 
extended to any fraction which has any power of 10 for its 
denominator. Thus i<nH> can be written -153 and iVVoVo can 
be written -15300. These two fractions are equal to each other, 
and also to -1530. A fraction written in this way is called a 
decimal fraction; or we might define a decimal fraction as a 
fraction having a power of 10 for its denominator, there being a 
special notation for writing such fractions. 

A mixed number, the fractional part of which is a decimal 
fraction, is expressed by writing the integral part in front of 
the point, which is called the decimal point. Thus 2 7To 5 o iJ o Q o~can 
be written 27-1530. This number, expressed in terms of the 
fraction to 000 ° r - oooi, would be 271530. Hence the successive 
figures after the decimal point have the same relation to each 
other and to the figures before the point as if the point did not 
exist. The point merely indicates the denomination in which 
the number is expressed: the above number, expressed in terms 



ARITHMETIC 



535 



of ^ji would be 271-530, but expressed in terms of 100 it would be 

•■271530- 

Fractions other than decimal fractions are usually called 
vulgar fractions. 

75. Decimal Numbers. — Instead of regarding the -153 in 
27- 153 as meaning iVoV> we may regard the different figures in 
the expression as denoting numbers in the successive orders 
of submultiples of 1 on a denary scale. Thus, on the grouping 
system, 27-153 will mean 2.io+7+i/io+5/io 2 +3/io 3 , while on 
the counting system it will mean the result of counting 
through the tens to 2, then through the ones to 7, then through 
tenths to 1, and so on. A number made up in this way may be 
called a decimal number, or, more briefly, a decimal. It will be 
seen that the definition includes integral numbers. 

76. Sums and Differences of Decimals. — To add or subtract 
decimals, we must reduce them to the same denomination, i.e. 
if one has more figures after the decimal point than the other, 
we must add sufficient o's to the latter to make the numbers 
of figures equal. Thus, to add 5-413 to 3-8, we must write the 
latter as 3-800. Or we may treat the former as the sum of 
5-4 and -013, and recombine the -013 with the sum of 3-8 and 

5-4- 

77. Product of Decimals. — To multiply two decimals exactly, 
we multiply them as if the point were absent, and then insert it 
so that the number of figures after the point in the product shall 
be equal to the sum of the numbers of figures after the points in 
the original decimals. 

In actual practice, however, decimals only represent approxi- 
mations, and the process has to be modified (§ in). 

78. Division by Decimal. — To divide one decimal by another, 
we must reduce them to the same denomination, as explained 
in § 76, and then omit the decimal points. Thus 5-413-^3-8 = 

?m+im= 5413+3800. 

79. Historical Development of Fractions and Decimals. — The 
fractions used in ancient times were mainly of two kinds: unit- 
fractions, i.e. fractions representing aliquot parts (§ 103), and 
fractions with a definite denominator. 

The Egyptians as a rule used only unit-fractions, other 
fractions being expressed as the sum of unit-fractions. The only 
known exception was the use of | as a single fraction. Except in 
the case of $ and \, the fraction was expressed by the denomin- 
ator, with a special symbol above it. 

The Babylonians expressed numbers less than 1 by the numer- 
ator of a fraction with denominator 60; the numerator only being 
written. The choice of 60 appears to have been connected with 
the reckoning of the year as 360 days; it is perpetuated in the 
present subdivision of angles. 

The Greeks originally used unit-fractions, like the Egyptians; 
later they introduced the sexagesimal fractions of the Baby- 
lonians, extending the system to four or more successive 
subdivisions of the unit representing a degree. They also, but 
apparently still later and only occasionally, used fractions of the 
modern kind. In the sexagesimal system the numerators of the 
successive fractions (the denominators of which were the suc- 
cessive powers of 60) were followed by ',","', "", the denominator 
not being written. This notation survives in reference to the 
minute (') and second (") of angular measurement, and has been 
extended, by analogy, to the foot (') and inch ("). Since £ repre- 
sented 60, and was the next letter, the latter appears to have 
been used to denote absence of one of the fractions; but it is not 
clear that our present sign for zero was actually derived from 
this. In the case of fractions of the more general kind, the 
numerator was written first with ', and then the denominator, 
followed by ", was written twice. A different method was used 
by Diophantus, accents being omitted, and the denominator 
being written above and to the right of the numerator. 

The Romans commonly used fractions with denominator 1 2 ; 
these were described as unciae (ounces) , being twelfths of the 
as (pound). 

The modern system of placing the numerator above the 
denominator is due to the Hindus; but the dividing line is a 
later invention. Various systems were tried before the present 



notation came to be generally accepted. 

1 



instance, the continued sum 4 +r-rrr+ g x 7 v s 



Under one system, for 
- would be denoted 



by 



this is somewhat similar in principle to a decimal 



7 5' 
notation, but with digits taken in the reverse order. 

Hindu treatises on arithmetic show the use of fractions, 
containing a power of 10 as denominator, as early as the begin- 
ning of the 6th century a.d. There was, however, no develop- 
ment in the direction of decimals in the modern sense, and the 
Arabs, by whom the Hindu notation of integers was brought to 
Europe, mainly used the sexagesimal division in the ' " "' 
notation. Even where the decimal notation would seem to arise 
naturally, as in the case of ' approximate extraction of a square 
root, the portion which might have been expressed as a decimal 
was converted into sexagesimal fractions. It was not until 
a.d. 1585 that a decimal notation was published by Simon 
Stevinus of Bruges. It is worthy of notice that the invention of 
this notation appears to have been due to practical needs, being 
required for the purpose of computation of compound interest. 
The present decimal notation, which is a development of that of 
Stevinus, was first used in 161 7 by H. Briggs, the computer of 
logarithms. 

80. Fractions of Concrete Quantities. — The British systems 
of coinage, weights, lengths, &c, afford many examples of the 
use of fractions. These may be divided into three classes, as 
follows: — 

(i) The fraction of a concrete quantity may itself not exist as 
a concrete quantity, but be represented by a token. Thus, if we 
take a shilling as a unit, we may divide it into 12 or 48 smaller 
units; but corresponding coins are not really portions of a 
shilling, but objects which help us in counting. Similarly we 
may take the farthing as a unit, and invent smaller units, 
represented either by tokens or by no material objects at all. 
Ten marks, for instance, might be taken as equivalent to a 
farthing; but 13 marks are not equivalent to anything except 
one farthing and three out of the ten acts of counting required 
to arrive at another farthing. 

(ii) In the second class of cases the fraction of the unit quantity 
is a quantity of the same kind, but cannot be determined with 
absolute exactness. Weights come in this class. The ounce, 
for instance, is one-sixteenth of the pound, but it is impossible to 
find 16 objects such that their weights shall be exactly equal and 
that the sum of their weights shall be exactly equal to the weight 
of the standard pound. 

(iii) Finally, there are the cases of linear measurement, where 
it is theoretically possible to find, by geometrical methods, an 
exact submultiple of a given unit, but both the unit and the 
submultiple are not really concrete objects, but are spatial 
relations embodied in objects. 

Of these three classes, the first is the least abstract and the 
last the most abstract. The first only involves number and 
counting. The second involves the idea of equality as a necessary 
characteristic of the units or subunits that are used. The third 
involves also the idea of continuity and therefore of unlimited 
subdivision. In weighing an object with ounce-weights the fact 
that it weighs more than 1 lb 3 oz. but less than 1 lb 4 oz. does 
not of itself suggest the necessity or possibility of subdivision 
of the ounce for purposes of greater accuracy. But in measuring 
a distance we may find that it is " between " two distances 
differing by a unit of the lowest denomination used, and a 
subdivision of this unit follows naturally. 

VII. Approximation 

81. Approximate Character of Numbers. — The numbers 
(integral or decimal) by which we represent the results of arith- 
metical queries are often only approximately correct. All
numbers, for instance, which represent physical measurements,are 
limited in their accuracy not only by our powers of measurement 
but also by the accuracy of the measure we use as our unit. Also 
most fractions cannot be expressed exactly as decimals; and this 
is also the case for surds and logarithms, as well as for the numbers 
expressing certain ratios which arise out of geometrical relation? 



;3& 



ARITHMETIC 



Even where numbers are supposed to be exact, calculations 
based on them can often only be approximate. We might, for 
instance, calculate the exact cost of 3 ft 5 oz. of meat at o|d. 
a ft, but there are no coins in which we could pay this exact 
amount. 

When the result of any arithmetical operation or queries
is represented approximately but not exactly by a number, 
the excess (positive or negative) of this number over the 
number which would express the result exactly is called the 
error. 

82. Degree of Accuracy. — There are three principal ways of 
expressing the degree of accuracy of any number, i.e. the extent 
to which it is equal to the number it is intended to represent. 

(i) A number can be correct to so many places of decimals. 
This means (cf. § 71) that the number differs from the true value 
by less than one-half of the unit represented by 1 in the last place 
of decimals. For instance, • 143 represents -7 correct to 3 places of 
decimals, since it differs from it by less than -0005. The final 
figure, in a case like this, is said to be corrected. 

This method is not good for comparative purposes. Thus • 143 
and 14-286 represent respectively \ and x ^ to the same number 
of places of decimals, but the latter is obviously more exact than 
the former. 

(ii) A number can be correct to so many significant figures. 
The significant figures of a number are those which commence 
with the first figure other than zero in the number; thus the 
significant figures of 13-027 and of -00013027 are the same. 

This is the usual method; but the relative accuracy of two 
numbers expressed to the same number of significant figures 
depends to a certain extent on the magnitude of the first figure. 
Thus -14286 and -85714 represent \ and f correct to 5 significant 
figures; but the latter is relatively more accurate than the former. 
For the former shows only that \ lies between -142855 and 
■142865, or, as it is better expressed, between -142855 and 
•142865; but the latter shows that f lies between -857135 
and -857145, and therefore that \ lies between -14285^ and 
•14285-1V 

In either of the above cases, and generally in any case where a 
number is known to be within a certain limit on each side of 
the stated value, the limit of error is expressed by the sign =*= . 
Thus the former of the above two statements would give \ = 
•14286=1= -000005. It should be observed that the numerical 
value of the error is to be subtracted from or added to the 
stated value according as the error is positive or negative: 

(iii) The limit of error can be expressed as a fraction of 
the number as stated. Thus ^=-143=== -0005 can be written 
i = - 143(1 ± -?l«-)- 

83. Accuracy after Arithmetical Operations. — If the numbers 
which are the subject of queries are not all exact, the accuracy
of the result requires special investigation in each case. 

Additions and subtractions are simple. If, for instance, the 
values of a and b, correct to two places of decimals, are 3-58 and 
1-34, then 2-24, as the value of a— b, is not necessarily correct 
to two places. The limit of error of each being =±= -005, the limit 
of error of their sum or difference is ± -oi. 

For multiplication we make use of the formula (§60 (i)) (c'=>=a) 
(b'±P) = a'b'+a[3±(a'(3+b'a.). If a' and b' are the stated values, 
and === a and =*= [3 the respective limits of error, we ought strictly 
to take a'b'-\-a.fi as the product, with a limit of error=<= (a'fi+b'a). 
In practice, however, both a/3 and a certain portion of a'b' are 
small in comparison with a' (3 and b'a, and we therefore re- 
place a'b' + afi by an approximate value, and increase the limit of 
error so as to cover the further error thus introduced. In the case 
of the two numbers given in the last paragraph, the product lies 
between 3-575Xi-335 = 4-772025 and 3-585 Xi-345 = 4-82i825. 
We might take the product as (3-58Xi-34)-f-(-oos) 2 = 4-797225, 
the limits of error being =>= -oo5(3-58-r-i-34) = =*= -0246; but it is 
more convenient to write it in such a form as 4-797=== -025 or 
4-80=== -03. 

If the number of decimal places to which a result is to be 
accurate is determined beforehand, it is usually not necessary 
in the actual working to go to more than two or three places 



beyond this. At the close of the work the extra figures are 
dropped, the last figure which remains being corrected (§82 (i)) 
if necessary. 

VIII. Suites and Logarithms 

84. Roots and Surds. — The ^>th root of a number (§43) may, 
if the number is an integer, be found by expressing it in terms of 
its prime factors; or, if it is not an integer, by expressing it as 
a fraction in its lowest terms, and finding the pth roots of the 
numerator and of the denominator separately. Thus to find the 
cube root of 1728, we write it in the form 2 6 .3 3 , and find that 
its cube root is 2 2 .3 = i2; cr, to find the cube root of 1-728, we 

write it as ffiff = *ii$= 2 A ' and find that the cube root is 

2 ,*l o 

-j- = i-2. Similarly the cube root of 2197 is 13. But we cannot 

find any number whose cube is 2000. 

It is, however, possible to find a number whose cube shall 
approximate as closely as we please to 2000. Thus the cubes of 
12-5 and of 12-6 are respectively 1953-125 and 2000-376, so that 
the number whose cube differs as little as possible from 2000 is 
somewhere between 12-5 and 12-6. Again the cube of 12-59 is 
1995-616979, so that the number lies between 12-59 an d 12-60. 
We may therefore consider that there is some number x whose 
cube is 2000, and we can find this number to any degree of 
accuracy that we please, 

A number of this kind is called a surd; the surd which is the 
pth root of n is written >/N,. but if the index is 2 it is usually 
omitted, so that the square root of N is written VN. 

85. Surd as a Power. — We have seen (§§ 43,44) that, if we take 
the successive powers of a number N, commencing with 1, they 
may be written N°, N 1 , N 2 , N 3 , . . . , the series of indices being 
the standard series; and we have also seen (§ 44) that multi- 
plication of any two of these numbers corresponds to addition of 
their indices. Hence we may insert in the power-series numbers 
with fractional indices, provided that the multiplication of these 
numbers follows the same law. The number denoted by N* will 
therefore be such that N*XN4xNS = N* + * + 5 = N; i.e. it will 
be the cube root of N. By analogy with the notation of fractional 
numbers, N 3 will be N^^N^XN*; and, generally, Nl will 
mean the product of p numbers, the product of q of which is equal 
to N. Thus N s will not mean the same as N*, but will mean the 
square of N s ; but this will be equal to N J , i.e. (VN) 2 =-v'N. 

86. Multiplication and Division of Surds. — To add or subtract 
fractional numbers, we must reduce them to a common denomin- 
ator ; and similarly, to multiply or divide surds, we must express 
them as power-numbers with the same index. Thus ^2 XV 5 = 
2'X5'=26X5' = 4=Xi25 i = 5oo J = V5oo. 

87. Antilogarithms.- — If we take a fixed number, e.g. 2, as base, 
and take as indices the successive decimal numbers to any particu- 
lar number of places of decimals, we get a series of antilogarithms 
of the indices to this base. Thus, if we go to two places of 
decimals, we have as th« integral series the numbers 1, 2, 4, 8, 
. . . which are the values of 2 , 2 1 , 2 2 , . . . and we insert within 
this series the successive powers of x, where x is such that x""> = 2. 
We thus get the numbers 2- 01 , 2- 02 , 2- 03 , . . . , which are the anti- 
logarithms of -or, -02, -03, . . . to base 2 ; the first antilogarithm 
being 2- 00 = 1, which is thus the antilogarithm of o to this (or any 
other) base. The series is formed by successive multiplication, 
and any antilogarithm to a larger number of decimal places is 
formed from it in the same way by multiplication. If, for 
instance, we have found 2- 31 , then the value of 2- 316 is 
found from it by multiplying by the 6th power of the 1 oooth 
root of 2. 

For practical purposes the number taken as base is 10; the 
convenience of this being that the increase of the index by an 
integer means multiplication by the corresponding power of 10^ 
i.e. it means a shifting of the decimal point. In the same way, 
by dividing by powers of 10 we may get negative indices. 

88. Logarithms. — If N is the antilogarithm of p to the base a, 
i.e. if N = a', then p is called the logarithm of N to the base a, 
and is written log„N. As the table of antilogarithms is formed 
by successive multiplications, so the logarithm of any given 



ARITHMETIC 



537 





IS. 


I2d. 


£i 


20s. 




£153, 7s. 4d. 


3067s. 4d. 


368o8d. 



number is in theory found by successive divisions. Thus, to find 
the logarithm of a number to base 2, the number being greater 
than 1, we first divide repeatedly by 2 until we get a number 
between 1 and 2; then divide repeatedly by l0 \2 until we get 
a number between 1 and 10 V2; then divide repeatedly by 100 V2; 
and so on. If, for instance, we find that the number is approxi- 
mately equal to 2 3 X ( l0 V2) 5 X ( 100 V2) 7 X ( 1000 V2) 4 , it may be 
written 2 3 - 674 , and its logarithm to base 2 is 3-574- 

For a further explanation of logarithms, and for an explanation 
of the treatment of cases in which an antilogarithm is less than 
1, see Logarithm. 

For practical purposes logarithms are usually calculated to 
base 10, so that logio 10= 1, log w 100= 2, &c. 

IX. Units 

89. Change of Denomination of a numerical quantity is usually 
called reduction, so that this term covers, e.g., the expression of 
£153, 7s. 4d. as shillings and pence and also the expression of 
3067s. 4d. as £, s. and d. 

The usual statement is that to express £153, 7s. as shillings we 
multiply 153 by 20 and add 7. This, as already explained (§37), 
is incorrect. £153 denotes 153 units, each of which is £1 or 20s.; 
and therefore we must multiply 20s. by 153 and add 7s., i.e. 
multiply 20 by 153 (the unit being now is.) and add 7. This is 
the expression of the process on the grouping method. On the 

counting method we have 

A a scale with every 20th 

shilling marked as a £; 
there are 153 of these 20's, 
and 7 over. 

The simplest case, in 
which the quantity can be 
expressed as an integral 
number of the largest units 
involved, has already been 
considered (§§ 37, 42). The 
same method can be 
applied in other cases 
by regarding a quantity 
expressed in several de- 
nominations as a fractional 
number of units of the 
largest denomination men- 
to be taken as meaning 7i%s., but 

The reduction of £153, 7s. 4d. to pence, 

and of 368o8d. to £, s. d., on this principle, is shown in diagrams 
A and B above. 

For reduction of pounds to shillings, or shillings to pounds, we 
must consider that we have a multiple-table (§ 36) in which the 
multiples of £1 and of 20s. are arranged in parallel columns; 
and similarly for shillings and pence. 

90. Change of Unit. — The statement "£153 = 30605." is not 
a statement of equality of the same kind as the statement 
" 153X20=3060," but only a statement of equivalence for 
certain purposes; in other words, it does not convey an 
absolute truth. It is therefore of interest to see whether we 
cannot replace it by an absolute truth. 

To do this, consider what the ordinary processes of multipli- 
cation and division mean in reference to concrete objects. If 
we want to give, to 5 boys, 4 apples each, we are said to multiply 
4 apples by 5. We cannot multiply 4 apples by 5 boys, for then 
we should get 20 " boy-apples," an expression which has no 
meaning. Or, again, to distribute 20 apples amongst 5 boys, 
we are not regarded as dividing 20 apples by 5 boys, but as divid- 
ing 20 apples by the number 5. The multiplication or division 
here involves the omission of the unit " boy," and the operation 
is incomplete. The complete operation, in each case, is as 
follows. 

(i) In the case of multiplication we commence with the 
conception of the number " 5 " and the unit " boy "; and we 
then convert this unit into 4 apples, and thus obtain the result, 





B 






20s. 


£1 


I2d. 


IS. 




368o8d. 


3067s. 4d. 


£153, 7s- 4d. 



tioned; thus 7s. 4d. i 
£0, 7s.4d. as£o^-(§i7) 



20 apples. The conversion of the unit may be represented as 
multiplication by a factor ^ fc , so that the operation is 

Vboy 65 x 5 b °y s = 5 X ^boy 63 X ! boy= 5X4 apples = 20 apples. 



Similarly, to convert £153 into shillings we must multiply it by a 

P 20s. , 

factor -jy' so that we get 

20S 20S 

-£T X £i53 - iS3 X -jf X £1 = 153 X 20s. =3o6os. 
Hence we can only regard £153 as being equal to 3060s. if we 
regard this converting factor as unity. 

(ii) In the case of partition we can express the complete opera- 
tion if we extend the meaning of division so as to enable us to 
.... „ r 20 apples 4 apples 

divide 20 apples by 5 boys. We thus get , ^ oys = j ^, oy > 

which means that the distribution can be effected by distributing 
at the rate of 4 apples per boy. The converting factor mentioned 
under (i) therefore represents a rate; and partition, applied to 
concrete cases, leads to a rate. 

In reference to the use of the sign X with the converting factor, 
7 lb 
it should be observed that "7-jb X " symbolizes the replacing of 

so many times 4 lb by the same number of times 7 lb, while 
" jX " symbolizes the replacing of 4 times something by 7 times 
that something. 

X. Arithmetical Reasoning 

91. Correspondence of Series of Numbers. — In §§ 33-42 we have 
dealt with the parallelism of the original number-series with a 
series consisting of the corresponding multiples of some unit, 
whether a number or a numerical quantity; and the relations 
arising out of multiplication, division, &c, have been exhibited by 
diagrams comprising pairs of corresponding terms of the two series. 
This, however, is only a particular case of the correspondence 
of two series. In considering addition, for instance, we have 
introduced two parallel series, each being the original number- 
series, but the two being placed in different positions. If we add 
1,2,3, ... to 6, we obtain a series 7,8,9, . . . , the terms of 
which correspond with those of the original series 1,2,3, . . . 

Again, in §§61-75 and 84-88 we have considered various kinds 
of numbers other than those in the original number-series. 
In general, these have involved two of the original numbers, e.g. 
5 s involves 5 and 3, and log 2 8 involves 2 and 8. In some cases, 
however, e.g. in the case of negative numbers and reciprocals, 
only one is involved; and there might be three or more, as in the 
case of a number expressed by (a+b) n . If all but one of these con- 
stituent elements are settled beforehand, e.g. if we take the num- 
bers 5, 5 2 ,5 S , ■ • -, or the numbers 3 Vi, 3 V 2, 3 >/3, . . . or log M i-ooi, 
log 10 1-002, logio* 1-003 ... we obtain a series in which each 
term corresponds with a term of the original number-series. 

This correspondence is usually shown by tabulation, i.e. by the 
formation of a table in which the original series is shown in one 

column, and each term of 
the second series is placed 
in a second column op- 
posite the corresponding 
term of the first series, 
each column being headed 
by a description of its 
contents. It is sometimes 
convenient to begin the 
first series with o, and even 
to give the series of nega- 
tive numbers; in most 
cases, however, these latter 
are regarded as belonging to a different series, and they need not 
be considered here. The diagrams, A, B, C are simple forms of 
tables; A giving a sum-series, B a multiple-series, and C a 
series of square roots, calculated approximately. 

92. Correspondence of Numerical Quantities. — Again, in § 89, we 
have considered cases of multiple-tables of numerical quantities, 
where each quantity in one series is equivalent to the corresponding 
quantity in the other series. We might extend this principle 
to cases in which the terms of two series, whether of numbers or 





A 






B 






C 


n 


6+n 




n 


\n 




n 


v« 





6 











•000 


I 


7 




1 


4 




1 


I -000 


2 


8 




2 


8 




2 


1-414 


3 


9 




3 


12 




3 


1-732 



538 



ARITHMETIC 



of numerical quantities, merely correspond with each other, the 
correspondence being the result of some relation. The volume 



D 



Length of 
edge in 
inches. 


Volume 

of 

cube. 


o 


Nil. 


i 


I cub. in. 


2 


8 cub. in. 


3 


27 cub. in. 



of a cube, for instance, bears a certain 
relation to the length of an edge of the 
cube. This relation is not one of pro- 
portion; but it may nevertheless be 
expressed by tabulation, as shown at D. 
93. Interpolation. — In most cases the 
quantity in the second column may 
be regarded as increasing or decreasing 
continuously as the number in the first 
column increases, and it has inter- 
mediate values corresponding to inter- 
mediate (i.e. fractional or decimal) 
numbers not shown in the table. The 
table in such cases is not, and cannot 
be, complete, even up to the number to which it goes. For 
instance, a cube whose edge is if in. has a definite volume, 
viz.' 3! cub. in. The determination of any such intermediate 
value is performed by Interpolation (q.v.). 

In treating a fractional number, or the corresponding value of 
the quantity in the second column, as intermediate, we are in effect 
regarding the numbers 1, 2, 3, . . . , and the corresponding 
numbers in the second column, as denoting points between which 
other numbers lie, i.e. we are regarding the numbers as ordinal, 
not cardinal. The transition is similar to that which arises in the 
case of geometrical measurement (§ 26), and it is an essential 
feature of all reasoning with regard to continuous quantity, such 
as we have to deal with in real life. 

94. Nature of Arithmetical Reasoning. — The simplest form of 
arithmetical reasoning consists in the determination of the term 
in one series corresponding to a given term in another series, when 
the relation between the two series is given; and it implies, 
though it does not necessarily involve, the establishment of each 
series as a whole by determination of its unit. A method 
involving the determination of the unit is called a unitary 
method. When the unit is not determined, the reasoning is 
algebraical rather than arithmetical. If, for instance, three 
terms of a proportion are given, the fourth can be obtained by 
the relation given at the end of § 57, this relation being then 
called the Rule of Three; but this is equivalent to the use of an 
algebraical formula. 

More complicated forms of arithmetical reasoning involve the 
use of series, each term in which corresponds to particular terms 
in two or more series jointly; and cases of this kind are usually 
dealt with by special methods, or by means of algebraical 
formulae. The old-fashioned problems about the amount of work 
done by particular numbers of men, women and boys, are of this 
kind, and really involve the solution of simultaneous equations. 
They are not suitable for elementary purposes, as the arithmetical 
relations involved are complicated and difficult to grasp. 

XI. Methods of Calculation 
(i.)' Exact Calculation. 

95. Working from Left. — It is desirable, wherever possible, to 
perform queries on numbers or numerical quantities from
the left, rather than from the right. There are several reasons 
for this. In the first place, an operation then corresponds more 
closely, at an elementary stage, with the concrete process which it 
represents. If, for instance, we had one sum of £3, 15s. gd. and 
another of £2, 6s. 5d., we should add them by putting the coins 
of each denomination together and commencing the addition with 
the £. In the second place, this method fixes the attention at 
once on the larger, and therefore more important, parts of the 
quantities concerned, and thus prevents arithmetical processes 
from becoming too abstract in character. In the third place, it is 
a better preparation for dealing with approximate calculations. 
Finally, experience shows that certain queries in which the
result is written down at once — e.g. addition or subtraction of 
two numbers or quantities, and multiplication by some small 
numbers — are with a little practice performed more quickly and 
more accurately from left to right. 



96. Addition. — There is no difference in principle between 
addition (or subtraction) of numbers and addition (or subtraction) 
of numerical quantities. In each case the grouping system 
involves rearrangement, which implies the commutative law, 
while the counting system requires the expression of a quantity in 
different denominations to be regarded as a notation in a varying 
scale(§§ 17,32). We need therefore consider numerical quantities 
only, our results being applicable to numbers by regarding the 
digits as representing multiples of units in different denominations. 

When the result of addition in one denomination can be partly 
expressed in another denomination, the process is technically 
called carrying. The name is a bad one, since it does not corre- 
spond with any ordinary meaning of the verb. It would be better 
described as exchanging, by analogy with the " changing " of 
subtraction. When, e.g., we find that the sum of 17s. and 18s. is 
35s., we take out 20 of the 35 shillings, and exchange them for £1. 

To add from the left, we have to look ahead to see whether 
the next addition will require an exchange. Thus, in adding 
£3, 17s. od. to £2, 18s. od., we write down the sum of £3 and £2 
as £6, not as £5, and the sum of 17s. and 18s. as 15s., not as 35s. 

When three or more numbers or quantities are added together, 
the result should always be checked by adding both upwards 
and downwards. It is also useful to look out for pairs of numbers 
or quantities which make 1 of the next denomination, e.g. 7 and 3, 
or 8d. and 4d. 

97. Subtraction. — To subtract £3, 5s. 4d. from £9, 7s. 8d., on 
the grouping system, we split up each quantity into its denomina- 
tions, perform the subtractions independently, and then regroup 
the results as the " remainder " £6, 2s. 4d. On the counting 
system we can count either forwards or backwards, and we can 
work either from the left or from the right. If we count forwards 
we find that to convert £3, 5s. 4d. into £9, 7s. 8d. we must 
successively add £6, 2s. and 4d. if we work from the left, or 4d., 
2s. and £6 if we work from the right. The intermediate values 
obtained by the successive additions are different according 
as we work from the left or from the right, being £9, 5s. 4d. and 
£9, 7s. 4d. in the one case, and £3, 5s. 8d. and £3, 7s. 8d. in the 
other. If we count backwards, the intermediate values are 
£3, 7s. 8d. and £3, 5s. 8d. in the one case, and £9, 7s. 4d. and 
£9, 5s. 4d. in the other. 

The determination of each element in the remainder involves 
reference to an addition-table. Thus to subtract 5s. from 7s. we 
refer to an addition-table giving the sum of any two quantities, 
each of which is one of the series os., is., ... . 19s. 

Subtraction by counting forward is called complementary 
addition. 

To subtract £3, 5s. 8d. from £9, 10s. 4d., on the grouping 
system, we must change is. out of the 10s. into i2d., so that we 
subtract £3, 5s. 8d. from £9, 9s, i6d. On the counting system 
it will be found that, in determining the number of shillings in 
the remainder, we subtract 5s. from 9s. if we count forwards, 
working from the left, or backwards, working from the right; 
while, if we count backwards, working from the, left, or 
forwards, working from the right, the subtraction is of 6s. 
from 10s. In the first two cases the successive values (in 
direct or reverse order) are £3, 5s. 8d., £9, 5s. 8d., £9, 9s. 8d. and 
£9, 10s. 4d.; while in the last two cases they are £9, 10s. 4d., 
£3, 10s. 4d., £3, 6s. 4d. and £3, 5s. 8d. 

In subtracting from the left, we look ahead to see whether a 1 
in any denomination must be reserved for changing; thus in 
subtracting 274 from 637 we should put down 2 from 6 as 3, not as 
4, and 7 from 3 as 6. 

98. Multiplication-Table. — For multiplication and division we 
use a multiplication-table, which is a multiple-table, arranged as 
explained in § 36, and giving the successive multiples, up to 
9 times or further, of the numbers from 1 (or better, from o) to 10, 
1 2 or 20. The column (vertical) headed 3 will give the multiples 
of 3, while the row (horizontal) commencing with 3 will give the 
values of 3 X 1, 3 X 2, ... To multiply by 3 we use the row. 
To divide by 3, in the sense of partition, we also use the row; 
but to divide by 3 as a unit we use the column. 

99. Multiplication by a Small Number. — The idea of a large 



ARITHMETIC 



539 



multiple of a small number is simpler than that of a small multiple 
of a large number, but the calculation of the latter is easier. It 
is therefore convenient, in finding the product of two numbers, 
to take the smaller as the multiplier. 

To find 3 times 427, we apply the distributive Jaw (§ 58 (vi) ) 
that3-427 =3(400+ 2o+7)=3.4oo+3. 20+3. 7. This, if we regard 
3.427 as 427+427+427, is a direct consequence of the com- 
mutative law for addition (§ 58 (iii) ), which enables us to add 
separately the hundreds, the tens and the ones. To find 3.400, 
we treat 100 as the unit (as in addition), so that 3.400 = 3.4.100 = 
12.100= 1200; and similarly for 3.20. These are examples of the 
associative law for multiplication (§ 58 (iv) ). 

100. Special Cases. — The following are some special rules: — 
(i) To multiply by 5, multiply by 10 and divide by 2. (And 

conversely, to divide by 5, we multiply by 2 and divide by 10.) 

(ii) In multiplying by 2, from the left, add 1 if the next figure of 
the multiplicand is 5, 6, 7, 8 or 9. 

(iii) In multiplying by 3, from the left, add 1 when the next 
figures are not less than 33 . . . 334 and not greater than 66 . . . 
666, and 2 when they are 66 . . . 667 and upwards. 

(iv) To multiply by 7, 8, 9, n or 12, treat the multiplier as 
10-3, 10-2, 10-1, 10+ 1 or 10+ 2; and similarly for 13, 17, 18, 19, &c. 

(v) To multiply by 4 or 6, we can either multiply from the left 
by 2 and then by 2 or 3, or multiply from the right by 4 or 6; 
or we can treat the multiplier as 5 — 1 or 5+1. 

101. Multiplication by a Large Number. — When both the 
numbers are large, we split up one of them, preferably the 
multiplier, into separate portions. Thus 231.4273 = (200+30+ 
1) 4273 = 200.4273+30.4273 + 1.4273. This gives the partial 
products, the sum of which is the complete product. The process 
is shown fully in A below, — 

A B C 





4273 




4273 


I- 04273 

2 - O8546 
3- I2819 


200 

30 

I 


854600 
128190 

4273 


231 


8546 

12819 

4273 


231 


987063 


987063 


IO-O4273O 



and more concisely in B. To multiply 4273 by 200, we use 
the commutative law, which gives 200.4273 = 2X100X4273 = 
2X4273X100 = 8546X100 = 854600; and similarly for 30.4273. 
In B the terminal o's of the partial products are omitted. It is 
usually convenient to make out a preliminary table of multiples 
up to 10 times; the table being checked at 5 times (§ 100) and at 
10 times. 

The main difficulty is in the correct placing of the curtailed 
partial products. The first step is to regard the product of two 
numbers as containing as many digits as the two numbers put 
together. The table of multiples will then be as in C. The next 
•step is to arrange the multiplier and the multiplicand above the 
partial products. For elementary work the multiplicand may 
come immediately after the multiplier, as in D; the last figure 
of each partial product then comes immediately under the corre- 
sponding figure of the multiplier. A better method, which leads 
D E 



231 



427323 -r 



0854:6 
128:19 
04b73 



231 



0987-063 



4273 
231 



08546 
12819 
04273 



0987063 



up to the multiplication of decimals and of approximate values 
of numbers, is to place the first figure of the multiplier under 
the first figure of the multiplicand, as in E; the first figure of 
each partial product will then come under the corresponding 
figure of the multiplier. 

102. Contracted Multiplication. — The partial products are 
sometimes omitted; the process saves time in writing, but is not 
easy. The principle is that, e.g., (a. io 2 +6. 10+c) (p. io 2 +q. 10+ 



I 


427 


6 


427 


2 


427 



69174 



r)=ap. io i +(aq+bp)io !l +(ar+bq+cp) io 2 +(br+cq) io+ef. 
Hence the digits are multiplied in pairs, and grouped according 
to the power of 10 which each product contains. A method of 
performing the process is shown here for the case of 162.427. 
The principle is that 162.427 = 100.427+60.427+2.427 = 
1.42700+6.4270+2.427; but, instead of 
writing down the separate products, we 
(in effect) write 42700, 4270 and 427 in 
separate rows, with the multipliers 1, 6, 2 
in the margin, and then multiply each 
number in each column by the corre- 
sponding multiplier in the margin, making allowance for any 
figures to be " carried." Thus the second figure (from the 
right) is given by 1 + 2.2+6.7=47, the 1 being carried. 

103. Aliquot Parts. — For multiplication by a proper fraction 
or a decimal, it is sometimes convenient, especially when we are 
dealing with mixed quantities, to convert the multiplier into the 
sum or difference of a number of fractions, each of which has 1 as 
its numerator. Such fractions are called aliquot parts (from Lat. 
aliquot, some, several). This can usually be done in a good many 
ways. Thusf=i-|,andalso = |+|, andi5% = -i5 = T V+-2V = 
£ — TiV = 5+T 1 o- The fractions should generally be chosen so 
that each part of the product may be obtained from an earlier 
part by a comparatively simple division. Thus l+^V - ttV is a 
simpler expression for T \ than f+'sV 

The process may sometimes be applied two or three times in 
succession; thus A=-H = (i— i) (1-3), and it = f-ii = 

(i-l) (i+tM- 

104. Practice. — The above is a particular case of the method 
caDed practice, but the nomenclature of the method is confusing. 
There are two kinds of practice, simple practice and compound 
practice, but the latter is the simpler of the two. To find the cost 
of 2 lb 8 oz. of butter at is. 2d. a lb, we multiply is. 2d. by 
2 T \ = 25. This straightforward process is called "compound" 
practice. " Simple " practice involves an application of the 
commutative law. To find the cost of n articles at £a, 6s. ed. 
each, we express £a, bs. cd. in the form £(a+f), where / is a 
fraction (or the sum of several fractions) ; we then say that the 
cost, being nX£(a+f), is equal to (a+/)X£», and apply the 
method of compound practice, i.e. the method of aliquot parts. 

105. Multiplication of a Mixed Number. — When a mixed 
quantity or a mixed number has to be multiplied by a large 
number, it is sometimes convenient to express the former in terms 
of one only of its denominations. Thus, to multiply £7, 13s. 6d. 
by 469, we may express the former in any of the way s £7 -67 5 , W 7 - of 
£i) 1535S., 153'Ss., 307 sixpences, or 1842 pence. Expression 
in £ and decimals of £1 is usually recommended, but it depends 
on circumstances whether some other method may not be simpler. 

A sum of money cannot be expressed exactly as a decimal of 
£1 unless it is a multiple of f d. A rule for approximate conver- 
sion is that is. = -05 of £1, and that 2|d. = -oi of £1. For accurate 
conversion we write -i£ for each 2s., and -ooi£ for each farthing 
beyond 2s. , their number being firstin creased by one twenty-fourth. 

106. Division. — Of the two kinds of division, although the idea 
of partition is perhaps the more elementary, the process of 
measuring is the easier to perform, since it is equivalent to a 

series of subtractions. Starting from 
the dividend, we in theory keep on 
subtracting the unit, and count the 
number of subtractions that have to 
be performed until nothing is left. In 
actual practice, of course, we subtract 
large multiples at a time. Thus, to 
divide 987063 by 427, we reverse the 
procedure of § 101, but with inter- 
mediate stages. We first construct the 
multiple-table C, and then subtract 
successively 200 times, 30 times and 
1 times; these numbers being the par- 
tial quotients. The theory of the pro- 
cess is shown fully in F. Treating x 
as the unknown quotient corresponding to the original dividend, 



« 


F 




4273 


X 


0987063 


200 


0854600 


X -200 


132463 


30 


128190 


x - 230 


04273 


1 


04273 


x-231 


0000 



54Q 



ARITHMETIC 



we obtain successive dividends corresponding to quotients x — 200, 
x — 230 and £ — 231. The original dividend is written as 0987063, 
since its initial figures are greater than those of the divisor; if the 
dividend had commenced with (e.g.) 3 ... it would not have 
been necessary to insert the initial o. At each stage of the 
division the number of digits in the reduced dividend is decreased 
by one. The final dividend being 0000, we have «— 231 = 0, and 
therefore x= 231. 

107. Methods of Division. — What are described as different 
methods of division (by a single divisor) are mainly different 
methods of writing the successive figures occurring in the 
process. In long division the divisor is put on the left of the 
dividend, and the quotient on the right; and each partial 
product, with the remainder after its subtraction, is shown in full. 
In short division the divisor and the quotient are placed respec- 
tively on the left of and below the dividend, and the partial 
products and remainders are not shown at all. The Austrian 
method (sometimes called in Great Britain the Italian method) 
differs from these in two respects. The first, and most important, 
is that the quotient is placed above the dividend. The second, 
which is not essential to the method, is that the remainders are 
shown, but not the partial products; the remainders being 
obtained by working from the right, and using complementary 
addition. It is doubtful whether the brevity of this latter 
process really compensates for its greater difficulty. 

The advantage of the Austrian arrangement of the quotient 

G H 



4273 



0987063 
08546 



4273 
2 



0987063 
08546 



lies in the indication it gives of the true value of each partial 
quotient. A modification of the method, corresponding with D 
of § 101, is shown in G; the fact that the partial product 08546 is 
followed by two blank spaces shows that the figure 2 represents a 
partial quotient 200. An alternative arrangement, corresponding 
to E of § 101, and suited for more advanced work, is shown in H. 

108. Division with Remainder. — It has so far been assumed 
that the division can be performed exactly, i.e. without leaving 
an ultimate remainder. Where this is not the case, difficulties 
are apt to arise, which are mainly due to failure to distinguish 
between the two kinds of division. If we say that the division of 
4id. by 12 gives quotient 3d. with remainder 5d., we are speaking 
loosely; for in fact we only distribute 36d. out of the 4id., the 
other 3d. remaining undistributed. It can only be distributed by 
a subdivision of the unit; i.e. the true result of the division is 
3j 5 2d. On the other hand, we can quite well express the result 
of dividing 4id. by is ( = i2d.) as 3 with sd. (not " 5 ") over, for 
this is only stating that 4id. = 3s. sd.; though the result might 
be more exactly expressed as 3i\s. 

Division with a remainder has thus a certain air of unreality, 
which is accentuated when the division is performed by means of 
factors (§ 42). If we have to divide 935 by 240, taking 12 and 20 

as factors, the result will depend on the fact that, in the notation 

(20) (12) 
of § 17, 935 = 3 "17'' ii- In incomplete partition the quotient 
is 3, and the remainders 11 and 17 are in effect disregarded; if, 
after finding the quotient 3, we want to know what remainder 
would be produced by a direct division, the simplest method is to 
multiply 3 by 240 and subtract the result from 935. In complete 

partition the successive quotients are 77 \\ and 3-jr i =3lio- 

Division in the sense of measuring leads to such a result as 
933d. = £3, 17s. nd.; we may, if we please, express the 17s. nd. 
as 2i5d., but there is no particular reason why we should do so. 

109. Division by a Mixed Number. — To divide by ,a mixed 
number, when the quotient is seen to be large, it usually saves 
time to express the divisor as either a simple fraction or a decimal 
of a unit of one of the denominations. Exact division by a mixed 
number is not often required in real life; where approximate 



division is required (e.g. in determining the rate of a " dividend '■), 
approximate expression of the divisor in terms of the largest 
unit is sufficient. 

no. Calculation of Square Root. — The calculation of the square 
root of a number depends on the formula (iii) of § 60. To find the 
square root of N, we first find some number a whose square is less 
than N, and subtract a 2 from N. If the complete square root is 
a-\-b, the remainder after subtracting a 2 is (2a+b)b. We there- 
fore guess b by dividing the remainder by 20, and form the 
product (20+6) b. If this is equal to the remainder, we have 
found the square root. If it exceeds the square root, we must 
alter the value of b, so as to get a product which does not exceed 
the remainder. If the product is less than the remainder, we get 
a new remainder, which is N— (a+&) 2 ; we then assume the 
full square root to be c, so that the new remainder is equal to 
(2a-\-2b-\-c) c, and try to find c in the same way as we tried to 
find b. 

An analogous method of finding cube root, based on the 
formula for (a+b) 3 , used to be given in text-books, but it is of no 
practical use. To find a root other than a square root we can 
use logarithms, as explained in § 113. 

(ii.) Approximate Calculation. 
in. Multiplication. — When we have to multiply two numbers, 
and the product is only required, or can only be approximately 
correct, to a certain number of significant figures, we need only 
work to two or three more figures (§83), and then correct the final 
figure in the result by means of the superfluous figures. 

A common method is to reverse the digits in one of the 
numbers; but this is only appropriate to the old-fashioned 
method of writing down products from the right. A better method 
is to ignore the positions of the decimal points, and multiply 
the numbers as if they were decimals 
between -i and i-o. The method E of 
§ 101 being adopted, the multiplicand 
and the multiplier are written with a 
space after as many digits (of each) as 
will be required in the product (on the 
principle explained in §101); and the 
multiplication is performed from the left, 
two extra figures being kept in. Thus, 
to multiply 27-343 by 3-1415927 to one 
decimal place, we require 2+1 + 1 = 4 
figures in the product. The result is 085-9 = 85-9, the position 
of the decimal point being determined by counting the figures 
before the decimal points in the original numbers. 

112. Division. — In the same way, in 
performing approximate division, we can 
at a certain stage begin to abbreviate 
the divisor, taking off one figure (but 
with correction of the final figure of the, 
partial product) at each stage. Thus, to 
divide 85-9 by 3-1415927 to two places 
of decimals, we in effect divide -0859 by 
•3J415927 to four places of decimals. In 
the work, as here shown, a o is inserted 
in front of the 859, on the principle 
explained in § 106. The result of the 

division is 27-34. 

113. Logarithms. — Multiplication, division, involution and 
evolution, when the results cannot be exact, are usually most 
simply performed, at any rate to a first approximation, by means 
of a table of logarithms. Thus, to find the square root of 2, we 
have log V2 = log (2») = § log 2. We take out log 2 from 
the table, halve it, and then find from the table the number oi 
which this is the logarithm. (See Logarithm.) The slide-rule 
(see Calculating Machines) is a simple apparatus for the 
mechanical application of the methods of logarithms. 

When a first approximation has been obtained in this way, 
further approximations can be obtained in various ways. Thus ? 
having found \2= 1-414 approximately, we write -J 2 = 1-414+6, 
whence 2 = (i-4i4) 2 +(2-8i8)0+0 2 . Since 2 is less than J of 





2734 3 




3141 59 




0820 29 




027 34 




10 94 




27 




14 




2 




0859 



3 Hi 5927 
2734 



0859 00 
0628 32 



230 


68 


219 


9i 


10 


77 


9 


42 



1 35 
1 26 



ARITHMETIC 



541 



(•ooi) 1 , we can obtain three more figures approximately by 
dividing 2 — (i-4i4) 2 by 2-818. 

114. Binomial Theorem. — More generally, if we have 
obtained a as an approximate value for the ^>th root of N, the 
binomial theorem gives as an approximate formula f VN = a+0, 
where N = a p +pa e ~ 1 d. 

115. Series. — A number can often be expressed by a series of 
terms, such that by taking successive terms we obtain successively 
closer approximations. A decimal is of course a series of this 
kind, e.g. 314159 . . . means 3 + i/io+4/io 2 +i/io 3 +5/io 4 + 
o/io 5 + ... A series of aliquot parts is another kind, e.g. 
3-1416 is a little less than 3+t — Tin- 
Recurring Decimals are a particular kind of series, which arise 

from the expression of a fraction as a decimal. If the denomin- 
ator of the fraction, when it is in its lowest terms, contains any 
other prime factors than 2 and 5, it cannot be expressed exactly 
as a decimal; but after a certain point a definite series of figures 
will constantly recur. The interest of these series is, however, 
mainly theoretical. 

116. Continued Products. — Instead of being expressed as the 
sum of a series of terms, a number may be expressed as the 
product of a series of factors, which become successively more and 
more nearly equal to 1. For example, 

3-i4i6 = 3Xi§*e=3XilB=3XifXfHJ=3(i+ 2 V)(i-J6Vff). 
Hence, to multiply by 3-1416, we can multiply by 34, and sub- 
tract is 1 ,) a ( = -0004) of the result; or, to divide by 3-1416, we 
can divide by 3 , then subtract -fa of the result, and then add t?W 
of the new result. 

117. Continued Fractions. — The theory of continued fractions 
(q.v.) gives a method of expressing a number, in certain cases, 
as a continued product. A continued fraction, of the kind we 

are considering, is an expression of the form a-\ — 



b+- 



c+ d+ &c. 
where b, c,d, . . . are integers, and a is an integer or zero. The 

expression is usually written, for compactness, a+ fr: ^rx jt; &c. 

The numbers a, b, c, d, . . . are called the quotients. 

Any exact fraction can be expressed as a continued fraction, 
and there are methods for expressing as continued fractions 
certain other numbers, e.g. square roots, whose values cannot be 
expressed exactly as fractions. 

The successive values p ° T l > • • • , obtained by taking 

account of the successive quotients, are called convergent, i.e. 
convergents to the true value. The following are the main 
properties of the convergents. 

(i) If we precede the series of convergents by y and %, then 
the numerator (or denominator) of each term of the series 



I h f 



06 + 1 



, after the first two, is found by multiplying 



the numerator (or denominator) of the last preceding term by the 
corresponding quotient and adding the numerator (or denom- 
inator) of the term before that. If a is zero, we may regard r 

as the first convergent, and precede the series by ^ and f. 

(ii) Each convergent is a fraction in its lowest terms. 

(iii) The convergents are alternately less and greater than the 
true value. 

(iv) Each convergent is nearer to the true value than any other 
fraction whose denominator is less than that of the convergent. 

(v) The difference of two successive convergents is the recipro- 
cal of the product of their denominators; e.g. — £ — -=— =-, and 
abc+c+a _ ab + i _ -1 ° * 10 

bc + i b b(bc + i)' 

It follows from these last three properties that if the successive 

convergents are 2-» > ' • • • *^ c number can be expressed 

in the form />, (1+^) (. l ~p^> ( - 1 +p^> • • • > and that if 
we go up to the factor i^-r— - — the product of these factors 
differs from the true value of the number by less than ± — — ■• 

ynynH-l 



In certain cases two or more factors can be combined so as to 
produce an expression of the form i^, where k is an integer. 

For instance, 3-1415927 = 3(1+^7) (1-2TT06) C 1 + 333- 113 ) • • ■> 
but the last two of these factors may be combined as (1 — 22-I ). 
Hence 3-1415927 = f-f I -|-|-ff . . . 

XII. Applications 
(i.) Systems of Measures. 1 

118. Metric System. — The metric system was adopted in 
France at the end of the 18th century. The system is decimal 
throughout. The principal units of length, weight and volume 
are the metre, gramme (or gram) and litre. Other units are 
derived from these by multiplication or division by powers of 10, 
the names being denoted by prefixes. The prefixes for multipli- 
cation by 10, io 2 , io 3 and io 4 are deca-, hecto-, kilo- and myria-, 
and those for division by 10, io 2 and io 3 are deci-, centi- and 
milli-; the former being derived from Greek, and the latter from 
Latin. Thus kilogramme means 1000 grammes, and centimetre 
means y^-j of a metre. There are also certain special units, such 
as the hectare, which is equal to a square hectometre, and the 
micron, which is y^o" of a millimetre. 

The metre and the gramme are defined by standard measures 
preserved at Paris. The litre is equal to a cubic decimetre. The 
gramme was intended to be equal to the weight of a cubic centi- 
metre of pure water at a certain temperature, but the equality is 
only approximate. 

The metric system is now in use in the greater part of the 
civilized world, but some of the measures retain the names of 
old disused measures. In Germany, for instance, the Pfund is 
5 kilogramme, and is approximately equal to iyVb English. 

119. British Systems. — The British systems have various 
origins, and are still subject to variations caused by local usage 
6r by the usage of particular businesses. The following tables are 
given as illustrations of the arrangement adopted elsewhere in 
this article; the entries in any column denote multiples or sub- 
multiples of the unit stated at the head of the column, and the 
entries in any row give the expression of one unit in term of 
the other units. 

Length 



Inch. 


Foot. 


Yard. 


Chain. 


Furlong. 


Mile. 


1 


A 


A 


tH 


tAu 


^ 


e 5 5 « 


12 


1 


i 


A 


■6 in 


tAd 


36 


3 


1 


1 

22 


Yin 


tAtt 


792 


66 


22 


I 


1 


1 
so 


7920 


660 


220 


IO 


1 


i 


63360 


5280 


1760 


80 


8 


I 


Weight (Avoirdupois) 


Ounce. 


Pound. 


Stone. 


Quarter. 


Hundred- 
weight. 


Ton. 


1 


1 6 


sibf 


sir 


1 

T7 5 


ysiw 


16 


I 


A 


A 


if* 


'22ns 


224 


14 


1 


1 
2 


1 

8 


165 


448 


28 


2 


1 


1 


A 


1792 


112 


8 


4 


1 


A 


3S 8 4o 


2240 


160 


80 


20 


1 



(Also 7000 grains = 1 lb avoirdupois.) 
120. Change of System. — It is sometimes necessary, when a 
quantity is expressed in one system, to express it in another, 
1 See also Weights and Measures. 



542 



ARIUS 



The following are the ratios of some of the units; each unit is 
expressed approximately as a decimal of the other, and their 
ratio is shown as a continued product (§ 116), a few of the corre- 
sponding convergents to the continued fraction (§ 117) being 
added in brackets. It must be remembered that the number 
expressing any quantity in terms of a unit is inversely proportional 
to the magnitude of the unit, i.e. the number of new units is to be 
found by multiplying the number of old units by the ratio of the 
old unit to the new unit. 



Yard 

Metre 

Inch 



_ 9144 __1_0000._1JL.384._82.25../'1 1 32 t.4 US) 

— 1 000 — 1 0936— 1 2 385 8224 U ifif ~ 7 6i 2 5 77 



S-. 1 & 



1 6 5 1 

10 5 0" ■ 



= 25400_L0 _ 5 . . _ 

Centimetre * u ° ° ° ~ »'9 " - "5 "*""& 

Milp 

1>1 " c 1_6 9 8 _ 1JU) _ 8 . 1 8.5 . 2 3 6 9 

Kilometre ~ _1 o"o~~o"o~ — 6 2 it — 5" f84 2368 
Square yard _ 8361 _ 10 ooo_j 30 6.1525( 
Square metre ~ Vo <r — 1 1 9 6 — « 3 or 1 5 T4 f 
Acre 



Hectare 

Quart 

Litre 

Pound 

Kilogramme 



._4_0_47 - 

lOOOS - 



10000. 
2 4Ti r ■ 



.85. 
St 



iO 
21 



. J._1JL6 5._ 1 Q_O0J . 
'10000— 8 7 9ff ' 



.8..1..7J...8J_J6 
"7 176 8 9 75- 



(Ml, W). 
(i,!*, W). 

f5 5 1 2 5 01 
(f 1 TZi 9 3 9)- 

(ifllri). 



_4536__ LA0OJl_l.l_0.4S_4..i9_ Sill (1 ,5, _44 £0_N 
1D000 — 2.2 046 — U 11 ¥85^ 2 9 3 9 2 •• VJ>T f;9 7.T6 $)■ 

(ii.) Special Applications., 

i2i. Commercial Arithmetic. — This term covers practically all 
dealings with money which involve the application of the prin- 
ciple of proportion. A simple class of cases is that which deals 
with equivalence of sums of money in different currencies; these 
cases really come under § 1 20. In other cases we are concerned 
with a proportion stated as a numerical percentage, or as a money 
percentage (i.e. a sum of money per £100), or as a rate in the £ or 
the shilling. The following are some examples. Percentage: 
Brokerage, commission, discount, dividend, interest, investment, 
profit and loss. Rate in the £: Discount, dividend, rates, taxes. 
Rate in the shilling: Discount. 

Text-books on arithmetic usually contain explanations of the 
chief commercial transactions in which arithmetical calculations 
arise; it will be sufficient in the present article to deal with 
interest and discount, and to give some notes on percentages and 
rates in the £. Insurance and Annuities are matters of general 
importance, which are dealt with elsewhere under their own 
headings. 

122. Percentages and Rates in the £. — In dealing with percent- 
ages and rates it is important to notice whether the sum which is 
expressed as a percentage of a rate on another sum is a part of or 
an addition to that sum, or whether they are independent of one 
another. Income tax, for instance, is calculated on income, and 
is in the nature of a deduction from the income; but local rates 
are calculated in proportion to certain other payments, actual 
or potential, and could without absurdity exceed 20s. in the £. 

It is also important to note that if the increase or decrease of an 
amount A by a certain percentage produces B, it will require a 
different percentage to decrease or increase B to A. Thus, if B is 
20% less than A, A is 25% greater than B. 

123. Interest is usually calculated yearly or half-yearly, at a 
certain rate per cent, on the principal. In legal documents the 
rate is sometimes expressed as a certain sum of money " per 
centum per annum "; here " centum " must be taken to mean 
"£ioo.» _ 

Simple interest arises where unpaid interest accumulates as a 
debt not itself bearing interest; but, if this debt bears interest, 
the total, i.e. interest and interest on interest, is called compound 
interest. If toor is the rate per cent, per annum, the simple 
interest on £A for n years is £nrA, and the compound interest 
(supposing interest payable yearly) is £[(1 +r)"— i]A. If n is 
large, the compound interest is most easily calculated by means 
of logarithms. 

124. Discount is of various kinds. Tradesmen allow discount 
for ready money, this being usually at so much in the shilling or £. 
Discount may be allowed twice in succession off quoted prices; in 
such cases the second discount is off the reduced price, and there- 
fore it is not correct to add the two rates of discount together. 
Thus a discount of 20%, followed by a further discount of 25%, 



gives a total discount of 40%, not 45%, off the original amount. 
When an amount will fall due at some future date, the present 
value of the debt is found by deducting discount at some rate per 
cent, for the intervening period, in the same way as interest to be 
added is calculated. This discount, of course, is not equal to the 
interest which the present value would produce at that rate of 
interest, but is rather greater, so that the present value as 
calculated in this way is less than the theoretical present value. 

125. Applications to Physics are numerous, but are usually 
only of special interest. A case of general interest is the meas- 
urement of temperature. The graduation of a thermometer is 
determined by the freezing-point and the boiling-point of water, 
the interval between these being divided into a certain number 
of degrees, representing equal increases of temperature. On the 
Fahrenheit scale the points are respectively 32 and 212°; on the 
Centigrade scale they are o° and ioo°; and on the Reaumur they 
are o° and 80°. From these data a temperature as measured on 
one scale can be expressed on either of the other two scales. 

126. Averages occur in statistics, economics, &c. An average 
is found by adding together several measurements of the same 
kind and dividing by the number of measurements. In calcu- 
lating an average it should be observed that the addition of any 
numerical quantity (positive or negative) to each of the measure- 
ments produces the addition of the same quantity to the average, 
so that the calculation may often be simplified by taking some 
particular measurement as a new zero from which to measure. 

Authorities. — For the history of the subject, see W. W. R. Ball, 
Short History of Mathematics (1901), and F. Cajori, History of Ele- 
mentary Mathematics (1896) ; or more detailed information in 
M. Cantor, Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der Mathematik (1894-1901). 
L. C.Conant, The Number- Concept (1896), gives a very full account of 
systems of numeration. For the latter, and for systems of notation, 
reference may also be made to Peacock's article " Arithmetic " in the 
Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, which contains a detailed account of 
the Greek system. F. Galton, Inquiries into Human Faculty (1883), 
contains the first account of number-forms; for further examples and 
references see D. E. Phillips, " Genesis of Number-Forms," American 
Journal of Psychology, vol. viii. (1897). There are very few works 
dealing adequately but simply with the principles of arithmetic. 
Homersham Cox, Principles of Arithmetic C1885), is brief and lucid, 
but is out of print. The P sychology'of Number, by J A. McLellan and 
J. Dewey (1895), contains valuable suggestions (some of which have 
been utilized in the present article), but it deals only with number as 
the measure of quantity, and requires to be read critically. This 
work contains references to Grube's system, which has been much dis- 
cussed in America : for a brief explanation, see L. Seeley, The Grube 
Method of Teaching A rithmetic (1890). Onthe teaching of arithmetic, 
and of elementary mathematics generally, see J. W. A. Young, The 
Teaching of Mathematics in the Elementary and the Secondary School 
(1907) ; D. E. Smith, The Teaching of Elementary Mathematics (1900), 
also contains an interesting general sketch ; W. P. Turnbull, The 
Teaching of Arithmetic (1903), is more elaborate. E. M. Langley, 
A Treatise on Computation (1895), has notes on approximate and 
abbreviated calculation. Text-books on arithmetic in general and 
on particular applications are numerous, and any list would soon be 
out of date. Recent English works have been influenced by the brief 
Report on the Teaching of Elementary Mathematics, issued by the 
Mathematical Association (1905) ; but this is critical rather than con- 
structive. The Association has also issued a Report on the Teaching 
of Mathematics in Preparatory Schools (1907). In the United States 
of America the Report of the Committee of Ten on secondary school 
studies ( 1 893) and the Report of the Committee of Fifteen on elementary 
education (1893-1894), both issued by the United States Bureau of 
Education, have attracted a good deal of attention. Sir O. Lodge, 
Easy Mathematics, chiefly Arithmetic (1905), treats the subject 
broadly in its practical aspects. The student who is interested 
in elementary teaching should consult the annual bibliographies in 
the Pedagogical Seminary; an article by D. E. Phillips in vol. v. 
(October 1 897) contains references to works dealing with the psycho- 
logical aspect of number. For an account of German methods, see 
W- King, Report on Teaching of Arithmetic and Mathematics in the 
Higher Schools of Germany (1903). (W. F. Sh.) 

ARIUS ("Apetos), a name celebrated in ecclesiastical history, 
not so much on account of the personality of its bearer as of the 
" Arian " controversy which he provoked. Our knowledge of 
Arius is scanty, and nothing certain is known of his birth or of his 
early training. Epiphanius of Salamis, in his well-known treatise 
against eighty heresies (Haer. lxix. 3), calls him a Libyan by 
birth, and if the statement of Sozomen, a church historian of 
the 5th century, is to be trusted, he was, as a member of the 
Alexandrian church, connected with the Meletian schism (see 



ARIUS 



543 



Meletius of Lycopolis), and on this account excommunicated 
by Peter of Alexandria, who had ordained him deacon. After 
the death of Peter (November 25, 311), he was received into 
communion by Peter's successor, Achillas, elevated to the 
presbytery, and put in charge of one of the great city churches, 
Baucalis, where he continued to discharge his duties with 
apparent faithfulness and industry after the accession of 
Alexander. This bishop also held him in high repute. Theodoret 
(Hist. Eccl. i. 2) indeed does not hesitate to say that Arius 
was chagrined because Alexander, instead of himself, had been 
appointed to the see of Alexandria, and that the beginning of 
his heretical attitude is, in consequence, to be attributed to 
discontent and envy. But this must be rejected, for it is a 
common explanation of heretical movements with the early 
church historians, and there is no evidence for it in the original 
sources. However, Arius was ambitious. Epiphanius, Using 
older documents, describes him as a man inflamed with his own 
opinionativeness, of a soft and smooth address, calculated to 
persuade and attract, especially women: " in no time he had 
drawn away seven hundred virgins from the church to his 
party. " When the controversy broke out, Arius was an old man. 
The real causes of the controversy lay in differences as to 
dogma. Arius had received his theological education in the 
school of the presbyter Lucian of Antioch, a learned man, and 
distinguished especially as a biblical scholar. The latter was a 
follower of Paul of Samosata, bishop of Antioch, who had been 
excommunicated in 269, but his theology differed from that of his 
master in a fundamental point. Paul, starting with the con- 
viction that the One God cannot appear substantially (ovaiia&m) 
on earth, and, consequently, that he cannot have become a 
person in Jesus Christ, had taught that God had filled the man 
Jesus with his Logos (aotpia) or Power (5vva.fj.Ls). Lucian, on the 
other hand, presisted in holding that the Logos became a person 
in Christ. But since he shared the above-mentioned belief of his 
master, nothing remained for him but to see in the Logos a second 
essence, created by God before the world, which came down to 
earth and took upon itself a human body. In this body the 
Logos filled the place of the intellectual or spiritual principle. 
Lucian's Christ, then, was not " perfect man," for that which 
constituted in him the personal element was a divine essence; 
nor was he " perfect God," for the divine essence having become 
a person was other than the One God, and of a nature foreign to 
him. It is this idea which Arius took up and interpreted unin- 
telligently. His doctrinal position is explained in his letters to 
his patron Eusebius, bishop of the imperial city of Nicomedia, 
and to Alexander of Alexandria, and in the fragments of the 
poem in which he set forth his dogmas, which bears the enig- 
matic title of " Thalia " (0a\eia), used in Homer, in the sense of 
" a goodly banquet," most unjustly ridiculed by Athanasius as 
an imitation of the licentious style of the drinking-songs of the 
Egyptian Sotades (270 B.C.). From these writings it can.even 
nowadays be seen clearly that the principal object which he had 
in view was firmly to establish the unity and simplicity of the 
eternal God. However far the Son may surpass other created 
beings, he remains himself a created being, to whom the Father 
before all time gave an existence formed out of not being (t£ owe 
ovrcov); hence the name of Exoukantians sometimes given to 
Arius's followers. On the other hand, Arius affirmed of the Son 
that he was " perfect God, only-begotten " (tX^ptjs deos novo- 
ytvr)s); that through him God made the worlds (aiives, ages); 
that he was the product or offspring of the Father, and yjBt 
not as one among things made (yivvrjua aXX' ov\ ws iv ryu 
ytytvr)(iiv<j0v). In his eyes it was blasphemy when he heard that 
Alexander proclaimed in public that " as God is eternal, so is his 
Son, — when the Father, then the Son, — the Son is present in 
God without birth (iyevvrirtjis), ever-begotten (a-tiyeviis), an 
unbegotten-begotten (ayevvrjTOyevris)." He detected in his 
bishop Gnosticism, Manichaeism and Sabellianism, and was 
convinced that he himself was the champion of pure doctrine 
against heresy. He was quite unconscious that his own mono- 
theism was hardly to be distinguished from that of the pagan 
philosophers, and that his Christ was a demi-god. 



For years the controversy may have been fermenting in 
the college of presbyters at Alexandria. Sozomen relates that 
Alexander only interfered after being charged with remissness in 
leaving Arius so long to disturb the faith of the church. Accord- 
ing to the general supposition, the negotiations which led to the 
excommunication of Arius and his followers among the presbyters 
and deacons took place in 318 or 319, but there are good reasons 
for assigning the outbreak of the controversy to the time follow- 
ing the overthrow «f Licinius by Constantine, i.e. to the year 
323. In any case, from this time events followed one another 
to a speedy conclusion. Arius was not without adherents, even 
outside Alexandria. Those bishops who, like him, had passed 
through the school of Lucian were not inclined to let him fall 
without a struggle, as they recognized in the views of their 
fellow-student their own doctrine, only set forth in a somewhat 
radical fashion. In addressing to Eusebius of Nicomedia a 
request for his help, Arius ended with the words: '' Be mindful 
of our adversity, thou faithful comrade of Lucian's school 
(avWovKiaviarvs)" ', and Eusebius entered the lists energetically 
on his behalf. But Alexander too was active; by means of a 
circular letter he published abroad the excommunication of his 
presbyter, and the controversy excited more and more general 
interest. 

It reached even the ears of Constantine. Now sole emperor, 
he saw in the one Catholic church the best means of counter- 
acting the movement in his vast empire towards disintegration; 
and he at once realized how dangerous dogmatic squabbles might 
prove to its unity. His letter, preserved by the imperial bio- 
grapher, Eusebius of Caesarea, is a state document inspired by 
a wisely conciliatory policy; it made out both parties to be 
equally in the right and in the wrong, at the same time giving 
them both to understand that such questions, the meaning of 
which would be grasped only by the few, had better not be 
brought into public discussion; it was advisable to come to an 
agreement where the difference of opinion was not fundamental. 
This well-meaning attempt at reconciliation, betraying as it did 
no very deep understanding of the question, came to nothing. 
No course was left for the emperor except to obtain a general 
decision. This took, place at. the fist oecumenical council, which 
was convened in Nicaea (q.v.) in 325. After various turns in the 
controversy, it was finally dicided, against Arius, that the Son 
was "of the same substance" (fywowtos) with the Father, 
and all thought of his being created or even subordinate had to 
be excluded. Constantine accepted the decision of the council 
and resolved to uphold it* Arius and the two bishops of 
Marmarica Ptolemais, who refused to subscribe the creed, 
were excommunicated and banished to Illyria, and even Eusebius, 
of Nicomedia, who accepted the creed, but not its anathemas, 
was exiled to Gaul. Alexander returned to his see triumphant, 
but died soon after, and was succeeded by Athanasius (q.v.), his 
deacon, with whose indomitable fortitude and strange vicissitudes 
the further course of the controversy is bound up. 

It only remains for us here to sketch what is known of the future 
career of Arius and the Aryans. Although defeated at the council 
of Nicaea, the Arians were hy'' no means subdued. Constantine* 
while strongly disposed at 'first to enforce the Nicene decrees, 
was gradually won to a more conciliatory policy by the influence 
especially of Eusebius of Caesarea and Eusebius of Nicomedia, 
the latter of whorA. returned from exile in 328 and won the ear 
of' the emperor, whom he baptized on his death-bed. In 330 
even Arius was recalled from banishment. Athanasius, on the 
other hand, was banished to Treves in 335. During his absence 
Arius returned to Alexandria, but even now the people are said 
to have raised a fierce riot against the heretic. In 336 the emperor 
wasiorced to summon him to Constantinople. Bishop Alexander 
reluctantly assented to receive him once more into the bosom of 
the church, but before the act of admission was completed, Arius 
was suddenly taken ill while walking in the streets, and died in a 
few moments. His death seems to have exercised no influence 
worth speaking of on the course of events. His theological 
radicalism had in any case neverf ound many convinced adherents. 
It was mainly the opposition to the Homoousios, as a formula 



544 



ARIZONA 



open to heretical misinterpretation, and not borne out by Holy 
Writ, which kept together the large party known as Semiarians, 
who under the leadership of the two Eusebiuses carried on, the 
strife against the Nicenes and especially Athanasius. Under the 
sons of Constantine Christian bishops in numberless synods 
cursed one another turn by turn. In the western half of the 
empire Arianism found no foothold, and even the despotic will 
of Constantius, sole emperor after 351, succeeded only for the 
moment in subduing the bishops exiled for the sake of their 
belief. In the east, on the other hand, the Semiarians had for 
long the upper hand. They soon split up into different groups, 
according as they came to stand nearer to or farther from the 
original position of Arius. The actual centre was formed by the 
Homoii, who only spoke generally of a likeness (dftoiorris) of the 
Son to the Father; to the left of them were the Anotnoii, who, 
with Arius, held the Son to be unlike (avdpoios) the Father; 
to the right, the Homoiousians who, taking as their catchword 
" likeness of nature " (o/khottjs kkt' ovaiav), thought that they 
could preserve the religious content of the Nicene formula with- 
out having to adopt the formula itself. Since this, party in 
the course of years came morn and more into sympathy with 
the representatives of the Nicene party, the Homoousians, 
and notably with Athanasius, the much-disputed formula 
became more and more popular, till the council summoned in 
381 at Constantinople, under the auspices of Theodosius the 
Great, recognized the Nicene doctrine as the only orthodox one. 
Arianism, which had lifted up its head, again under the emperor 
Valens, was thereby thrust out of the state church. It lived to 
flourish anew among the Germanic tribes at the time of the great 
migrations. Goths, Vandals, Suebi, Burgundians and Lango- 
bardi embraced it; here too as a distinctive national type of 
Christianity it perished before the growth of medieval Catholi- 
cism, and the name of Arian ceased to represent a definite form 
of Christian doctrine within the church, or a definite party 
outside it. 

The best account of the proceedings, both political and theological, 
may be found in the following books:— H. M. Gwatkin, Studies of 
Arianism (2nd edit., Cambridge, i960); A. Harnack, History of 
Dogma (Eng. trans., 1894-1899); J. F. Bethune-Baker, An Intro- 
duction to the Early History of Christian Doctrine (London, 1903) ; 
W. Bright, The Age of the Fathers (London, 1903). Cardinal Newman's 
celebrated Arians of the Fourth Century is interesting more from the 
controversial than from the historical point of view. See also Paavo 
Snellman, Der Anfang des arianischen Streites (Helsingfors, 1904) ; 
Sigismund Rogala, Die Anfahge des arianischen Streites (Paderborn, 
1907). (G. K.) 

ARIZONA (from the Spanish-Indian Arieonac, of unknown 
meaning, — possibly " few springs,''' — the name of an 1 8th-century 
mining camp in the Santa Cruz valley, just S. of the present 
border of Arizona), a State on the S.W. border of the United 
States of America, lying between 31° 20' and 37 N. lat. and 
ioo° 2' and 114 45' W. long. It is bounded N. by Utah, E. by 
New Mexico, S. by Mexico and W. by California and Nevada, 
the Colorado river separating it from Calif ornia and in part from 
Nevada. On the W. is the - Great B asin. Arizona itself is mostly 
included in the great arid mountainous uplift of the Rocky 
Mountain region, and partly within the desert plain region of 
the Gulf of California, or Open Basin region. The whole state 
lies on the south-western exposure of a great roof whose crest, 
along the continental divide in western New .Mexico, pitches 
southward. Its altitudes vary from 12,800ft. tolessthan 100 ft. 
above the sea. Of its total area of 113,956 sq. m. (water surf ace, 
116 sq. m.), approximately 39,000 lie below 3000 ft., 27,000 from 
3000 to 5000 ft., and 47,000 above 5000 ft. 

Physical Features. — Three characteristic physiographic regions 
are distinctly marked: first the great Colorado Plateau, some 
45, 000 sq. m. in area, embracing ail the regiowN. and E. of a line 
drawn from the Grand Wash Cliffs in the N.W. corner of the 
state to its E. border near Clifton; next a broad zone of 
compacted mountain ranges with a southern limit of similar 
trend; and lastly a region of desert plains, occupying somewhat 
more than the S.W. quarter of the state. The plateau region 
has an average elevation of 6000-8000 ft. eastward, but it is 
much broken down in the west. The plateau is hot a plain. Itis 



dominated by high mountains, gashed by superb canyons of 
rivers, scarred with dry gullies and washes, the beds of inter- 
mittent streams, varied with great shallow basins, sunken deserts, 
dreary levels, bold buttes, picturesque mesas, forests and rare 
verdant bits of valley. In the N.W. there is a giddy drop, into 
the tremendous cut of the Grand Canyon (q.v.) of the Colorado 
river. The surf ace in general is rolling, with a gentle slope north- 
ward, arid drains through the Little Colorado (or Colorado 
Chi qui to), Rio Puerco and other streams in to the Grand Canyon. 
Along the Colorado is the Painted Desert, remarkable for the 
bright colours — red, brown, blue, purple, yellow and white — of 
its sandstones, shales and clays. Within the desert is a petri- 
fied forest, the most remarkable in the United States. The trees 
are of mesozoic time, though mostly washed down to the foot of 
the mesas in which they were once embedded, and lying now 
amid deposits of a later age. Blocks and logs of agate, chalce- 
dony, jasper, opal, and other silicate deposits lie in hundreds 
over an area of 60 sq. in. The forest is now protected as a 
national reserve against vandalism and commercialism. Every- 
where are evidences of water and wind erosion, of desiccation 
and differential weathering. This is the history* of the mesas, 
which are the most characteristic scenic feature of the highlands. 
The marks of volcanic action, particularly lava-flows, are also 
abundant and widely scattered. 

Separating the plateau from the mountain region is an abrupt 
transition slope, often deeply eroded, crossing the entire state as 
has been indicated. In localities the : slope is a true escarpment 
falling 150 and even 250 ft. per mile. In the Aubrey Cliffs and 
along the Mogollon mesa, which for about 200 m. parts the waters 
of the Gila and the Little Colorado; it often has an elevation 
of 1000 to 2000 ft., and the ascent is impracticable through long 
distances to the most daring climber. , It is not of course every- 
where so remarkable, or even distinct, and especially after its 
trend turns southward W. of Clifton* itis much broken dowri and 
obscured by erosion and lava deposits. The mountain region 
has a width of 70 to 150 m., and is filled with short parallel 
ranges trending parallel to the plateau escarpment. Many of 
the mountains • are extinct volcanoes. In the San Francisco 
mountains, in the north central part of the state, three peaks 
rise to from 10,000 to 12,794 ft.; three others are above 9000 ft.; 
all are eruptive cones, and among the lesser summits are old 
cinder cones. The S.E. corner o! Arizona is a region of 
greatly eroded ranges and gentle aggraded valleys. This moun- 
tain zone has an. average elevation of not less than 4000 ft., 
while in places its crests are 5000 ft. above the plains below. The 
line dividing the two regions runs roughly from Nogales on the 
Mexican border, past Tucson, Floreiice and Phoenix to Needles 
(California) , onithe W. boundary. These plains, the third or desert 
region of the state, have their mountains also, but they are 
lower, and they are not compacted; the plains near the mountain 
region slope toward the Gulf of California across wide valleys 
separated by isolated ranges, then across broad desert stretches 
traversed by rocky ridges, and finally there is no obstruction to 
the slope at all. Small parts of the desert along the Mexican 
boundary are shifting, sand: 

Climate. — As may be inferred from the physical description, 
Arizona has a wide variety of local climates. In general it is 
characterized by wonderfully clear airland extraordinarily > low 
humidity. The scanty rainfall is distributed from July to April, 
with marked: excess from July to September and a lesser maxi- 
mum in December. May and June are very dry. Of ten during 
a month, sometimes for several months, no rain falls over the 
greatest part of Arizona* Very little, rain comes from, the 
Pacific or the Gulf of California, the mountains and desert, as 
well as the adverse winds, making it impossible. Rain and snow 
fall usually from clouds blown from the Gulf of Mexico and not 
wholly dried in Texas. The mountainous areas are the only ones 
of adequate precipitation; the northern slope of the Colorado 
Plateau is almost destitute of water; the region of least pre- 
cipitation is the "desert" region. The mean annual rainfall 
varies from amounts of 2 to 5-5 in. at various points in the 
lower gulf valley,- and on the western border to amounts of 25 to 



ARIZONA 

Scale, 1:3,160,000 

English Miles 



Indian Reserves 

County Seats 

County Boundaries 




\tgi" 



ijlle-' 



^ ' - V * - J? ;? ^ — $*V 

I 5 * <%.• V > Mt.Loga«S jB \fiJtof J* 



N a v a j jo 



o* Jiff. Wifton ?rBcandon' 



Canyon^ 



HI. 

a' 

z 4 



s Chlonde T WX™y l y 



Acme 



■logman. \ A r- y 

.V*„.rf I .g-aJpoi^CStton— 




desert r ._ . =i»......^?.... 

Nicdoitsoi JjFi 
Shinomu Pealt 

V N ,v,jo juba • R fe s e r#v e 



2whf, H'dLad--. 'SuHualpai I Ind.# " 

c white iorui- -c v<- t-* ^ * 

S Hms Wr >' -^ \^. Reserve ^ - 




■^ M\*o qui, i 



• Rums of '•&■{ 

■}ai«D««!",,p Polacca -^ 
Orajbi / • Keam ' s; 

Toreyao j^~^Canyon 



3& 



**V( Black Falll^ j A< 4,„ me „ (W ,. - S«AOir.HE«* 



'he Crossing^ 



r \ 

Cress Mi 



Keedles3«L \%%£ 
>_^ *» ..wfc^^^*^ Cedar 
*"!•*£* "e /Veed/es 



Seligman 

♦ % ^V^™" ,l! Vv"'* ElagstaffU«» *^,w»\X$ 

■J - \ Kock\>! \ . 1 U V.X^ 

Amil Hoch \. Butte ftiqedar GUde ./ J W( ^]^ ' 

,l*t«o _^-^. J^ —■" y .tofigfellop 



_^»wMiS»«g^«asis™j 9/ J 



_ Pottery'MIl 
XT^ -fC'ifefe Butte 1 



•i^y Allantown1§ 



X 



*ffi .SVinslowiJ 




damana 
^'trifled Forest 

_ blbrpok / 

?>\i bant/on Butte^i 

,Wo6dniff.y).-'' , 

A St/ V <y 'Ki±L.- < --» i Tfe Meadcws 



Snowflake' 



7! 




/ J* 



>St. 



Pinedal'e^ : j- 
d °„ s \J?''^_ r ^R.chvllel 




Wictcnburg 
Vulturt . 
'ullin Vol. Its. «e' 



Halfway fe >-£\3\t ^ 



>nowllaKe'? • ' o^ ei ; TohniH 

< j^r~-^ <£3/lor(t Coacbof^J Jotins| 

:•— -a^«r^.l.J..^*»K5^- ^-wi^-KtfT -^ - I ■■ ■ ' - ? Tea ^_— - y—y. \x —•>_ Stern ^Q 

Jontoi 



£^lj W V Springerville^ 
f^: Pinetop 




« 



\* 






W«» IVater 

t j' , te« M A 

■%, Cathtdral ^S, 

>fa„ % i »g»»"<w''<jj-^ 



gVAV Tkffeserwo/r 



'orrlstownT;^^ 

- Ulw-fl^feW^tToTt 165 * ' fnffs CmwnJ'k.L '• Bt*clt^Glpbe 

»rii„^„KXiv-sr_<f* ,, "li2s:' ,, C p I T *«*S» iSilTenKSg .^""i 

Arlln K tofiJ3v^ «C-eye^^««4L NT S T^-V. (C'Valr, 






ias V friSjS* 
,. . ^-_ ^ . „-f^°»» y^?»T (Mil A R#Se""fi .-^^V,»» 1 

"^^'fc 1-^r^f/ .f. s w 



c*. 



/7 Cf#«^ Ni Xsfi^rioV-- ^, 



% Castle Oome^Af. U":™{Z~i£?.* \ 



^ 






' 8. ^rSisW 'V^Met^alfQc^SOrovf 
.Ttom^^HCSCliftonl 

! Matthews^N. ^y, Sanchj 










^ , p V'^< Eomta\/K es t 

v ^V i.*i- -."J, -53 ^ Hookers <? 

CvRlllitoJ -5 (? P Butte 
''j^o f P S Redingion j ~ 

~ j \,P00l Pd S V/ 

" I ^7 s 

o gfAiiillFlafii. '% ' 
nsonl ^.Cochise " . 

Oraidon ^_5^- PBSL 

•arce ^ -c, • ° r^% 

?/ o/rfVA* ■ Greatervjlle \ciack Diamoi^^ >T>^xoRuckcr ^p 



Emery Walker sC 



ARIZONA 



5'4S 



30 in. in the mountains. The highest recorded maximum in 
Arizona is 35 in. The proportion of perfectly clear days in 
the year varies at different points from a half to two-thirds; 
of the rest not more than half are without brilliant sunshine 
part of the day. Local thunderstorms and cloud-bursts are 
a characteristic phenomenon, inundating limited areas and 
transforming dried-up streams into muddy torrents carrying 
boulders and debris. Often in the plateau country the dry under- 
air absorbs the rain as it falls; and rarely in the Hopi Country 
do flooded gullies " run through " to the Little Colorado. The 
country of the cliff-dwellers in the N.E. is desert -like. Only 
points high in altitude catch much rain. Mountain snows feed 
the Gila, the Little Colorado, and the Colorado rivers. The 
Colorado, apart from the Gila, draws little water from Arizona. 
The mountain zone W. of Prescott drains into the Colorado, 
and to the S. and E. into the Gila; and the latter is by far the 
heavier drainage in volume. The floods come in May and June, 
and during the wet season the rivers, all with steep beds in their 
upper courses, wash along detritus that lower down narrows, 
and on smaller streams almost chokes, their courses. These 
gradients enable the inconstant streams tributary to the Colorado 
to carve their canyons, some of which are in themselves very 
remarkable, though insignificant beside the Grand Canyon. Many 
streams that are turned in spring or by summer cloud-bursts 
into torrents are normally mere water films or dry gulches. 
Even the Gila is dry in its bed part of the year at its mouth near 
Yuma. From the Gila to the southern boundary the parched 
land gives no water to the sea, and the international boundary 
runs in part through a true desert. In the hot season there 
is almost no surface water. Artesian wells are used in places, 
as in the stock country of the Baboquivari valley. 

The temperature of Arizona is somewhat higher than that of 
points of equal latitude on the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico 
coasts. In the mountains on the plateau it ranges from that of the 
temperate zone to that of regions of perpetual snow; S. of the 
mountains it ranges from temperate heats in the foothills to 
semi-tropic heat in the lower valleys 6f the Gila and Colorado. 
The average annual temperature over the region N. of 34' N. 
is about 55°; that of the region S. is about 68°. The warmest 
region is the lower Gila valley. Here the hottest temperature of 
the year hovers around 130 , the mean for the hottest month 
(July) is about 98°, and the mean for the year is from 68. 9°- 
74. 4° F. at different points. Some parts of the Santa Cruz 
valley are equally hot. In the hottest (western) portions of the 
true desert on the Mexican border the daily maximum tempera- 
ture is about no° F. ; but owing to the rapid radiation in the 
dry, clear, cloudless air the temperature frequently falls 40-50° 
in the night. The coldest points on the high plateau have annual 
means as low as 45-48°, and a mean for the coldest month at 
times below 20° F. The range from high to low extreme on the 
plateau may be as great as 125°, but in the S.W. it is only about 
70-80° F. The daily variation (not uncommonly 60° F.) is of 
course greatest in the most arid regions, where radiation is most 
rapid. And of all Arizona it should be said that owing to 
the extreme dryness of the air, evaporation from moist surfaces 
is very rapid, 1 so that the high temperatures here are decidedly 
less oppressive than much lower temperatures in a humid 
atmosphere. The great difference between absolute and sensible 
temperature is a very important climatic characteristic of 
Arizona. Generally speaking, during two-thirds' of the year the 
temperature is really delightful; the nights are cool, the morning^ 
bracing, the days mild though splendid. Intense heat prevails 
in July, August and September. In lowness of humidity (mean 
annual relative humidity at Yuma about 39, at Phoenix 36.7, 
at Tucson 37.8) and clarity of atmosphere, southern Arizona 
rivals Upper Egypt and other famous arid health resorts. 

Fauna and Flora. — Within the borders of Arizona are areas 
representative of every life zone save the humid tropical. From 

1 At Yuma, Phoenix and Tucson, the records of twenty-six, 
eighteen and fifteen years respectively show a rate of evaporation 
35-2, 12-7. and 7-7 times as great as the mean annual rainfall, which 
was 2-84 in., 7-06 in. and 11-7 in. for the places named. 

11. 18 



the summit of the San Francisco Mountains one may pass rapidly 
through all these down into' the Painted Desert. The Boreal- 
Canadian, Transition and Upper Sonoran embrace the highlands. 
Coyotes are very common; wild 1 Cats and mountain lions are 
fairly plentiful. Deer and antelope are represented by various 
species. Prairie-dogs, jack-rabbits, crows and occasional ravens, 
quail, grouse, pheasants and wild tuTkeys are also noteworthy in 
a rather scant animal life. Characteristic forms of the Upper 
Sonoran zone are the burrowing owl, Nevada sage- thrush, sage- 
thrasher and special species of orioles, kangaroo rats, mice, 
rabbits and squirrels. The Lower Sonoran covers the greatest 
part of southern and western Arizona, as well as the immediate 
valleys of the Colorado and Little Colorado rivers. Its animal 
life is in the main distinguished in species only from that of the 
Upper Sonoran belt, including among birds, the desert sparrow, 
desert thrasher, mocking-bird, hooded oriole; and among 
mammals small nocturnal species of kangaroo rats, pocket mice, 
mice and bats. Jaguars occasionally stray into Arizona from 
Mexico. Lizards and toads are conspicuous in the more desert 
areas. Snakes are not numerous. The Gila-monster, tarantula, 
the scorpion and thelyphonuS, scolopender and julus occur in 
some localities in the rainy season. The Arid -Tropical zone is 
represented by a narrow belt along the lower Colorado river, with 
a short arm extending into the valley of the Gila. The country 
is so arid that it supports only desert birds and mammals. 
Camels were very successfully employed as pack animals on the 
Tule desert in the palmy days of Virginia City, Nevada, before the 
advent of railways. 

The general conditions of distribution of the fauna of Arizona 
are shown even more distinctly by the flora. There are firs and 
spruces on the mountains, characteristic of the Boreal zone; pines 
characteristic of the Transition zone; pinon juniper, greasewood 
and the universally conspicuous sage-brush, characteristic of the 
Upper Sonoran zone. In the Lower Sonoran belt, soapweed, 
acacias (Palo Verde or Par kins onia torreyana) , agaves, yuccas 
and dasylirions, the creosote bush and mesquite tree, candle 
wood, and about seventy -five species of cactuses — among them 
omnipresent opuntiae and great columnar " Chayas " — make up 
a striking vegetation, which in its colours of dull grey and olive 
harmonizes well with the rigidity and forbidding barrenness 
of the plains.' It has exercised profound influence upon the 
industries, arts, faiths and general culture of the Indians. In 
places the giant cactus grows in groves, attaining a height of 
40 and even 50 ft. The mesquite varies in size from a tangled 
thorny shrub td a spreading tree as much as 3 ft. in diameter 
and 50 ft. high; it is normally perhaps half as high, and 6-8 in. 
in diameter. Enduring hardily great extremes of heat and 
moisture, it is throughout the arid South-west the most important, 
and in many localities the only important, native tree. From 
the great juicy, leafless, branchless stalk of the yucca, soap is 
prepared, and strong fibres useful in making paper, rope and 
fabrics. The fibre of the agave is also made into rope and its 
juice into pulque. The canaigre grows wild and is also cultivated. 
It is easy to exaggerate greatly the barrenness of an arid country. 
There are fine indigenous grasses that spring up over the mesas 
after the Summer rains, furnishing range for live-stock; some are 
extraordinarily independent of the rainfall. In the most arid' 
regions there is a small growth of green in the rainy season, and a 
rich display of small wild-flowers, as well as the enormous flower 
clusters of the yucca, arAI blooms in pink and orange, crimson, 
yellow and scarlet of the giant cactus and its fellows. Even in the 
Mexican border, desert oak, juniper and manzanita cover the 
mountains, and there is & vigorous though short-lived growth 
of grasses and flower from' July to October. The cliff-dweller 
country supports a scant vegetation — a few cottonwood in the 
washes, a few cedars on the mesas. 

Continuous forest areas are scant. A fair variety of trees — 
cottonwood, sycamore, ■. ash, willow, walnut and cherry — grow 
in thickets in the canyons, and each mountain range is a forest 
area. Rainfall varying with the altitude, the lower timber line 
below which precipitation is insufficient to sustain a growth of 
trees is about 7000 ft., and the upper timber line about 11,500 ft 

11 



54-6 



ARIZONA 



Oaks, juniper, pinon, cedars, yellow pine, fir and spruce grow 
on the mountains and over large areas oi the plateau country. 1 
The Coconino forest is one of the largest unbroken pine forests 
(about 6000 sq. m.) in the United States. Since 1898 about 
86 % of the wooded lands have been made reservations, and work 
has been done also to preserve the forest areas in the mountains 
in the south-east, from which there are few streams of permanent 
flow to the enclosing arid valleys. 

Soil. — The soils in the southern part of Arizona are mainly 
sandy loams, varying from light loam to heavy, close adobe; on 
the plateaus is what is known as " mesa " soil; and along the 
rivers are limited overflow plains of fine sediment — especially 
along the Colorado and the river Verde. These soils are in 
general rich, but deficient in nitrogen and somewhat in humus; 
and in limited areas white alkaline salts are injuriously in excess. 
Virgin soils are densely compact. By far the most useful crops 
are leguminous green manures, especially alfalfa, which grows 
four to seven cuttings in a year and as a soil flocculator and 
nitrogen-storer has proved of the greatest value. The greatest 
obstacle to agriculture is lack of water. Artesian wells are much 
used in the south-east. For the reservation of the water-partings 
— in the past considerably denuded by lumbermen and ranchmen 
— the increase of the forest areas, and the creation of reservoirs 
along the rivers, to control their erratic flow 2 and impound their 
flood waste for purposes of irrigation, much has been done by the 
national government. The irrigated areas are only little spots 
along the permanent streams. In 1900 the farm area was only 
2.7% of the total area of the state and only 0-31% was 
actually improved (including Indian reservations, 0-35%; In 
1906, 092% was cultivated); of the land actually under crops, 
88- 5% was irrigated. The improved acreage more than quin- 
tupled from 1880 to 1900. The total irrigated area in 1900 was 
185,000 acres and in 1902, 247,250 acres. The increase in land 
values by irrigation from 1890 to 1900 is estimated at $3,500,000. 
A reservoir was begun in 1904 just below the junction of the 
Tonto and the Salt with capacity to store 1,330,000 acre-ft. for 
irrigation, and develop also an electric power sufficient to pump 
underground water for an additional 50,000 acres at the lowest 
estimate 3 of lands lying too high for supply by gravity. 
Another important undertaking begun about the same time was 
the throwing of an East Indian weir dam (the only one in the 
United States) across the Colorado near Yuma, and the confine- 
ment of both sides of the lower Gila and Colorado with levees. 

Agriculture. — Strawberries and Sahara dates; alfalfa, wheat, 
barley, corn and sorghum; oranges, lemons, wine grapes, limes, 
olives, figs, dates, peanuts and sweet potatoes; yams and sugar 
beets, show the range of agricultural products. The date palm 
fruits well; figs grow luxuriantly, though requiring much irri- 
gation; almonds do well if protected from spring frosts; sea- 
island cotton grows in the finest grades, but is not of commercial 
importance. The country about Yuma is particularly suited to 
subtropical fruits. Temperate fruits — peaches, pears, apples, 
apricots and small fruits — do excellently; as do all important 
vegetables. The fruit industry is becoming more and more 
important. Farming is very intensive, and crop follows crop 
in swift succession; in 1905 the yield of barley per acre, 44 
bushels, was greater than in any other state or territory, as was 
the farm price per bushel on the 1st of December, 81 cents; 
the average yield per acre of hay was the highest in the Union in 

1903, 3-46 tons, the general average being 1-54 tons, was fourth in 

1904, 2-71 tons (Utah 3- 54, Idaho 3-07, Nevada 3-04), the general 
average being 1-52 tons, and was highest in 1905, 3-75 tons, the 
general average for the country being 1-54 tons; and in the 
same three years the average value per acre of hay was greater 
in Arizona than in any other state of the Union, being $35-78 in 

1 The San Francisco yellow pine forest, with an area of some 4700 
sq. m., is the finest forest of the arid south-west. 

4 The combined flow of the Salt and Verde varies from 100 to more 
than 10,000 cub. ft. per second. 

' The dam locks a narrow canyon. The height is 284 ft., the water 
rising 230 ft. against it. The storage capacity is exceeded by prob- 
ably but one reservoir in the world — the Wachusett reservoir near 
Boston. 



1903, $40-22 in 1904, and $46-39 in 1905, the general averages fof 
the country being $13-93, $13-23 and $13-11 respectively, for the 
three years. Of the total farm acreage of the state 97-6% were 
held in 1900 by the whites; and of these 80-2 % owned in whole 
or in part the land they cultivated. 

Stock-raising is a leading industry, but it has probably 
attained its full development. The over-stocking of the ranges 
has caused much loss in the past, and the almost total eradication 
of fine native grasses over extended areas. Of the neat cattle 
(7,042,635) almost 98 %, and of the sheep (861,761) almost 100%, 
were in 1900 pastured wholly or in part upon the public domain. 
The extension of national forest reserves and the regulations 
enforced by the United States government for the preservation 
of the ranges have put limits to the industry. In 1900 the value 
of live-stock represented 15-7% of the capital invested in 
agriculture; the value of animals sold or slaughtered for 
food ($3,204,758) was half the total value of all farm products 
($6,997,097). Ostrich farms have been successfully established 
in the Salt river valley since 1893; in 1907 there were six farms 
in the Salt river valley, on which there were about 1354 birds; 
the most successful food for the ostrich is alfalfa. 

Minerals. — Mining is the leading industry of Arizona. 
Contrary to venerable traditions there is no evidence that 
mining was practised beyond the most inconsiderable extent 
by aborigines, Spanish conquistadores, or Jesuits. In 1738 an 
extraordinary deposit of silver nuggets, quickly exhausted 
(1741), was discovered at Arizonac. At the end of the 18th 
century the Mexicans considerably developed the nines in the 
south-east. The second half of the 1 9th century witnessed several 
great finds; first, of gold placers on the lower Gila and Colorado 
(1858-1869); later, of lodes at Tombstone, which flourished from 
1879-1886, then decayed, but in 1905 had again become the 
centre of important mining interests; and still later the develop- 
ment of copper mines at Jerome and around Bisbe*. Several of 
the Arizona copper mines are among the greatest of the world. 
The Copper Queen at Bisbee from 1880- 190 2 produced 
378,047,210 lb of crude copper, which was practically the total 
output of the territory till after 1900, when other valuable 
mines were opened; the Globe, Morenci and Jerome districts are 
secondary to Bisbee. Important mines of gold and silver, con- 
siderable deposits of wolframite, valuable ores of» molybdenum 
and vanadium, and quarries of onyx marble, are also worked. 
Low-grade coal deposits occur in the east central part of the 
state and near the junction of the Gila and San Pedro rivers. 
Some fine gems of peridot, garnet and turquoise have been found. 
The mineral products of Arizona for 1907 were valued at 
$s6,753,65o;ofwhich$5 1, 3 55,687 (more than thatofanyotherstate) 
was the value of copper; $2,664,000, gold; and $1,916,000, silver. 
In 1907 the legislature passed an elaborate act providing 
for the taxation of mines, its principal clause being that the 
basis of valuation for taxation in each year be one-fourth of the 
output of the mines in question for the next preceding year. 

Manufactures. — The manufacturing industries are of relatively 
slight importance, though considerable promise attends the 
experiments with canaigre as a source of tannin. The Navaho 
and Moqui Indians make woollen blankets and rugs and the 
Pimas baskets. Onyx marbles of local source are polished at 
Phoenix. The capital invested in manufacturing industries 
increased from $9,51 7,573 in 1900 to $14,395,654 in 1905, or 
Si'3%> an d the value of products from $20,438,987 in 1900 to 
$28,083,192 in 1905, or 37-4%. Of the total product in 1905 
the product of the principal industry, the smelting and refining 
of copper ($22,761,981), represented 811%; it was 9-4% of all 
the smelting and refining of copper done in the United States in 
that year. The other manufactures were of much less importance, 
the principal ones being cars and general shop construction, 
including repairs by steam railway companies ($1,329,308), 
lumber and timber products ($960,778), and flour and grist mill 
products ($743,124). 

Two transcontinental railway systems, the Southern Pacific 
and Santa Fe, were built across Arizona in 1878-1883. They 
are connected by one line, and a feeder runs S. into Sonora. 



ARIZONA 



547 



The railway mileage of Arizona on the ist of January 1908 
was 1935-35 m - 

Population. — The population of Arizona in 1880 was 
40.440; in 1890, 59,620; in 1900, 122,931 (including 28,623 
reservation Indians not counted before); in 1910, 204,354. The 
native population is of the most diverse origin; the foreign 
element is equally heterogeneous, but more than half (in 1900, 
14,172 out of 24,28,, foreign-born) are Mexicans, many of whom 
are not permanent residents; after 1900, immigrants were largely 
mine labourers, and included Slavonians and Italians. The 
largest towns in 1900 were Tucson, Phoenix, which is the 
capital, Prescott (pop. 3559), Jerome (pop. 1890, 250; in 1900, 
2861); Winslow (pop. 1890, 363; in 1900, 1305), Nogales (pop. 
1900. 1761), and Bisbee. The last was an insignificant mining 
camp in 1880, still unincorporated in 1900, but with an estimated 
population of 6000 in 1904. It is crowded picturesquely into 
several narrow confluent ravines. Railway connexion with El 
Paso was established in 1902. Douglas is another growing camp. 

Over thirty Indian tribes are represented in the Indian schools 
of Arizona. The more important are the Hualapais or Apache- 
Yumas; the Mohaves; the Yavapais or Apache-Mohaves; the 
Yumas, whose lesser neighbours on the lower Colorado are the 
most primitive Indians of the United States in habits; the 
Maricopas; the Pimas and Papagoes, who figure much in 
early Arizona history, and who are superior in intelligence, 
adaptability, application and character; the Hopis or Moquis, 
possessed of the same good qualities and notably temperate and 
provident, famous for their prehistoric culture (Tusuyan) ; the 
Navaho. and the kindred Apaches, perhaps the most relentless 
and savage of Indian warriors. All the Indians of Arizona live 
on reservations save the few non-tribal Indians taxed and treated 
as active citizens. Even the Apaches after being whipped 
by relentless war into temporary submission have been bound 
by treaties which the gifts, vices and virtues of the reservation 
system have tempted them to observe. The Pimas and Papagoes 
were early converted by the Spaniards, and retain to-day a 
smattering of Christianity plentifully alloyed with paganism. 
Apaches. Pimas. Papagoes have been employed by the United 
States on great irrigation works, and have proved industrious 
and faithful labourers. In 1900 there were 1836 taxed Indians, 
26,480 reservation Indians not taxed, and in addition many 
friendly Papagoes unenumerated. 

In 1906 the Indian population was estimated as being 14 % of 
the whole population of Arizona, and that they are singularly law- 
abiding is argued from the fact that in the same year the Indians 
furnished only 3 % of the convicts in the territorial prison. 

Government and Education. — Arizona became a territory of 
the first (or practically autonomous) class in 1863. Her organic 
law thereafter until 19 10 consisted of various sections of the 
Revised Statutes' of the United States. From the beginning she 
had a territorial legislature. Congress retained ultimately direct 
control of all government, administration being in the hands of 
resident officials appointed by the president and Senate. Special 
mention must be made of the secret police, the Arizona Rangers, 
organized in 1901 to police the cattle ranges; they are " fearless 
men, trained in riding, roping, trailing and shooting," a force 
whose personnel is not known to the general public. The legis- 
lature repealed the law licensing public gambling in 1907; 
enacted a law requiring the payment of $300 per annum as 
licence fee by retail liquor dealers; and provided for juvenile 
courts and probationary control of children. In 1907 the total 
tax valuation of property was $77,705,251; the net debt of the 
territory $1,022,972, and that of counties and towns $3,123,275. 
The receipts of the territorial treasury for the year ending on 
the 30th of June 1907 were $687,386, and the disbursements for 
the same period were $601,568. A homestead provision (1901) 
exempts from liability for debts (except mortgages or liens placed 
before the homestead claim) any homestead belonging to the head 
of a family, existing in one compact body and valued at not more 
than $2500; such a homestead a married man may not sell, 
lease or put a lien on without his wife's consent. Personal 
property to the value of $500 is exempt from the same liability, 



The public school system was established in 1 8 7 1 . A compulsory 
attendance law applies to children between 6 and 14 years of age, 
but it is not generally obeyed by the Mexican element of popu- 
lation. In 1907 there was an enrolment of 24,962 out of 33,167 
children of school age ; there were six high schools — three new 
in 1906; and the average number of school days was 128-4. In 
the fiscal year ending June 1907, the total receipts for schools 
were $697,762, and the expenditures were $701,102. Illiteracy 
is high, amounting in 1900 to 23-1 % of native males, above 21 
years of age, and 30-5 % of foreign males, principally because of 
the large number of Indians, Chinese, Japanese and Mexicans 
in the state. There are two normal schools at Tempe (1886) 
and Flagstaff (1899), a university at Tucson with an agricultural 
experiment station that has done much for the industries of 
Arizona; there is a considerable number of Indian schools, the 
largest of which are maintained by the national government, 
and the funds of the university come largely from the same source. 
The first juvenile reform school, called the Territorial Industrial 
school, was opened in 1903 at Benson. The territorial prison, 
formerly at Yuma, was abandoned for a modern building at 
Florence, Pinal county; and a hospital for the insane is 3 m. 
from Phoenix. 

History. — The history of the South-west is full of interest to the 
archaeologist. A prehistoric culture widely distributed has left 
abundant traces. Pueblo ruins are plentiful in the basins of the 
Gila and Colorado rivers and their tributaries. Geographical 
conditions and a hard struggle against nature fixed the character 
of this " aridian " culture, and determined its migrations; the 
onslaughts of nomad Indians determined the sedentary civiliza- 
tion of the cliff dwellers. A co-operative social economy is 
evidenced by the traces of great public works, such as canals 
many miles in length. The pueblos of the Gila valley are held to 
be older than those of the Colorado. Casa Grande, 15 m. S.E. 
of a railway station of the same name on the Southern Pacific 
railway, is the most remarkable of plain ruins in the South-west, 
the only one of its type in the United States. It resembles the 
Casa Grande ruin of Chihuahua, Mexico, with its walls of sun- 
dried puddled clay, and its area of rooms, courts and plazas, 
surrounded by a wall. It was already a ruin when discovered in 
1694 by the Jesuit father Kino. John Russel Bartlett described 
it in 1854, and in 1889 Congress voted that it be protected 
as a government reservation; in 1892 it was set apart by the 
government. Excavations were made there in 1906-1907 by Dr 
J. Walter Fewkes. Migration was northward. The valleys of the 
Salt river and its affluents, the Agua Fria, Verde and Tonto, 
are strewn with aboriginal remains; but especially important 
in migrations of culture was the Little Colorado. A very con- 
siderable population must have lived once in this valley. It is 
represented to-day by the still undeserted habitats of Zurii 
(in New Mexico) and Tusayan; the Moquis, after the Zunis, 
are in customs and traditions the best survival of the ancient 
civilization. 

Arizona north of the Gila, save for a very limited and inter- 
mittent missionary effort and for scant exploring expeditions, 
was practically unknown to the whites until well after the 
beginning of American rule. The Santa Cruz valley, however, 
has much older annals of a past that charms by its picturesque 
contrasts with the present. Arizona history begins with the 
arrival in Sonora in 1536 of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, who, 
although he had not entered Arizona or New Mexico, had heard 
of them, and by his stories incited the Spaniards to explore the 
unknown north in hope of wealth. Marcos de Niza, a Franciscan 
friar to whom the first reconnaissance was entrusted, was the 
first Spaniard to enter the limits of Arizona. He crossed the 
south-eastern corner to Zuni in 1539, passing through the Santa 
Cruz valley; and F. V. de Coronado (q.v.) was led by Fray 
Marcos over the same route in 1540; while Hernando Alarcon 
explored the Gulf of California and the lower Colorado river. 
Members of Coronado's expedition explored the Moqui country 
and reached the Grand Canyon, and after this a succession of 
remarkable and heroic explorations followed through the century; 
which however accomplished little forgeography,furthcr confusing 



548 



ARJUNA-^ARK 



and embellishing rather than clearing up its mysteries. All this 
has left traces in still living myths about the early history of 
the South-west. Early in the 1 7th century considerable progress 
had been made in Christianizing the Pimas, Papagoes and Moquis. 
Following 1680 came a great Indian revolt in New Mexico and 
Arizona, and thereafter the Moquis remained independent of 
Spanish and Christian domination, although visited fitfully by 
rival Jesuits and Franciscans. In 1732 (possibly in 1720) 
regular Jesuit missions were founded at Bac (known as an Indian 
rancheria since the 17th century) and at Guevavi. The region 
south of the Gila had already been repeatedly explored. In the 
second half of the century there was a presidio at Tubac (whose 
name first appears 1752) and some half-dozen pueblos de visita, 
including the Indian settlement of Tucson. 

A few errors should be corrected and some credit given with 
reference to this early period. The Inquisition never had any 
jurisdiction whatever over the Indians; compulsory labour by 
the Indians was never legalized except on the missions, and the 
law was little violated; they were never compelled to work 
mines; of mining by the Indians for precious metals there is no 
evidence; nor by the Jesuits (expelled in 1767, after which their 
missions and other properties were held by the Franciscans), 
except to a small extent about the presidio of Tubac, although 
they did some prospecting. Persistent traditions have greatly 
exaggerated the former prosperity of the old South-west. The 
Spaniards probably provoked some inter-tribal intercourse 
among the Indians, and did something among some tribes for 
agriculture. Their own farms and settlements, save in the 
immediate vicinity of the presidio, were often plundered and 
abandoned, and such settlement as there was was confined to the 
Santa Cruz valley. From about 1790 to 1822 was a period of 
peace with the Apaches and of comparative prosperity for church 
and state. The fine Indian mission church at Bac, long abandoned 
and neglected, dates from the last decade of the 18th century. 
The establishment of a presidio at Tucson in 1776 marks its 
beginning as a Spanish settlement. 

The decay of the military power of the presidios during the 
Mexican war of independence, the expulsion of loyal Spaniards 
— notably friars — and the renewal of Apache wars, led to the 
temporary abandonment of all settlements except Tubac and 
Tucson. The church practically forsook the field about 1828. 

American traders and explorers first penetrated Arizona in the 
first quarter of the 1 9th century. As a result of the Mexican War, 
New Mexico, which then included all Arizona north of the Gila, 
was ceded to the United States. California gold discoveries drew 
particular attention to the country south of the Gila, which was 
wanted also for a transcontinental railway route. This strip, 
known as the " Gadsden Purchase " (see Gadsden, James), was 
bought in 1854 by the United States, which took possession 
in 1856. This portion was also added to New Mexico. The 
Mexicans, pressed by the Apaches, had, in 1848, abandoned even 
Tubac and Tamacacori, first a visita of Guevavi, and after 1784 
a mission. The progress of American settlement was interrupted 
by the Civil War, which caused the withdrawal of the troops and 
was the occasion for the outbreak of prolonged Indian wars. 

Meanwhile a convention at Tucson in 1856 sent a delegate to 
Congress and petitioned for independent territorial government. 
This movement and others that followed were ignored by 
Congress owing to its division over the general slavery question, 
and especially the belief of northern members that the control of 
Arizona was an object of the pro-slavery party. A convention 
held in April i860 at Tucson undertook to" ordain and establish," 
of its own motion, a provisional constitution until Congress should 
" organize a territorial government." This provisional territory 
constituted all New Mexico south of 34 40' N. Officials were 
appointed and New Mexican legislation for the Arizona counties 
ignored, but nothing further was done. In 1861 it was occupied 
by a Texan force, declared for the Confederacy, and sent a 
delegate (who was not admitted) to the Confederate congress. 
That body in January 1862 passed a formal act organizing the 
territory, including in it New Mexico, but in May 1862 the 
Texans were driven out by a Union force from California. By 



act of the 24th of February 1863 Congress organized Arizona 
territory as the country west of 109 W. long. In December 
an itinerant government sent out complete from Washington 
crossed the Arizona line and effected a formal organization. The 
territorial capital was first at Prescott (1863-1867), then at 
Tucson (1867-1877), again at Prescott (187 7-1889), and finally 
at Phoenix (since 1889). 

There have been boundary difficulties with every contiguous 
state or territory. The early period of American rule was 
extremely unsettled. The California gold discoveries and over- 
land travel directed many prospecting adventurers to Arizona. 
For some years there was considerable sentiment favouring 
filibustering in Sonora. The Indian wars, breeding a habit of 
dependence on force, and the heterogeneous elements of cattle 
thieves, Sonoran cowboys, mine labourers and adventurers led 
to one of the worst periods of American border history. But 
since about 1880 there is nothing to chronicle but a continued 
growth in population and prosperity. Agitation for statehood 
became prominent in territorial politics for some years. In 
accordance with an act of Congress, approved on the 16th of 
June 1906, the inhabitants of Arizona and New Mexico voted on 
the 6th of November 1 906 on the question of uniting the territories 
into a single state to be called Arizona; the vote of New Mexico 
was favourable to union and statehood, but these were defeated 
by the vote of Arizona (16,265 against, and 31,41 for statehood). 
In June 1910 the President approved an enabling act providing for 
the admission of Arizona and New Mexico as separate states. 

Bibliography.- — For the Colorado river and the Grand Canyon 
see those articles; for the Sonoran boundary region, Report of the 
Boundary Commission upon the Boundaries between the United States 
and Mexico (3 vols., Washington, 1898-1899, also as Senate Docu- 
ment No. 247, vols. 23-25, 55 Congress, 2 Session) ; for the petrified 
forest of the Painted Desert, L. F. Ward in Smithsonian Institution 
Annual Rep., 1899; for the rest of the area, Various reports in the 
U.S. Geological Survey publications, bibliography in Bulletin Nos. 
100, 177. — Fauna and Flora: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
North American Fauna, No. 3 (1890), No. 7 (1893); U.S. Biological 
Survey, Bulletin No. 10 (1898) ; publications of the Desert 
Botanical Laboratory at Tucson; also titles under archaeology 
below, particularly Bandelier's " Final Report." — Climate, Soil, 
Agriculture: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Climate and Crop 
Service, Arizona, monthly reports, annual summaries; Arizona 
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletins. — Mineral Industries : 
U.S. Geological Survey publications, consult bibliographies; The 
Mineral Industry, annual (New York and London). — Government : 
Arizona Revised Statutes (Phoenix, 1887); Report of the Governor of 
Arizona Territory to the Secretary of the Interior, annual. — Archae- 
ology: An abundance of materials in the Annual Report, U.S. 
Bureau of Ethnology for different years; consult also especially 
A. F. A. Bandelier, " Contributions to the History of the South- 
western Portion of the United States," in Archaeological Institute 
of America, Papers, American Series, vol. 5 (Cambridge, 1890); 
" Final Report of Investigations among the Indians of the South- 
western United States," ib. vols. 3 and 4 (Cambridge, 1890-1892); 
other material may be found in Smithsonian Institution, Annual 
Report, 1896, 1897, &c, and many important papers by J. W. 
Fewkes, F. W. Hodge, C. Mendeleff and others in the American 
Anthropologist and Journal of American Ethnology. — History : H. H. 
Bancroft, History of Arizona and New Mexico (San Francisco, 1887) ; 
A. F. A. Bandelier, " Historical Introduction to Studies among the 
Sedentary Indians of New Mexico," in Archaeological Institute of 
America, Papers, American Series, vol. 1 (Boston, 1881) ; The Gilded 
Man (El Dorado) and other Papers (New York, 1893) ; G. P. Winship, 
" The Coronado Expedition," in U.S. Bureau of Ethnology, 14th 
Annual Report (1892-1893), pp. 339-613, with an abundant literature 
to which this may be the guide. The traditional errors respecting 
the early history of the Spanish South-west are fully exposed in the 
works of Bancroft and Bandelier, whose conclusions are supported 
by E. Coues, On the Trail of a Spanish Pioneer, Francisco Garces 
(2 vols. New York, 1900). 

ARJUNA, in Hindu mythology, a semi-divine hero of the 
Mahabharata. He was the third son of Pandu, son of Indra. 
His character as sketched in the great epic is of the noblest kind. 
He is the central figure of that portion of the epic known as the 
Bhagwad-gita, where he is represented as horrified at the impend- 
ing slaughter of a battle and as being comforted by Krishna. 

ARK (a word common to Teutonic languages, cf. Ger. Arche, 
adapted from the Lat. area, chest, cf. arcere, to shut up, enclose),, 
a chest, basket or box. The Hebrew word tebah, translated in the 
A.V. by " ark," is used in the Old Testament (1) of the box made 



ARK 



549 



of bulrushes in which Pharaoh's daughter found the infant Moses 
(Exodus ii. 3), and (2) of the great vessel or ship in which Noah 
took refuge during the flood (Genesis vi.-ix.). 

Noah's Ark. — According to the story in Genesis, Noah's ark 
was large enough to contain his family and representatives of each 
kind of animal. Its dimensions are given as 300 cubits long, 
50 cubits broad and 30 cubits high (cubit =18-22 in.). It was 
made of " gopher " wood, which has been variously identified 
with cypress, pine and cedar. Before the days of the " higher 
criticism " and the rise of the modern scientific views as to the 
origin of species, there was much discussion among the learned, 
and many ingenious and curious theories were advanced, as to 
the number of the animals and the space necessary for their 
reception, with elaborate calculations as to the subdivisions of the 
ark and the quantities of food, &c, required to be stored. It may 
be interesting to recall the account given in the first edition of the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica (1771), which contained a summary of 
some of these various views (substantially repeated up to the 
publication of the eighth edition, 1853). " Some have thought the 
dimensions of the ark as given by Moses too scanty . . . and 
hence an argument has been drawn against the authority of the 
relation. To solve this difficulty many of the ancient Fathers and 
the modern critics have been put to miserable shifts. But Buteo 
and Kircher have proved geometrically that, taking the cubit of 
a foot and a half, the ark was abundantly sufficient for all the 
animals supposed to be lodged in it. Snellius computes the ark 
to Have been above half an acre in area . . . and Dr Arbuthnot 
computes it to have been 81,062 tuns . . . if we come to a calcu- 
lation the number of species of animals will be found much less 
than is generally imagined, not amounting to a hundred species 
of quadrupeds, nor to two hundred of birds. . . . Zoologists 
usually reckon but an hundred and seventy species in all." The 
progress of the " higher criticism," and the gradual surrender of 
attempts to square scientific facts with a literal interpretation of 
the Bible, are indicated in the shorter account given in the eighth 
edition, which concludes as follows: — " the insuperable diffi- 
culties connected with the belief that all the existing species of 
animals were provided for in the ark, are obviated by adopting 
the suggestion of Bishop Stillingfleet, approved by Matthew 
Poole, Pye Smith, le Clerc, Rossenmiiller and others, that the 
deluge did not extend beyond the region of the earth then 
inhabited, and that only the animals of that region were pre- 
served in the ark." The first edition also gives an engraving of the 
ark (repeated in the editions up to the fifth), in shape like a long 
roofed box, floating on the waters; the animals are seen in 
separate stalls. By the time of the ninth edition (1875) precise 
details are no longer considered worthy of inclusion ; and the age 
of scientific comparative mythology has been reached. 

For a comparative study of the occurrence of the ark in the 
various deluge myths, in the present edition, see Deluge; 
Cosmogony ; Babylonia and Assyria. 

The Ark of the Law, in the Jewish synagogue, is a chest or 
cupboard containing the scrolls of the Torah (Pentateuch), and 
is placed against or in the wall in the direction of Jerusalem. It 
forms one of the most decorative features of the synagogue, and 
often takes an architectural design, with columns, arches and a 
dome. There is a fine example in the synagogue at Great St 
Helens, London. (X.) 

Ark of the Covenant, Ark of the Revelation, Ark of the Testimony, 
are the full names of the sacred chest of acacia wood overlaid 
with gold which the Israelites took with them on their journey into 
Palestine. The Biblical narratives reveal traces of a considerable 
development in the traditions regarding this sacred object, and 
those which furnish the most complete detail are of post-exilic 
date when the original ark had been lost. The fuller titles of the 
ark originate in the belief that it contained the " covenant " 
{Urith) or "testimony" {'eduth), the technical terms for the 
Decalogue (q.v.) ; primarily, however, it would seem to have been 
called "the ark of Yahweh" (or "Elohim"), or simply "the 
ark." The word itself {iron) designates an ordinary chest (cp. 
Gen. 1. 26 ; 2 Kings xii. 10) , and the (late) description of its appear- 
ance represents it as an oblong box 2$ cubits long, i§ cubits in 



breadth and height (roughly 1-2 by -75 metres). It was lined 
within and without with gold, and through four golden rings were 
placed staves of acacia wood, by means of which it was carried. 
A slab of the same metal (the so-called " mercy-seat," kapporeth, 
Gr. hilasterion) covered the top, and this was surmounted by two 
Cherubim (Ex. xxv. 10-22, xxxvii. 1-9). The latter, however, 
are not mentioned in earlier passages (Deut. x. 1, 3), and would 
naturally increase the weight of the ark, which, according to 
2 Sam. xv. 29, could be carried by two men. 

The ark was borne by the Levites (Deut. x. 8), and the latest 
narratives amplify the statement with a wealth of detail char- 
acteristic of the post-exilic interest in this order. (See Levites.) 
An interesting passage relating the commencement of an Israelite 
journey vividly illustrates the power of the sacred object. As the 
ark started, it was hailed with the cry," Arise, Yahweh, let thine 
enemies be scattered, let them that hate thee flee from before 
thee," and when it came to rest, the cry again rang out, " Return, 
O Yahweh, to the myriads of families of Israel" (Num. x. 33-36). 
This saying appears to imply a settled life in Canaan, but both 
affirm the warlike significance of Yahweh and the ark. Thus it is 
the permanent pledge of Yahweh's gracious presence; it guides 
the people on their journey and leads them to victory. It is no 
mere receptacle, but a sacrosanct object as much to be feared as 
Yahweh himself. To presume to fight without it was to invite 
defeat, and on one notable occasion the Israelites attempted to 
attack their enemy north of Kadesh without its aid, and were, 
defeated (Num. xiv. 44 sq.). There are many gaps in its history, 
and although at the crossing of the Jordan and at the fall of 
Jericho the ark figures prominently (Josh. iii. sq., vi. sq.), it 
is unaccountably missing in stories of greater national moment. 
Once it is found at Bethel (Judges xx. 27 sq.). It is met with 
again at Shiloh, where it is under the care of Eli and his sons, 
descendants of an ancient family of priests (1 Sam. ii. 28; cp. 
Josh, xviii. 1). After a great defeat of Israel by the Philistines 
it was brought into the field, but was captured by the enemy. 
The trophy was set up in the Philistine temple of Ashdod, but vin- 
dicated its superiority by overthrowing the god Dagon. A plague 
smote the city, and when it was removed to Ekron, pestilence 
followed in its wake. After taking counsel the Philistines placed 
the ark with a votive offering upon a new cart drawn by two cows. 
The beasts went of their own accord to Beth-shemesh, where it 
remained in the field of a certain Joshua. Again a disaster 
happened through some obscure cause, and seventy of the sons of 
Jeconiah were smitten (1 Sam. vi. 19, R.V., margin). Thence it 
was removed to the house of Abinadab of Kirjath-jearim, who 
consecrated his son to its service (1 Sam. iv.-vii. 1). For many 
years the ark remained untouched — apparently forgotten. Shiloh 
disappears from history; neither Saul nor even Samuel, whose 
youth had been spent with it, takes any further thought of it. 
After a remarkable period of obscurity, the ark enters suddenly 
into the history of David (2 Sam. vi.). Some time after the 
capture of Jerusalem the ark was brought from Baal-Judah, 
but at the threshing-floor of Nacon (an unintelligible name) 
Abinadab's son Uzzah laid hands upon it and was struck down 
for his impiety. On this account the place is said to have 
received the name Perez-Uzzah (" breach of Uzzah "). It was 
taken into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite {i.e. of Gath), and 
brought a blessing upon his house during the three months that it 
remained there. Finally the king had it conveyed to the city 
of David, where a tent was prepared to shelter it. Once at 
Jerusalem, it seems to have lost its unique value as the token of 
Yahweh's presence; its importance was apparently merged with 
that of the Temple which Solomon built. The foundation of the 
capital would pave the way for the belief that the national god 
had taken a permanent dwelling-place in the royal seat. The 
prophets themselves lay no weight upon the ark as the central 
point of Jerusalem's holiness. The real Deuteronomic code does 
not mention it, and to Jeremiah (iii. 16) it was a thing of no conse- 
quence. Later, in the age of the priestly schools, the ark received 
much attention, although it must obviously be very doubtful how 
far a true recollection of its history has survived. But nowhere 
is any light thrown upon its fate. The invasion of Shishak, the 



55o 



ARKANSAS 



capture of Jerusalem by Joash (2 Kings xiv. 13,14), the troublous 
reign of Manasseh, the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchad- 
rezzar, have found each its supporters. The wild legends of 
its preservation at the taking of Jerusalem (2 Mace. ii. and else- 
where) only show that the popular mind was unable to share the 
view that the ark was an obsolete relic. More poetical is the 
tradition that the ark was raised to heaven, there to remain 
till the coming of the Messiah, a thought which embodies the 
spiritual idea that a heavenly pledge of God's covenant and 
faithfulness had superseded the earthly symbol. 1 

A critical examination of the history of the Israelite ark 
renders it far from certain that the object was originally the 
peculiar possession of all Israel. Many different traditions have 
gathered around the story of the Exodus, and the ark was not the 
only divinely sent guide or forerunner which led the Israelites. 
Its presence at Shiloh, and its prominence in the life of Joshua, 
support the view that it was the palladium of the Joseph tribes, 
but the traditions in question conflict with others. The account 
of the commencement of the ark's journey associates it with 
Moses and his kin (Num. x. 29 sqq.) — that is, with the south 
Palestinian clans with which the term " Levites " appears to be 
closely connected. (See Levites.) A distinct movement direct 
into Judah is implied by certain old traditions (see Caleb), but 
this is subordinated to the more comprehensive account of the 
journey round by the east of the Jordan. (See Exodus, The.) 
The narratives in 1 Sam. iv.-vi. stand on a plane by themselves, 
and the gap between them and 2 Sam. vi. has not been satis- 
factorily fixed. But it is not certain that the two belong to the 
same cycle of tradition; Kirjath-jearim and Baal-Judah are 
identified only in later writings, and the behaviour of Saul's 
daughter (2 Sam. vi. 15 sqq.) may conceivably imply that the ark 
was an unknown object to Benjamites. It is of course possible 
that the ark was originally the sacred shrine of the clans which 
came direct to Judah, and that the traditions in 1 Sam. iv.-vi., 
Josh.iii. sqq. are of secondary origin, and are to be associated with 
its appearance at Shiloh, the fall of which place, although attri- 
buted to the' time of Samuel, is apparently regarded by Jeremiah 
(xxvi. 6) as a recent event. Of these two divergent traditions, it 
would seem that the one which associates it with the kin of Moses 
and David may be traced farther in those late narratives which 
connect the ark closely with the Levites and even attribute its 
workmanship to Bezalel, a Calebite (Ex. xxxi. 2; 1 Chron. 
ii. 19 sqq.) . The tradition in Psalms exxxii. 6 of the search for the 
ark at Jaar (Kirjath-jearim) and Ephratah is not clear; but a 
comparison with 1 Chron. ii. 50 seems to show that it recognized 
the " Calebite " origin of the ark. 

See, on this, S.A.Cook, Critical Notes on 0. T. History (Index s.v.), 
and, for other views, Kosters, Theol. Tijd. xxvii. 361 sqq. ; Cheyne, 
Encyc. Bib. " Ark "; G. Westphal, Yahwes Wohnstdtten, pp. 55 sqq., 
85 sqq. (Giessen, 1908). 

Whether the ark originally contained some symbol of Yahweh 
or not has been the subject of much discussion. Thus, it has been 
held that it contained stone fetishes (meteoric stones and the 
like) from Yahweh's original abode on Sinai or Horeb. As the 
palladium of the Joseph tribes, it has even been suggested that 
the bones of Joseph were treasured in the ark. Others have 
regarded it as an empty portable throne, 2 or as a receptacle for 
sacred serpents (analogies in Frazer, Pausanias, iv. pp.292, 344). 
That it contained the tables of the law (Deut. x. 2 ; 1 Kings viii. 9) 
was the later Israelite view, and the subsequent development is 
illustrated in Heb. ix. 4. It is enough to decide that the ark 
represented in some way or other the presence of Yahweh and 
that the safety of his followers depended upon its security 
(analogies in Frazer, Paus. x. p. 283). The Semitic world affords 
many examples of the belief that a man's religion was part of his 
political connexion and that the change of nationality involved 

1 Cp. Rev. xi. 19, and W. R. Smith, Old Test, in Jew. Church, 
Index. For later traditional material, see Buxtorf, De Area Foederis 
(Basel, 1659). 

1 But see Budde, Expos. Times (1898), pp. 398 sqq. ; Theolog. Stud. 
u. Krit. (1906), pp. 489-507. The possibility must be conceded that 
there were several arks in the course of Hebrew history and that 
separate tribes or groups of tribes had their own sacred object. 



change of cul't. He who leaves his land to enter another, leaves his 
god and is influenced by the religion of his new home (1 Sam. 
xxvi. i9;Ruthi. i6sqq.), but strangers know not "the cult of the 
God of the land " (2 Kings xvii. 26). No nation willingly changes 
its god (Jer. ii. n), and there are means whereby the follower of- 
Yahweh may continue his worship even when outside Yahweh's 
land (2 Kings v. 17). When a people migrate they may take 
with them their god, and if they conceive him to be a spiritual 
being who cannot be represented by an image, they may desire a 
symbolical expression of or, rather, a substitute for his presence. 
Accordingly the conception of the ark must be based in the first 
instance upon the beliefs of the particular clans or tribes whose 
sacred object it was. 

See further, W. R. Smith, Religion of the Semites, p. 37 ; Schwally, 
Kriegsaltertiimer, i. p. 9; Revue biblique (1903), pp. 249 sqq. ; and on the 
ark, generally, in addition to the literature already cited, Kautzsch, 
Hastings' Diet. Bible, v. p. 628; A. R. S. Kennedy, Century Bible: 
Samuel {Appendix); E. Meyer, Die Israeliten, Index s.v. " Lade,"; 
and R. H. Kennett, Enc. of Rel. and Ethics. (S. A. C.) 

ARKANSAS, a river of the United States of America, rising 
in the mountains of central Colorado, near Leadville, in lat. 
39 20' N., long. 106 15' W., and emptying into the Mississippi, 
at Napoleon, Arkansas, in lat. 33° 40' N. Its total length is 
about 2000 m., and its drainage basin (greater than that of the 
Upper Mississippi) about 185,000 sq. m. It is the greatest 
western affluent of the Missouri-Mississippi system. It rises in a 
pocket of lofty peaks at an altitude of 10,400 ft. on a sharply 
sloping plateau, down which it courses as a mountain torrent, 
dropping 4625 ft. in 120 m. At Canyon City it passes out of the 
Rockies through the Grand Canyon of the Arkansas; then turn- 
ing eastward, and soon a turbid, shallow stream, depositing its 
mountain detritus, it flows with steadily lessening gradient and 
velocity in a broad, meandering bed across the prairies and low- 
lands of eastern Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma and Arkansas, 
shifting its direction sharply to the south-east in central Kansas. 
The Arkansas ordinarily receives little water from its tributaries 
save in time of floods. In topography and characteristics and in 
the difficulties of its regulation the Arkansas is in many ways 
typical of the rivers in the arid regions of the western states. 
The gradient below the mountains averages 7-5 ft. per mile 
between Canyon City and Wichita, Kansas (543 m.), about 1-5 ft. 
between Wichita and Little Rock (659 m.), and 0-65 of afoot from 
Little Rock to the mouth (173 m.). The shores are sand, clay or 
loam throughout some 1300 m., with very rare rock ridges or 
rapids, and the banks rise low above ordinary water. The waters 
are constantly rising and falling, and almost never is the discharge 
at any point uniform. Every year there are, normally, two 
distinct periods of high water; one an early freshet due mainly 
to the heavy winter rainfall on the lower river, when the upper 
river is still frozen hard; the other in the late spring, due to 
the setting in of rains along the upper courses also, and to the 
melting of the snow in the mountains. The lowest waters are 
from August to December. In the summer there are sometimes 
violent floods due to cloud-bursts. Everywhere along the river 
there is a never-ending variation of velocity and discharge, and 
an equally ceaseless transformation of the river's bed and 
contour. These changes become revolutionary in times of flood. 
All these characteristics are accentuated below Little Rock. The 
depth of water at this point has been known to vary from 27 ft. 
to only half -a-foot, and the discharge to fall to n 70 cub. ft. per 
second. There is often no more than 1 • 5 f t. of water, and far below 
Little Rock a depth of 3 ft. on crossings is not infrequent. In 
many places there are different channels for high and low water, 
the latter being partly filled by each freshet, and recut after 
each subsidence; and the river meanders tortuously through the 
alluvial bottom in scores of great bends, loops and cut-offs. It is 
estimated that the eating and caving of the shore below Little 
Rock averages 7-64 acres per mile every year (as against 1-99 
acres above Little Rock). By way of the White river cut-off the 
Arkansas finds an additional outlet through the valley of that 
river in times of high water, and the White, when the current 
in its natural channel is deadened by the backwaters of the 
Mississippi, finds an outlet by the same cut-off through the valley 



ARKANSAS 



55 1 



of the Arkansas. This backwater, where it meets and checks the 
current of the Arkansas, occasions the precipitation of enormous 
alluvial deposits, and vast quantities of snags. The banks 'are 
disintegrated along this part of the river and built up again on 
the opposite side to their original height in the extraordinarily 
short time of two or three years, the channel remaining all the 
while narrow. At the mouth of the White, the Arkansas and 
the Mississippi the level of recurrent floods is 6 or 8 ft. above 
the timber-bearing soil along the banks, and all along the lower 
river the country is liable to overflow; and as the land back- 
ward from the stream slopes downward from the banks heaped 
up by successive flood-deposits, each overflow creates along the 
river a fringe of swamps. These features, although exaggerated 
in the portion of the river now in question, are qualitatively 
characteristic of its entire course below the mountains. 

Up to the 30th of June 1907 the government -of the United 
States expended $2,384,557 on improvements along the Arkansas. 
Almost half of this sum was required for snagging queries
alone. There is a considerable traffic on the river within the 
borders of Arkansas in miscellaneous freights, and a slight 
passenger movement. The river is rarely navigable above Fort 
Smith, and during a considerable part of the year not above Pine 
Bluff. Steamer service is maintained the year round between 
this point and Memphis. Ordinarily there are some 400 m. of 
channel open to steamers part of the year, and in time of high 
flood considerably more. To the mouth of the Grand river 
(460 m.) the river is open about four months in a year for 
vessels of 4 ft. draft and about eight months for vessels of 2 ft. 
draft. 

Bibliography. — General descriptions of different portions of 
the river are indicated in the Index to the Reports of the Chief of 
Engineers, U. S. Army (many volumes, 1879-1900). See also 
H. Gannett, Profiles of Rivers in the U. S.(V. S. Geolog. Survey, 1 901) ; 
Greenleaf, "Western Floods," in Engin. Mag. xii. 945-958; U. S. 
Geolog. Survey, Bull. 140; I. C. Russell, Rivers of North America 
(1898); T. J. Vivian, Transportation, Rivers of the Miss. Valley 
(U. S. Census, 1890, special Rp.). 

ARKANSAS, one of the South Central states of the United 
States of America, situated between 89 40' N. and 94 42' W., 
bounded N. by Missouri, E. by the Mississippi river, separating 
it from Tennessee and Mississippi, and W. by Texas and Okla- 
homa. Its area is 53,335 sq. m., of which 810 are water surface. 

Arkansas lies in the drainage basin of the lower Mississippi, and 
has a remarkable river system. The Arkansas bisects the state 
from W. to E. ; along its valley lie the oldest and largest settle- 
ments of the state. Nine other considerable streams drain the 
state; of these, the Red, the Ouachita, the White and the St 
Francis are the most important. There are a number of swamps 
and bayous in the eastern part. 

Physical Features. — The surface of Arkansas is the most 
diversified of that of any state in the central Mississippi valley. 
It rises, sloping upward toward the N.W., from an average 
elevation of less than 300 ft. in the south-east to heights of 
2000 ft. and more in the north-western quarter. There are four 
physiographic regions: two of highlands; one of river valley 
plain separating the two highland areas; while the fourth is a 
region of hills, lowlands and scanty prairie. The last covers the 
E. half of the state, and is part of the Gulf or coastal plain 
province of the United States. If a line be drawn from the 
point where the Red river cuts the western boundary to where 
the Black cuts the northern, E: of it is the Gulf plain and W. 
of it are the highlands (over 500 ft.) and the mineral regions 
of the state. They are divided by the valley of the Arkansas 
river into two regions, which are also structurally different. 
South of the river are the Ouachita Mountains, and north of it 
are the Boston Mountains. The Ouachita Mountains are 
characterized by close folding and faulting. Their southern edge 
is covered with cretaceous deposits, and their eastern edge is 
covered as well with the tertiary deposits of the Gulf plains. The 
Arkansas valley is marked by wide and open folding. The Boston 
Mountains are substantially a continuation of the Ozark dome of 
Missouri. Their northern border is marked by an escarpment of 
500 to 700 ft. in height. The trend is from E. to W. between 



Batesville and Wagoner, Oklahoma. In structure they are 
monoclinical, their rocks — sandstones and shales — being laid 
southward and blending on that side with the Arkansas valley 
region. The entire region is very much dissected by streams, 
and the topography is characteristically of a terrace and escarp- 
ment type. In the highlands N. of the Arkansas the country 
is very irregularly broken ; S. of the river the hills lie less 
capriciously in short, high ranges, with low, fertile valleys 
between them. The Ouachitas extend 200 m., from within 
Oklahoma (near Atoka) to central Arkansas, near Little Rock. 
They are characterized by long, low ridges bearing generally 
W.-E., with wide, flat valleys. Near the western boundary 
of the state they attain a maximum altitude of 2900 ft. above the 
sea, and 2000 ft. above the valleys of the Arkansas and Red 
river; falling in elevation eastward (as westward) to 500-700 ft. 
at their eastern end. Five peaks rise above 2000 ft. Magazine 
Mountain, 2833 ft. above the sea-level and 2350 ft. above 
the surrounding country, is the highest point between the 
Alleghanies and the Rockies. Altitudes of 2250 ft. are attained 
in the Boston Mountains, which are the highest portion of the 
Ozark uplift, and the most picturesque. The streams are vigor- 
ous, and in their lower courses flow in deep-cut gorges, 500 to 
1000 ft. deep, almost deserving the name of canyons. The main 
streams are tortuous, and their dendritic tributaries have cut the 
region into ridges. The mountains do not fill the N.W. quarter 
of the state, and are separated from a lower, greatly eroded 
highland region on their N. by a bold escarpment 500 to 1000 
ft. in height. Along the upper course of the White river in the 
Bostons and in the country about Hot Springs in the Ouachitas 
is found the most beautiful scenery of the highlands; few regions 
are more beautiful. The valley region embraces the bottom-lands 
along the Mississippi, and up the Arkansas as far as Pine Bluff, 
and the cypress swamp country of the St Francis. 

Climate. — The climate of the state is " southern," owing to the 
influence of the Gulf of Mexico. The mean temperatures for the 
different seasons are normally about 41-6°, 61 -1°, 78-8° and 
61-9° F. for winter, spring, summer arid autumn respectively. 
The normal mean precipitations are about 11-7, 14-5, 10-5 and 
10.2 in. for the same seasons. The extreme range of the monthly 
isotherms crossing the state is from about 35° in winter to 8i° F. 
in summer, and the range of annual isotherms from about 54 to 
6o° F. That is, the variation of mean annual temperatures for 
different parts of the state is only 6° F. The variation of the 
mean annual temperature for the entire state is only 4 (from 
59° to 63 F.). The variation of precipitation is as great as 30 in. 
(from 34 to 64 in.) according to locality. There is little snow, no 
severe winter cold, and no summer drought. Sheltered valleys 
in the interior produce spring crops three or four weeks earlier 
than is usual in Kansas. The climate is generally healthy. 

Flora. — Arkansas lies in the humid, or Austroriparian, area of 
the Lower Austral life-zone, except the highlands of the^Ozark 
uplift and Ouachita Mountains, which belong to the humid, 
or Carolinian, area of the Upper Austral. The state possesses a 
rich fauna and flora. From an economic standpoint its forests 
deserve special mention. The forest lands of the state include 
four-fifths of its area, and three-fourths are actually covered by 
standing timber. Valuable trees are of great variety: cotton- 
wood, poplar, catalpa, red cedar, sweet-gum, birch-eye, sassafras, 
persimmon, ash, elm, sycamore, maple, a variety of pines, pecan, 
locust, dogwood, hickory, various oaks, beech, walnut and 
cypress are all abundant. There are one hundred and twenty- 
nine native species of trees. The yellow pine, the white oak 
and the cypress are the most valuable growths. The northern 
woods are mainly hard; the yellow pine is most characteristic 
of the heavy woods of the south central counties; and magnifi- 
cent cypress abounds in the north-east. Hard woods grow even 
on the alluvial lands. " The hard-wood forests of the state are 
hardly surpassed in variety and richness, and contain inestimable 
bodies of the finest oak, walnut, hickory and ash timber " (U.S. 
Census, 1870 and 1900). The growth on the alluvial bottoms 
and the lower uplands in the E. is extraordinarily vigorous. 
The leading species of the Appalachian woodland maintain their 



552 



ARKANSAS 



full vigour of growth nearer to the margin of forest growth in 
this part of the Mississippi valley than in any other part of the 
United States; and some species, such as the holly, the osage 
orange and the pecan, attain their fullest growth in Arkansas 
{Shaler). There are two Federal forest reserves (4968 sq. m.). 

Soil. — The soils of Arkansas are of peculiar variety. That of 
the highlands is mostly but a thin covering,: and their larger 
portion is relatively poorly fitted for agriculture. The uplands 
are generally fertile. Their poor soils are distinctively sandy, 
those of the lowlands clayey; but these elements are usually 
found combined in rich loams characterized by the predominance 
of one or the other constituent. Finally the alluvial bottoms are 
of wonderful richness. 

Agriculture. — This variety of soils, a considerable range of 
moderate altitudes and favourable factors of heat and moisture 
promote a rich diversity in agriculture. Arkansas is predomin- 
antly an agricultural state. The farm area of i860 was only 
28-2 % of the whole area of the state, that of 1900 (16,636,719 
acres) was 49 % ; and while only a fifth of this farm area was 
actually improved in i860, two-fifths were improved in 1900; 
thus, the part of the state's area actually cultivated approxi* 
mately quadrupled in four decades. The value of products in 
1900 ($796 millions) was 44 % of the total farm values ($181-4 
millions). The rise in average value of farm lands since 1870 has 
not been a fifth of the increase of the aggregate value of all farm 
property. 

The Civil War wrought a havoc from which a full recovery was 
hardly reached before 1 890. The economic evolution of the state 
since Reconstruction has been in the main that common to all 
the old slave states developing from the plantation system of 
ante-bellum days, somewhat diversified and complicated by the 
special features of a young and border community. The farms 
of Arkansas increased in number 357-8 %, in area 73-7 % and in 
total true (as distinguished from tax) valuation about 53-8 % 
between i860 and 1900; the decade of most extraordinary 
growth being that of 1870-1880. Thus Arkansas has shared that 
fall in the average size of farms common to all sections of the 
Union (save the north central) since 1850, but especially marked 
since the Civil War in the " Cotton States," owing to the sub- 
division of large holdings with the introduction of the tenant 
system. The rapidity of the movement has not been excep- 
tional in Arkansas, but the size of its average farm, less in 1850 
than that of the other cotton states, was in 1900, 93-1 acres 
(108-8 for white farmers alone, 49-0 for blacks alone), which was 
even less than that of the North Atlantic states (96-5 acres, the 
smallest sectional unit of the Union). The percentage of farms 
worked by owners fell from 69-1 % in 1880 to 54-6% in 1900; 
the difference of the balances or 14-5 % indicates the increase of 
tenant holdings, two-thirds of these being for shares. 

It is interesting to compare in this matter the whites and the 
negroes. In actual numbers the white farmers heavily predomin- 
ate, whether as owners, tenants for cash or tenants on shares; 
but if we look at the numbers within each race holding by these 
respective tenures (65-0, 8-7 and 26-3 % respectively for whites; 
25'6, 33-7 and 40-7 % for negroes, in 1900), we see the lesser 
independence of the negro farmer. The cotton counties, which 
are the counties of densest coloured habitancy, exemplify this 
fact with great clearness. The few negroes in the white counties 
of the uplands are much better off than those in the cotton low- 
lands; more than three times as large a part of them owners; 
the poorer element is segregated in the cotton region. In 
Arkansas, as elsewhere in the south, negro tenants, like white 
tenants, are more efficient than owners working their own lands. 
The black farmer is in bondage to cotton; for him still " Cotton 
is King." He gives it four-fifths of his land; while his white 
rival allows it only a quarter of his, less by half than the area he 
gives to live-stock, dairying, hay and grains. At Sunnyside, on the 
west bank of the Mississippi, negro tenant farmers have been 
practically forced out of business by Italians, who produced in 
1 890-1 904 more than twice as much lint cotton per working 
hand, and 70 % more per acre. The general place of the negro 
in agriculture is shown also by the fact that more than four-fifths 



of the farm acreage and farm values of the state are in the hands 
of the whites. The white farmer gives an outlay in labour and 
fertilizers on his farm greater by 61-4% than the black, gathers 
a produce greater by 22-5%, and possesses a farm of a value 
53"5% greater (Census, 1900). 

Cotton is the leading product. It absorbs about a third of the area 
under crops, and its returns ($28,000,000 in 1899) are about a half 
of the value of all crops. A part of the cotton lands of Arkansas 
are among the richest in the south. Other distinctively southern 
products (tobacco, &c.) are of no importance in Arkansas. 
Cereals are given more than twice as much acreage as cotton, 
but yield only a third as great aggregate returns, Indian corn 
being much the most remunerative; about three-fourths of the 
cereal acreage are given to its cultivation, and it ranks after 
cotton in value of harvest. 1 For all the other staple agricultural 
products of the central states the showing of Arkansas is uni- 
formly good, but not noteworthy. But its rank as a fruit- 
growing country is exceptional. Plums, prunes, peaches, pears 
and grapes are cultivated very generally over the western half of 
the state (grapes in the east also), but with greatest success in 
the south-west; apples prosper best in the north-west. Small 
berries are a very important product. All fruits are of the finest 
quality. For apples the state makes probably a finer showing 
than that of any other state except Oregon. About ninety 
varieties are habitually entered in national competitions. The 
fruit industry generally has developed with extreme rapidity. 

Manufactures. — Although Arkansas is rich in minerals and in 
forests, in 1900 only 2 % of its population were engaged in manu- 
facturing. But the development has been rapid; the value of 
products multiplied seven times, the wages paid nine, and the 
capital invested twelve, in the years 1880-1900; and the 
increase in the same categories from 1900-1905 was 35, 42-8 and 
82-4 % respectively. 2 It must be noted as characteristic of the 
state that of the total manufactures in 1905, 80-3 % were pro- 
duced in rural districts (83-7 in 1900). About two- thirds of the 
increase between 1890 and 1900 was in the lumber industry 
which was of slight importance before the former year; it repre 
sented more than half the total value of the manufactures oi the 
state in 1905 (output, 1905, $28,065,171 and of mill products 
$3>786,772 additional); in the value of lumber and timber 
products the state ranked sixth among the states of the United 
States in 1900, and seventh in 1905. After the lumber and 
timber industry ranked in 1905 the manufacture of cotton-seed 
oil and cake ($4,939,919) and flour and grist milling. Cotton 
ginning increased 739 % from 1890 to 1900. 

Minerals.— The progress of coal-mining has been a striking 
feature of the state's economy since 1880. The field extends 
from Oklahoma eastward' to central Arkansas, along both sides 
of the Arkansas river. A production of 5000 tons (short) in 
1882 became 542,000 tons in 1891 and 2,229,172 tons in 1903 — 
a maximum for the state up to 1905; in 1907 the yield was 
2,670,438 tons, valued at $4,473,693 ; the value of the product in- 
creased more than eight-fold in 1886-1900. The United States 
Geological Survey estimates that three-fourths of the coal area 
(over 1700 sq. m.) can made commercially productive. Apart 
from coal the great and varied mineral wealth of the state has 
been only slightly utilized. The great zinc and lead area along 
the northern border in the plateau portion of the Ozark region 
has proved a disappointment in development; the iron areas 
have hardly been touched, and the product of the exceptionally 
promising deposits of manganese lost ground after 1890 before 

1 For 1906 the Yearbook of the U. S. Department of Agriculture 
reported the following statistics for Arkansas: — Indian corn, 
52,802,659 bu., valued at $24,817,207; oats 3>783j7°6 bu., valued 
at $1,589,157; wheat, 1,915,250 bu., valued at $1,436,438; rice, 
131,446 bu., valued at $111,724; rye, 23,652 bu., valued at $19,631; 
potatoes, 1,666,960 bu., valued at $1,116,863; hay, 113,49! tons, 
valued at $1,123,561. 

2 The special census of the manufacturing industry for 1905 was 
concerned only with the establishment conducted under the so- 
called " factory system "; for purposes of comparison the figures 
for 1900 have been reduced to the same standard, and this fact 
should be borne in mind with regard to the percentages of increase 
given above. 



ARKANSAS 



553 



the output of Virginia and Georgia. Among the products of 
the rich stone quarries of the state, only that of abrasive stones 
is important in the markets of the Union; the novaculites of 
Arkansas are among the finest whetstones in the world. Deposits 
of true chalk are utilized in the manufacture of Portland cement 
for local markets. The chalk region lies in the S. E. part of the 
state, S. of the Ouachita Mountains. Bauxite was discovered 
in the state in 1887, and the product increased from 5045 
long tons in 1899 to 50,267 long tons in 1906, the production for 
the whole country in 1899 being 35,280 long tons and in 1906 
75,332 long tons. The only other states in which bauxite was 
produced during the period were Alabama and Georgia, which 
in this respect have greatly declined in importance relatively 
to Arkansas. Extremely valuable and varied marls, kaolins and 
clays, fuller's earth, asphaltum and mineral waters show special 
promise in the state's industry. In 1906 diamonds were found in 
a peridotite dike in Pike county 25 m. S. E. of Murfreesboro; 
this is the first place in North America where diamonds have 
been found in situ, and not in glacial deposit or in river gravel. 

Communications. — The rivers afford for light craft (of not over 
3 ft. draft) about 3000 m. of navigable waters, a river system 
unequalled in extent by that of any other state. The labours of 
the United States government have much extended and very 
greatly improved this navigation, materially lessening also the 
frequency and havoc of floods along the rich bottom-lands 
through which the rivers plough a tortuous way in the eastern 
and southern portions of the state. As a result of these improve- 
ments land and timber values have markedly risen, and great 
impetus has been given to traffic on the rivers, which carry a 
large part of the cotton, lumber, coal, stone, hay and miscel- 
laneous freights of the state. The greatest of these internal 
improvements is the St Francis levee, from New Madrid, 
Missouri, to the mouth of the St Francis, 212 m. along the 
Mississippi; an area of 3500 sq. m., of exceptional fertility, is 
here reclaimed at a cost of about $1500 per sq. m. (as compared 
with $10,000 per sq. m. for the 2500 sq. m. reclaimed by the Nile 
works at Assuan and Assiut). Whether with regard to area or 
population, Arkansas is also relatively well supplied with railways 
(4,472-8 m. at the end of 1907). A state railway commission 
controls transportation rates, which are also somewhat checked 
by the competition of river freights. There is also a considerable 
passenger traffic on the Arkansas. 

Population. — The population in 1910 was 1,574,449. The 
growth in 1880-1900 is shown by the following table: — - 



Census 
Year. 


Total 
Pop. 


%White 
Pop. 


%Negro 
Pop. 


Average 
per sq. m. 


% Increase by decades. 


Total. 


Whites. 


Negroes. 


1880 
1890 
1900 


802,525 
1,128,211 
1.31 1.564 


73-7 
72-6 
72-0 


26-3 
27-4 
28-0 


21-5 
25-0 


65-6 
40-6 
163 


63-3 
38-4 
1 5 '4 


72-4 
46-6 
187 



In 1900 the rank of the state in total population was twenty-fifth, 
and in negro population tenth. The proportion of the coloured 
element steadily rose from n % in 1820 to 28 %in 1900, at which 
time there were more than a dozen counties along the border of the 
Mississippi and- lower Arkansas in which the negroes numbered 
50 to 89 % of the total. They have never been a large element in 
the highland counties; it was these counties which were most 
strongly Unionist at the time of the Civil War, and which to-day 
are the region of diversified industry. About a ninth of the 
state's population is gathered into towns of more than 2000 
inhabitants. Fort Smith (pop. 11,587 in 1900), Little Rock, 
the state capital (38,307), and Pine Bluff (11,496) lie in the valley 
of the Arkansas. In 1900 a dozen other towns had a population 
exceeding 2500, the most important being Hot Springs (9973), 
Helena (5550), Texarkana (4914), Jonesboro (4508), Fayetteville 
(4061), Eureka Springs (3572), Mena (3423) and Paragould 
(3324). Foreign blood has only very slightly permeated the 
state; negroes and -native whites of native parents make up 
more than 95 % of its population. , Immigration is almost 
entirely from other southern states. The strongest religious 
sects are the Methodists and Baptists. 



Government. — The present constitution of the state dates from 
1874 (with amendments). Few features mark it off from the 
usual type of such documents. The governor holds office for two 
years; he has the pardoning and veto power, but his veto may 
be overridden by a simple majority in each house of the whole 
number elected to that house (a provision unusual among the 
state constitutions of the Union). There is no lieutenant- 
governor. The legislature is bicameral, senators holding office 
for four years, representatives (about thrice as numerous) for 
two. The length of the regular biennial legislative sessions is 
limited to sixty days, but by a vote of two-thirds of the members 
elected to each house the length of any session may be extended. 
Special sessions may be called by the governor. A majority of 
the members elected to each of the two houses suffices to propose 
a constitutional amendment, which the people may then accept 
by a mere majority of all votes cast at an election for the legis- 
lature (an unusually democratic provision) ; no more than three 
amendments, however, can be proposed or submitted at the same 
time. The supreme court has five members, elected by the 
people for eight years; they are re-eligible. The population of 
the state entitles it to seven representatives in the national 
House of Representatives, and to nine votes in the Electoral 
College (census of 1900). Elections of members of the state 
legislature and of Congress are not held at the same time — a very 
unusual provision. Elections are by Australian ballot; the 
constitution prescribes that no law shall " be enacted whereby 
the right to vote at any election shall be made to depend upon any 
previous registration of the elector's name " (extremely unusual). 
The qualifications for suffrage include one year's residence in the 
state, six months in the county, and one month in the voting 
district, next before election; idiots, insane persons, convicts, 
Indians not taxed, minors and women are disqualified; aliens 
who have declared their intention to become citizens of the 
United States vote on the same terms as actual citizens. An 
amendment of 1893 requires the exhibition of a poll-tax receipt 
by every voter (except those " who make satisfactory proof that 
they have attained the age of twenty-one years since the time of 
assessing taxes next preceding " the election). There is nothing 
in the constitution or laws of Arkansas with any apparent 
tendency to disfranchise the negroes; there are statutory 
provisions (1866- 186 7) against intermarriage of the races and 
constitutional and statutory (1886-1887) provisions for separate 
schools, a " Jim Crow " law (1891) requires railways to provide 
separate cars for negroes, and a law (1893) provides for separate 
railway waiting-rooms for negroes. Giving or accepting a 
challenge to a duel bars from office, but this survival of the 
ante-bellum social life is to-day only reminiscent. Declared 
atheists are similarly disqualified. There is no constitutional 
provision for a census. Marriage is pronounced a civil contract 
A law for compulsory education was passed in 1909. 

Finance. — The constitution makes 1 % on the assessed valua- 
tion of property a maximum limit of state taxation for ordinary 
expenses, but by an amendment of 1906 the legislature may levy 
three mills on the dollar per annum for common schools; and 
may " authorize school districts to levy by a vote of the qualified 
electors of such district a tax not to exceed seven mills on the 
dollar in any year for school purposes." The state debt in 1874 
was $12,108,247, of which about $9,370,000 was incurred after the 
Civil War for internal improvement schemes. This new debt was 
practically repudiated in 1875 by a decision of the supreme court, 
and completely set aside in 1884 by constitutional amendment. 
Until 1900, when an adjustment of the matter was reached, there 
was also another disputed debt to the national government, 
owing to the collapse in 1839 of a so-called Real Estate Bank of 
Arkansas, in which the state had invested more than $500,000 
paid to it by the United States in exchange for Arkansas bonds 
to be held as an investment for the Smithsonian Institution, 
on which bonds the state defaulted after 1839. If the unac- 
knowledged debt be included (as it often is; and hence the 
necessity of reference to it), very few states — and those all 
western or southern — have a heavier burden per capita. But 
the acknowledged debt was in 1907 only $1,250,500, and this is 



554 



ARKANSAS 



not a true debt, being a permanent school fund that is not to be 
paid off; of this total in 3 % bonds, $1,134,500 is held by the 
common schools and $116,000 by the state university. In net 
combined state and local debt, Arkansas ranks very low among 
the states of the Union. The hired labourer suffers from the 
" truck " system, taking his pay in board and living, in goods, in 
trade on his employer's credit at the village store; the inde- 
pendent farmer suffers in his turn from unlimited credit at the 
same store, where he secures everything on the credit of his future 
crops; and if he is reduced to borrow money, he secures it by 
vesting the title to his property temporarily in his creditor. 
His legal protections under such " title bonds " are much 
slighter than under mortgages. Homesteads belonging to the 
head of a family and containing 80 to 160 acres (according to 
value) if in the country, or a lot of j to cne acre (according to 
value), if in town, village or city, are exempt from liability for 
debts, excepting liens for purchase money, improvements or 
taxes. A married man may not sell or mortgage a homestead 
without his wife's consent. 

Education. — The legal beginnings of a public school system date 
from 1843; i n x 867 the first tax was imposed for its support. 
Only white children were regarded by the laws before Reconstruc- 
tion days. There are now separate race schools, with terms of 
equal length, and offering like facilities; the number of white 
and coloured teachers employed is approximately in the same 
proportion to the number of attending children of the respective 
races; in negro districts two out of three school directors are 
usually negroes. " The coloured race as a whole go to the 
schools as regularly and as numerously in proportion as do the 
whites " (Shinn). Of the current expenses of the common schools 
about three-fourths is borne by the localities; the state distri- 
butes its contribution annually among the counties. There is also 
a permanent school fund derived wholly from land grants from 
the national government. The total expenditure for the schools 
is creditable to the state; but before 1909 hardly half the school 
population attended; and in general the rural conditions 
of the state, the shortness of the school terms and the dependence 
of the schools primarily upon local funds and local supervision, 
make the schools of inadequate and quite varying excellence. 
The average expenditure in 1906 for tuition per child enrolled 
was $4-93, and the average length of the school term was only 
eighty-one days. In June 1906 there were 1102 school houses in 
thestatevaluedat$iooorless. In 1 905-1906 the Peabody Board 
gave $2000 to aid rural schools, and in general it has done much 
for the improvement of country public schools throughout the 
state. In 1906 an amendment to the state constitution, greatly 
increasing the tax resources available for educational work, was 
passed by a large popular vote. The University of Arkansas was 
opened at Fayetteville in 1 8 7 2 . The law and medical faculties are 
at Little Rock. A branch "normal school, established 1873-1875 
at Pine Bluff, provides for coloured students, who enjoy the same 
opportunities for work, and are accorded the same degrees, as the 
students at Fayetteville; they are about a fourth as numerous. 
In 1905-1906 there were 497 students in the college of liberal 
arts, sciences and engineering, 548 in the preparatory school 
and 26 in the conservatory of music and arts, all in Fayetteville; 
171 in the medical school and 46 in the law school in Little 
Rock; and 240 in the branch normal college at Pine Bluff. The 
university and the normal school are supported by the Morrill 
Fund and by state appropriations. The state still suffered in 
1906 from the lack of a separate and special training school for 
teachers; but in 1907 the legislature voted to establish a state 
normal school. Of the Morrill Fund (see Morrill, Justin 
Smith), three-elevenths goes to the normal school. The 
agricultural experiment station of the university dates from 
1887. The financial support of the university has been light, 
about three-fifths coming from the United States government. 
Besides the university there are about a score of denominational 
colleges or academies, of which half-a-dozen are for coloured 
students. Among the large denominational colleges are 
Philander Smith College, Little Rock (Methodist Episcopal, 
1877); Ouachita College, Arkadel;>hia (Baptist, 1886); Hcndrix 



College, Conway (Methodist Episcopal, South, 1884); and 
Arkansas College, Batesville (Presbyterian, 1872). There are few 
libraries in Arkansas. In this matter her showing has long been 
among the very poorest in the Union relatively to her population. 
Daily papers are few in number. The state charitable institu- 
tions—insane asylum, deaf-mute and blind institutes — and 
the penitentiary, are at Little Rock. 

Local government is of the ordinary southern county type, 
without noteworthy variations. Municipal corporations rest 
upon a general state law, not upon individual charters. The 
liquor question is left by the state to county (i.e. including 
" local," or town) option, and prohibition is the most common 
county law, the alternative being high-licence. 

History. — The first settlement by Europeans in Arkansas was 
made in 1686 by the French at Arkansas Post (later the residence 
of the French and Spanish governors, important as a trading post 
in the earlier days of the American occupation, and the first 
territorial capital, 1819-1820). In 1720 a grant on the Arkansas 
was made to John Law. In 1762 the territory passed to Spain, 
in 1780 back to France, and in 1803 to the United States as a 
part of the " Louisiana Purchase." Save in the beginnings of 
western frontier trade, and in a great mass of litigation left to the 
courts of later years by the curious and uncertain methods of land 
delimitation that prevailed among the French and Spanish colon- 
ists, the pre-American period of occupation has slight connexions 
with the later period, and scant historical importance. 

From 1804 to 181 2 what is now Arkansas was part of the 
district (and then the territory) of Louisiana, and from 181 2 to 
1819 of the territory of Missouri. Its earliest county organiza- 
tions date from this time. It was erected successively into a 
territory of the first and second class by acts of Congress of the 
2nd of March 1819 and the 21st of April 1820. By act of the 
15th of June 1836 it was admitted into the Union as a slave 
state. 

There is little of general interest in the history of ante-bellum 
days. Economic life centred in the slave plantation, and there 
was remarkable development up to the Civil War. The decade 
1819-1829 saw the first newspaper (1819), the beginning of steam- 
boating on Arkansas rivers, and the first weekly mail from the 
east. Trade was largely confined to the rivers and freighting for 
Sarite F6 and Salt Lake before the war, but the first railway 
entered the state in 1853. Social life was sluggish in some ways 
and wild 'in others. An unhappy propensity to duelling, the 
origin in Arkansas of the bowie-knife, — from an alleged use of 
which Arkansas received the nickname, which it has always 
retained, of the "toothpick state," — and other backwoods 
.associations gave the state a reputation which to some extent has 
survived in spite of many years of sober history. The questions 
of the conduct of territorial affairs do not seem to have been 
contested systematically on national party lines until about 1825. 
The government of Arkansas before the Civil War was always in 
the hands of a few families closely intermarried. From the 
beginning the state has been unswervingly Democratic, save in 
the Reconstruction years, though often with heavy Whig or 
Republican minorities. 

In February 1861 the people of Arkansas voted to hold a 
convention to consider the state of public affairs. The conven- 
tion assembled on the 4th of March. Secession resolutions were 
defeated, and it was voted to submit to the people the question 
whether there should be " co-operation " through the Lincoln 
government, or " secession." The plan was endorsed of holding 
a convention of all the states to settle the slavery question, and 
delegates were chosen to the proposed Border State Convention 
that was to meet at Frankfort, Kentucky, on the 27 th of May. 
Then came the fall of Fort Sumter and the proclamation of 
President Lincoln calling for troops to put down rebellion. The 
governor of Arkansas curtly refused its quota. A quick surge of 
ill-feeling, all the bitterer on account of the divided sentiments 
of the people, chilled loyalty to the Union. The convention re- 
assembled on call of the governor, and on the 6th of May, with a 
single dissentient voice, passed an ordinance of secession. It 
then repealed its former vote submitting the question of secession 



ARKANSAS 



555 



to the people. On the 16th of May Arkansas became one of the 
Confederate States of America. 

In the years of war that followed, a very large proportion 
of the able-bodied men of the state served in the armies of the 
Confederacy ; several regiments, some of coloured troops, served 
the Union. Union sentiment was strongest in the north. In 
1862-1863 various victories threw more than half the state, 
mainly the north and east, under the Federal arms. Accordingly, 
under a proclamation of the president, citizens within the 
conquered districts were authorized to renew allegiance to the 
Union, and a special election was ordered for March 1864, to 
reorganize the state government. But meanwhile, a convention 
of delegates chosen mainly at polls opened at the army posts, 
assembled in January 1864, abolished slavery, repudiated 
secession and the secession war debt, and revised in minor details 
the constitution of 1836, restricting the suffrage to whites. This 
new fundamental law was promptly adopted by the people, i.e. 
by its friends, who alone voted. But the representatives of 
Arkansas under this constitution were never admitted to Congress. 
• The Federal and Confederate forces controlled at this time 
different parts of the state; there was some ebb and flow of 
military fortune in 1864, and for a short time two rival govern- 
ments. Chaotic conditions followed the war. The fifteenth 
legislature (April 1864 to April 1865) ratified the Thirteenth 
Amendment, and passed laws against " bush- whacking," a term 
used in the Civil War for guerilla warfare, especially as carried 
on by pretended neutrals. Local militia, protecting none who 
refused to join in the common defence, and all serving " not as 
soldiers but as farmers mutually pledged to protect each other 
from the depredations of outlaws who infest the state," strove 
to secure such public order as was necessary to the gathering of 
crops, so as " to prevent the starvation of the citizens " (governor's 
circular, 1865). Strugglingin these difficulties, the government of 
the state was upset by the first Reconstruction Act. The governor 
in these years (1865-1868) was a Republican, the caster of the 
single Union vote in the convention of 1861; but the sixteenth 
legislature (1866-1867) was largely Democratic. It undertook 
to determine the rights of persons of African descent, and regret- 
table conflicts followed. The first Reconstruction Act having 
declared that " no legal state government or adequate protection 
for life or property " existed in the " rebel states," Arkansas was 
included in one of the military districts established by Congress. 
A registration of voters, predominantly whites, was at once 
carried through, and delegates were chosen for another constitu- 
tional convention, which met at Little Rock in January 1868. 
The secessionist element was voluntarily or perforce excluded. 
This convention ratified the Fourteenth Amendment, and framed 
the third constitution of the state, which was adopted by a small 
majority at a popular election, marred by various irregularities, 
in March 1868. By its provisions negroes secured full political 
rights, and all whites who had been excluded from registration for 
ihe election of delegates to the convention were now practically 
stripped of political privileges. The organization of Arkansas 
being now acceptable to Congress, a bill admitting it to the Union 
was passed over President Johnson's veto, and on the 22nd of 
June 1868 the admission was consummated. 

Arkansas now became for several years Republican, and 
suffered considerably from the rule of the " carpet-baggers." 
The debt of the state was increased about $9,375,000 from 1868 to 
1874, largely for railroad and levee schemes; much of the money 
was misappropriated, and in a case involving the payment of 
railway aid bonds the action of the legislature in pledging the 
credit of the state was held nugatory by the state supreme court 
in 1875 on the ground that, contrary to the constitution, the bond 
issue had never been referred to popular vote. An amendment 
to the constitution approved by a popular vote in 1884 provided 
that the General Assembly should " have no power to levy any 
tax, or make any appropriation, to pay " any of the bonds issued 
by legislative action in 1868, 1869 and 1871. The current expenses 
of the state in the years of Reconstruction were also enormously 
increased. The climax of the Reconstruction period was the so- 
called Baxter-Brooks war. 



Elisha Baxter (1827-1899) was the regular Republican candi- 
date for governor in 1872. He was opposed by a disaffected 
Republican faction known as " brindletails," or, as they called 
themselves, "reformers," led by Joseph Brooks (1821-1877), an d 
supported by the Democrats. Baxter was irregularly elected. 
The election was contested, and his choice was confirmed by 
the legislature, the court of last resort in such cases. He soon 
showed a willingness to rule as a non-partisan, and favoured 
the re-enfranchisement of white citizens. This would have 
put the Democrats again in power, and they rallied to Baxter, 
while the Brooks party now assumed the name of " regulars," and 
received the support of the " carpet-bag " and negro elements. 
After Baxter had been a year in office Brooks received a 
judgment of ouster against him from a state circuit judge, and 
got possession of the public buildings (April 1874). The state 
flew to arms. The legislature called for Federal intervention 
(May 1874), and Federal troops maintained neutrality while 
investigations were conducted by a committee sent out by 
Congress. As a result, President Grant pronounced for Baxter, 
and the Brooks forces disbanded. 

The chief result was another convention. In 1873 the article 
of the constitution which had disfranchised the whites was 
repealed, and the Democrats thus regained power. By an over- 
whelming majority the people now voted for another convention, 
which (July to October 1874) framed the present constitution. 
It removed all disfranchisement, and embraced equitable amnesty 
and exemption features. It also took away all patronage from 
the governor, reduced his term to two years, forbade him to 
proclaim martial law or suspend the writ of habeas corpus, and 
abolished all registration laws: all these provisions being reflec- 
tions of Reconstruction struggles. The people ratified the new 
constitution on the 13th of October 1874. After Reconstruc- 
tion the state again became Democratic, and the main interest 
of its history has been the progress of economic development. 

The following is a list of the territorial and state governors of 
Arkansas : — 

Territorial. 
James Miller 1 . . . . . . 1819-1825 

George Izard 1825-1828 

John Pope 2 1829-1835 

William S. Fulton 1835-1836 

Stale. 

James S. Conway 1836-1840 Democrat 

Archibald Yell 3 1840-1844 

Thomas S. Drew 4 1844-1849 „ 

John S. Roane 1849-1852 ,, 

Elias N. Conway .... 1852-1860 ,, 

Henry M. Rector 5 . . . . . 1860-1862 „ 

Harris Flannigan 6 .... 1862-1865 ,, 

Isaac Murphy 7 1864-1868 Republican 

C. H. Smith 8 1867-1868 

Powell Clayton 1868-187 1 „ 

Ozra A. Hadley 9 1871-1873 

Elisha Baxter 1873-1874 ,, 

August H. Garland .... 1874-1877 Democrat 

William R. Miller 1877-1881 

Thomas J. Churchill .... 1881-1883 „ 

James H. Berry 1883-1885 „ 

Simon P. Hughes 1885-1889 „ 

James P. Eagle 1889-1893 „ 

1 During this period Robert Crittenden, the secretary of the 
territory, was frequently the acting governor. 

2 Robert Crittenden was acting governor in 1828-1829. 

3 Samuel Adams was acting governor from the 29th of April to 
the 9th of November 1844. 

4 R. C. Byrd was acting governor from the nth of January to 
the 19th of April 1849. 

5 Thomas Fletcher was acting governor from the 4th to the 15th 
of November 1862. 

8 Confederate governor. 

7 Union governor. 

8 United States military (sub) governor. 

9 Acting governor. 



55& 



ARKANSAS CITY— ARKWRIGHT 





State- 


-continued. 




William M. Fishback 




. 1803-1805 


Democrat 


James P. Clarke . 




. 1895-1897 


?j 


Daniel W. Jones . 




. 1897-1901 


>> 


Jefferson Davis 




. 1901-1907 


J? 


John S. Little 




1907-1908 


?j 


X. O. Pindall, Acting 


Gov. . 


. 1908 


ty 


George W. Donaghey 




. 1909 


>i ■ 



Bibliography. — Information regarding the resources, climate, 
population and industries of Arkansas should be sought in the 
volumes of the United States Census, United States Department of 
Agriculture and the United States Geological Survey (for the last 
two there are various bibliographical guides) ; consult also the 
publications of the Arkansas (Agricultural) Experiment Station (at 
Fayetteville), the reports of the state horticulturist, the biennial 
reports of the state treasurer, of the auditor, arid of the Bureau of 
Mines, Manufactures and Agriculture (all published at Little Rock). 

The constitutional documents may best be consulted in the 
latest compiled Statutes of the state. See also J. H. Shinn, Education 
in Arkansas (U.S. Bur. of Education, 1900) ; W. F. Pope, Early Days 
in Arkansas (Little Rock, 1895); and F. Hempstead, Pictorial 
History of Arkansas (St Louis, 1890). Similar to the last in popular 
character, vast in bulk and loose in method, are a series of Bio- 
graphical and Pictorial Histories, covering the different sections of the 
state (1 vol. by J. Hallum, Albany, 1887; four others compiled 
anonymously, Chicago, 1889-1891). For the Reconstruction period 
see especially the Poland Report in House Rp. No. 2, 43 Cong. 2 
Sess., vol. i. (1874), and John M. Harrell's The Brooks and Baxter 
War: A History of the Reconstruction Period in Arkansas (St Louis, 
Missouri, 1893), which is frankly in favour of Baxter; also a paper by 
B. S. Johnson in vol. ii. (1908) of the Publications of the Arkansas 
Historical Association. 

ARKANSAS CITY, a city of Cowley county, Kansas, U.S.A., 
situated near the S. boundary of the state, in the fork of the 
Arkansas and Walnut rivers. Pop. (1890) 8347; (1900) 6140, 
of whom 302 were negroes; (1905) 7634; (1910) 7508. The city 
is served by the Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe, the Missouri 
Pacific, the St Louis & San Francisco, the Midland Valley and 
the Kansas South-Western railways. To the south is the Chilocco 
Indian school (in Key county, Oklahoma), established by the U.S. 
government in 1884. A canal joining the Arkansas and Walnut 
ri versf urnishes good water power. The manufactories include flour 
mills, packing establishments, a creamery and a paint factory. 
The city is situated in the midst of a rich agricultural region and 
is a supply centre for southern Kansas and Oklahoma, with large 
jobbing interests. The municipality owns and operates the water- 
works. Arkansas City, first known as Creswell, was settled in 
1870, was chartered as a city under its present name in 1872 
and was rechartered in 1880. 

ARKLOW, a seaport and market town of Co. Wicklow, Ireland, 
in the east parliamentary division, 49 m. S. of Dublin, by the 
Dublin & South-Eastern railway. Pop. (1901) 4944. Sea- 
fisheries are prosecuted, and there are oyster-beds on the coast, 
but the produce requires to be freed from a peculiar flavour by the 
purer waters of the Welsh and English coast before it is fit for 
food. The produce of the copper and lead mines of the Vale of 
Avoca is shipped from the port. There are cordite and explosives 
works, established by Messrs Kynoch of Birmingham, England. 
In 1882 an act was passed providing for the improvement of 
the harbour and for the appointment of harbour commissioners. 
The town hall and the Protestant church (1899) were gifts of the 
earl of Carysfort, in whose property the town is situated. There 
are slight ruins of an ancient castle of the Ormondes, demolished in 
1649 by Cromwell. On the 9th of June 1798 the Irish insurgents, 
attacking the town, were defeated by the royal troops near Arklow 
Bridge, and their leader, Father Michael Murphy, was killed. 

ARKWRIGHT, SIR RICHARD (1732-1792), English inventor, 
was born at Preston in Lancashire, on the 23rd of December 1732, 
of parents in humble circumstances. He was the youngest of 
thirteen children, and received but a very indifferent education. 
After serving his apprenticeship in his native town, he established 
himself as a barber at Bolton about 1750, and later amassed a 
little property from dealing in human hair and dyeing it by a 
process of his own. This business he gave up about 1767 in order 
to devote himself to the construction of the spinning frame. The 
spinning jenny, which was patented by James Hargreaves 
(d. 1778), a carpenter of Blackburn, Lancashire, in 1770, though 



he had invented it some years earlier, gave the means of spinning 
twenty or thirty threads at once with no more labour than had 
previously been required to spin a single thread. The thread 
spun by the jenny could not, however, be used except as weft, 
being destitute of the firmness or hardness required in the 
longitudinal threads or warp. Arkwright supplied this deficiency 
by the invention of the spinning-frame, which spins a vast number 
of threads of any degree of fineness and hardness. 

The precise date of the invention is not known; but in 1767 he 
employed John Kay, a watchmaker at Warrington, to assist him 
in the preparation of the parts of his machine, and he took out a 
patent for it in 1769. The first model was set up in the parlour 
of the house belonging to the free grammar school at Preston. 
This invention having been brought to a fairly advanced stage, 
he removed to Nottingham in 1768, accompanied by Kay and 
John Smalley of Preston, and there erected his first spinning 
mill, which was worked by horses. But his queries were at
first greatly fettered by want of capital, until Jedediah Strutt 
(q.v.) , having satisfied himself of the value of the machines, entered 
with his partner, Samuel Need, into partnership with him, and 
enabled him in 1771 to build a second factory, on a much larger 
scale, at Cromford in Derbyshire, the machinery of which was 
turned by a water-wheel. A fresh patent, taken out in 1775, 
covered several additional improvements in the processes of 
carding, roving and spinning. As the value of his processes 
became known, he began to be troubled with infringements of his 
patents, and in 1 781 he took action in the courts to vindicate his 
rights. In the first case, against Colonel Mordaunt, who was 
supported by a combination of manufacturers, the decision was 
unfavourable to him, on the sole ground that the description of 
the machinery in the specification was obscure and indistinct. In 
consequence he prepared a " case," which he at one time intended 
to lay before parliament, as the foundation of an application for 
an act for relief. But this intention was subsequently abandoned ; 
and in a new trial (Arkwright v. Nightingale) in February 1785, 
the presiding judge having expressed himself favourably with 
respect to the sufficiency of the specification, a verdict was given 
for Arkwright. On this, as on the former trial, nothing was 
stated against the originality of the invention. 

In consequence of these conflicting verdicts, the whole matter 
was brought, by a writ of scire facias, before the court of King's 
Bench, to have the validity of the patent finally settled, and it 
was not till this third trial, which took place in June 1785, that 
Arkwright's claim to the inventions which formed the subject 
of the patent was disputed. To support this new allegation, 
Arkwright's opponents brought forward, for the first time, 
Thomas Highs, or Hayes, a reed-maker at Bolton, who stated 
that he had invented a machine for spinning by rollers previously 
to 1768, and that he had employed the watchmaker Kay to make 
a model of that machine. Kay himself was produced to prove 
that he had communicated that model to Arkwright, and that 
this was the real source of all his pretended inventions. Having 
no idea that any attempt was to be made to overturn the patent 
on this new ground, Arkwright's counsel were not prepared with 
evidence to repel this statement, and the verdict went against 
him. On a motion for a new trial on the 10th of November of 
the same year it was stated that he was furnished'with affidavits 
contradicting the evidence that had been given by Kay and 
others with respect to the originality of the invention; but the 
court refused to grant a new trial, on the ground that, what- 
ever might be the fact as to the question of originality, the 
deficiency in the specification was enough to sustain the verdict, 
and the cancellation of the patents was ordered a few days 
afterwards. His fortunes, however, were not thereby seriously 
affected, for by this time his business capacity and organizing 
skill had enabled him to consolidate his position, in spite of the 
difficulties he had encountered not only from rival manufacturers 
but also from the working classes, who in 1779 displayed their 
antipathy to labour-saving appliances by destroying a large mill 
he had erected near Chorley. 

Though a man of great personal strength, Arkwright never 
enjoyed good health, and throughout his career of invention and 



ARLES 



557 



discovery he laboured under a severe asthmatic affection. A 
complication of disorders at length terminated his. life on the 3Td 
or August 1792, at his works at Gromford. He was knighted in 
1786 when he presented a congratulatory address from the 
wapentake of Wirksworth to George III., on his escape from the 
attempt on his life by Margaret Nicholson. 

ARLES, a town of south-eastern France, capital of an arron- 
dissement in the department of Bouches-du-Rh6ne, 54 m. N.W. 
of Marseilles by rail. Pop. (1906) 16,191. A canal unites Aries 
with the harbour of Bouc on the Mediterranean. Aries stands on 
the left bank of the Rhone, just below the point at which the river 
divides to form its delta. A tubular bridge unites it with the 
suburb of Trinquetaille on the opposite bank. The town is 
hemmed in on the east by the railway line from Lyons to 
Marseilles, on the south by the Canal de Craponne. Its streets 
are narrow and irregular, and, away from the promenades which 
border it on the south, there is little animation. In the centre 
of the town stand the Place de la Republique, a spacious square 
overlooked by the hotel de ville, the museum, and the old 
cathedral of St Trophime, the finest Romanesque church in 
Provence. Founded in the 7th century, St Trophime has been 
several times rebuilt, and was restored in 1870. Its chief portal, 
which dates from the 12 th century, is a masterpiece of graceful 
arrangement and rich carving. The interior, plain in itself, 
contains interesting sculpture. The choir opens into a beautiful 
cloister, the massive vaulting of which is supported on heavy 
piers adorned with statuary, between which intervene slender 
columns arranged in pairs and surmounted by delicately carved 
capitals. Two of the galleries are Romanesque, while two 
are Gothic. Aries has two other churches of the Romanesque 
period, and others of later date. The hotel de ville, a building 
of the 17th century, contains the library. Its clock tower, sur- 
mounted by a statue of Mars, dates from the previous century. 
The museum, occupying an old Gothic church, is particularly 
rich in Roman remains and in early Christian sarcophagi; there 
is also a museum of Provengal curiosities. The tribunal of 
commerce and the communal college are the chief public institu- 
tions. Aries is not a busy town and its port is of little importance. 
There are, however, flour mills, oil and soap works, and the 
Paris-Lyon-Mediterranee Railway Company have large work- 
shops. Sheep-breeding is a considerable industry in the vicinity. 
The women of Aries have long enjoyed a reputation for marked 
beauty, but the distinctive type is fast disappearing owing to their 
intermarriage with strangers who have immigrated to the town. 

Aries still possesses many monuments of Roman architecture 
and art, the most remarkable being the ruins of an amphitheatre 
(the Arenes). capable of containing 25,000 spectators, which, in 
the nth and 12th centuries, was flanked with massive towers, 
of which three are still standing. There are also a theatre, in 
which, besides the famous Venus of Aries, discovered in 1651, 
many other remains have been found; an ancient obelisk of 
a single block, 47 ft. high, standing since 1676 in the Place de 
la Republique; the ruins of the palace of Constantine, the 
forum, the thermae and the remains of the Roman ramparts 
and of aqueducts. There is, besides, a Roman cemetery known 
as the Aliscamps (Ely six Campi), consisting of a short avenue 
once bordered by tombs, of which a few still remain. 

The ancient town, A relate, was an important place at the 
time of the invasion of Julius Caesar, who made it a settlement 
for his veterans. It was pillaged in a.d. 270, but restored and 
embellished by Constantine, who made it his principal residence, 
and founded what is now the suburb of Trinquetaille. Under 
Honorius, it became the seat of the prefecture of the Gauls and 
one of the foremost cities in the western empire. Its bishopric 
founded by St Trophimus in the 1st century, was in the 
5th century the primatial see of Gaul; it was suppressed in 
1790. After the fall of the Roman empire the city passed into 
the power of the Visigoths, and rapidly declined. It was 
plundered in 730 by the Saracens, but in the 10th century became 
the capital of the kingdom of Aries (see below). In the 12th 
century it was a free city, governed by a podesta and consuls 
after the model of the Italian republics, which it also emulated in I 



commerce and navigation. In 1 251 it submitted to Charles I. 
of Anjou, and from that time onwards followed the fortunes of 
Provence. A number of ecclesiastical synods have been held at 
Aries, as in 314 (see below), 354, 452 and 475. 

See V. Clair, Monuments d' Aries (1837) ; J. J. Estrangin, Description 
de la ville d' Aries (1845) ;- : E. Beissier, Le Pays a" Aries (1889) ; Roger 
Peyre, Nimes, Aries, Orange (1903). (R. Tr.) 

Synod of Aries (3 14) . — As negotiations held at Rome in October 
313 had failed to settle the dispute between the Catholics and the 
Donatists, the emperor Constantine summoned the first general 
council of his western half of the empire to meet at Aries by the 
1 st of August following. The attempt of Seeck to date the synod 
316 presupposes that the emperor was present in person, which is 
highly improbable. Thirty-three bishops are included in the most 
authentic list of signatures, among them three from Britain, — 
York, London and " Colonia Londinensium " (probably a corrup- 
tion of Lindensium, Ot Lincoln, rather than of Legionensium or 
Caerleon-On-Usk). The twenty^ two canons deal chiefly with the 
discipline of clergy and people. Husbands of adulterous wives are 
advised not to remarry during the lifetime of the guilty party. 
Reiteration of baptism in the name of the Trinity is forbidden. 
For the consecration of a bishop at least three bishops are 
required. It is noteworthy that British representatives assented 
to Canon I., providing that Easter be everywhere celebrated 
on the same day: the later divergence between Rome and the 
Celtic church is due to improvements in the supputatio Romana 
adopted at Rome in 343 and subsequently. 

For the canons see Mansi ii. 471 ff. ; Bruns ii. 107 ff. ; Lauchert 
26 ff. See also W. Smith and S. Cheetham, Dictionary oj Christian 
Antiquities (Boston, 1875), ■• H 1 ff- (contains also notices of later 
synods at Aries); W. Bright, Chapters of Early English Church 
History (2nd edition, Oxford, 1888), 9 f. ; Herzog-Hauck, Realency- 
klopadie (3rd edition), ii- 59, x. 238 ff. ; W. Moller, Kirchengeschichte 
(2nd edition by H. von Schubert, Tubingen, 1902), i. 417. For full 
titles see Council. (w. W. R.*) 

ARLES, kingdom or, the name given to the kingdom formed 
about 933 by the union of the old kingdoms of Provence (q.v) 
or Cisjurane Burgundy, and Burgundy (q.v.) Transjurane, and 
bequeathed in 1032 by its last sovereign, Rudolph III., to the 
emperor Conrad IL ; It comprised the countship of Burgundy 
(Franche-Comte), part of which is now Switzerland (the dioceses 
of Geneva, Lausanne, Sion and part of that of Basel), the 
Lyonnais, and. the whole of the territory bounded by the Alps, 
the Mediterranean and the Rhone; on the right bank of the 
Rhone it further included the Vivarais. It is only after the end 
of the 12th century that the name " kingdom of Aries" is applied 
to this district; formerly it was known generally as the kingdom 
of Burgundy, but under the Empire the name of Burgundy came 
to be limited more and more to the countship of Burgundy, and 
the districts lying beyond the Jura. The authority of Rudolph 
III. over the chief lords of the land, the count of Burgundy and 
the count of Maurienne, founder of the house of Savoy, was 
already merely nominal, and the Franconian emperors (1039- 
1 1 2 5) , whose visits to the country were rare and of short duration, 
did not establish their power any more firmly. During the first 
fifty years of their domination they could rely on the support of 
the ecclesiastical feudatories, who generally favoured their cause, 
but the investiture struggle, in which the prelates of the kingdom 
of Aries mostly sided with the pope, deprived the Germanic 
sovereigns even of this support. The emperors, on the other 
hand, realized early that their absence from the country was a 
grave source of weakness; in 1043 Henry III. conferred on 
Rudolph, count of Rheinfelden (afterwards duke of Swabia), the 
title of dux et rector Burgundiae, giving him authority over the 
barons of the northern part of the kingdom of Aries. Towards 
the middle of the 12th century Lothair II. revived this system, 
conferring the rectorate on Conrad of Zahringen, in whose family 
it remained hereditary up to the death of the last representative 
of the house, ; Berthold V., in 1218; and it was the lords of 
Zahringen who were foremost in defending the cause of the 
Empire against its chief adversaries, the counts of Burgundy. 
In the time of the Swabian emperors, the Germanic sovereignty 
in the kingdom of Aries was again, during almost the whole period, 



55» 



ARLINGTON 



merely nominal, and it was only in consequence of fortuitous 
circumstances that certain of the heads of the Empire were able 
to exercise a real authority in these parts. Frederick I., by his 
marriage with Beatrix (1156), had become uncontested master 
of the countship of Burgundy; Frederick II., who was more 
powerful in Italy than his predecessors had been, and was extend- 
ing his activities into the countries of the Levant, found Provence 
more accessible to his influence, thanks to the commercial 
relations existing between the great cities of this country and 
Italy and the East. Moreover, the heretics and enemies of the 
church, who were numerous in the south, upheld the emperor in 
his struggle against the pope. Henry VII. also, thanks to his 
good relations with the princes of Savoy, succeeded in exercising 
a certain influence over a part of the kingdom of Aries. The 
emperors further tried to make their power more effective by 
delegating it, first to a viceroy, William of Baux, prince of 
Orange (12 15), then to an imperial vicar, William of Montferrat 
(1220), who was succeeded by Henry of Revello and William of 
Manupello. In spite of this, the history of the kingdom of Aries 
in the 13th century, and still more in the 14th, is distinguished 
particularly by the decline of the imperial authority and the 
progress of French influence in the country. In 1246 the 
marriage of Charles, the brother of Saint Louis, with Beatrice, 
the heiress to the countship of Provence, caused Provence to pass 
into the hands of the house of Anjou, and many plans were made 
to win the whole of the kingdom for a prince of this house. At 
the beginning of the 14th century the bishops of Lyons and 
Viviers recognized the suzerainty of the king of France, and in 
1343 Humbert II., dauphin of Viennois, made a compact with 
the French king Philip VI. that on his death his inheritance 
should pass to a son or a grandson of the French king. Humbert, 
who was perhaps the most powerful noble in Aries, was induced 
to take this step as he had just lost his only son, and Philip had 
already cast covetous eyes on his lands. Then in 1349, being in 
want of money, he agreed to sell his possessions outright, and thus 
Viennois, or Dauphine, passed into the hands of Philip's grand- 
son, afterwards King Charles V. The emperor Charles IV. took 
an active part in the affairs of the kingdom, but without any con- 
sistent policy, and in 1378 he, in turn, ceded the imperial vicariate 
of the kingdom to the dauphin, afterwards King Charles VI. 
This date may be taken as marking the end of the history of the 
kingdom of Aries, considered as an independent territorial area. 

See the monumental work of P. Fournier, Le Royqume d' Aries et de 
Vienne (Paris, 1890); Leroux, Recherches critiques sur les relations 
politiques cfe la France avec I'Allemagne de 1292 d. 1378 (Paris, 1882). 
For the early history of the kingdom, L. Jacob, Le Royaume de Bour- 
gogne sous les empereurs franconiens (1038-1129), (Paris, 1906). The 
question of the nature and extent of the rights of the Empire over the 
kingdom of Aries has given rise, ever since the 1 6th century, to 
numerous juridical polemics; the chief dissertations published on 
this subject are indicated in A. Leroux, Bibliographic Acs conflits 
entre la France et VEmpire (Paris, 1902). (R. Po.) 

ARLINGTON, HENRY BENNET, Earl or (1618-1685), 
English statesman, son of Sir John Bennet of Dawley, Middlesex, 
and of Dorothy Crofts, was baptized at Little Saxham, Suffolk, 
in 1618, and was educated at Westminster school and Christ 
Church, Oxford. He gained some distinction as a scholar and a 
poet, and was originally destined for holy orders. In 1643 he 
was secretary to Lord Digby at Oxford, and was employed as 
a messenger between the queen and Ormonde in Ireland. Subse- 
quently he took up arms for the king, and received a wound in the 
skirmish at Andover in 1644, the scar of which remained on his 
face through life. 1 And after the defeat of the royal cause he 
travelled m France and Italy, joined the exiled royal- family in 
1650, and in 1654 became official secretary to James on Charles's 
recommendation, who had already been attracted by his 
"pleasant and agreeable humour." 2 In March 1657 he was 
knighted, and the same year was sent as Charles's agent to Madrid, 
where he remained, endeavouring to obtain assistance for the 
royal cause, till after the Restoration. On his return to England 
in 1 661 he was made keeper of the privy purse, and became the 

• See his portrait in the earl of Arlington's Letters to Sir W. 
Temple, by Tho. Babington (1701). 

1 Clarendon's Life and Continuation, 397. 



prime favourite. One of his duties was the procuring and 
management of the royal mistresses, in which his success gained 
him great credit. Allying himself with Lady Castlemaine, he 
encouraged Charles's increasing dis]ike to Clarendon; and he 
was made secretary of state in October 1662 in spite of the opposi- 
tion of Clarendon, who had to find him a seat in parliament. He 
represented Callington from 1661 till 1665, but appears never 
to have taken part in debate. He served subsequently on the 
committees for explaining the Irish Act of Settlement and for 
Tangiers. In 1663 he obtained a peerage as Baron Arlington of 
Arlington, or Harlington, in Middlesex, and in 1667 was appointed 
one of the postmasters-general. The control of foreign affairs was 
entrusted to him, and he was chiefly responsible for the attack 
on the Smyrna fleet and for the first Dutch War. In 1665 he 
advised Charles to grant liberty of conscience, but this was merely 
a concession to gain money during the war; and he showed great 
activity later in oppressing the nonconformists. On the death of 
Southampton, whose administration he had attacked, his great 
ambition, the treasurership, was not satisfied; and on the fall of 
Clarendon, against whom he had intrigued, he did not, though 
becoming a member of the Cabal ministry, obtain the supreme 
influence which he had expected; for Buckingham first snared, 
and soon surpassed him, in the royal favour. With Buckingham 
a sharp rivalry sprang up, and they only combined forces when 
endeavouring to bring about some evil measure, such as the ruin 
of the great Ormonde, who was an opponent of their policy and 
their schemes. Another object of jealousy to Arlington was Sir 
William Temple, who achieved a great popular success in 1668 
by the conclusion of the Triple Alliance; Arlington endeavoured 
to procure his removal to Madrid, and entered with alacrity into 
Charles's plans for destroying the whole policy embodied in the 
treaty, and for making terms with France. He refused a bribe 
from Louis XIV., but allowed his wife to accept a gift of 10,000 
crowns 3 ; in 1670 he was the only minister besides the Roman 
Catholic Clifford to whom the first secret treaty of Dover (May 
1670), one clause of which provided for Charles's declaration of 
his conversion to Romanism, was confided (see Charles II.); 
and he was the chief actor in the deception practised upon the rest 
of the council. 4 He supported several other pernicious measures 
— the scheme for rendering the king's power absolute by force of 
arms; the " stop of the exchequer," involving a repudiation of 
the state debt in 1672; and the declaration of indulgence the 
same year, " that we might keep all quiet at home whilst we are 
busy abroad." 5 On the 22nd of April 1672 he was created an 
earl, and on the 15th of June obtained the Garter; the same 
month he proceeded with Buckingham on a mission, first to 
William at the Hague, and afterwards to Louis at Utrecht, 
endeavouring to force upon the Dutch terms of peace which were 
indignantly refused. But Arlington's support of the court policy 
was entirely subordinate to personal interests; and after the 
appointment of Clifford in November 1672 to the treasurership, 
his jealousy and mortification, together with his alarm at the 
violent opposition aroused in parliament, caused him to veer 
over to the other side. He advised Charles in March 1673 to 
submit the legality of the declaration of indulgence to the House 
of Lords, and supported the Test Act of the same year, which 
compelled Clifford to resign. He joined the Dutch party, and in 
order to make his peace with his new allies, disclosed the secret 
treaty of Dover to the staunch Protestants Ormonde and 
Shaftesbury. 6 Arlington had, however, lost the confidence of all 
parties, and these efforts to procure support met with little 
success. On the 15th of January 1674 he was impeached by the 
Commons, the specific charges being "popery," corruption and 
the betrayal of his trust — Buckingham in his own defence having 
accused him the day before of being the chief instigator of the 
French and anti-Protestant policy, of the scheme of governing by 

3 Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, by Sir John Dalrymple 
(1790), i. 125. 

4 Ibid. 114 et seq. 

5 Arlington to Sir B. Gascoyn, in J. T. Brown's Miscellanea Aulica 
(1702), 66. 

6 On the authority of Colbert, 20th November 1673 ; Dalrymple's 
Memoirs, i. 131. 



ARLINGTON— ARM 



559 



the army, of responsibility for the Dutch War, and of embezzle- 
ment. But the motion for his removal, owing chiefly to the 
influence of his brother-in-law, the popular Lord Ossory, was 
rejected by 166 votes to 127. His escape could not, however, 
prevent his fall, and he resigned the secretaryship on the nth of 
September 1674, being appointed lord chamberlain instead. 
In 1675 he made another attempt to gain favour with the parlia- 
ment by supporting measures against France and against the 
Roman Catholics, and by joining in the pressure put upon Charles 
to remove James from the court. In November he went on a 
mission to the Hague, with the popular objects of effecting a 
peace and of concluding an alliance with William and James's 
daughter Mary. In this he entirely failed, and he returned home 
completely discredited. He had again been disappointed of the 
treasurership when Danby succeeded Clifford; Charles having 
declared " that he had too much kindness for him to let him have 
it, for he was not fit for the office." 1 His intrigues with dis- 
contented persons in parliament to stir up an opposition to his 
successful rival came to nothing. From this time, though 
lingering on at court, he possessed no influence, and was treated 
with scanty respect. It was safe to ridicule his person and 
behaviour, and it became a common jest for ' ' some courtier to put 
a black patch upon his nose and strut about with a white staff in 
his hand in order to make the king merry at his expense." 2 He 
was appointed a commissioner of the treasury in March 1679, 
was included in Sir William Temple's new modelled council the 
same year, and was a member of the inner cabinet which was 
almost immediately formed. In 1681 he was made lord lieutenant 
of Suffolk. He died on the 28th of July 1685, and was buried at 
Euston, where he had bought a large estate and had carried out 
extensive building queries. His residence in London wasGoring
House, on the site of which was built the present Arlington Street. 

Arlington was a typical statesman of the Restoration, possess- 
ing outwardly an' attractive personality, and according to Sir 
W. Temple " the greatest skill of court and the best turns of art 
in particular conversation," 3 but thoroughly unscrupulous and 
self-seeking, without a spark of patriotism, faithless even to a 
bad cause, and regarding public office solely as a means of 
procuring pleasure and profit. His knowledge of foreign affairs 
and of foreign languages, gained during his residence abroad, 
was considerable, but long absence from England had also taught 
him a cosmopolitan indifference to constitutions and religions, 
and a careless disregard for English public opinion and the 
essential interests of the country. According to Clarendon, he 
" knew no more of the constitution and laws of England than he 
did of China, nor had he in truth a care or tenderness for church 
or state, but believed France was the best pattern in the world." 4 
He was one of the chief promoters of the attempt to reintroduce 
into England arbitrary government after the French model, not 
because he imagined an absolute monarchy essential to the well- 
being and security of the state, but because undersuch an adminis- 
tration the favourites of a king enjoyed far greater privileges and 
profits than under a constitutional government. Of the same 
egotistical character was his religion, towards which his atti- 
tude was similar to that of Charles II. himself. He was credited 
with having inclined the king towards Romanism. Before the 
Restoration he had attended mass with the king abroad, and in 
opposition to Lord Bristol had urged Charles to declare publicly 
his conversion in order to obtain the long-expected succour from 
the foreign powers. But his religion sat lightly upon him as it 
did upon his master, and it was often convenient to disguise it. 
Like the king he continued to profess and practise Protestantism, 
and spent large sums in restoring the church at Euston; and, 
unlike Clifford, he took the Test in 1673 and remained in office, 
successfully concealing his faith till on his deathbed, when he 
declared himself an adherent of Roman Catholicism. 5 

1 James's statement in Macpherson's Orig. Pap. i. 67. 

s Eachard's History of England (1720), 911. 

3 Memoirs of W. Temple, ed. by T. P. Courtenay, ii. 27. 

4 Life and Con. 404. 

5 Cf. North's Examen, 26; Dalrymple's Mem. (1790) i. 40; 
Pepys's Diary (Feb. 17, 1663); Cal. of Clarendon St. Pap. iii. 295; 
T. Carte's Life of ike Duke of Ormonde (1851), iv. 109. 



He married Isabella of Beerwaert, daughter of Louis of Nassau, 
by whom he had one daughter, Isabella, who married Henry, 
duke of Grafton, the natural son of Charles II. and Lady 
Castlemaine. 

Authorities. — In addition to those mentioned above, see Bio- 
graphia Britannica (Kippis), accurate and careful, but too partial, 
and written without complete knowledge of Arlington's career; 
Wood's Fasti Oxonienses (Bliss), ii. 274; Hist, of Great Britain by 
J. Macpherson (1776), i. 132-133; Lauderdale Papers (Camden Soc. 
N.S., vols. 34, 36, 38), and MSS. in Brit. Mus. ; Original Letters of 
Sir R. Fanshaw (1724); Letters from the Secretaries of Stale to Francis 
Parry (1817); Add. MSS. Brit. Mus. indexes; Cal. of State Pap. 
Dom., and Hist. MSS. Comm. — MSS. of Marquis of Ormonde, and 
Duke of Buccleugh at Montagu House, ii. 49. (P. C. Y.) 

ARLINGTON, a township of Middlesex county in E. Massa- 
chusetts, U.S.A. Pop. (1890) 5629; (1900) 8603, of whom 
2387 were foreign-born; (1910 census) 11,187 Area, 5! sq. m. 
It is served by the Boston & Maine railway. It has pleasant 
residential villages (Arlington, Arlington Heights, &c.) with 
attractive environs, and there is an excellent public library (the 
Robbins library). At Arlington Heights there are several well- 
known sanatoriums. Spy Pond (about 100 acres) is one of the 
prettiest bodies of water in the vicinity of Boston. Arlington is 
an important centre for market-gardening (in hot-houses), and 
along Mill Brook, in the township, are several factories, including 
chrome works, a large mill and a manufactory of pianoforte 
cases. In 1762 Arlington was made a " precinct " of Cambridge 
(of which it was a part from 1635 to 1807) under the name of 
Menotomy. In 1807 it became a separate township under the 
name (retained until 1867) of West Cambridge. 

See B. and W. R. Cutter,Historyofthe Town of Arlington . . .1637- 
1879 (Boston, 1880); and C. S. Parker, The Town of Arlington, Past 
and Present (Arlington, 1907). 

ARLON, the chief town of the Belgian province of Luxemburg, 
situated on a hill about 1240 ft. above the sea. Pop. (1904) 
10,894. It is a very ancient town, and in the time of the Romans 
was called Orolaunum, being a station on the Antoninian way 
connecting Reims and Treves. Authorities dispute as to the 
origin of the name, some tracing it to Ara Lunae, a temple of 
Diana having been erected here, while others more plausibly 
derive it from the Celtic words ar (mount) and lun (wooded). 
Nowadays the woods have disappeared, and Arlon is chiefly 
notable for the extensive views obtainable from the church of St 
Donat which crowns the peak. Arlon is no longer fortified. 
When Vauban by order of Louis XIV. turned it into a fortress 
in 1671 great damage was done to the old Roman wall, the foun- 
dations of which were practically intact. In the local museum 
are many Roman antiquities collected on the spot, including 
several large sculptural stones similar to the celebrated monument 
at Igel near Treves. In the middle ages Arlon was the seat of 
a powerful countship (later marquisate), held after 1235 by the 
dukes of Luxemburg. As an important strategic position it was 
several times seized by the French, e.g. in 1647 and 1651. 

ARM (a common Teutonic word; the Indo-European root is 
ar, to join or fit; cf. the Lat. armus, shoulder, and the plural word 
arma, weapons, Gr. apjuos, joint, and the reduplicated apapioKeiv, 
to join), the human upper limb from the shoulder to the wrist, 
and the fore limb of an animal. (See Anatomy: Superficial and 
Artistic, and Skeleton: Appendicular.) The word is also used of 
any projecting limb, as of a crane, or balance, of a branch of a 
tree, and so, in a transferred sense, of the branch of a river or 
a nerve. Through the Fr. armes, from the Lat. arma, and so in 
English usually in the plural " arms," comes the use of the word 
for weapons of offence and defence, and in many expressions such 
as " men-at-arms," " assault-at-arms," and the like, and for the 
various branches, artillery, cavalry, infantry, of which an army 
is composed, the " arms of the service." " Arms " or " armorial 
bearings " are the heraldic devices displayed by knights in battle 
on the defensive armour or embroidered on the surcoat worn over 
the armour and hence called " coats of arms." These became 
hereditary and thus are borne by families, and similar insignia are 
used by nations, cities, episcopal sees and corporations generally. 
(See Heraldry.) 



560 



ARMADA— ARMADILLO 



ARMADA, THE. The Spanish or Invincible Armada was the 
great fleet (in Spanish, armada) sent against England by Philip II. 
in 1 588. The marquis of Santa Cruz, to whom the command had 
first been given, died on the 9th of February 1588 (according to 
the Gregorian calendar then used by Spain; on the 31st of 
January by the Julian calendar used in England ; the other dates 
given in this article will be in Old Style, or Julian calendar). 
Santa Cruz was succeeded by Don Alonso Perez de Guzman, duke 
of Medina Sidonia, a noble of large estate, but of no experience or 
capacity, who took the command unwillingly, and only on the 
reiterated order of the king. The fleet was collected at Lisbon, 
after many delays, and sailed on the 20th of May 1588. Its 
nominal strength was 132 vessels, of 59,190 tons, carrying 21,621 
soldiers and 8066 sailors. But from a third to a half of the 
vessels were transports, galleys or very small boats, and some 
of them never reached the Channel. The effective force was 
far below the paper strength. On the 10th of June, when the 
Armada had rounded Cape Finisterre, it was scattered by squalls. 
Some of the vessels went on to the appointed rendezvous at the 
Scilly Isles, but the majority anchored on the north coast of 
Spain. Medina Sidonia, who found many defects in his fleet, did 
not finally sail till the 12 th of July. On the English side all the 
royal navy, and such armed merchant ships as could be obtained 
from the ports, had been collected under the command of the 
lord high admiral Howard of Effingham, who had with him 
Hawkins, Drake and Frobisher as subordinate admirals. The 
number of vessels is put at 197, but the majority were very small. 
It is impossible to state with confidence what were the relative 
numbers of guns carried by the two fleets. The Spaniards had 
more pieces, but their gunnery was inferior. The English fleet 
carried 16,000 or 17,000 men, of whom the large majority were 
sailors. About 100 of their ships were at Plymouth with the 
lord high admiral. The others were in the Downs with Lord 
Henry Seymour and Sir William Winter, to co-operate with a 
Dutch squadron under Justinus of Nassau in blockading the 
Flemish ports, then occupied by the Spanish army of the duke of 
Parma. The object was to prevent the proposed junction of the 
forces of Medina Sidonia and Parma. On the 20th of July the 
Armada was seen off the Lizard. It sailed past Plymouth, and 
was followed by the English fleet. The Spaniards, who were 
heavy sailers, and were hampered by the transports, were much 
harassed by the more active English, and were defeated in all their 
attempts to board, which it was their wish to do in order to make 
use of their superior numbers of men. The flagship of the 
squadron of Andalucia, " Nuestra Senora del Rosario," com- 
manded by Don Pedro de Valdes, was crippled, fell behind and 
had to surrender. On the 25th of July, when the fleets were near 
the Isle of Wight, a shift of the wind offered the Spaniards a 
chance of bringing on a close action, but it soon changed again. 
The English fleet, of which part had been in some danger, escaped 
uninjured, and the Spaniards stood on. They anchored on the 
26th of July at Calais. The duke of Medina Sidonia now sent an 
officer to Parma, calling on him to come to sea and join in a 
landing on the shore of England. But Parma could not leave 
port in face of Justinus of Nassau's squadron. While these 
messages were going and coming, Lord Howard had been joined 
by Lord Henry Seymour and Sir William Winter from the 
Downs. A council of war was held, to decide on the measures to 
be taken to assail the Spaniards at Calais. The course taken was 
to send fireships among them. On the night of the 28th of July 
the fireships were sent in, and produced an utter panic in the 
Armada. Most of the Spanish vessels slipped their cables and 
ran to sea. Others weighed anchor, and escaped in a more 
orderly style. One great vessel ran ashore and was taken 
possession of by the English, who were however compelled to 
give her up by the French governor of Calais. On the 29th of 
July the scattered Spaniards, who were quite unable to restore 
order, were attacked by the English off Gravelines. The engage- 
ment was hot, and, though the English did not succeed in taking 
any of the Spaniards, they destroyed some of them, and their 
superiority in sailing force and gunnery was now so obvious that 
the duke of Medina Sidonia lost heart. His large vessels were 



indeed so helpless that only a timely shift of the wind saved many 
of them from drifting on to the banks of Flanders. Officers and 
men alike were completely discouraged. It was now recognized 
that an invasion of England could not be carried out in face of the 
more active English fleet and the proved impossibility of bringing 
about the proposed union with Parma's army. Suggestions were 
made that the Armada should sail to Hamburg, refit there, and 
renew the attack. But by this time the Spanish force was 
incapable of energetic action. Medina Sidonia and his council 
could think of nothing but of a return to Spain. As the wind 
was westerly, and the English fleet barred the way, it was im- 
possible to sail down the Channel. The only alternative was to 
take the route between the north of Scotland and Norway. So 
the Armada sailed to the north. Lord Howard followed, after 
detaching Lord Henry Seymour to remain in the Downs. He 
watched the Spaniards to the Firth of Forth. The English had 
at that time little knowledge of the seas beyond the Firth, and 
they were beginning to run short of food and ammunition. On 
the 2nd of August, therefore, they gave up the pursuit. Medina 
Sidonia continued to the north, till his pilots told him that it was 
safe to turn to the west. Up to this time the loss of the Spaniards 
in ships had not been considerable. If the weather had been that 
of a normal summer, they would probably have reached home 
with no greater loss of men than was usually inflicted on all fleets 
of the age by scurvy and fever. But the summer of 1588 was 
marked by a succession of gales of unprecedented violence. The 
damaged and weakened Spanish ships, which were from the first 
greatly undermanned in sailors, were unable to contend with the 
storms. It is not possible to give the details of the disasters 
which overtook them. Nineteen of them are known to have 
been wrecked on the coasts of Scotland and Ireland. The 
crews who fell into the hands of the English officers in Ireland 
were put to the sword. Many more of them disappeared at sea. 
Of the: total number of the vessels originally collected for the 
invasion of England one-half, if not more, perished, and the 
crews of those which escaped were terribly diminished by scurvy 
and starvation. 

The failure of the Armada was mainly due to its own interior 
weakness; and as a military operation the English victory was 
less glorious than some other less renowned achievements of the 
British fleet. But the repulse of the great Spanish armament was 
an event of the first historical importance. It marked the final 
failure of King Philip II. of Spain to establish the supremacy 
of the Habsburg dynasty and of the Church of Rome, which he 
considered as being in a peculiar sense his charge, in Europe. 
From that time forward no serious attempt to invade England 
was, or could be, made. It became therefore the unconquerable 
supporter of that part of Europe which had thrown off the 
authority of the pope. The Armada had much of the character 
of a crusade. Though Philip II. had political reasons for 
hostility to Queen Elizabeth, they were so intimately bound 
up with the struggle between the Reformation and the Counter 
Reformation that the secular and the religious elements of the 
conflict cannot be separated from one another. The struggle 
was therefore not one between armed forces in national rivalry 
alone. It was a trial of strength between two widely different 
conceptions of life and of the state — between the medieval and 
the modern worlds. The volunteers of all ranks who came 
forward in large numbers on both sides were fighting for a 
religious cause as well as for the interests of their respective 

peoples. 

Authorities. — The English side of the story of the Armada can 
best be studied in the State Papers relating to the Defeat of the Spanish 
Armada, edited by Sir J. K. Laughton, and printed for the Navy 
Records Society (London, 1894). The Spanish side will be found in 
La Armada Invencible, by Captain Cesareo Fernandez Duro (Madrid, 
1884). Froude summarized the work of Captain Fernandez Duro in 
his brilliant Spanish Story of the Armada (London, 1892). (D. H.) 

ARMADILLO, the Spanish designation for the small mail-clad 
Central and South American mammals of the order Edentata, 
constituting the family Dasypodidae. The armature consists.of a 
bony case, partly composed of solid buckler-like plates, and partly 
of movable transverse bands, the latter differing in number with 



ARMAGEDDON— ARMAGH 



561 



the species, and giving to the body a considerable degree of 
flexibility. The bony plates are overlain by horny scales. 
Armadillos are omnivorous, feeding on roots, insects, worms, 
reptiles and carrion, and are mostly, though not universally, 




Peba Armadillo (Tatusia novemcincta) . 

nocturnal. They are harmless and inoffensive creatures, offering 
no resistance when caught; their principal means of escape being 
the extraordinary rapidity with which they burrow in the 
ground, and the tenacity with which they retain their hold in 
their subterranean retreats. Notwithstanding the shortness of 
their limbs they run with rapidity. Most of the species are 
esteemed good eating by the natives of the countries in which 
they live. They are all inhabitants of the open plains or the 
forests of the tropical and temperate parts of South America, 
with the exception of a few species which range as far north as 
Texas. The largest species is the giant armadillo {Priodon 
gigas), measuring nearly a yard long, from the forests of Surinam 
and Brazil; while one of the smallest is Dasypus minulus, a near 
ally of the larger D. sexcinctus. The peba {Tatusia novemcincta) 
represents a group with a large number of movable bands in the 
armour; while the apar (Tolypeutes tricinctus) and the other 
members of the same genus are remarkable for their power of 
rolling themselves up into balls. For the distinctive characters 
of these and the other genera see Edentata. 

ARMAGEDDON, a name occurring in the Authorized Version 
of the English Bible in Rev. xvj. 16. The Revised Version has 
Harmagedon. The form is commonly regarded as the Greek 
equivalent of the Hebrew har megiddon, the mountain district of 
Megiddo. The writer is describing the place where the last 
decisive battle was to be fought at the Day of Judgment, and 
Harmagedon may have been chosen as the name because the 
district about Megiddo had been on several occasions the scene 
of great battles (cf. Judg. iv. 6 ff., v. 19). It has, however, 
been suggested in the Zeitschrift fiir die Alttestamentliche Wissen- 
schaft, vii. 170 (1887), that the name is for har migdo, " his fruit- 
ful mountain " — the mountain land of Israel. Prof. Cheyne 
(Encyc. Bibl. S.v.) again, following suggestions of H. Gunkel, 
H. Zimmern and P. Jensen, compares the dragon of the Apoca- 
lypse with the Babylonian Tiamat, thinks that some myth is 
referred to, and finds the fiaytdwv of 'ApuayeSwv in the divine 
name 'YttTeMj.iya.dwi>> a Babylonian god of the underworld. The 
name of the place where Tiamat was defeated by Marduk perhaps 
included that of a god of the underworld. (See Antichrist.) 
From the application of the word Armageddon to the great 
battle of the End of Time comes the use of the phrase " an 
Armageddon " to express any great slaughter or final conflict. 

ARMAGH, an inland county of Ireland, in the province of 
Ulster, bounded N. by Lough Neagh, E. by Co. Down, S. by 
Louth and W. by Monaghan and Tyrone. The area is 327,704 
acres, or about si 2 sq. m. The general surface of the county is 
gently undulating and pleasantly diversified; but in the northern 
extremity, on the borders of Lough Neagh, there is a considerable 
tract of low, marshy land, and the southern border of the county 



is occupied by a barren range of hills, the highest of which, Slieve 
Gullion, attains an elevation of 1 893 ft. In the western portion of 
the county are the Few Mountains, a chain of abrupt hills mostly 
incapable of cultivation. The county is well watered by numerous 
streams. The principal are the Callan, the Tynan and the 
Tallwater, flowing into the Blackwater, which, after forming the 
boundary between this county and Tyrone, empties itself into 
the south-western angle of Lough Neagh. The Tara and New- 
town-Hamilton, the Creggan and the Fleury, flow into the bay 
of Dundalk. The Cam or Camlin joins the Bann, which, crossing 
the north-western corner of the county, falls into Lough Neagh 
to the east of the Blackwater. The Newry Canal, communicating 
with Carlingford Lough at Warrenpoint, 6 m. below Newry, 
proceeds northward through Co. Armagh for about 21 rr., 
joining the Bann at Whitecoat. The Ulster Canal begins at 
Charlemont on the river Blackwater, near its junction with 
Lough Neagh, proceeding through the western border of the 
county, and passing thence to the south-west by Monaghan and 
Clones into Upper Lough Erne, after a course of 48 m. Part of 
Lough Neagh is in the county, and there are many small loughs, 
such as Gullion, Cam and Ross. 

Geology. — The flat shore of Lough Neagh in the north is due 
to the thick deposit of pale-coloured clays with lignites, which are 
probably of Pliocene age, and indicate a reduction of the area of 
the lake in still later times. Between this lowland and Armagh 
city, the early Cainozoic basalts form slightly higher ground, 
while on the west a strip of Trias appears, overlying Carboniferous 
Limestone. A rough conglomerate containing blocks of this 
latter rock forms the hills on which Armagh itself is built; this 
outlier is probably Permian. The Carboniferous Limestone 
beneath it and around it is red-brown instead of grey, and is 
famous for its richness in fish remains. A hummocky irregular 
country spreads southward, where the Silurian axis is encountered, 
in continuation of the southern uplands of Scotland. Slates and 
fine-grained sandstones appear here freely through the glacial 
drift. In the south the granite core of this upland is revealed, 
and is quarried extensively about Bessbrook. It is penetrated 
by far younger intrusive masses at Slieve Gullion and Forkill. 
These rocks, which include some highly siliceous lavas, form part 
of the Eocene series that is so conspicuously displayed above 
Carlingford in Co. Louth. Lead-veins have been worked in 
various parts of the county from time to time. 

Industries. — The soil of the northern portion of the county is 
a rich brown loam, on a substratum of clay or graveL Towards 
Charlemont there is much reclaimable bog resting on a limestone 
substratum. The eastern portion of the county is generally of a 
light friable soil; the southern portion rocky and barren, with 
but little bog except in the neighbourhood of Newtown-Hamilton. 
The climate of Armagh is considered to be one of the most genial 
in Ireland, and less rain is supposed to fall in this than in any 
other county. Only about one-twentieth of the land is naturally 
barren, and Armagh offers a relatively large area of cultivable 
soil. Agriculture, however, is not far advanced, yet owing to the 
linen industry the inhabitants are generally in circumstances of 
comparative comfort. The principal crops are oats and potatoes, 
but all grain crops are decreasing, and flai, formerly grown to a 
considerable extent, is now practically neglected. The acreage 
under pasture slightly exceeds that of tillage. Cattle, sheep, pigs 
and poultry show a general increase in numbers. The principal 
manufacture, and that which has given a peculiar tone to the 
character of the population, is that of linen, though it has some- 
what declined in modern times. It is not necessary to the 
promotion of this manufacture that the spinners and weavers 
should be congregated in large towns, or united in crowded and 
unwholesome factories. On the contrary, most of its branches 
can be carried on in the cottages of the peasantry. The men 
devote to the loom those hours which are not required for the 
cultivation of their little farms; the women spin and reel the yarn 
during the intervals of their other domestic occupations. Smooth 
lawns, pure springs and the open sky are necessary for perfecting 
the bleaching process. Hence the numerous bleachers dwell in the 
country with their assistants and machinery. Such is the effect 



562 



ARMAGH— ARMAGN AC 



of this combination of agricultural occupations with domestic 
manufactures . that the farmers are more than competent to 
supply the resident population of the county with vegetable, 
though not with animal food; and some of the less crowded 
and less productive parts of Ulster receive from Armagh a con- 
siderable supply of oats, barley and flour. Apples are grown 
in such quantities as to entitle the county to the title applied 
to it, the orchard of Ireland. 

Communications are monopolized by the Great Northern rail- 
way company, whose main line from Belfast divides at Portadown, 
sending off lines to Omagh, to Clones and to Dublin. A branch 
from Omagh joins the Dublin line to Goraghwood, and from this 
line there is a branch to Newry in Co. Down. An electric tram 
way connects Bessbrook, a town with important linen manu- 
factures and granite quarries, with Newry. 

Population and Administration. — The population (72,286 in 
1891 ;■ 65,619 in 1901) shows a heavy decrease, though emigration 
affects it less seriously than the majority of Irish counties. Of 
the total about 45% are Roman Catholics, 32% Protestant 
Episcopalians, and 16 % Presbyterians, the Roman Catholic faith 
prevailing in the mountainous districts and the Protestant in the 
towns and lowlands. About 74 % of the whole constitutes the 
rural population. The chief towns are Armagh (a city and the 
county town, pop. 7588), Lurgan (11,782), Portadown (10,092), 
Tanderagee (1427), Bessbrook (2977) and Keady (1466). Armagh 
is divided into eight baronies, and contains twenty-five parishes 
and parts of parishes, the greater number of which are in the 
Protestant and Roman Catholic dioceses of Armagh, and a few 
in the Roman Catholic diocese of Dromore. The constabulary 
has its headquarters at Armagh, the county being divided into 
five districts. Assizes are held at Armagh, and quarter sessions 
at Armagh, Ballybot, Lurgan, Markethill and Newtown-Hamilton. 
The parliamentary divisions are three: mid, north and south, 
each returning one member. 

History and Antiquities. — Armagh, together with Louth, 
Monaghan and some smaller districts, formed part of a territory 
called Orgial or Urial, which was long subject to the occasional 
incursions of the Danes. The county was made shire ground in 
1586, and called Armagh after the city by Sir John Perrott. 
When James I. proceeded to plant with English and Scottish 
colonists the vast tracts escheated to the crown in Ulster, the 
whole of the arable and pasture land in Armagh, estimated at 
77,800 acres, was to have been allotted in sixty-one portions. 
Nineteen of these, comprising 22,180 acres, were to have been 
allotted to the church, and forty- two, amounting to 55,620 
acres, to English and Scottish colonists, servitors, native Irish 
and four corporate towns — the swordsmen to be dispersed 
throughout Connaught and Munster. This project was not 
strictly adhered to in Co. Armagh, nor were the Irish swordsmen 
or soldiers transplanted into Connaught and Munster from this 
and some other counties. The antiquities consist of cairns and 
tumuli ; the remains of the fortress of Emain near the city of 
Armagh (q.v.) , once the residence of the kings of Ulster ; and 
Danes Cast, an extensive fortification in the south-east of the 
county, near Poyntzpass, extending into Co. Down. Spears, 
battle-axes, collars, rings, amulets, medals of gold, ornaments of 
silver, jet and amber, &c, have also been found in various places. 
The religious houses were at Armagh, Killevy, KiJmore, Strad- 
hailloyse and Tahenny. Of military antiquities the most remark- 
able are Tyrone's ditches, near Poyntzpass; and the pass of 
Moyry, the entry into the county from the south, which was 
fiercely contested by the Irish in 1595 and 1600, is defended by a 
castle. The summit of Slieve Gullion is crowned by a large cairn, 
which forms the roof of a singular cavern of artificial construction, 
probably an early burial-place. 

ARMAGH, a city and market town, and the county town of 
Co. Armagh, Ireland, in the mid parliamentary division, 895 m. 
N.N.W. of Dublin by the Great Northern railway, at the junction 
of the Belfast-Clones line. Pop. (1901) 7588. It is said to derive 
its name of Ard-macha, the Hill of Macha, from Queen Macha of 
the Golden Hair, who flourished in the middle of the 4th century 
B.C.. but earlier it was named from its situation on the sides of a 



steep hill called Drumsailech, or the Hill of Sallows, which rises 
in the midst of a fertile plain near the Callan stream. Of high 
antiquity, and, like many other Irish towns, claiming (with 
considerable probability) to have been founded by St Patrick 
in the 5th century, it long possessed the more important distinc- 
tion of being the metropolis of Ireland; and, as the seat of a 
flourishing college, was greatly frequented by students from other 
lands, among whom the English and Scots were said to have 
been so numerous as to give the name of Trian-Sassanagh, or 
Saxon Street, to one of the quarters of the city. St Patrick's bell, 
long preserved at Armagh, the oldest Irish relic of its kind, is 
now, with its shrine of the year 109 1, preserved in the museum 
of the Royal Irish Academy at Dublin. Of a synod that was held 
at Armagh as early as 448, there is an interesting memorial in the 
Book of Armagh, an Irish MS. dating about a.d. 800. Exposed 
to the successive calamities of the Danish incursions, the English 
conquest and the English wars, and at last deserted by its 
bishops, who retired to Drogheda, the venerable city sank into an 
insignificant collection of cabins, with a dilapidated cathedral. 
From this state of decay, however, it was raised, in the second 
half of. the 18th century, by the unwearied exertions of Arch- 
bishop Richard Robinson, 1st Lord Rokeby (1709-1794), 
which, seconded by similar devotion on the part of succeeding 
archbishops of the Beresford family, notably Archbishop Lord 
John George Beresford (1773-1862), made of Armagh one of the 
best built and most respectable towns in the country. As the 
ecclesiastical metropolis and seat of an archbishop (Primate of all 
Ireland) in both the Protestant and Roman organizations, it 
possesses two cathedrals and two archiepiscopal palaces. As the 
county town Armagh has a court-house, a prison, a lunatic asylum 
and a county infirmary. Besides these there is a fever hospital, 
erected by Lord John George Beresford; a college, which Primate 
Robinson was anxious to raise to the rank of a university; a 
public library founded by him, an observatory, which has become 
famous from the efficiency of its astronomers; a number of 
churches and schools, and barracks. Almost all the buildings are 
built of the limestone of the district, but the Anglican cathedral 
is of red sandstone. It stands boldly on the top of the hill, a 
cruciform structure dating from the 13th, but practically rebuilt 
in the 18th century, in accordance with its original plan. The 
Roman Catholic cathedral is in the Decorated style, and was 
consecrated in 1873. Armagh was a parliamentary borough until 
1885; and, having been incorporated in 1613, so remained until 
1835. The administration is in the hands of an urban district 
council. Two miles W. of Armagh is Emain, Emania, or Navan 
Fort, with large entrenchments and mounds, the site of a royal 
palace of Ulster, founded by that Queen Macha who gave her 
name to the city. In a.d. 335 it was destroyed during the inroad 
on the defeat of the king of Ulster by the three brothers Colla, 
cousins of Muredach, king of Ireland. Armagh itself fell before 
the king Brian Boroime, who was buried here; and before 
Edward Bruce in 13 15, while previous to the English war after the 
Reformation, it had witnessed the struggles of Shane O'Neill 
(1564). 

ARMAGNAC, formerly a province of France and the most 
important fief of Gascony, now wholly comprised in the depart- 
ment of Gers (q.v.). In the 15th century, when it attained its 
greatest extent, it included, besides Armagnac, the neighbouring 
territories of Fezensac, Fezensaguet, Pardiac, Pays de Gaure, 
Riviere Basse, Eauzan and Lomagne, and stretched from the 
Garonne to the Adour. Armagnac is a region of hills ranging to a 
height of 1000 ft., watered by the river Gers and other rivers which 
descend fanwise from the plateau of Lannemezan. On the slope 
of its hills grow the grapes from which the famous Armagnac 
brandy is made. In Roman Gaul this territory formed part of 
the diocese of Auch (civitas Ausciorum), which corresponded 
roughly with the later duchy of Gascony (q.v.). About the end 
of the 9th century Fezensac (comitatus Fedentiacus), in circum- 
stances of which no trustworthy record remains, was erected 
into an hereditary countship. This latter was in its turn 
divided, the south-western portion becoming, about 960, the 
countship of Armagnac (pagus Armaniacus). The domain of 



ARMATOLES— ARMAVIR 



5 6 3 



this countship, at first very limited in extent, continued steadily 
to increase in size, and about 1140 Count Gerald III. added the 
whole of Fezensac to his possessions. Under the English rule 
the counts of Armagnac were turbulent and untrustworthy 
vassals; and the administration of the Black Prince, tending to 
favour the towns of Aquitaine at the expense of the nobles, drove 
them to the side of France. The complaint against the English 
prince which Count John I., in defiance of the treaty of Bretigny, 
himself carried to Paris, was the principal cause of the resumption 
of hostilities of 1369, and of the incessant defeats sustained by 
the English until the accession of their king Henry V. 

At that moment Count Bernard VII. was all-powerful at the 
French court; and Charles of Orleans, in order to be able to 
avenge his father, Louis of Orleans, who had been assassinated in 
1407 by John the Fearless, duke of Burgundy, married Bonne, 
Bernard's daughter. This was the origin of the political party 
known as " the Armagnacs." With the object of combating the 
duke of Burgundy's preponderant influence, a league was 
formed at Gien, including the duke of Orleans and his father-in- 
law, the dukes of Berry, Bourbon and Brittany, the count of 
Alencon and all the other discontented nobles. Bernard VII. 
ravaged the environs of Paris; and the treaty of Bicetre 
(November 2, 1410) only suspended hostilities for a few months, 
war breaking out afresh in the spring of 141 1. Paris sided 
with the duke of Burgundy, and at his instigation Charles VII. 
collected an army to besiege the allies in Bourges. The peace of 
Bourges, confirmed at Auxerre on the 22nd of August, put an end 
to the war. Paris was dominated at that time by the party of the 
" butchers," or Cabochiens, which had been organized and armed 
by the count of Saint-Pol, brother-in-law of John the Fearless. 
But their excesses, and in particular the Cabochien ordinance 
of the 25th of May 141 3, aroused public indignation; a reaction 
took place, and in the month of August the Armagnacs in their 
turn became masters of the government and of the king. The 
duke of Burgundy, besieged in Arras, only obtained peace 
(treaty of Arras, September 4, 1414), on condition of not 
returning to Paris. 

Several months later Henry V. declared war against France; 
and when, in August 1415, the English landed in Normandy, the 
Armagnacs and Burgundians united against them, but were 
defeated in the battle of Agincourt (October 25, 1415). John 
the Fearless then began negotiations with the English, while 
Bernard VII., appointed constable in place of the count of Saint- 
Pol, who had been killed at Agincourt, returned to defend Paris. 
However, the excesses committed by the Armagnacs incensed the 
populace, and John the Fearless, who was ravaging the surround- 
ing districts, re-entered the capital on the 29th of May 1418, in 
consequence of the treason of Perrinet Leclerc. On the 12th of 
June Bernard VII. and the members of his party were massacred. 
From this time onward the Armagnac party, with the dauphin, 
afterwards King Charles VII., at its head, was the national party, 
while the Burgundians united with the English. This division in 
France continued until the treaty of Arras, on the 21st of 
September 1435. The rivalry of the Burgundians and Armagnacs 
brought terrible disasters upon France, and for many years after- 
wards the name of " Armagnacs " was bestowed upon the bands 
of adventurers who were as much to be feared as the Grandes 
Compagnies of the preceding age. 

In 1444-45 the emperor Frederick III. of Germany obtained 
from Charles VII. a large army of Armagnacs to enforce his 
claims in Switzerland, and the war which ensued took the name 
of the Armagnac war (Armagnakcnkrieg). In Germany the 
name of the foreigners, who were completely defeated in the 
battle of St Jakob on the Birs, not far from Basel, was mockingly 
corrupted into 'Anne Jacken, Poor Jackets, or Arme Gecken, 
Poor Fools. 

On the death of Charles of Armagnac, in 1497, the countship 
was united to the crown by King Charles VII., but was again 
bestowed on Charles, the nephew of that count, by Francis I., 
who at the same time gave him his sister Margaret in marriage. 
After the death of her husband, by whom she had no children, she 
married Henry of Albret, king of Navarre; and thus the count- 



ship of Armagnac came back to the French crown along with the 
other dominions of Henry IV. In 1645 Louis XIV. erected a 
countship of Armagnac in favour of Henry of Lorraine, count of 
Harcojirt, in whose family it continued till the Revolution. 
James of Armagnac, grandson of Bernard VII., was made duke 
of Nemours in 1462, and was succeeded in the dukedom by his 
second son, John, who died without issue, and his third son, Louis, 
in whom the house of Armagnac became extinct in 1503. 

In 1789 Armagnac was a province forming part of the 
Gouvernement-general of Guienne and Gascony; it was divided 
into two parts, High or White Armagnac, with Auch for capital, 
and Low or Black Armagnac. At the Revolution the whole of 
the original Armagnac was included in the department of Gers. 

For authorities see U. Chevalier, Repertoire des sources hist, du 
moyen age, s. Armagnac (Montbeliard, 1894). For the Armagnacs see 
Paul Dognon, " Les Armagnacs et les Bourguignons, le comte de Foix 
et le dauphin en Languedoc " (1416-1420) \yv Annates du Midi (1889) ; 
Rameau, "Guerre des Armagnacs dans leMaconnais " (1418-1435) in 
the Rev. soc. lit. de I'Ain (1884); Berthold Zeller, Les Armagnacs et 
les Bourguignons, la Commune de 1413 ; E. Wiilcker, Urkunden und 
Schreiben betreffend den Zug der Armagnaken (Frankfort, 1873); 



:, 1873); 
1889). 



Witte, Die Armagnaken im Elsass, 143Q-1445 (Strassburg, 

ARMATOLES (Gr. apuarooXos, a man-at-arms), the name given 
to some Greeks who discharged certain military and police 
functions under the Turkish government. When the Turks under 
SultanMahommedll. conquered Greecein the 1 5th century, many 
of the Greeks fled into the mountainous districts of Macedonia 
and northern Greece, and maintained a harassing warfare with the 
conquerors of their country. These men were called Klephts 
(modern Gr. kX€(/>tt?s, ancient Kktirr^ns, a thief, a brigand), and 
during the 16th century the Turkish pashas came to terms with 
some of them, and these men were allowed to retain their local 
customs, and were confirmed in the possession of certain districts, 
while in return they undertook some duties, such as the custody 
of the highroads. Those who accepted these terms were called 
armatoles, and the districts in which they lived armatoliks. 
Strengthened by a considerable number of Christian Albanians, 
they rendered good service in defending Greece, and to some 
extent repressed the ravages of the Klephts; but their power and 
independence were disliked by the Turks. After the peace of 
Belgrade in 1739 (between Austria and Turkey), the Turkish 
government sought to weaken the position of the armatoles. 
Their privileges were restricted, Mahommedan Albanians were 
introduced into the armatoliks, and towards the end of the 18th 
century their numbers were seriously reduced. Irritated by this 
policy the armatoles rendered considerable service to Ali Pasha of 
Iannina in his struggle with the Turks in 1820-22, and afforded 
valuable assistance to their countrymen during the Greek war of 
independence in 1830. 

ARMATURE (from Lat. armahira, armour), a covering for 
defence. In zoology the word is used of the bony shell of the 
armadillo. In architecture it is applied to the iron stays by 
which the lead lights are secured in windows. (See Stanchion 
and Saddle: Saddle-Bars.) In magnetism Dr William Gilbert 
applied the term to the piece of soft iron with which he " armed " 
or capped the lodestone in order to increase its power. It is also 
used for the " keeper " or piece of iron which is placed across the 
poles of a horse-shoe magnet, and held in place by magnetic 
attraction, in order to complete the magnetic circuit and preserve 
the magnetism of the steel; and hence, in dynamo-electric 
machinery, for the portion which is attracted by the electro- 
magnet, as the moving part of an electric motor, or, by extension, 
the moving part of a dynamo (<?.».). 

ARMAVIR. (1) The ruins of the old capital of Armenia, on the 
S.E. slope of the extinct volcano Ala-geuz, according to legend, 
built by Armais, a grandson of Haik, in 1980 B.C., and the capital 
of the Armenian kings till the 2nd century a.d. Now a small 
village, Tapadibi, occupies its seat. (2) A district town of Russia, 
northern Caucasia, province of Kuban, on Kuban river, and 
on the main line of the Caucasian railway, 40 m. by rail west 
of Stavropol, built in 1848 for the settlement of Armenian 
mountaineers, and now a well-built, growing town with 8000 
inhabitants, the merchants of which carry on a lively trade. 



5 6 4- 



ARMENIA 



ARMENIA (old Persian Armina, Armenian Hayasdan, or 
Hayq) , the popular modern name of a district south of the 
Caucasus and Black Sea, which formed part of the ancient 
Armenian kingdom. The name, which first occurs in the cunei- 
form inscriptions of Darius Hystaspis, supplanted the earlier 
Urardhu, or Ararat, but its origin is unknown. In its widest 
extent Armenia stretched from 37° to 49 ° E. long., and from 
37J to 415° N. lat.; but this area was never, or only for a brief 
period, united under one king. Armenia is now divided between 
Persia, Russia and Turkey, and the three boundaries have a 
common point on Little Ararat. 

Geographically, Armenia is a continuation westward of the 
great Iranian plateau. On the north it-descends abruptly to the 
Black Sea; on the south it breaks down in rugged terraces to the 
lowlands of Mesopotamia; and on the east and west it sinks 
more gradually to the lower plateaus of Persia and Asia Minor. 
Above the general level of the plateau, 6000 ft., rise bare ranges 
of mountains, which run from north-east to south-west at an 
altitude of 8000-12,000 ft., and culminate in Ararat, 17,000 ft. 
Between the ranges are broad elevated valleys, through which the 
rivers of the plateau flow before entering the rugged gorges that 
convey their waters to lower levels. Geologically, Armenia 
consists of archaic rocks upon which, towards the north, are 
superimposed Palaeozoic, and towards the south later sedi- 
mentary rocks. The last have been pierced by volcanic out- 
bursts that extend southward to Lake Van. Amongst the higher 
mountains are the two Ararats; Ala-geuz Dagh, north of the 
Aras; Bingeul Dagh, south of Erzerum; and the peaks near 
Lake Van. The rivers are the Euphrates, Tigris, Aras, Churuk 
Su (Chorokh) and Kelkit Irmak, all rising on the plateau. The 
more important lakes are Van, 5100 ft., about twice the size of the 
Lake of Geneva, and Urmia, 4000 ft., both salt; Gokcha or 
Sevan, 5870 ft., discharging into the Aras; and Chaldir, into the 
Kars Chai. The aspect of the plateau is dreary and monotonous. 
The valleys are wide expanses of arable land, and the hills are for 
the most part grass-covered and treeless. But the gorges of the 
Euphrates and Tigris, and their tributaries, cannot be surpassed 
in wildness and grandeur. The climate is varied. In the higher 
districts the winter is long and the cold severe; whilst the summer 
is short, dry and hot. In Erzerum the temperature ranges from 
-22 to 84 F., and snow sometimes falls in June. In the valley 
of the Aras, and in the western and southern districts, the 
climate is more moderate. Most of the towns lie high, from 4000 
to 6000 ft. The villages are usually built on gentle slopes, in 
which the houses are partially excavated as a protection against 
the severity of the weather. Many of the early towns were on of 
near the Araxes, and amongst their ruins are the remains of 
churches which throw light on the history of Christian archi- 
tecture in the East. Armenia is rich in mineral wealth, and there 
are many hot and cold mineral springs. The vegetation varies 
according to the locality. Cereals and hardy fruits grow on the 
higher ground, whilst rice is cultivated in the hot, well-watered 
valley of the Araxes. The summer is so hot that the vine grows 
at much higher altitudes than it does in western Europe, and the 
cotton tree and all southern fruit trees are cultivated in the 
deeper valleys. On the fine pasture lands which now support the 
flocks of the Kurds, the horses and mules, so celebrated in ancient 
times, were reared. Trout are found in the rivers, and a small 
herring in Lake Van. The country abounds in romantic scenery; 
that of the district of Ararat especially has been celebrated by 
patriotic historians like Moses of Chorene and Lazarus of Pharb. 

Population. — Accurate statistics cannot be obtained; but it 
is estimated that in the nine vilayets, which include Turkish 
Armenia^ there are 925,000 Gregorian, Roman Catholic and 
Protestant Armenians, 645,000 other Christians, 100,000 Jews, 
Gypsies, &c, and 4,460,000 Moslems. The Armenians, taking 
the most favourable estimate, are in a majority in ninekazas or 
sub-districts only (seven near Van, and two near Mush) out of 1 59. 
In Russian Armenia there are 960,000 Armenians, and in Persian 
Armenia 130,000. According to an estimate made by General 
Zelenyi for the Caucasus Geographical Society {Zapiski, vol. 
xviii., Tiflis, 1896, with map), the population of the nine Turkish 



vilayets, Erzerum, Van, Bitlis, Kharput (Mamuret-el-Aziz). 
Diarbekr, Sivas, Aleppo, Adana and Trebizond, was 6,000,000 
(Armenians, 913,875, or 15 %; other Christians, 632,875, or 11 %; 
and Moslems, 4,453,250, or 74 %). In the first five vilayets which 
contain most of the Armenians, the population was 2,642,000 
(Armenians, 633,250, or 24%; other Christians, 179,875, or 7%; 
and Moslems, 1,828,875, or 69%); and in the seven Armenian 
kazas the population was 282,375 (Armenians, 184,875, or 65%; 
otherChristians, 1000, or 0.3 % ; and Moslems, 96,500, or 34- 7 %). 
In 1897 there were 970,656 Armenians in Russia, of whom 
827,634 were in the provinces of Erivan, Elisavetpol and Tiflis. 

The total number of Armenians is estimated at 2,900,000 (in 
Turkey, i;soo,oco; Russia, 1,000,000; Persia, 150,000; Europe, 
America and East Indies, 250,000). 

History. — The history of Armenia has been largely influenced 
by its physical features. The isolation of the valleys, especially 
in winter, encouraged a tendency to separation, which invariably 
showed itself when the central power was weak. The rugged 
mountains have always been the home of hardy mountaineers 
impatient of control, and the sanctuary to which the lowlanders 
fled for safety in times of invasion. The country stands as an 
open doorway between the East and the West. Through its long 
valleys run the roads that connect the Iranian plateau with the 
fertile lands and protected harbours of Asia Minor, and for its 
possession nations have contended from the remotest past. 

The original inhabitants of Armenia are unknown, but, about 
the middle of the 9th century B.C., the mass of the people belonged 
to that great family of tribes which seems to have been Et /, nology- 
spread over western Asia and to have had a common 
non-Aryan language. Mixed with these proto-Armenians, there 
was an important Semitic element of Assyrian and Hebrew 
origin. In the 7th century B.C., between 640 and 600, the country 
was conquered by an Aryan people, who imposed their language, 
and possibly their name, upon the vanquished, and formed a 
military aristocracy that was constantly recruited from Persia 
and Parthia. Politically the two races soon amalgamated, but, 
except in the towns, there was apparently little intermarriage, 
for the peasants in certain districts closely resemble the proto- 
Armenians, as depicted on their monuments. After the Arab 
and Seljuk invasions, there was a large emigration of Aryan and 
Semitic Armenians to Constantinople and Cilicia; and all that 
remained of the aristocracy was swept away by the Mongols and 
Tatars. This perhaps explains the* diversity of type and char^ 
acteristics amongst the modern Armenians. In the recesses of 
Mount Taurus the peasants are tall, handsome, though somewhat 
sharp-featured, agile and brave. In Armenia and Asia Minor 
they are robust, thick-set and coarse-featured, with straight black 
hair and large hooked noses. They are good cultivators of the 
soil, but are poor, superstitious, ignorant and unambitious, and 
they live in semi-subterranean houses as their ancestors did 800 
years B.C. The townsmen, especially in the large towns, have 
more regular features — often of the Persian type. They are 
skilled artisans, bankers and merchants, and are remarkable for 
their industry, their quick intelligence, their aptitude for 
business, and for that enterprising spirit which led their ancestors, 
in Roman times, to trade with Scythia, China and India. The 
upper classes are polished and well educated, and many have 
occupied high positions in the public service in Turkey, Russia, 
Persia and Egypt. The Armenians are essentially an Oriental 
people, possessing, like the Jews, whom they resemble in their 
exclusiveness and widespread dispersion, a remarkable tenacity 
of race and faculty of adaptation to circumstances. They are 
frugal, sober, industrious and intelligent, and their sturdiness of 
character has enabled them to preserve their nationality and 
religion under the sorest trials. They are strongly attached to 
old manners and customs, but have also a real desire for progress 
which is full of promise. On the other hand they are greedy of 
gain, quarrelsome in small matters, self-seeking and wanting in 
stability; and they are gifted -with a tendency to exaggeration 
and a love of intrigue which has had an unfortunate influence 
on their history. They are deeply separated by religious 
differences, and their mutual jealousies, their inordinate vanity 



ARMENIA 




Q Longitude Kast 42 of Greenwich ~£) 



E 



EmeryWalkcr se- 



their versatility and their cosmopolitan character must always 
be an obstacle to the realization of the dreams of the nationalists. 
The want of courage and self-reliance, the deficiency in truth and 
honesty sometimes noticed in connexion with them, are doubtless 
due to long servitude under an unsympathetic government. 

The early history of Armenia, more or less mythical, is partly 
based on traditions of the Biainian kings (see Ararat), and is 

interwoven with the Bible narrative, of which a know- 
kJngdom. ledge was possibly obtained from captive Jews settled 

in the country by Assyrian and Babylonian monarchs. 
The legendary kings are but faint echoes of the kings of Biainas; 
the story of Semiramis and Ara is but another form of the myth 
of Venus and Adonis; and tradition has clothed Tigranes, the 
reputed friend of Cyrus, with the transient glory of the opponent 
of Lucullus. The fall of the Biainian kingdom, perhaps over- 
thrown by Cyaxares, was apparently soon followed by an immi- 
gration of Aryan (Medo-Persian) races, including the progenitors 
of the Armenians. But they spread slowly, for the "Ten 
Thousand," when crossing the plateau to Trebizond, 401-400 B.C., 
met no Armenians after leaving the villages four days' march 
beyond the Teleboas, now Kara Su. Under the Medes and 
Persians Armenia was a satrapy governed by a member of the 
reigning family; and after the battle of Arbela, 331 B.C., it was 
ruled by Persian governors appointed by Alexander and his 
successors. Ardvates, 317-284 B.C., freed himself from Seleucid 
control; and after the defeat of Antiochus the Great by the 
Romans, 190 B.C., Artaxias (Ardashes), and Zadriades, the 
governors of Armenia Major and Armenia Minor, became inde- 
pendent kings, with the concurrence of Rome. (See Tigranes.) 
Artaxias established his capital at Artaxata on the Araxes, and 
his most celebrated successor was Tigranes (Dikran), 94-56 B.C., 



the son-in-law of Mithradates VI., the Great. Tigranes founded 
a new capital, Tigrariocerta, in northern Mesopotamia, which he 
modelled on Nineveh and Babylon, and peopled with Greek and 
other captives. Here, and at Antioch, he played the part of 
"great king " in Asia until his refusal to surrender his father-in- 
law involved him in war with Rome. Defeated, 69 B.C., by 
Lucullus beneath the walls of his capital, he surrendered his 
conquests to Pompey, 66 B.C., who had driven Mithradates across 
the Phasis, and was permitted to hold Armenia as a vassal state 
of Rome. 

The campaigns of Lucullus an3 Pompey brought Rome into 
delicate relations with Parthia. Armenia, although politically 
dependent upon Rome, was connected with Parthia by 
geographical position, a common language and faith, / a " e / r 
intermarriage and similarity of arms and dress. It had Empire. 
never been Hellenized, as the provinces of Asia Minor 
had been; the Roman provincial system was never applied to it; 
and the policy of Rome towards it was never consistent. The 
country became the field upon which the East and West contended 
for mastery, and the struggle ended for a time in the partition 
of Armenia, a.d. 387, between Rome and Persia. The Roman 
portion was soon added to the Diocesis Pontica. The Persian 
portion, Pers-Armenia, remained a vassal State under an Arsacid 
prince until 428. It was afterwards governed by Persian arid 
Armenian noblemen selected by the " great king," and entitled 
marzbans. Before the partition, Tiridates, converted by St 
Gregory, " the Illuminator," had established Christianity as the 
religion of the state, and set an example followed later by Con- 
stantine. After the partition, the invention of the Armenian 
alphabet, and the translation of the Bible into the vernacular, 
410, drew the Armenians together, and the discontinuance of 



5 66 



ARMENIA 



Greek in the Holy Offices relaxed the ecclesiastical dependence on 
Constantinople, which ceased entirely when the Patriarch, 491, 
refused to accept the decrees of the council of Chalcedon. The 
rule of the marzbans was marked by relentless persecution of the 
Christians, forced conversions to Magism, frequent insurrections 
and the rise to importance of the great families founded by men 
of Assyrian, Parthian, Persian, Syrian and Jewish origin, and in 
some cases of royal blood, who had been governors of districts,. or 
holders of fiefs under the Arsacids. Amongst the marzbans were 
Jewish Bagratids and Persian Mamegonians; and one of the 
latter family, Vartan, made himself independent (571-578), with 
Byzantine aid. In 632 the victories of Heraclius restored Armenia 
to the Byzantines; but the war that followed the Arab invasion, 
636, left the country in the hands of the caliphs, who set over it 
Arab and Armenian governors (ostikans). One of the governors, 
the Bagratid Ashod I., was crowned king of Armenia by the 
caliph Motamid, 885, and founded a dynasty which ended with 
Kagig II. in 1079. A little later the Ardzrunian Kagig, gover- 
nor of Vaspuragan or Van, was crowned king of that province 
by the caliph Moktadir, 908, and his descendants ruled at Van 
and Sivas until 1080. The Bagratids founded dynasties at Kars, 
962-1080, and in Georgia, which they held until its absorption, 
1801, by Russia. From 984 to 1085 the country from Diarbekr 
to Melasgerd was ruled under the suzerainty first of Arabs then 
of Byzantines and Seljuks, by the Mervanid dynasty of Kurds, 
called princes of Abahuni ('ATaxovvfjs). The Arab invasion drove 
many Armenian noblemen to Constantinople, where they inter- 
married with the old Roman families or became soldiers of for- 
tune. Artavasdes, an Arsacid, usurped the Byzantine throne for 
two years; Leo V., an Ardzrunian, and John Zimisces, became 
emperors; whilst Manuel, the Mamegonian, and others were 
amongst the best generals of the empire. In 991, and again in 
102 1, Basil II. invaded Armenia, and in the latter year Senek- 
herim, king of Vaspuragan, exchanged his kingdom for Sivas 
and its territory, where he settled down with many Armenian 
emigrants. Basil's policy was to make the great Armenian 
fortresses, garrisoned by imperial troops, the first line of defence 
on his eastern frontier; but it failed in the hands of his feeble 
successors, who thought more of converting heretical Armenia 
than of defending its frontier. The king of Ani, Kagig II., was 
compelled to exchange his kingdom for estates in Cappadocia. 
The country was raided by Seljuks and harried by Byzantine 
soldiers, and the miseries of the people were regarded as 
gain to the Orthodox church. After the defeat and capture of 
Romanus IV. by Alp Arslan, 1071, Armenia formed part of the 
Seljuk empire until it split up, 1157, into petty states, ruled by 
Arabs, Kurds and Seljuks, who were in turn swept away by the 
Mongol invasion, 1235. For more than three centuries after the 
appearance of the Seljuks, Armenia was traversed by a long 

succession of nomad tribes whose one aim was to secure 
partition. 8°°^ pasturage foi» their flocks on their way to the 

richer lands of Asia Minor. The cultivators were driven 
from the plains, agriculture was destroyed, and the country was 
seriously impoverished when its ruin was completed by the 
ravages and wholesale butcheries of Timur. Many Armenians 
fled to the mountains, where they embraced Islam, and inter- 
married with the Kurds, or purchased security by paying black- 
mail to Kurdish chiefs. Others migrated to Cappadocia or to 
Cilicia, where the Bagratid Rhupen had founded, 1080, a small 
principality which, gradually extending its limits, became the 
kingdom of Lesser Armenia. This Christian kingdom in the 
midst of Moslem states, hostile to the Byzantines, giving valuable 
support to the leaders of the crusades, and trading with the great 
commercial cities of Italy, had a stormy existence of about 300 
years. Internal disorders, due to attempts by the later Lusignan 
kings to make their subjects conform to the Roman Church, 
facilitated its conquest by Egypt, 1375. The memory of Kiligia 
(Cilicia) is enshrined in a popular song, and at Zeitun, in the 
recesses of Mount Taurus, a small Armenian community has 
hitherto maintained almost complete independence. After the 
death of Timur, Armenia formed part of the territories of the 
Turkoman dynasties of Ak- and Kara-Kuyunli, and under their 



milder rule the seat of the Catholicus, which, during the Seljuk 
invasion, had been moved first to Sivas, and then to Lesser 
Armenia, was re-established, 1441, at Echmiadzin. 

In 1514, the Persian campaign of Selim I. gave Armenia to the 
Osmanli Turks, and its reorganization was entrusted to Idris, the 
historian, who was a Kurd of Bitlis. Idris found the 
rich arable lands almost deserted, and the mountains Turkey 
bristling with the castles of independent chieftains, of 
Kurd, Arab and Armenian descent, between whom there were 
long-standing feuds. He compelled the Kurds to settle on the 
vacant lands, and divided the country into small sanjaks which 
in the plains were governed by Turkish officials, and in the 
mountains by local chiefs. This policy gave rest to the country, 
but favoured the growth of Kurd influence and power, which by 
1 534 had spread westwards to Angora. . Armenia was invaded 
by the Persians in 1575, and again in 1604, when Shah Abbas 
transplanted many thousand Armenians from Julfa to his new 
capital Isfahan. In 1639, the province of Erivan, which included 
Echmiadzin, was assigned by treaty to Persia, and it remained 
in her hands until it passed to Russia, 1828, under the treaty 
of Turkman-chai. The Turko-Russian War of 1828-29, which 
advanced the Russian frontier to the Arpa Chai, was followed by 
a large emigration of Armenians from Turkish to Russian terri- 
tory, and a smaller exodus took place after the war of 1877-78, 
which gave Ba'tum, Ardahan and Kars to Russia. In 1834 
the independent power of the Kurds in Armenia was greatly 
curtailed; and risings under Bedr Khan Bey in 1843, and Sheik 
Obeidullah in 1880, were firmly suppressed. 

After the capture of Constantinople, 1453, Mahommed II. 
organized his non-Moslem subjects in communities, or millets, 
under ecclesiastical chiefs to whom he gave absolute 
authority in civil and religious matters, and in criminal An^ n f" 
offences that did not come under the Moslem religious ans. 
law. Under this system the Armenian bishop of Brusa, 
who was appointed patriarch of Constantinople by the sultan, 
became the civil, and practically the ecclesiastical head of his 
community (Ermeni millet), and a recognized officer of the 
imperial government with the rank of vizier. He was assisted 
by a council of bishops and clergy, and was represented in each 
province by a bishop. This imperium in imperio secured to the 
Armenians a recognized position before the law, the free enjoy- 
ment of their religion, the possession of their churches and 
monasteries, and the right to educate their children and manage 
their municipal affairs. It also encouraged the growth of a 
community life, which eventually gave birth to an intense 
longing for national life. On the other hand it degraded the 
priesthood. The priests became political leaders rather than 
spiritual guides, and sought promotion by bribery and intrigue. 
Education was neglected and discouraged, servility and treachery 
were developed, and in less than a century the people had become 
depraved and degraded to an almost incredible extent. After the 
issue, 1839, of the hatt-i-sherif of Giil-khaneh, the tradesmen 
and artisans of the capital freed themselves from clerical control. 
Under regulations, approved by the sultan in 1862, the patriarch 
remained the official representative of the community, but all 
real power passed into the hands of clerical and lay councils 
elected by a representative assembly of 140 members. The 
" community," which excluded Roman Catholics and Protestants, 
was soon called the " nation," " domestic " became " national " 
affairs, and the " representative " the " national " assembly. 

The connexion of " Lesser Armenia "with the Western powers 
led to the formation, 1335, of an Armenian fraternity, " the 
Unionists," which adopted the dogmas of the Roman 
church, and at the council of Florence, 1439, was catholics. 
entitled the " United Armenian Church." Under the 
millet system the unionists were frequently persecuted by the 
patriarchs, but this ended in 1830, when, at the intervention of 
France, they were made a community (Katoluk millet), with their 
own ecclesiastical head. The Roman Catholics, through the works 
issued by the Mechitharists at Venice, have greatly promoted the 
progress of education and the development of Armenian literature. 
They are most numerous at Constantinople, Angora and Smyrna. 



ARMENIA 



567 



The Protestant movement, initiated at Constantinople by 
American missionaries in 1831, was opposed by the patriarchs 

and Russia. In 1846 the patriarch anathematized all 
tanis. ' Armenians with Protestant sympathies, and this led 

to the formation of the " Evangelical Church of the 
Armenians," which was made, after much opposition from France 
and Russia, a community (Protestant millet), at the instance of the 
British ambassador. The missionaries afterwards founded colleges 
on the Bosporus, at Kharput, Marsivan and Aintab, to supply 
the needs of higher university education, and they opened good 
schools for both sexes at all their stations. Everywhere they 
supplied the people with pure, wholesome literature, and repre- 
sented progress and religious liberty. 

When Abd-ul-Hamid came to the throne of Turkey in 1876, the 
condition of the Armenians was better than it had ever been under 

the Osmanlis; but with the close of the war of 1877-78 
Armenian came the " Armenian Question." By the treaty of San 
question. Stefano, Turkey engaged to Russia to carry out reforms 

" in the provinces inhabited by the Armenians, and 
to guarantee their security against the Kurds and Circassians." 
By the treaty of Berlin, 13th of July 1878, a like engagement to the 
six signatory powers was substituted for that to Russia. By the 
Cyprus convention, 4th of June 1878, the sultan promised Great 
Britain to introduce necessary reforms " for the protection of the 
Christians and other subjects of the Porte " in the Turkish 
territories in Asia. The Berlin treaty encouraged the Armenians 
to look to the powers, and not to Russia for protection; and the 
convention, which did not mention the Armenians, was regarded 
as placing them under the special protection of Great Britain. 
This impression was strengthened by the action of England at 
Berlin in insisting that Russia should evacuate the occupied 
territory before reforms were introduced, and so removing the 
only security for their introduction. The presentation of identic 
and collective notes to the Porte by the powers, in 1880, produced 
no result, and in 1882 it was apparent that Turkey would only 
yield to compulsion. In 1881 a circular note from the British 
ministry to the five powers was evasively answered, and in 1883 
Prince Bismarck intimated to the British government that 
Germany cared nothing about Armenian reforms and that the 
matter had better be allowed to drop. Russia had changed her 
policy towards the Armenians, and the other powers were 
indifferent. The so-called " Concert of Europe " was at an end, 
but British ministries continued to call the attention of the 
sultan to his obligations under the treaty of Berlin. 

Russia began to interest herself in the Armenians when she 
acquired Georgia in 1801; but it was not until 1828-1829 that 

any appreciable number of them became her subjects. 
policy " She found them necessary to the development of her 

new territories, and allowed them much freedom. 
They were permitted, within certain limits, to develop their 
national life; many became wealthy, and many rose to high 
positions in the military and civil service of the state. After the 
war of 1877-78 the Russian consuls in Turkey encouraged the 
formation of patriotic committees in Armenia, and a project was 
formed to create a separate state, under the supremacy of Russia, 
which was to include Russian, Persian and Turkish Armenia. 
The project was favoured by Loris-Melikov, then all-powerful in 
Russia, but in 1881 Alexander II. was assassinated, and shortly 
afterwards a strongly anti-Armenian policy was adopted. The 
schools were closed, the use of the Armenian language was dis- 
couraged, and attempts were made to Russify the Armenians and 
bring them within the pale of the Russian Church. All hope of 
practical self-government under Russian protection now ceased, 
and the Armenians of Tiflis turned their attention to Turkish 
Armenia. They had seen the success of the Slav committees 
in treating disturbances in the Balkans, and became the moving 
spirit in the attempts to produce similar troubles in Armenia. 
Russia made no real effort to check the action of her Armenian 
subjects, and after 1884 she steadily opposed any active inter- 
ference by Great Britain in favour of the Turkish Armenians. 
When Echmiadzin passed to Russia, in 1828, the Catholicus began 
to claim spiritual jurisdiction over the whole Armenian Church, 



and the submission of the patriarch of Constantinople was 
obtained by Russia when she helped the sultan against 
Mehemet Ali. Subsequently Russia secured the submission of 
the independent catholicus of Sis, and thus acquired a power of 
interference in Armenian affairs in all parts of the world. During 
1900 Russia showed renewed interest in Turkish Armenia by 
securing the right to construct all railways in it, and in the 
Armenians by pressing the Porte to restore order and introduce 
reforms. 

The Berlin treaty was a disappointment to the Gregorian 
Armenians, who had hoped that Armenia and Cilicia would have 
been formed into an autonomous province administered by 
Christians. But the formation of such a province was impossible. 
The Gregorians were scattered over the empire, and, except in a 
few small districts, were nowhere in a majority. Nor were they 
bound together by any community of thought or sentiment. 
The Turkish-speaking Armenians of the south could scarcely 
converse with the Armenian-speaking people of the north; and 
the ignorant mountaineers of the east had nothing in common, 
except religion, with the highly educated townsmen 
of Constantinople and Smyrna. After the change in yo„ajy 
Russian policy and the failure of the powers to secure movement 
reforms, the advanced party amongst the Armenians, 
some of whom had been educated in Europe and been deeply 
affected by the fiee thought and Nihilistic tendencies of the day, 
determined to secure their object by the production of disturb- 
ances such as those that had given birth to Bulgaria. Societies 
were formed at Tiflis and in several European capitals for the 
circulation of pamphlets and newspapers, and secret societies, 
such as the Huntchagist, were instituted for more revolutionary 
methods. An active propaganda was carried on in Turkish 
Armenia by emissaries, who tried to introduce arms and explo- 
sives, and represented the ordinary incidents of Turkish misrule 
to Europe as serious atrocities. The revolutionary movement 
was joined by some of the younger men, who formed local 
committees on the Nihilist plan, but it was strongly opposed 
by the Armenian clergy and the American missionaries, who saw 
the impossibility of success; and its irreligious tendency and the 
self-seeking ambition of its leaders made it unacceptable to the 
mass of the people. Exasperated at their failure, the emissaries 
organized attacks on individuals, wrote threatening letters, and 
at last posted revolutionary placards, 5th of January 1893, at 
Yuzgat, and on the walls of the American College at Marsivan. In 
the last case the object of the Huntchagists was to compromise 
the missionaries, and in this they succeeded. The Americans were 
accused of issuing the placards; two Armenian professors were 
imprisoned ; and the girls' school was burned down. Outbreaks, 
easily suppressed, followed at Kaisarieh and other places. 

One of the revolutionary dreams was to make the ancient 
Daron the centre of a new Armenia. But the movement met with 
no encouragement, either amongst the prosperous peasants on the 
rich plain of Mush or in the mountain villages of Sasun. In the 
summer of 1893, an emissary was captured near Mush, and the 
governor, hoping to secure others, ordered the Kurdish Irregular 
Horse to raid the mountain district. The Armenians drove off 
the Kurds, 1 and, when attacked in the spring of 1894, again held 
their own. The vali now called up regular troops from Erzingan; 
and the sultan issued a firman calling upon all loyal subjects 
to aid in suppressing the revolt. A massacre of a most brutal 
character, in which Turkish soldiers took part, followed; and 
aroused deep indignation in Europe. In November 1894 a 
Turkish commission of inquiry was sent to Armenia, and was 
accompanied by the consular delegates of Great Britain, France 
and Russia, who elicited the fact that there had been no attempt 

1 The Armenians and Kurds have lived together from the earliest 
times. The adoption of Islam by the latter, and by many Armenians, 
divided the people sharply into Christian and Moslem, and placed the 
Christian in a position of inferiority. But the relations between the 
two sects were not unfriendly previously to the Russian campaigns 
in Persia and Turkey. After 1829 the relations became less friendly; 
and later, when the Armenians attracted the sympathies of the 
European powers after the war of 1877-78, they became bitterly 
hostile. 



5 68 



ARMENIAN' CHURCH 



at revolt to justify the action of the authorities. Throughout 
1894 the state of the country bordered upon anarchy, and 
during the winter of 1 894-1 895 the British government, with 
lukewarm support from France and Russia, pressed for adminis- 
trative reforms in the vilayets of Erzerum, Van, Bitlis, Sivas, 
Memuret-el-Aziz (Kharput) and Diarbekr. The Porte made 
counter-proposals, and officials concerned in the Sasun massacres 
were decorated and rewarded. On the nth of May 1895 the 
three powers presented to the sultan a complicated scheme of 
reforms which was more calculated to increase than to lessen 
the difficulties connected with the government of Armenia; but 
it was the only one to which Russia would agree. The sultan 
delayed his answer. Great Britain was in favour of coercion, but 
Russia, when sounded, replied that she " would certainly not 
join in any coercive measures " and she was supported by France. 
At this moment, 21st of June 1895, Lord Rosebery's cabinet 
resigned, and when Lord Salisbury's government resumed the 
negotiations in August, the sultan appealed to France and Russia 
against England. During the negotiations the secret societies had 
not been inactive. Disturbances occurred at Tarsus; Armenians 
who did not espouse the " national " cause were murdered; the 
life of the patriarch was threatened; and a report was circu- 
lated that the British ambassador wished some Armenians killed 
to give him an excuse for bringing the fleet to Constantinople. 
On the 1st of October 1895 a number of Armenians, some armed, 
went in procession with a petition to the Porte and were ordered 
by the police to disperse. Shots were, fired, and a riot occurred 
in which many Armenian and some Moslem lives were lost. The 
British ambassador now pressed the scheme of reforms upon the 
sultan, who accepted it on the 1 7 th of October. Meanwhile there 
had been a massacre at Trebizond (October 8), in which armed 
men from Constantinople took part, and it had become evident 
that no united action on the part of the powers was to be feared. 
The sultan refused to publish the scheme of reforms, and massacre 
followed massacre in Armenia in quick succession until the 1st 
of January 1896. Nothing was done. Russia refused to agree 
to any measure of coercion, and declared (December 19) 
that she would take no action except such as was needed for 
the protection of foreigners. Great Britain was not prepared 
to act alone. In the summer of 1896 (June 14-22) there 
were massacres at Van, Egin, and Niksar; and on the 26th of 
August the Imperial Ottoman Bank at Constantinople was 
seized by revolutionists as a demonstration against the Christian 
powers who had left the Armenians to their fate. The project 
was known to the Porte, and the rabble, previously armed 
and instructed, were at once turned loose in the streets. Two 
days' massacre followed, during which from 6000 to 7000 
Gregorian Armenians perished. 

The massacres were apparently organized and carried out in 
accordance with a well-considered plan. They occurred, except 
The mas- ' n six P^ aces ' in tne vilayets to which the scheme of 
gac,^ reforms was to apply. At Trebizond they took place 
just before the sultan accepted that scheme, and after 
his acceptance of it they spread rapidly. They were confined 
to Gregorian and Protestant Armenians. The Roman Catholics 
were protected by France, the Greek Christians by Russia. The 
massacre of Syrians, Jacobites and Chaldees at Urfa and else- 
where formed no part of the original plan. Orders were given 
to protect foreigners, and in some cases guards were placed over 
their houses. The damage to the American buildings at Kharput 
was due to direct disobedience of orders. The attacks on the 
bazars were made without warning, during business hours, when 
the men were in their shops and the women in their houses. 
Explicit promises were given, in some instances, that there would 
be no danger to those who opened their shops, but they were 
deliberately broken. Nearly all those who, from their wealth, 
education and influence, would have had a share in the govern- 
ment under the scheme of reforms, were killed and their families 
ruined by the destruction of their property. Where any attempt 
at defence was made the slaughter was greatest. The only 
successful resistance was at Zeitun, where the people received 
honourable terms after three months' fighting. In some towns 



the troops and police took an active part in the massacres. At 
Kharput artillery was used- In some the slaughter commenced 
and ended by bugle-cal'l, and in a few instances the Armenians 
were disarmed beforehand. Wherever a superior official or army 
officer intervened the massacre at once ceased, and wherever 
a governor stood firm there was no disturbance. The actual 
perpetrators of the massacres were the local Moslems, aided by 
Lazis, Kurds and Circassians. A large majority of the Moslems 
disapproved of the massacres, and many Armenians were saved 
by Moslem friends. But the lower orders were excited by reports 
that the Armenians, supported by the European powers, were 
plotting the overthrow of the sultan; and their cupidity was 
aroused by the prospect of wiping out their heavy debts tp 
Armenian pedlars and merchants. No one was punished for the 
massacres, and many of those implicated in them were rewarded. 
In some districts, especially in the Kharput vilayet, the cry of 
" Islam or death " was raised. Gregorianpriests and Protestant 
pastors were tortured, but preferred death to apostasy. Men and 
women were killed in prison and in churches in cold blood. 
Churches, monasteries, schools and houses were plundered and 
destroyed. In some places there was evidence of the previous 
activity of secret societies, in others none. The number of those 
who perished, excluding Constantinople, was 20,000 to 25,000.' 
Many were forced to embrace Islam, and numbers were reduced 
to poverty. The destruction of property was enormous, the 
hardest-working and best tax-paying element in the country was 
destroyed, or impoverished, and where the breadwinners were 
killed the women and children were left destitute. Efforts by 
Great Britain and the United States to alleviate the distress were 
opposed by the authorities, but met with some success. After 
the massacres the number of students in the American schools 
and colleges increased, and many Gregorian Armenians became 
Roman Catholics in order to obtain the protection of France. 
: The Armenian revolutionary societies continued their pro- 
paganda down to the granting of the Turkish constitution in 
1908; and meanwhile further massacres occurred here and there, 
notably at Mush (1904) and Van (1908). 

See Abich, Geologie d. armenischen Hochlandes (Wien, 1882); 
Bishop, Journeys in Persia and Kurdistan {Land., 1891); Bliss, 
Turkey and the Armenian Atrocities (Lond., 1896); Bryce, Trans- 
caucasia and Ararat (4th ed., Lond., 1896); De Coursous, La 
Rebellion armenienne (Paris, 1895); Lepsius, Armenia and Europe 
(Lond., 1897); Murray, Handbook for Asia Minor (Lond., 1895); 
Parly. Papers, Turkey, I. (1895); Turkey, I., II. (1896); Supan, 
"Die Verbreitung d. Armenier in der asiatischen Tiirkei, u. in 
Transkaukasien," in Pet. Mitt. vol. xlii. (1896); Tozer, Turkish 
Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor (Lond., l88i>; Cholet, Armeftie, 
Kurdistan, et Mesopotamie (1892); Lynch, Armenia (2 vols., 1901). 

(C. W. W.) 

ARMENIAN CHURCH. No trustworthy account exists of 
the evangelization of Armenia, for the legend of King Abgar's 
correspondence with Christ, even if it contained any historical 
truth, only relates to Edessa and Syriac Christianity. That the 
Armenians appropriated from the Syrians this, as well as the 
stories of Bartholomew and Thaddeus (the Syriac Addai), was 
merely an avowal on their part that Edessa was the centre from 
which the faith radiated over theirland. In the 4th century and 
later the liturgy was still read in Syriac in parts of Armenia, 
and the New Testament, the history of Eusebius, the homilies of 
Aphraates, the works of St Ephraem and many other early 
books were translated from Syriac, from which tongue most 
of their ecclesiological terms were derived. The earliest notice 
of an organized church in Armenia is in Eusebius, H, E. vi. 46, 
to the effect that Dionysius of Alexandria c. 250 sent a letter to 
Meru'zanes, bishop of the brethren in Armenia. There were many 
Christians in Melitene at the time of the Decian persecution in 
a.d. 250, and two bishops from Great Armenia were present at the 
council of Nice in 325. King Tiridates (c. a.d. 238-314) had 
already been baptized some time after 261 by Gregory the 
Illuminator. The latter was ordained priest and appointed 
catholicus or exarch of the church of Great Armenia by Leontius, 
bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. This one fact is certain amidst 
the fables which soon. obscured the history of this great missionary. 

1 According to some estimates the number killed was .50,000 or more. 



ARMENIAN CHURCH 



5 6 9 



Thus the church of Great Armenia began as a province of the 
Cappadocian see. But there was a tradition of a line of bishops 
earlier than Gregory' in Siuniq, a region east of Ararat along the 
Araxes (Aras), which in early times claimed to be independ- 
ent of the catholicus. The Adoptianist bishop Archelaus, who 
opposed the entry of Mani into Armenia under Probus c. 277, was 
also perhaps a Syriac -speaking bishop of Pers-Armenia. Almost 
the earliest document revealing anything of the inner organiza- 
tion and condition of the Armenian church in the Nicene age is 
the epistle of Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, to the Armenian 
bishop Verthanes, written between 325 and 335 and preserved 
in Armenian. Its genuineness has been unreasonably suspected. 
It insists on the erection of fonts; on distinction of grades 
among the ordained clergy; on not postponing baptism too 
long; on bishops and priests alone, and not deacons, being 
allowed to baptize and lay hands on or confirm the baptized; 
on avoiding communion with Arians; on the use of unleavened 
bread in the Sacrament, &c. We learn from it that the bishop 
of Basen and Bagrevand was an Arian at that time. By the year 
450 these two districts already had separate bishops of their own. 
The letter of Macarius, therefore, if a forgery, must be a' very 
early one. 1 The Armenians must, like the Georgians a little 
later, have set store by the opinion of the bishop of Jerusalem, 
or they would not have sent to consult him. It was equally from 
Jerusalem that they subsequently adopted their lectionary and 
arrangement of the Christian year; and a oth-century copy 
of this lectionary in the Paris library preserves to us precious 
details of the liturgical usages of Jerusalem in the 4th century. 
We can trace the presence of Armenian convents on the Mount 
of Olives as early as the 5th century. 

Tradition represents the conversion of Great Armenia under 
Gregory and Tiridates as a sort of triumphant march, in which 
the temples of the demons and their records were destroyed 
wholesale, and their undefended sites instantly converted into 
Christian churches. The questions arise: how was the tran- 
sition from old to new effected? and what was the type of 
teaching dominant in the new church? Armenian tradition, 
confirmed by nearly contemporary Greek sources, answers the 
first question. The old order went on, but under new names. 
The priestly families, we learn, hearing that the God preached by 
Gregory needed not sacrifice, sent to the king a deputation and 
asked how they were to live, if they became Christians; for until 
then the priests and their families had lived off the portions 
of the animal victims and other offerings reserved to them by 
pagan custom. Gregory replied that, if they would join the new 
religion, not only should the sacrifices continue, but they should 
have larger perquisites then ever. The priestly families then 
went over en masse. How far the older sacrificial rules resembled 
the levitical law we do not know, but in the canons of Sahak, 
c. 430, the priests already receive the levitical portions of the 
victims; and we find that animals are being sacrificed every 
Sunday, on the feast days which at first were few, in fulfilment 
of private vows, in expiation of the sins of the living, and still 
more of those of the dead. No one might kill his own meat and 
deprive the priest of his due; but this rule did not apply to the 
chase. The earliest Armenian rituals contain ample services for 
the conduct of an agape (q.v.) or love feast held in the church off 
sacrificial meat. The victim was slaughtered by the priest in 
the church porch before the crucifix, after it had been ritually 
wreathed and given the holy salt, by licking which it appropri- 
ated a sacramental purity or efficacy previously conveyed into the 
salt by exorcisms and consecration. In the canons of Sahak the 
priest is represented as eating the sins of the people in these repasts. 

1 If a forgery, why should this letter have been assigned to Macarius, 
a comparatively obscure person whose name is not even found in the 
menaea of the Eastern church ? But convincing proof of its authen- 
ticity lies in Macarius' reference to himself as merely archbishop of 
Jerusalem, and his avowal that he was unwilling to advise the 
Armenians, " being oppressed by the weakness of the authority con- 
ceded him by the weighty usages of the church." Jerusalem was only 
allowed to rank as a patriarchate in 451, and the seventh canon of 
Nice subordinated the see to that of Caesarea in Palestine. To this 
decree Macarius somewhat bitterly alludes. 



It is easy to underrate the importance in religion of a change 
of names. The old sacrificial hymns were probably obscene 
and certainly nonsensical, and the substitution for them of the 
psalms, and of lections of the prophets and New Testament, was 
an enormous gain. We do not know precisely how the euchar- 
istic rite was adjusted to these sacrificial meals; but, in the 
canons of Sahak, 1 Cor. xi. 17-34 is interpreted of these meals, 
which were known as the Dominical (suppers). The Eucharist 
was, therefore, long associated with the matal or animal victim, 
and only in the 8th century do we hear of an interval of time being 
left between the fleshly and the spiritual sacrifices, as the two 
rites were then called. The Basilian service of the Eucharist 
was used in the 5th century, but superseded later on by a 
Byzantine rite which will be found translated in F. E. Bright- 
man's Eastern Liturgies. The Eucharist was no doubt the one 
important sacrifice in the minds of the clergy who had attended 
the schools of Constantinople and Alexandria; yet the heart of 
the people remained in their ancient blood-offerings, and as late 
as the 1 2th century they were prone to deny that the mass could 
expiate the sins of the dead unless accompanied by the sacrifice 
of an animal. Perhaps even to-day the worst fate that can befall 
a villager after death is to be deprived, not of commemoration 
in the mass, but of the victim slain for his sins. The keenest 
spiritual weapon of the Armenian priest was ever a threat not to 
offer the matal for a man when he died. 

Another survival in the Armenian church was the hereditary 
priesthood. None but a scion of a priestly family could become 
a deacon, elder or bishop. Accordingly the primacy remained 
in the family of Gregory until about 374, when the king Pap 
or Bab murdered Nerses, who had been ordained by Eusebius 
of Caesarea (362-370) and was over-zealous in implanting in 
Armenia the canons about celibacy, marriage, fasting, hospices 
and monastic life which Basil had established in Cappaddcia. 
It may be remarked that Gregory's own family was a cadet 
branch of the Arsacid kin which had occupied the thrones of 
Persia, Bactria, Armenia and Georgia. His primacy therefore 
was in itself a survival of an earlier age when king and priest 
were one. He was in fact a rex sacrificulus , and later on, when 
the Arsacid dynasty fell in Armenia c. a.d. 428, the Armenian 
catholicus became the symbol of national unity and the rallying- 
point of patriotism. The line of Gregory was restored in 390 in 
the person of Isaac or Sahak, son of Nerses, and his patriarchate 
was the golden age of Armenian literature. But by this time the 
autonomy of the Armenian church was thoroughly established. 
On the death of Nerses the right of saying grace at the royal 
meals, which was the essence of the catholicate, was transferred by 
the king, in despite of the Greeks, to the priestly family of Albianus, 
and thenceforth no Armenian catholicus went to Caesarea for 
ordination. The ties with Greek official Christendom were 
snapped for ever, and in subsequent ages the doctrinal preferences 
of the Armenians were usually determined more by antagonism 
to the Greeks than by reflection. If they accepted the council 
of Ephesus in 430 and joined in the condemnation of Nestorius, 
it was rather because the Sassanid kings of Persia, who thirsted 
for the reconquest of Armenia, favoured Nestorianism, a form of 
doctrine current in Persia and rejected in Byzantium. But later 
on, about 480, and throughout the following centuries, the 
Armenians rejected the decrees of Chalcedon and held that the 
assertion of two natures in Christ was a relapse into the heresy of 
Nestor. From the close of the 5th century the Armenians have 
remained monophysite, like the Copts and Abyssinians, and have 
only broken the record with occasional short interludes of ortho- 
doxy, as when in 633 the emperor Heraclius forced reunion on 
them, under a catholicus named Esdras, at a council held in 
Erzerum. Even then all parties were careful not to mention 
Chalcedon. The march of Arab conquest kept the Armenians 
friendly to Byzantium for a few years; but in 718- the catholicus 
John of Odsun ascended the throne and at the council of Manaz- 
kert in 728 repeated and confirmed the anathemas against 
Chalcedon and the tome of Leo, that had been first pronounced by 
the catholicus Babken in 491 at a synod held in Valarshapat by 
the united Armenian, Georgian or Iberian, and Albanian churches. 



57° 



ARMENIAN CHURCH 



The Armenians marked their complete disruption with the Greeks 
by starting an era of their own at the synod of Dvin. The era 
began on the nth of July 552, and their year is vague, that is to 
say, it does not intercalate a day in February every fourth year, 
like the Julian calendar. 

The two churches of Iberia and Albania at first depended on 
the Armenian for ordination of their primates or catholici, and in 
large part owed their first constitution to Armenian missionaries 
sent by Gregory the Illuminator. The Iberians still reverence 
as saints the Armenian doctors of the 5th century, but as early 
as 552 they began to resent the dictatorial methods of the 
Armenians, as well might a proud race of mountaineers who 
never wholly lost their political independence; and they broke 
off their allegiance to the Armenian see very soon afterwards, 
accepted Chalcedon and joined the Byzantine church. The 
Albanians of the Caucasus were also converted in the age of 
Gregory, early in the 4th century, and were loyal to the 
Armenians in the great struggle against Mazdaism in the 5th; 
but broke away for a time towards 600, and chose a patriarch 
without sending him to Armenia for ordination. Eventually 
this interesting church was engulfed by the rising tide of 
Mahommedan conquest, but not before one of their bishops, 
named Israel, had converted (677-703) the Huns who lay to the 
north of the Caspian and had translated the Bible and liturgies 
into their language. If the Albanian and Hunnish versions could 
be found, they would be of the greatest linguistic importance. 

The mother church of Armenia was established by Gregory at 
Ashtishat in the province of Taron, on the site of the great temple 
of Wahagn, whose festival on the seventh of the month Sahmi 
was reconsecrated to John the Baptist and Athenogenes, an 
Armenian martyr and Greek hymn writer. The first of Navasard, 
the Armenian new year's day, was the feast of a god Vanatur 
or Wanadur (who answered to Zei)s £«nos) in the holy pilgrim 
city of Bagawan. His day was reconsecrated to the Baptist, 
whose relics were brought to Bagawan. The feast of Anahite, 
the Armenian Venus and spouse of the chief god Aramazd, was 
in the same way rededicated to the Virgin Mary, who for long was 
not very clearly distinguished by the Armenians from the virgin 
mother church. The old cult of sacred stones and trees by an 
easy transition became cross-worship, but a cross was not sacred 
until the Christ had been, by priestly prayer and invocation, 
transferred into it. 

What was the earliest doctrine of the churches of Armenia? 
If we could believe the fathers of the 5th and succeeding cen- 
turies Nicene orthodoxy prevailed in their country from the first; 
and in the 5 th century they certainly chose for translation the 
works of orthodox fathers alone, such as Chrysostom, Basil, 
Gregory of Nyssa and Gregory Nazianzen, Cyril of Jerusalem and 
Cyril of Alexandria, Athanasius, Julius of Rome, Hippolytus, 
Irenaeus, avoiding Origen and other fathers who were becoming 
suspect. However, we do hear of versions of Nestorian writers 
like Diodore of Tarsus being in circulation, and the Disputation of 
Archelaus proves that the current orthodoxy of eastern Armenia 
was Adoptianist, if not Ebionite in tone. The Persian Armenians 
as late as the 6th century had not heard of the faith of Nicaea, 
and only then received it from the catholicus Babken. They sent 
a copy of their old creed to Babken, and it closely resembles the 
Adoptianist creed of Archelaus, the gist of which was that Jesus, 
until his thirtieth year, was a man mortal like other men; then, 
because he was righteous above all others, he was promoted to the 
honour and name of Son of God. He received the title by grace, 
but was not equal to God the Father. Because the Spirit worked 
with him, he was able to vanquish Satan and all desires, and 
because of his righteousness and good works he was made worthy 
of grace and became a Temple of God the Word, which came 
down from heaven in Jordan, dwelt in him and through him 
wrought miracles. From such a standpoint the baptism of Jesus 
was the moment of the divine incarnation. The man righteous 
above all others was then reborn of. the Spirit, was illuminated, 
was spiritually anointed, became the Christ and Son of God. In 
effect the fathers of the Armenian church often fell back into such 
language, far removed as it is from orthodoxy; and they em- 



phasized the importance of thebaptismal feast of the Epiphany on 
the 6th of January by refusing to accept the feast of the physical 
birth of the 25th of December. As late as 1165 their patriarch 
Nerses defends the Armenian custom of keeping Christmas on 
the 6th of January on the express ground that as he was born 
after the flesh from the Virgin, so he was born by way of baptism 
from the Jordan. The custom from the first, he says, had been 
to feast on one and the same day the two births, much as they 
differed in sacramental import and in point of time. We see 
how deep the early Adoptianism had struck its roots, when a 
primate of the 12th century could still appeal to the baptismal 
regeneration of Jesus. The same Nerses held that the second 
Adam, Jesus Christ, received a new body and nature and the 
sevenfold grace of the Spirit in the Jordan. The Armenian 
doctors also taught that John by laying hands on Jesus and 
ordaining him at his baptism sacramentally transferred to him 
the three graces or charismata of kingship, prophecy and priest- 
hood which had belonged to ancient Israel. After baptism, if 
not before, the flesh of Christ was incorruptible. It consisted of 
ethereal fire, and he was not subject to the ordinary phenomena 
of digestion, secretions and evacuations. 

Monastic institutions were hardly introduced in Armenia 
before the 5th century, though Christian rest-houses had been 
erected along the high-roads long before and are mentioned in 
the Disputation of Archelaus. The Armenians called them wanq, 
and out of them grew the monasteries. The monks were, strictly 
speaking, penitents wearing the cowl, and not allowed to take 
a part in church government. This belonged to the elders. At 
first there was no separate episcopal ordination, and the one rite 
of elder or priest (Armen. Qahanay, Heb. cohen) sufficed. There 
were also deacons, half-deacons and readers. Besides these there 
was a class of wardapets or teachers, answering to the didascalos of 
the earliest church, whose province it was to guard the doctrine 
and for whom no rite of ordination is found in the older rituals. 

A few other peculiarities of Armenian church usage or belief 
deserve notice. In baptism the rubric ordains that the baptized 
be plunged three times in the font in commemoration of the 
entombment during three days of the Lord. In the West trine 
immersion was generally held to be symbolic of the triune name 
of " Father, Son and Holy Ghost." This name the Armenians 
have used, at least since the year 700; before which date their 
fathers often speak of baptism into the death of Christ as the 
one essential. As late as about 1300 a traveller hostile to the 
Armenians reported to the pope that he had witnessed baptisms 
without any trinitarian invocation in as many as three hundred 
parish churches. 

The paschal lamb is now eaten on Sunday, but until the nth 
century, and even later, it was eaten with the Eucharist at a 
Lord's Supper celebrated on the evening of Maundy Thursday 
after the rite of pedilavium or washing of feet. On the morning 
of the same day the penitents were released from their fast. 

The rite of extreme unction was introduced in the crusading 
epoch, although it was already usual to anoint the bodies of dead 
priests. The worship of images never seems to have taken root 
among Armenians; indeed they supplied the Greek world with 
iconoclast soldiers and emperors. The worship of crosses into 
which the Spirit or Christ had been inserted by the priest must 
have satisfied the religious needs of a people who, save in archi- 
tecture, showed little artistic faculty. In their older rituals we 
find a rite for blessing a painted church, but no word of statues. 
Frescoes in their churches are rare, and mostly too high up for 
veneration to be paid to them. 

On certain days the cross was washed, and the water in which 
it had been washed was a sovereign charm for curing sickness 
in men and animals and for bringing fertility to the land. 

In the older rituals we find a rite of exhomologesis, for restoring 
those who had sinned after baptism. It was a medicine of sin 
that could only be used once and not a second time. In form 
it is a rehearsal of the first baptismal rite, but with omission 
of the water. It involved like the first rite open confession and 
repentance, and absolution by the church. In a later and less 
rigorous age this rite was abridged and adjusted to constant 



ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



57i 



repetition, in such wise that a sinner could be restored to grace 
not once only, but as often as the clergy chose to accept his 
repentance and confession. Thus the whole development of the 
penitentiary system is traceable in the MSS. 

The confession of a dying man might be taken by any layman 
present, and written down in order to be shown to the priest when 
he arrived. It then was the duty of the latter to supplicate for 
his forgiveness, and administer to him the Eucharist. 

The clergy of all grades were originally married. The parish 
priests, or white clergy, are so still, except some of the Latinizing 
ones. But since the 12th century, or even earlier, the higher 
clergy, i.e. patriarchs and bishops, have taken monkish vows and 
worn the cowl. 

There were abortive attempts to unite the Armenian church 
with the Byzantine in the 9th century under the patriarch 
Photius, and again late in the 12th under the emperor Manuel 
Comnenus, when a joint council met at Romkla, near Tarsus, but 
ended in nothing (a.d. 1170). Neither could the Armenians keep 
on good terms even with the Syriac monophysites. From the 
age of the crusades on, the Armenians of Cilicia, whose patriarch 
sat at Sis, improved their acquaintance with Rome; and more 
than one of their patriarchs adopted the Roman faith, at least in 
words. Dominican missions went to Armenia, and in 1328 under 
their auspices was formed a regular order called the United 
Brethren, the forerunners of the Uniats of the present day, who 
have convents at Venice and Vienna, a college in Rome and a 
numerous following in Turkey. They retain their Armenian 
liturgies and rites, pruned to suit the Vatican standards of ortho- 
doxy, and they recognize the pope as head of the church. 

The patriarchs of Great Armenia first resided at Ashtishat, 
on the Araxes. From 478 to 931 they occupied Dvin in the same 
neighbourhood, then Aghthamar, an island in the Lake of Van, 
931-967, the city of Ani, 992-1054, where are still visible the 
magnificent ruins of their churches and palaces. Since 1441 the 
chief catholicus has sat at Echmiadzin, the convent of Valar- 
shapat, now part of Russian Armenia. A rival catholicus, with a 
small following, still has his cathedral and see at Sis. The catho- 
licus of Valarshapat is nominally chosen by all Armenians. A 
synod of bishops, monks and doctors meets regularly to transact 
under his eye the business of the convent and the oecumenical 
affairs of the church; but its decisions are subject to the veto of 
a Russian procurator. There are Armenian patriarchs, subject 
to the spiritual jurisdiction of Echmiadzin, in Constantinople and 
Jerusalem. In the latter place the Armenians occupy a convent 
on Mount Sion, and keep up in the churches of the Sepulchre and 
of Bethlehem their own distinct rites and feasts, the only ones 
there which at all resemble those of the 4th century. 

The following list of councils was compiled by John, catholicus 
about the year 728, and read at the council of Manazkert, when 
the dogmatic and disciplinary attitude of the Armenian church 
was defined once and for all: — 

1. In twentieth year of catholicate of Gregory and thirty- 
seventh of Trdat, the king, on return of Aristaces from council of 
Nice, bringing the Nicene creed and canoi.s. 

2. Council held by St Nerses on his return from the council of 
the 1 50 fathers at Constantinople against Macedonius. 

3. Held by St Sahak and Mesrop on receipt of letters from 
Proclusand Cyril after the council of Ephesus, when the " Glory 
in the Highest " was adopted. Held against Nestorianism. 

4. Held by Joseph, disciple of Mashdotz (Mesrop) and St Sahak, 
in Shahapiwan in the sixth year of King Yazkert (i.e. Yazdegerd) 
of Persia, for the regulation of the church. Forty bishops pre- 
sent. (The Massalians were anathematized.) 

5. Held by Babken, catholicus, in the City-plain (i.e. Dvin), 
in the 18th year of King Kavat (i.e. Kavadh), against the 
heresy of Acacius and Barsuma (Bar-sauma), the friends of 
Nestorius. The true (Nicene) faith was sent to the Armenians of 
the farther East (shortly afterwards a slightly different creed was 
adopted, identical with a pseudo-Athanasian symbol used by 
Evagrius of Pontus and given in Greek in Patr. Gr. xxvi. Col. 
1232). 

6. At the beginning of the Armenian era, held by Nerses in 



Dvin, in the fourth year of his catholicate, in the fourteenth of 
Chosroes' reign and in the fourteenth of Justinian Caesar. 
Held against Chalcedon, uniting the Baptism and Christmas 
feasts on the 6th of January (Epiphany), declaring for mono- 
physitism, and adopting in the Trisagion the words " who wast 
crucified for us." This settlement lasted for about seventy-four 
years. 

7. After the retaking of Jerusalem and recovery of the Cross 
from the Persians in the eighteenth year of his "reign, Heraclius 
called a mixed council at Karin (Theodosiopolis) of Greeks and 
Armenians under Ezr (Esdras) , catholicus, at which the preceding 
council of Dvin was cursed, its reforms repudiated and the 
confession of Chalcedon adopted. This remained the official 
attitude of the Armenian church until the catholicate of Elias 
(703-7 1 7) . John, catholicus, denies to Ezr's meeting the name of 
council, and so makes his own the seventh. 

8. Under John, catholicus, in Manazkert, in the one hundred 
and seventieth year of the Armenian era ( = a.d. 728) under 
the presidency of Gregory Asharuni Chorepiscopos (Gregory 
Asheruni). All the Armenian bishops attended, as also the 
metropolitan of Urhha (Edessa), Jacobite bishops of Gartman, 
of Nfrkert, Amasia, by command of the archbishop of Antioch. 
Chalcedon was repudiated afresh, union with the Jacobites 
instituted, use of water and leaven in the Eucharist condemned, 
the five days' preliminary fast before Lent restored, Saturday as 
well as Sunday made a day of feasting and synaxis, any but the 
orthodox excluded from the Maundy Thursday Communion, 
the first communion of the new catechumens; union of the 
Baptismal and Christmas feasts was restored, and the faithful 
forbidden to fast on Fridays from Easter until Pentecost. In 
general these rules have been observed in the Armenian church 
ever since. 

For list of authorities on the Armenian church see the works 
enumerated at the end of Armenian Language and Literature. 
For the relations of the Armenian church to the Persian kings see 
Persia: Ancient History, section viii. §§ 2 and 3. (F. C. C.) 

ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE. The Arme- 
nian language belongs to the group called Indo-European, 
of which the Iranic and Indie tongues formed one 
branch, and Greek, Albanian, Italian, Celtic, Germanic suvge. 
and Baltic-Slavonic dialects the other great branch. Unlike 
most of these, Armenian lost its genders long before the year 
a.d. 400, when the existing literature begins. Modern Persian 
similarly has lost gender; and in both cases the liberation must 
have been due to attrition of other tongues which had a different 
system of gender or none at all. So the Armenians were ever in 
contact on the north with the Iberians of the Caucasus who had 
none, and with the Semitic races on the south and east which had 
other ways of forming genders than the Indo-European tongues. 

From the original Armenian stock can be readily distinguished 
a mass of Old and Middle Persian loan-words. These are so 
numerous that for a time Armenian was classed as an Iranian 
tongue. For more than a thousand years, say until a.d. 640, 
Armenia was an appanage of the realm of the Persians and 
Parthians. Until a.d. 428 the Armenian throne was occupied by 
a younger branch of the Arsacid dynasty that ruled in Persia 
until the advent of the Sassanids (c. a.d. 226), and the internal 
polity and court administration of Armenia were modelled on the 
Persian or Parthian. Accordingly over 200 proper and personal 
names in Armenia were Old Persian, as well as 700 names of 
things. If we count in the derivative forms of these words we 
get at least 2000 Old Persian words. Often the same Persian 
word was borrowed twice over in an earlier and later form at an 
interval of centuries, just as in English we inherit a word direct 
or have taken it from Latin, and have also assimilated from 
French a later form of the same. The Persian influence in 
Armenian was already strong as early as 400 B.C., when Xenophon 
used a Persian interpreter to converse. In some of the Armenian 
villages they answered him in Persian. The Persian loan-words 
already present in Armenian as early as a.d. 400 mirror the 
earlier political and social life of Armenia. Thus many of their 
kings and nobles had Persian names; Persian also were most 



572 



ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



words used in connexion with horses and the chase, with war 
and army, with dress, trade and coinage, calendar, weights and 
measures, with court and political institutions, with music, 
medicine, school, education, literature and the arts. Many 
everyday words were of the same origin, e.g. the words for village, 
desert, building and build, need, rich or liberal, arm (of body), 
rod or goad, face, opposite, wicked, unfriendly, discontented, 
difficult, daughter, eulogy, a youth, wary, enjoy, unhappy, 
volition, voluntary, unwilling, blind, cautious, blood-kin, coquet 
with, slumber, humble, mad, grace or favour, memory or atten- 
tion, grandfather, old woman, prepared, duty, necessary, end, 
endless, superior, confident, mistake, warmth, heat, glory. The 
language of their old religion was mainly Persian, but in the 
4th century they derived numerous ecclesiological words from the 
Syrians, from whom by way of Edessa and Nisibis Christianity 
penetrated eastern Armenia. The language of the garden and 
the names of plants were also Persian. They had their own 
numerals, but the words for one thousand and for ten thousand 
are Persian. 

Yet more indicative of the extent of the Persian influence is the 
adoption of the adjectival ending -akan and -zan, added to purely 
Armenian words; also of the preposition ham, answering to con 
in " conjoin," " conspire," added to purely Armenian words, as 
in hambarnam, I take away, and hamboir, a kiss, a word which, 
strange to say, the Iberians in turn borrowed from the Armenians. 
From Persia also the Armenians took their names for surround- 
ing races, e.g. Tatshik or Tajik, first for Arab and then for Turk, 
Ariq for Persians, Kapkoh for Caucasus, Hrazdan, Vaspuragan, 
&c. The Armenians call themselves Hay, plural Hayq; their 
country Hayasdan. The Iberians they called Virq or Wirq 
(where q marks the plural), the Medes Marq, the Cappadocians 
Gamirq (Cimmerians), the Greeks Y fines or Ionians; Ararat they 
call Masis, the Euphrates the Aradsan, the Tigris Teglath, 
Erzerum is Karin, Edessa Urhha, Nisibis Mdsbin, Ctesiphon 
Tizbon, &c. 

When the Persian and other loan-words are removed, a stock 
remains of native words and forms governed by other phonetic 
laws than those which govern the Aryan, i.e. Indian and Iranic, 
branch of the Indo-European tongues. Armenian appears to be 
a half-way dialect between the Aryan branch and Slavo-lettic. 
Much, however, in Armenian philology remains unexplained. 
For example the plural of nouns, pronouns and the first and 
second persons plural of verbs are all formed by adding a q or k, 
which has no parallel in any Indo-Germanic tongue. The 
genitive plural again is formed by adding a tz or c, and the same 
consonant characterizes the composite aorist and the conjunctive. 
In all three cases it is unexplained. In the verbs the termination 
m for the first singular at once explains itself, and the n of the 
third plural is the Indo-Germanic nti. But not so the second 
person singular ending in s, e.g. berem, I bear, beres, thou bearest. 
This has a superficial likeness to the I.-G. esi in bheresi, " thou 
bearest." Yet we should expect the s between vowels to vanish, 
and give us in Armenian bere. Perhaps, therefore, an old variant 
of esi, similar to the Greek katri, lies behind the Armenian es, 
thou art. and the es in beres, thou bearest. In any case it is clear 
that many of the oldest forms which Armenian shared with other 
Indo-Germanic dialects were lost and replaced by forms of which 
the origin is obscure. Perhaps a closer study of Mingrelian and 
Georgian will explain some of these peculiarities, for these and 
their cognate tongues must have had a wider range in the 7 th and 
8th centuries B.C. than they had later when clear history begins. 
The attempts made by S. Bugge to assimilate Old Armenian to 
Etruscan, and by P. Jensen to explain from it the Hittite inscrip- 
tions, appear to be fanciful. There is a large Semitic influence 
traceable in Armenian due to their early contact with the Syriac- 
speaking peoples to the south and east of them, and later to the 
Arab conquest. Much remains to be done in the way of collecting 
Armenian dialects, for which task there are written materials 
as far back as tha. 12 th century over and above the work to be 
done by an intelligent traveller armed with a phonograph. Two 
main dialects of Armenian are distinguishable to-day, that of 
Ararat and Tiflis, and that of Stambul and the coast cities of 



Asia Minor. The latter is much overlaid with Tatar or Turkish 
words, and the Tatar order of words distinguishes the modern 
Armenian sentence from the ancient. 

It remains to say that classical Armenian resembles rather the 
modern idiom of Van than of western Armenia. It was a plastic 
and noble language, capable of rendering faithfully; yet not 
servilely, the Greek Bible and Greek fathers. Often the Armenian 
translators, and especially after the 5th century, rendered word 
for word, preserving the order of the Greek. This literalness, 
though unpleasing from a literary standpoint, gives to many of 
their ancient versions the value almost of a Greek codex of the 
age in which the version was made. The same literalness also 
characterizes their translations from Syriac. 

The Armenians had a temple literature of their own, which 
was destroyed in the 4th and 5th centuries by the Christian 
clergy, so thoroughly that barely twenty lines of it literature. 
survive in the history of Moses of Khoren (Chorerie). 
Their Christian literature begins about 400 with the invention of 
the Armenian alphabet by Mesrop. This was probably an older 
alphabet to which Mesrop merely added vowels; but, in order 
to pacify the Greek ecclesiastics and the emperor Theodosius the 
Less, the Armenians concocted a story that it had been divinely 
revealed. Once their alphabet perfected, the catholicus Sahak 
formed a school of translators who were sent to Edessa, Athens, 
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Caesarea in Cappadocia,; 
and elsewhere, to procure codices both in Syriac and Greek and 
translate them. From Syriac were made the first version of the 
New Testament, the version of Eusebius' History and his Life of 
Constantine (unless this be from the original Greek) , the homilies 
of Aphraates, the Acts of Gurias and Samuna, the works of 
Ephrem Syrus(partly published in four volumes by the Mechithar- 
ists of Venice). They include the commentaries on the Diates- 
saron and the Paulines, Laboubna and History of Addai, the 
Syriac canons of the Apostles. 

From the original Greek were rendered in the 5th century the 
following authors and works. An asterisk is prefixed to those 
which have been printed: — *Eusebius' Chronicon; *Philo's lost 
commentaries on Genesis and Exodus, and his lost treatises on 
Providence and Animals, as well as a great number of his works 
still preserved in Greek; *the entire Bible (the New Testament 
is a recension after Antiochene Greek texts of an older version 
made from the oldest Syriac text); *the Alexander romance 
of the pseudo-Callisthenes; * Epistles and Acts of Ignatius of 
Antioch; *many homilies of Gregory Thaumaturgus; *Athan- 
asius (a large number of works, many of them wrongly 
attributed); Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses and Ad Marcianum 
(recently found); *Hippolytus' commentaries on the Song of 
Songs and Daniel, and many fragments; *Timotheus' life of 
Athanasius; Theophilus of Alexandria, various homilies; 
*Eusebius of Gabala or Severianus, fifteen Homilies; *Cyril of 
Jerusalem, Catecheses and Letter to Constantine; *Wisdom of 
Ahikar; *the Apology of Aristides; Gregory of Nazianzus, 
thirty- four Homilies; *Nonnus' work on Gregory (perhaps a 
version of 6th century); Basil of Caesarea, *Hexaemeron, 
fifteen Homilies on faith, epistle to Terentius, ascetic writings 
and canons, on the Holy Spirit, to Cledonius, &c. Helladius of 
Caesarea's life of Basil; Gregory of Nyssa's treatise on the 
Beatitudes, and many other homilies, Commentaries on Song of 
Songs, *On Human Nature (Nemesius), panegyrics on sundry 
Martyrs, and other works (but some of these versions belong to 
the beginning of the 8th century) ; Epiphanius of Salamis, Com- 
mentary on the Gospels, *0n weights and measures, *Physiologus, 
canons and many homilies; Evagrius of Pontus, Homilies and 
Ascetic works, Letters to Melania, &c; John Chfysostom, 
*Homilies and Prayers, in very beautiful language; *Proclus, 
patriarch of Constantinople, many homilies; *Nilus the Ascete, On 
the Eight Spirits of Evil; *Josephus, On the. Jewish War; Dionysius 
of Alexandria, * Against Paul of Samosata and other fragments: 
Acacius, bishop of Melitene, *Le.tters to Sahak; Julius of Rome 
(fragments); Zenobius, Homilies (? from Syriac); the History 
of Julius Africanus was perhaps also translated in this century, 
but it is lost. To the 5th century belong the versions of the 



ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



573 



Nicene canons, of which the Armenian text as preserved is barely 
intelligible, of the eucharistic rites called of *Basil, *Chrysostom, 
*Ignatius and others; also the *Hours or Breviary, the *Rites 
of Ordination, Baptism, of the making and release of Penitents, 
of Epiphany, and perhaps the many rites of animal sacrifice, for 
these are partly originals, partly versions of lost Greek texts. 
A mass of martyrs' acts were also rendered in this century, 
including parts of the lost collection made by Eusebius. Among 
these the *Acts and Apology of Apollonius restore a lost 2nd- 
century text. The *Canons of Sahak also purport to be trans- 
lated from a Greek original about the year 330. 

The Armenians were so busy in this century translating Greek 
and Syriac fathers that they have left little that is original. Still 
a number of historical works survive: *Faustus of Byzantium 
relates the events of the period a.o. 344-392 in a work instinct 
with life and racy of the soil. It was perhaps first composed in 
Greek, but it gives a faithful picture of the court of the petty 
sovereigns of Armenia, of the political organization, of the blood 
feuds of the clans, of the planting of Christianity. Procopius 
preserves some fragments of the Greek. 

The *Hislory of Taron, by Zenobius of Glak, is a somewhat 
legendary account of Gregory the Illuminator, and may have been 
written in Syriac in the 5th, though it was only Armenized in a 
later century. 

*Elisaeus Wardapet wrote a history of Wardan (Vardan), and 
of the war waged for their faith by the Armenians against the 
Sassanids. He was an eye-witness of this struggle, and gives a 
good account of the contemporary Mazdaism which the Persians 
tried to force on the Armenians. *Lazar of Pharp wrote a history 
embracing the events of the 5th century up to the year 485, as a 
continuation of the work of Faustus. 

*A history of St Gregory and of the conversion of Armenia 
by Agathangelus is preserved in Greek, Armenian and Arabic. 
The Arabic edited by Professor Marr of St Petersburg seems to 
be the oldest form of text. The Greek is a rendering of the 
Armenian. It is a compilation, and the second part which 
contains the Acts of Gregory and of St Rhipsima seems wholly 
legendary. The Greek and Armenian texts were edited together 
by Lagarde. 

*The History of Armenia by Moses of Khoren (Chorene) 
relates events up. to about the year 450. It is a compilation, 
devoid of historical method, value or veracity, from all sorts of 
previous authors, mostly from those which already existed in an 
Armenian dress. Some critics put down the date of composition 
as low* as about 700, and it was certainly retouched in the late 
6th century. 

*A long volume of rhetorical exercises, based on Aphthonius, 
is also ascribed to Moses of Khoren, and appears to be of the 5th 
century. The *geography which passes under his name may 
belong to the 7th century. Various homilies of Moses survive, 
as also of Elisaeus. 

Gorium wrote in this century a *Life of Mesrop, and Eznik a 
* Refutation of the Sects, based largely on antecedent Greek works. 
The sects in question are Paganism, Mazdaism, Greek Philosophy 
and Manicheism. A volume of *homilies under the name of 
Gregory the Illuminator, but not his, also belongs to this century, 
and a series of ascetic discourses attributed to John Mandakuni, 
who was patriarch 478-500. 

Or the 6th and 7th centuries few works survive except anony- 
mous versions of the *Acts of Thomas (perhaps from the Syriac), 
of the *Acts of Peter and Paul, *of John (pseudo-Prochorus), 
*of Bartholomew, and of other apostles; also of *the Acts of 
Paul and Thekla, *of Titus, *of the Protevangel, *of the Testa- 
ments of the patriarchs, of the *Gospel of Nicodemus, or Acts of 
Pilate, of the *Book of Adam, of the *Deaths of the Prophets, of 
the *History of Baruch, of the *Apocalypses of Paul and of the 
Virgin Mary, of the *Acts of Sylvester, and of an enormous 
number of other similar apocryphs. Some of these may be of the 
5th century. Two volumes of these apocryphs of the Old and 
New Testaments have recently been published at Venice. To 
these centuries belong also the versions of the Acts of the council 
of Ephesus, of Gangra, Laodicea and of other councils. To the 



late 7th century belong the *calendarial works of Ananiah of 
Shirak, who also has left a *chronicon compiled from Eusebius, 
Andreas of Crete, Hippolytus and other sources. In the *Letter~ 
book of the Patriarchs, lately printed at Tiflis, are to be found 
a number of controversial monophysite tracts of these and the 
succeeding three centuries; important for church history. It 
includes a mass of documents relative to the churches of Iberia 
and Albania. The chief literary monument of the 7th century is 
the history of the wars of Heraclius and of the early Mahommedan 
conquests in Asia Minor, by the bishop Sebeos, who was an eye- 
witness. The *history of the Albanians of the Caucasus, by 
Moses Kalankatuatzi, also belongs to the end of this century. 
To the middle of the 7 th century also belong the translations of 
Aristotle's treatises *On the Categories, and *On Interpretation, 
and of *Porphyry's Isagoge, as well as of voluminous Greek 
commentaries on these books; the version of the *Grammar of 
Dionysius Thrax and an incomplete Euclid. The translator 
was one David called the Invincible, who also wrote mono- 
physite tracts. At the end of this 7 th century one Philo of 
Tirak is supposed to have made the version of the *History 
of Socrates, unless indeed it Was made earlier. To this century 
also seems to belong the Armenian version of a *history of the 
Iberians, by Djuansher, a work full of valuable information. 

The early 8th century was a time of great literary activity. 
Gregory Asheruni wrote an important *commentary on the 
Jerusalem Lectionary, and his friend *John the catholicus (717- 
728) commentaries on the other liturgical works of his church; 
he also collected all existing canon law, Greek Or Armenian, 
respected in his church, wrote *against the Paulicians and 
Docetae, and composed many beautiful hymns. *Leoncius the 
priest has left a history of the first caliphs, and Stephanus, bishop 
of Siunik, translated the ""controversial works of Cyril of 
Alexandria (whose Glaphyra and commentaries, however, seem 
to have been translated at an earlier period). He also translated 
the works of Dionysius the Areopagite, commented on the 
Armenian breviary and wrote hymns. 

In the 9th century Zachariah, catholicus, the correspondent of 
Photius, wrote many eloquent homilies for the various church 
feasts. Shapuh Bagratuni wrote a history of his age, now lost. 
Mashtotz, catholicus, collected in one volume the Armenian 
rituals. 

In the 10th century (c. 925) the catholicus John VI. issued his 
*history of Armenia, and Thomas Artsruni a *history Of his clan 
carried up to the year 936. Ananias of Mok (943-965) wrote a 
great work against the Paulicians, unfortunately lost. Chosroes 
wrote a Commentary on the eucharistic rites and breviary, 
*Mesrop a history of Nerses the Great ; *Stephen of Asolik wrote 
a history of the world, and a commentary on Jeremiah; * Gregory 
of Narek his famous meditations and hymns; Samuel Kamrdjt- 
soretzi a commentary on the Lectionary based on Gregory 
Asheruni. 

In the nth century the catholicus Gregory translated many 
Acts of Martyrs, and John Kozerhn wrote a history, now lost, as 
well as a work on the Armenian calendar; Stephen Asolik a 
*history of Armenia up to the year 1004; *Aristaces of Lastiverd 
a valuable history of the conquest of Armenia by the Seljuk 
caliphs. We may also mention a *monophysite work against 
the Greek doctor Theopistus by Paul of Taron; *Ietters and 
poems of Gregory Magistros, who also was the translator of the 
*Laws, Timaeus and other dialogues of Plato. 

The 12th century saw many remarkable writers, mostly in 
Cilician Armenia, viz. Nerses the Graceful (d. 1165), author of an 
* Elegy on the taking of Edessa, of Voluminous hymns, of long 
""Pastoral Letters and Synodal orations of value for the historian 
of eastern churches. *Samuel of Ani composed a chronicle up to 
1 1 79. Nerses of Lambron, archbishop of Tarsus, left a *Synodal 
oration, a *Commentary on the liturgy, &c, and his contempo- 
rary Gregory of Tlay an *Elegy on the capture of Jerusalem, 
and various *dogmatic works. In this century the *history of 
Michael the Syrian was translated; Ignatius and Sargis com- 
posed Commentaries on Luke and *the catholic epistles, and 
*Matthew of Edessa a valuable history of the years 952-i'i3'6, 



574 



ARMENIAN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 



continued up to 1176 by Gregory the priest. Mechithar 
(Mekhitar) Kosh (d. 1207) wrote an elegant *Book of Fables, 
and compiled a *corpus of civil and canon law (partly from 
Byzantine codes). 

In the 13 th century the following works or authors are to be 
noticed: — *history of Kiriakos of Ganzak, which contains much 
about the Mongols, Georgians and Albanians; *Malakia the 
monk's history of the Tatars up to 1 272 ; *Chronicle of Mechithar 
of Ani (fragmentary); *Vahram's rhymed chronicle of the 
kings of Lesser Armenia; *history of the world, by Vartan, up to 
1 269. In this century mostly falls the redaction of a large fable 
literature, recently edited in three volumes by Professor Marr of 
St Petersburg. 

14th century: *history of Siunik, by Stephen Orbelian, 
archbishop of that province 1287-1304; *Sempat's chronicle 
of Lesser Armenia (952-1274), carried on by a continuator to 
1331; *Mechithar of Airivanq, a chronography; *Hethoum's 
account of the Tatars, and chronography of the years 1076- 
1307, John of Orotn (d. 1388) compiled commentaries on John's 
gospel and the Paulines, and wrote homilies and monophysite 
works; his disciple Gregory of Dathev (b. 1340) compiled a 
*Summa theologiae called the Book of Questions, in the style of the 
Summa of Aquinas, which had been translated into Armenian 
c. 1330, as were a little later the *Summa of Albertus and works 
of other schoolmen. 

15th century: *History of Tamerlane, by Thomas of Medsoph, 
carried up to 1447. 

17th century, Araqel of Tabriz wrote a *history of the Persian 
invasions of Armenia in the years 1602-1661. 

In the above list are not included a number of medical, 
astrological, calendarial and philological or lexicographic works, 
mostly written during or since the Cilician or crusading epoch. 
The hymns used in Armenian worship rarely go back to the 5th 
century; and they were still few in number and brief in length 
when Nerses the Graceful and his contemporaries more than 
doubled their number and bulk in the 12th century. Most 
Armenian poems embody acrostics, and their poets began to 
rhyme in the 8th century or thereabouts. Since the 1 5th century 
a certain number of profane poets have arisen, whose work is 
less jejune on the whole than that of the hymn and canticle 
writers of an earlier age. Gregory Magistros (d. 1058) abridged 
the whole of the Old and New Testaments in a ""rhyming poem, 
and set a fashion to later writers. Such works as *Barlaam and 
Josaphat, the * History of the Seven Sages, the *Wisdom of Ahikar, 
the * Tale of the City of Bronze, were freely turned into verse in the 
13th and following centuries. 

It will be realized from the above enumeration of works 
written in each century that Armenian literature was purely 
monkish. There was no epic or romance literature; although 
this was not lacking in the contiguous country of Georgia, 
where there seem to have always been knights and ladies willing 
to read and keep alive a literature of poetry and narrative, not 
altogether suitable for monks, and more akin to Persian literature. 

Other forms of faith than the orthodox had a hold in Armenia, 
particularly the Nestorian and the Manichean. Sundry works of 
Mani were translated in the year 588, but are lost. Perhaps 
certain works of Diodore of Tarsus survive, but the orthodox 
monks were so vigilant that there is little chance of finding any 
other monuments than those of the stereotyped orthodoxy. 

The 1 6th century saw the first books printed in Armenian. 
A press was set up at Venice in 1 565, and the psalms and breviary 
were printed. In 1 584 the Roman propaganda began its issue of 
Armenian books with a Gregorian calendar. In the 1 7 th century 
presses were working at Lembourg, Milan, Paris, Isfahan (where 
in 1640 a large folio of the Lives of the Fathers of the Desert 
appeared), in Leghorn, Amsterdam (where in 1664 the first 
edition of the Hymn-book, in 1666 the first Bible, and in 1667 the 
first Ritual were printed), Marseilles, Constantinople ', Leipzig 
and Padua. 

The press which has done most in printing Armenian authors 
is that of the Mechitharists of Venice. Here in 1836 was issued a 
magnificent thesaurus of the Armenian language, with the Latin 



and Greek equivalents of each word. At that time there was no 
dictionary of any language and literature to be compared with 
this for exhaustiveness and accuracy. There are now Armenian 
presses all over the world, reprinting old books or issuing new 
works, often translations of modern writers, English, French, 
Russian and German. 

The chief collections of, old Armenian MSS. are : at the 
convent of *Echmiadzin at Valarshapat; at Stambul in the 
library of the fathers of St Anthony; at Venice in the Mechitharist 
convent of San Lazaro; at the "Mechitharist convent in Vienna; 
in the *Royal library at Vienna; in the *Paris Bibliotheque 
Nationale; in the Vatican library; in the British Museum; in 
the *Bodleian; in the Rylands library; in the *Berlin and 
*Munich libraries; *in Tubingen; in St Petersburg, and in the 
*Lazarev institute at Moscow; at New Joulfa, the Armenian 
suburb of Isfahan. Private collections have been made by Mr 
Rendel Harris in Birmingham (presented to the university of 
Leiden) ; at Parham and elsewhere. A printed catalogue exists 
of those marked with an asterisk. 

Authorities. — F. Combefis, Historia MonothelitarumCPa.r\s,i6^S>) ; 
Arshak Ter Mikelian, Die armen. Kirche, iv. bis zum xiii. Jahr- 
hundert (Leipzig, 1892); H. Gelzer, " Die Anfange der armenischen 
Kirche" in the Berichte der Koniglich. Sachsischen Gesellschaft der 
Wissenschaften: Historisch-philologische Classe (1895), p. 171; Gut- 
schmid, Kleine Schriften (Leipzig, 1892), t. iii. ; Langlois, Collection 
d'historiens armeniens (Paris, 1867) (the translations often careless) ; 
E. W. Brooks, The Syriac Chronicle known as Zachariah of Mitylene 
(London, 1899), p. 24; Dulaurier, Recherches sur la chronologie 
armenienne (Paris, 1859) ; Agop Manandian, Beitrage zur albanischen 
Geschichte (Leipzig, 1897); G. Owsepian, Die Entstehungsgeschichte 
des Monotheletismus (Leipzig, 1897) ; Cardinal Angelo Mai, Nova SS. 
patrum bibliotheca, 6 vols. (Rome, 1844-1871), vol. ii. contains Latin 
version of Armenian canons; Hergenrother, Photius (Regensburg, 
1867); Tchamchian, History of Armenia (in Armenian at Venice 
and English abridged translation entitled M. Chamich by John 
Audall, Calcutta, 1827); Domini Joannis Onziensis, Opera Latine 
(Venice, 1834) ; Nersetis Clajensis, Opera omnia Latine (Venice, 
1833) I A. Papadopoulos-Kerameus in the Recueil de la societe 
orthodoxe de Palestine (St Petersburg, 1892) (Armenian correspond- 
ence with Photius translated) ; Enthymius Zigabenus, Panoplia, 
Patrol. Gr. vol. 130, col. 1173; E. Dulaurier, Histoire de Veglise 
armen. (Paris, 1857) ; le Quien, Oriens chrislianus ; Mansi, Concilia, 
vol. 25; Steph. Azarian, Ecclesiae Armenae Traditio (Rome, 1870); 
A. Balgy, Historia doctrinae catholicae inter Armenos (Vienna, 1878) ; 
Clemens Galanus, Conciliatio Ecclesiae Armenae cum Romana 
(Rome, 1690); L. Alishan, Sissouan, contree de VArmenie (Venice, 
1893), in Armenian, but also in French translation; Recueil d'actes 
relatifs aux Armeniens (3 vols., Moscow, 1833) ; St Martin, Memoires 
historiques sur VArmenie (Paris, 1818); V. Langlois, Voyage dans la 
Cilicie (Paris, 1861) ; H. G. O. Dwight, Christianity in Turkey (London, 
1854); De Damas, Coup d'xil stir VArmenie (Lyon, 1887); H. F. B. 
Lynch, Armenia (2 vols., London, 1902); J. Issaverdens, Armenia, 
Ecclesiastical History (Venice, 1875); E. Dulaurier, Historiens 
armeniens des Croisades (Paris) ; Giovanni de Serpos, Compendio 
Storico (Venice, 1786); Garabed Chahnazarian, Esquisse de V histoire 
de VArmenie (Paris, 1856); Gelzer, " Armenien " in Herrog-Hauck, 
Realencyklopddie fur protestantische Theologie (ed. 3, Leipzig, 1897); 
Hefele, Hist, of Councils, vols. 3 and 9 ; F. Neve, L'Armenie chretienne 
(Paris) ; P. Hunanian, Histoire des conciles d 'Orient (Vienna, 
1847); Gr. Chalathianz, Apocryphes (Moscow, 1897), and other 
works; Brosset, Collection d'historiens armeniens (St Petersburg, 
1874), and numerous otker works by the same author; J. Catergian, 
De fidei symbolo quo Armenii utuntur (Vienna, 1893); Ricaut, 
The present state of the Greek and Armenian Churches (London, 1679) ; 
H. Denzinger, Ritus orientalium (Wiirzburg, 1863); Fred. C. Cony- 
beare, Rituale Armenorum (Oxford, 1905); F. E. Brightman, Eastern 
Liturgies (Oxford, 1896) ; P. Vetter, Chosroae magni explicatio missae 
(Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1880); L. Petit, articles on Armenian re- 
ligious history, councils, literature, creed and disciplire in Diction, 
de theologie catholique, cols. 1888-1968; F. C. Conybeare, " The 
Armenian canons of St Sahak " in the American Journal of Theology 
(Chicago, 1898), p. 828; C. F. Neumann, Geschichte der armenischen 
Literatur (Leipzig, 1836); Simon Weber, Die katholische Kirche in 
Armenien (Freiburg-im-Breisgau, 1903); Sukias Somal, Quadro 
delta Storia Letter aria di Armenia (Venice, 1829); M. V. Ermoni, 
" L'Armenie " in Revue de V orient chretien (for year 1896) ; F. Tour- 
nebize, " Histoire de TArmenie " (ib. 1902-3-4-5); R. P. D. Girard, 
" Les Madag " (ib. for year 1902); H. Hiibschmann, Armenische 
Studien and Grammatik (Leipzig, 1883 and 1895). Grammars by 
Petermann (in Porta Orientalium Linguarum series), by Prof. Meillet 
of Paris, by Prof. N. Marr of St Petersburg (in Russian), by Joseph 
Karst(of the Cilician dialect). Texts of most of the Armenian fathers 
and historians have been printed by the Mechitharists of San Lazaro, 
Venice, and are readily procurable at th^ir convent. (F. C. C.) 



ARMENTIERES— ARMILLA 



575 



ARMENTIERES, a town of northern France, in the depart- 
ment of Nord, on the Lys, 13 m. W.N.W. of Lille on the Northern 
railway from that city to Dunkirk. Pop. (1906) 25,408. The 
chief building is the hotel de ville with a 17th-century belfry. 
There are communal colleges for girls and boys, a board of trade- 
arbitrators, a chamber of commerce and a national technical 
school. The town is an important centre for the spinning and 
weaving of flax and cotton; bleaching, dyeing and the manu- 
facture of machinery are among the other industries. Its 
industrial prosperity dates from the middle ages, when, however, 
woollen, not cotton, goods were the staple product. 

ARMET (diminutive of Fr. arme), a form of helmet, which was 
developed out of existing forms in the latter part of the 15th 
century. It was round in shape, and often had a narrow ridge or 
comb along the top. It had a pivoted or hinged vizor and nose- 
piece, and complete chin, neck and cheek protection, closely con- 
nected with the gorget. It is distinguished from the basinet by its 
roundness, and by the fact that it protects the neck and chin by 
strong plates, instead of a " camail " or loose collar of mail; 
from the salade and heaume by its close fit and skull-cap shape; 
and from the various forms of vizored burgonets by the absence 
of the projecting brim. It remained in use until the final abandon- 
ment of the complete closed head-piece. 

ARMFELT, GUSTAF MAURITZ, Count (1757-1814), son of 
Charles II. 's general, Carl Gustaf Armfelt, was born in Finland 
on the 31st of March 1757. In 1774 he became an ensign in the 
guards, but his frivolity provoked the displeasure of Gustavus III. 
and he thought it prudent to go abroad. Subsequently, however, 
(1780) he met the king again at Spa and completely won the 
monarch's favour by his natural amiability, intelligence and 
brilliant social gifts. Henceforth his fortune was made. At first 
he was the maitre des plaisirs of the Swedish court, but it was not 
long before more serious affairs were entrusted to him. He took 
part in the negotiations with Catherine II. (1783) and with the 
Danish government (1787), and during the Russian war of 1788-90 
he was one of the king's most trusted and active counsellors. 
He also displayed great valour in the field. In 1788 when the 
Danes unexpectedly invaded Sweden and threatened Gothenburg, 
it was Armfelt who under the king's directions organized the 
Dalecarlian levies and led them to victory. He remained 
absolutely faithful to Gustavus when nearly the whole of the 
nobility fell away from him ; brilliantly distinguished himself in 
the later phases of the Russian war; and was the Swedish pleni- 
potentiary at the conclusion of the peace of Verela. During the 
last years of Gustavus III. his influence was paramount, though 
he protested against his master's headstrong championship of the 
Bourbons. On his deathbed Gustavus III. (1792) committed 
the care of his infant son to Armfelt and appointed him a member 
of the council of regency; but the anti-Gustavian duke-regent 
Charles sent Armfelt as Swedish ambassador to Naples to get rid 
of him. From Naples Armfelt communicated with Catherine II., 
urging her to bring about by means of a military demonstration 
a change in the Swedish government in favour of the Gustavians. 
The plot was discovered by the regent's spies, and Armfelt only 
escaped from the man-of-war sent to Naples to seize him, with the 
assistance of Queen Caroline. He now fled to Russia, where he 
was interned at Kaluga, while at home he was condemned to 
confiscation and death as a traitor, and his unjustly accused 
mistress Magdalena Rudenschold was publicly whipped to gratify 
an old grudge of the regent's. When Gustavus IV. attained his 
majority, Armfelt was completely rehabilitated and sent as 
Swedish ambassador to Vienna (1802), but was obliged to quit 
that post two years later for sharply attacking the Austrian 
government's attitude towards Bonaparte. From 1805 to 1807 
he was commander-in-chief of the Swedish forces in Pomerania, 
where he displayed great ability and retarded the conquest of the 
duchy as long as it was humanly possible. On his return home, 
he was appointed commander-in-chief on the Norwegian frontier, 
but could do nothing owing to the ordres, contre-ordres et desordres 
of his lunatic master. He would have nothing to say to the 
revolutionaries who in 1809 deposed Gustavus IV. and his whole 
family. Armfelt was the most courageous of the supporters of 



the crown prince Gustavus, and when Bernadotte was elected 
resolved to retire to Finland. His departure was accelerated 
by a decree of expulsion as a conspirator (181 1). Over the im- 
pressionable Alexander I. of Russia, Armfelt exercised almost as 
great an influence as Czartoryski, especially as regards Finnish 
affairs. He contributed more than any one else to the erection 
of the grand-duchy into an autonomous state, and was its first 
and best governor-general. The plan of the Russian defensive 
campaigns is, with great probability, also attributed to him, and 
he gained Alexander over to the plan of uniting Norway with 
Sweden. He died at Tsarskoe Selo on the 19th of August 1814. 
See Robert Nisbet Bain, Gustavus III. vol. ii. (London, 1895) ; Elof 
Tegner, Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt (Stockholm, 1883-1887). (R. N. B.) 

ARMIDALE, a town in Sandon county, New South Wales, 
Australia, 313 m. by rail N. of Sydney. Pop. (1901) 4249. It 
lies at an elevation of 3313 ft., in a picturesque mountainous 
district, for the most part pastoral and agricultural, though it 
contains some alluvial gold diggings. Antimony is found in large 
quantities near the town. Armidale is a cathedral town, being 
the seat of a Roman Catholic bishop and belonging to the joint 
Anglican diocese of Grafton; Armidale St Peter's, the Anglican 
cathedral, and St Mary's, the Rqman Catholic, are both fine 
buildings. The town is the centre of great educational activity, 
its schools including the New England girls' school, St Patrick's 
college, the high school, the Ursuline convent and state schools. 
Armidale became a municipality in 1863. 

ARMILLA, Armil or Armillary Sphere (from the Lat. 
armilla, a bracelet), an instrument used in astronomy. In its 
simplest form, consisting of a ring fixed in the plane of the 
equator, the armilla is one of the most ancient of astronomical 
instruments. Slightly developed, it was crossed by another ring 
fixed in the plane of the meridian. The first was an equinoctial, 
the second a solstitial armilla. Shadows were used as indices of 
the sun's position, in combination with angular divisions. When 
several rings or circles were combined representing £he great 
circles of the heavens, the instrument became an armillary 
sphere. Armillae are said to have been in early use in China. 
Eratosthenes (276-196 B.C.) used most probably a solstitial 
armilla for measuring the obliquity of the ecliptic. Hipparchus 
(160-125 B.C.) probably used an armillary sphere of four rings. 
Ptolemy (c. a.d. 107-161) describes his instrument in the 
Syntaxis (book v. chap, i.), and it is of great interest as an 
example of the armillary sphere passing into the spherical 
astrolabe. It consisted of a graduated circle inside which 
another could slide, carrying two small tubes diametrically 
opposite, the instrument being kept vertical by a plumb-line. 



Zenith 




From M. Blundeville's Treatise of the first principles oj 
Cosmography and specially of the Spheare. 

Armillary Sphere. A-D. 1636. 

No material advance was made on Ptolemy's instrument until 
Tycho Brahe, whose elaborate armillary spheres passing into 
astrolabes are figured in his Astronwtiae Inslauratae Mechanica. 



576 



ARMINIUS 



The armillary sphere survives as useful for teaching, and may 
be described as a skeleton celestial globe, the series of rings 
representing the great circles of the heavens, and revolving on an 
axis within a horizon. With the earth as centre such a sphere 
is known as Ptolemaic; with the sun as centre, as Copernican. 

The designer of the instrument shown no doubt thought that 
the north pole might suitably have the same ornament as was 
used to mark N. on the compass card, and so surmounted it 
with the fteur-de-lys, traditionally chosen for that purpose on 
the compass by Flavio Gioja in honour of Charles of Anjou, king 
of Sicily and Naples. 

Armillary spheres occur in many old sculptures, paintings 
and engravings; and from these sources we know that they were 
made for suspension, for resting on the ground or on a table, for 
holding by a short handle, or either for holding or for resting on a 
stand. 

Authorities. — Tycho Brahe, Aslronomiae Instauratae Mechanica; 
M. Blundeviile, his Exercises; N. Bion, Traite des instrumens de 
mathimatique; also L' Usage des globes celestes; Sedillot, Memoire sur 
les instrumens; J. B. Delambre, Histoire de I'astronomie ancienne; 
R. Grant, History of Physical Astronomy. (M. L. H.) 

ARMINIUS, the Latinized form of the name of Hermann, or 
more probably AemIn (17 b.c.-a.d. 21), the German national 
hero. He was a son of a certain Segimer, a prince of the tribe of 
the Cherusci, and in early life served with distinction as an officer 
in the Roman armies. Returning to his own people he found 
them chafing under the yoke of the Roman governor, Quintilius 
Varus; he entertained for them hopes of freedom, and cautiously 
inducing neighbouring tribes to join his standard he led the 
rebellion which broke out in the autumn of a.d. 9. Heavily 
laden with baggage the troops of Varus were decoyed into the 
fastnesses of the Teutoburger Wald, and there attacked, the 
completeness of the barbarian victory being attested by the 
virtual annihilation of three legions, by the voluntary death of 
Varus, and by the terror which reigned in Rome when the news 
of the defeat became known, a terror which found utterance 
in the emperor's despairing cry: "Varus, give me. back my 
legions! " Then in a.d. 15 Germanicus Caesar led the Romans 
against Arminius, and captured his wife, Thusnelda. An 
indecisive battle was fought in the Teutoburger Wald, where 
Germanicus narrowly escaped the fate of Varus, and in the 
following year Arminius was defeated. The hero's later years 
were spent in fighting against Marbod, prince of the Marcomanni, 
and in disputes with his own people occasioned probably by his 
desire to found a powerful kingdom. He was murdered in a.d. 21. 

In 1875 a great monument to Arminius was completed. This 
stands on the Grotenburg mountain near Detmold. Klopstock 
and other poets have used his exploits as material for dramas. 

Much discussion has taken place with regard to the exact spot in 
the Teutoburger Wald where the great battle between Arminius and 
Varus was fought. There is an immense literature on this subject, 
and the following may be consulted: — T. Mommsen, Die Ortlichkeit 
der Varusschlacht (1885); E. Meyer, Untersuchungen uber die 
Schlacht im Teutoburger Walde (1893) ; A. Wilms, Die Schlacht im 
Teutoburger Walde (1899); F. Knoke, Das Schlachtfeld im Teutoburger 
Walde (1899); E. Diinzelmann, Der Schauplatz der Varusschlacht 
(1889); and P. Hofer, Die Varusschlacht (1888). For more general 
accounts of Arminius see: Tacitus, Annals, edited by H. Furneaux 
(1884-1891); O. Kemmer, Arminius (1893); F. W. Fischer, Arm-in 
und die Romer (1893); W. Uhl, Das Portrait des Arminius (1898); 
and F. Knoke, Die Kriegszuge des Germanicus in Deutschland (1887). 

ARMINIUS, JACOBUS (1560-1609), Dutch theologian, author 
of the modified reformed theology that receives its name of 
Arminian from him, was born at Oudewater, South Holland, on 
the 10th of October 1560. Arminius is a Latinized form of his 
patronymic Hermanns or Hermansen. His father, Hermann 
Jakobs, a cutler, died while he was an infant, leaving a widow and 
three children. Theodorus Aemilius, a priest, who had turned 
Protestant, adopting Jakob, sent him to school at Utrecht, but 
died when his charge was in his fifteenth year. Rudolf Snellius 
(Snel van Roijen, 1 546-1613), the mathematician, a native of 
Oudewater, then a professor at Marburg, happening at the time 
to visit his early home, met the boy, saw promise in him and 
undertook his maintenance and education. But hardly was he 
settled at Marburg when the news came that the Spaniards had 



besieged and taken Oudewater, and murdered its inhabitants 
almost without exception. Arminius hurried home, but only to 
find all his relatives slain. In February the same year (1575), 
the university of Leiden had been founded, and thither, by the 
kindness of friends, Arminius was sent to study theology. The 
six years he remained at Leiden (1576-1582) were years of active 
and innovating thought in Holland. The War of Independence 
had started conflicting tendencies in men's minds. To some it 
seemed to illustrate the necessity of the state tolerating only one 
religion, but to others the necessity of the state tolerating all. 
Dirck Coornhert argued, in private conferences and public 
disputations, that it was wrong to punish heretics, and his great 
opponents were, as a rule, the ministers, who maintained that 
there was no room for more than one religion in a state. Caspar. 
Koolhaes, the heroic minister of Leiden— its first lecturer, too, 
in divinity — pleaded against a too rigid uniformity, for such 
an agreement on " fundamentals " as had allowed Reformed, 
Lutherans and Anabaptists to unite. Leiden had been happy, 
too, in its first professors. There taught in theology Guillaume 
Feuguieres or Feuguereius (d. 1613), a mild divine, who had 
written a treatise on persuasion in religion, urging that as to 
it " men could be led, not driven "; Lambert Danaeus, who 
deserves remembrance as the first to discuss Christian ethics 
scientifically, apart from dogmatics; Johannes Drusius, the 
Orientalist, one of the most enlightened and advanced scholars of 
his day, settled later at Franeker; Johann Kolmann the younger, 
best known by his saying that high Calvinism made God " both 
a tyrant and an executioner." Snellius, Arminius's old patron, 
now removed to Leiden, expounded the Ramist philosophy, and 
did his best to start his students on the search after truth, 
unimpeded by the authority of Aristotle. Under these men 
and influences, Arminius studied with signal success; and the 
promise he gave induced the merchants' gild of Amsterdam to 
bear the further expenses of his education. In 1582 he went to 
Geneva, studied there awhile under Theodore Beza, but had 
soon, owing to his active advocacy of the Ramist philosophy, to 
remove to Basel. After a short but brilliant career there he 
turned to Geneva, studied for three years, travelled, in 1586, in 
Italy, heard Giacomo Zarabella (1 533-1 589) lecture on philosophy 
in Padua, visited Rome, and, open-minded enough to see its good 
as well as its evil, was suspected by the stern Dutch Calvinists of 
"popish" leanings. Next year he was called to Amsterdam, 
and there, in 1588, was ordained. He soon acquired the reputa- 
tion of being a good preacher arid faithful pastor., He was com- 
missioned to organize the educational system of the city, and is 
said to have done it well. He greatly distinguished himself by 
fidelity to duty during a plague that devastated Amsterdam in 
1602. In 1603 he was called, in succession to Franz Junius, to a 
theological professorship at Leiden, which he held till his death 
on the 19 th of October 1609. 

Arminius is best known as the founder of the anti-Calvinistic 
school in Reformed theology, which created the Remonstrant 
Church in Holland (see Remonstrants), and contributed to form 
the Arminian tendency or party in England. He was a man of 
mild and liberal spirit, broadened by varied culture, constitu- 
tionally averse from narrow views and enforced uniformity. 
He lived in a period of severe systematizing. The Reformed 
strengthened itself against the Roman Catholic theology by 
working itself, on the one hand, into vigorous logical consistency, 
and supporting itself, on the other, on the supreme authority of 
the Scriptures. Calvin's first principle, the absolute Sovereignty of 
God, had been so applied as to make the divine decree determine 
alike the acts and the destinies of men; and his formal principle 
had been so construed as to invest his system with the authority 
of the source whence it professed to have been drawn. Calvinism 
had become, towards the close of the 16 th century, supreme in 
Holland, but the very rigour of the uniformity it exacted pro- 
voked a reaction. Coornhert could not plead for the toleration of 
heretics without assailing the dominant Calvinism, and so he 
opposed a conditional to its unconditional predestination. The 
two ministers of Delft, who had debated the point with him, 
had, the better to turn his arguments^ descended from the 



ARMISTICE^-ARMOIRE 



577 



sUpralapsarian to the infralapsarian position, i.e. made the divine 
decree, instead of precede and determine, succeed the Fall. 
This seemed to the high Calvinists of Holland a grave heresy. 
Arminius, fresh from Geneva, familiar with the dialectics of Beza, 
appeared to many the man able to speak the needed word, and so, 
in 1589, he was simultaneously invited by the ecclesiastical court 
of Amsterdam to refute Coornhert, and by Martin Lydius, pro- 
fessor at Franeker, to combat the two infralapsarian ministers 
of Delft. Thus led to confront the questions of necessity and 
free will, his own views became unsettled, and the further he 
pursued his inquiries the more he was inclined to assert the 
freedom of man and limit the range of the unconditional decrees 
of God. This change became gradually more apparent in his 
preaching and in his conferences with his clerical associates, and 
occasioned much controversy in the ecclesiastical courts where, 
however, he successfully defended his position. The controversy 
was embittered and the differences sharpened by his appointment 
to the professorship at Leiden. He had as colleague Franz 
Gomarus, a strong supralapsarian, perfervid, irrepressible; and 
their collisions, personal, official, political, tended to develop and 
define their respective positions. 

Arminius died, worn out by uncongenial controversy and 
ecclesiastical persecution, before his system had been elaborated 
into the logical consistency it attained in the hands of his 
celebrated successor, Simon Episcopius; but though inchoate in 
detail, it was in its principles clear and coherent enough. These 
may be thus stated: 

1. The decree of God is, when it concerns His own actions, 
absolute, but when it concerns man's, conditional, i.e. the decree 
relative to the Saviour to be appointed and the salvation to be 
provided is absolute, but the decree relative to the persons saved 
or condemned is made to depend on the acts— belief and repent- 
ance in the one case, unbelief and impenitence in the other — of 
the persons themselves. 

2. The providence or government of God, while sovereign, is 
exercised in harmony with the nature of the creatures governed, 
i.e. the sovereignty of God is so exercised as to be compatible 
with the freedom of man. 

3. Man is by original nature, through the assistance of divine 
grace, free, able to will and perform the right; but is in his fallen 
state, of and by himself, unable to do so; he needs to be regener- 
ated in all his powers before he can do what is good and pleasing 
to God. 

4. Divine grace originates, maintains and perfects all the good 
in man, so much so that he cannot, though regenerate, conceive, 
will or do any good thing without it. 

5. The saints possess, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, sufficient 
strength to persevere to the end in spite of sin and the flesh, but 
may so decline from sound doctrine as to cause divine grace to be 
ineffectual. 

6. Every believer may be assured of his own salvation. 

7. It is possible for a regenerate man to live without sin. 
Arminius's works are mostly occasional treatises drawn from 

him by controversial emergencies, but- they everywhere exhibit 
a calm, well-furnished, undogmatic and progressive mind. He 
was essentially an amiable man, who hated the zeal for an 
impossible orthodoxy that constrained " the church to institute 
a search after crimes which 'have not betrayed an existence, yea, 
and to drag into open contentions those who are meditating no 
evil." His friend Peter Bertius, who pronounced his funeral 
oration, closed it with these words: " There lived a man whom 
it was not possible for those who knew him sufficiently to esteem; 
those who entertained no esteem for him are such as never knew 
him well enough to appreciate his merits." 

The works of Arminius (in Latin) were published in a single quarto 
volume at Leiden in 1629, at Frankfort in 1631 and 1635. Two 
volumes of an English translation, with copious notes, by James 
Nichols, were published at London, 1 825-1 828; three volumes 
(complete) at Buffalo, 1853. A life was written by Caspar Brandt, 
son of Gerard Brandt, the historian of the Dutch reformation, and 
published in 1724; republished and annotated by J. L. Mosheim in 
1725; and translated into English by the Rev. John Guthrie, 1854. 
James Nichols also wrote a life (London, 1843). 

n. 19 



ARMISTICE (from Lat. arma, arms, and sistere, to stop), a 
suspension of hostilities by mutual agreement between two 
nations at war, or their respective forces. An armistice may be 
either general or particular; in the first case there is a complete 
cessation of hostile queries in every part of the dominions of
the belligerent powers; in the second there is merely a temporary 
truce between two contending armies, or between a besieged 
fortress and the force besieging it. Such a temporary truce, when 
for a very limited period and for a special purpose, e.g. the 
collection of the wounded and the burial of the dead, is termed 
a suspension of arms. A general armistice cannot be concluded 
by the commanders-in-chief unless special authority has been 
previously delegated to them by their respective governments; 
otherwise any arrangement entered into by them requires subse- 
quent ratification by the supreme powers of the states. A partial 
truce may be concluded by the officers of the respective powers, 
without any special authority from their governments, wherever, 
from the . nature and extent of the commands they exercise, 
their duties could not be efficiently discharged without their 
possession of such a power. The conduct of belligerent parties 
during an armistice is usually regulated in modern warfare by 
express agreement between the parties, but where this is not the 
case the following general conditions may be laid down. (1) Each 
party may do, within the limits prescribed by the truce, whatever 
he could have done in time of peace For example, he can raise 
troops, collect stores, receive reinforcements and fortify places 
that are not actually in a state of siege. (2) Neither party can 
take advantage of the armistice to do what he could not have 
done had military queries continued. Thus he cannot throw
provisions or reinforcements into a besieged town, and neither 
besiegers nor besieged are at liberty to repair their fortifications 
or erect new works. (3) All things contained in places the 
possession of which was contested, must remain in the state 
in which they were before the armistice began. Any infringe- 
ment by either party of the conditions of the truce entitles 
the other to recommence hostile queries without previous
intimation. 

ARMOIRE, the French name (cf. Almery) given to a tall 
movable cupboard, or "wardrobe," with one or more doors. It 
has varied considerably in shape and size, and the decoration of 
its doors and sides has faithfully represented mutations of fashion 
and modifications of use. It was originally exceedingly massive 
and found its chief decoration in elaborate hinges and locks of 
beaten iron. The finer ecclesiastical armoires or aumbries which 
have come down to us— Used in churches for the safe custody of 
vestments, eucharistic vessels, reliquaries and other precious 
objects — are usually painted, sometimes even upon the interior, 
with sacred subjects or with incidents from the lives of the saints. 
The cathedrals of Bayeux and Noyon contain famous examples; 
the most typical English one is in York minster. By the end of 
the 14th century, when the carpenter and the wood-carver had 
acquired a better mastery of their material, the taste for painted 
surfaces appears to have given place to the vogue of carving, and 
the simple rectangular panels gradually became sculptured with 
a simple motive, such as the linen-fold or parchment patterns. 
In the treasury of St Germain l'Auxerrois the ends of the 15th- 
century armoires are treated in this way. In that and the two 
following centuries the keys and the escutcheons of the locks 
became highly ornamental; usually in forged iron, they were 
occasionally made of more precious metals. By slow degrees the 
shape of this receptacle changed — from breadth was evolved 
height, and the tall form of armoire became characteristic. The 
Renaissance exercised a notable effect upon this, as upon so 
many other varieties of furniture. It became less obviously and 
aggressively a thing of utility; its proportions shrank from the 
massive to the elegant; its artistic effectiveness was vastly 
enhanced by its division into an upper and a lower part. En- 
riched with columns and pilasters, its panels carved with 
mythology, its canopied niches filled with sculptured statuettes, 
and terminating with a rich cornice and perhaps a broken 
pediment, it was widely removed in appearance, if not in purpose, 
from the uncompromising iron-mounted receptacle of earlier 

11 



578 



ARMORICA— ARMOUR PLATES 



generations. During the 16th century, when the surging im- 
pulses of the Renaissance had died away, the armoire relapsed 
into plainness, its proportions increased, and it was again con- 
structed in one piece. Ere long, however, it grew more sump- 
tuous than ever. Boulle encrusted it with marqueterie from 
designs by Berain; it glowed with dmorini, with the torches and 
arrows of Cupid, with the garlands which he weaves for his 
captives, and when allusiveness left a corner vacant, it was filled 
with arabesques in ebony or ivory, in brass or white metal. 
While the royal palaces and the hotels of the great nobility were 
filled with those costly splendours, the ordinary cabinetmaker 
continued to construct his modest pieces, and by the middle of 
the 1 8th century the armoire was found in every French house, 
ample in width and high in proportion to the lofty rooms of the 
period. It is not to be supposed that so useful a piece of furniture 
was confined to France. It was used, more or less, throughout 
a considerable part of Europe, but it was distinctively Gallic 
nevertheless, and never became thoroughly acclimatized else- 
where until about the beginning of the 19th century, when it 
developed into the glass-fronted wardrobe which is now an 
essential detail in the plenishing of the bed-chamber, not merely 
in France and England, but in many other countries. The 
armoire a glace was known and occasionally made in France as 
far back as the middle of the 18th century, and almost the earliest 
mention of it connects it with the scandalous relations of the 
Marechal de Richelieu and the beautiful fermiere gtn&rale, Mme 
de la Popeliniere, who had one made to mask a secret door. In 
the conventional and not very attractive wardrobe of commerce 
it is difficult to descry the gracious characteristics of the armoire 
of the Renaissance or the 17 th century, and it is not altogether 
surprising that Theodore de Banville should have condemned one 
of the most solidly useful of household necessaries as a " hideous 
monster." 

ARMORICA (Aremorica), the Roman name, derived from 
two Celtic words meaning the " seaside " (ar, on, and mor, sea), 
for the land of the Armorici, roughly the peninsula of Brittany. 
At the time of the Roman advance on Gaul there were five 
principal tribes in Armorica, the Namneti, the Veneti, the Osismii, 
the Curiosolitae and the Redones. It was subdued by Caesar, 
who entirely destroyed the seafaring tribe of its south coast, the 
Veneti. Under the Empire it formed part of the province of 
Gallia Lugudunensis (Lugdunensis). It contained hardly any 
towns, though many large country houses, and was perhaps less 
Romanized than the rest of Gaul. In and after the later part of 
the 5th century it received many Celtic immigrants from the 
British Isles, fleeing (it is said) from the Saxons; and the Celtic 
dialect which the Bretons still speak is thought to owe its origin 
to these immigrants. (See further Brittany.) 

ARMOUR, PHILIP DANFORTH (1832-1901), American 
merchant and philanthropist, was boxn in Stockbridge, New 
York, on the 16th of May 1832. He was educated at Cazenovia 
Academy, Cazenovia, N.Y., worked for several years on his 
father's farm, and in 1852 with a small party went overland to 
California, a large part of the journey being made on foot. Here 
during the next four years he laid the foundations of his fortune. 
In 1856 he became associated with his friend, Frederick S. Miles, 
in a wholesale grocery and commission business at Milwaukee, 
In 1863 he became the head of the firm of Armour, Plankington 
& Co. , pork packers, whose headquarters were at Milwaukee. He 
also obtained a large interest in the firm H. O. Armour & Co., 
which was founded by his brother, Herman Ossian Armour 
(1837-1901), and which, starting as a grain commission business, 
in 1868 established also a large pork-packing plant. Of this firm, 
the name of which was changed to Armour & Co. in 1870, he 
became the head in 1875, and thereafter the business made 
such rapid progress that in 1901 as many as 11,000 hands were 
employed. Besides contributing to many charitable enterprises, 
Armour founded the Armour Institute of Technology at Chicago 
in 1892 and the Armour Flats in Chicago, built for the purpose of 
supplying at a low rental good homes for working men and their 
families. He also contributed liberally to the Armour Mission in 
Chicago, which was founded in 1881 by his brother, Joseph 



Armour. At the time of his death, on the 6th of January 1901, 
Philip D. Armour's private fortune was supposed to exceed 
$50,000,000. 

ARMOUR PLATES. The earliest recorded proposal to employ 
armour for ships of war (for body armour, &c, see Arms and 
Armour) appears to have been made in England by Sir 
William Congreve in 1805. In The Times of the 20th torVhfps. 
of February of that year reference is made to Congreve's 
designs for an armoured, floating mortar battery which the in- 
ventor considered would be proof against artillery fire. Among 
Congreve's unpublished papers there is also a suggestion for 
armour-plating the embrasures of casemates. Nothing, however, 
seems to have come of these proposals, and a similar lack of 
appreciation befell the next advocate of armour, John Stevens of 
New Jersey, U.S.A., who submitted the plans of an armoured 
vessel to Congress in 181 2. The Stevens family, however, 
continued to work at the subject, and by 1841 had determined 
by actual experiment the thickness of wrought-iron armour 
which was proof against the projectiles then in use. The necessity 
for armouring ships as a protection against shell fire was again 
pointed out by General Paixhans in 1841, and in 1845 History 
Dupuy de Lome had prepared the designs of an 
armoured frigate for the French government. During the period 
between 1827 and 1854, experiments in connexion with the 
proposed application of armour to both ships and forts were 
carried out in England, the United States and France, but the 
question did not get beyond the experimental stage until the 
latter year, when armoured floating batteries were laid down in 
all three countries, probably as the immediate outcome of the 
destruction of the Turkish fleet by shell fire at Sinope on the 30th 
of November 1853. 

Three of the French floating batteries were in action at the 
bombardment of Kinburn in 1855, where they achieved a con- 
spicuous success, silencing the Russian forts after a four hours' 
engagement, during which they themselves, although frequently 
struck, were practically uninjured, their loss in personnel being 
but trifling. To quote Very: " This comparatively insignificant 
action, which had little if any effect upon the course of the 
Crimean War, changed the whole condition of armour for 
naval use from one of speculation to one of actual and constant 
necessity." The military application of armour for the protec- 
tion of guns mounted in permanent fortifications followed. Its 
development, however, took rather a different course, and the 
question of armour generally is of less importance for the military 
engineer than for the naval constructor. For the employment 
of armour in ship construction and in permanent works on land, 
see the articles Shipbuilding; Fortification and Siegecrajt; 
the present article is concerned solely with the actual armour 
itself. 

The earliest armour, both for ships and forts, was made of 
wrought iron, and was disposed either in a single thickness or in 
successive layers sandwiched with wood or concrete. 
Such armour is now wholly obsolete, though examples tioa and " 
of it may still be found' in a few forts of early date, testing. 
The chief application of armour in modern land 
defences is in the form of shields for the protection of guns 
mounted en barbette. Examples of such shields are shown in 
figs. 1 and 2. Fig. 1 shows a 4-s-in.-steel shield for the U.S.A. 
government, face-hardened by the Harvey process, to which 
reference is made below. It was attacked by 5-in. and 6-in. 
armour-piercing shot, and proved capable of keeping out the 
5-in. up to a striking velocity of nearly 1800 ft. per second, but 
was defeated by a 6-in. capped A.P. shot with a striking velocity 
of 1842 ft. per second. The mounting was not seriously damaged 
by the firing, but could be operated after the impact of one 3-2-in., 
five 5-in. and three 6-in. projectiles. Fig. 2 shows a gun-shield, 
manufactured by Messrs Hadfield of Sheffield, after attack by 
4-i-in., 4-7-01. and 6-in. armour-piercing and other projectiles. 
The limit of the shield's resistance was just reached by an 
uncapped 4-7-in. A.P. shell with a striking velocity of 2128 ft. per 
second. The shield (the average maximum thickness of which 
was 5-8 in.) showed great toughness, and although subjected to a 



ARMOUR PLATES 



579 



severe battering, and occasionally outmatched by the attacking 
projectiles, developed no visible crack. It is chiefly remarkable 
for the fact that it was cast and not forged. As is evident from 
the fringing around the hole made by the 6-in. A. P. shell, the 
shield was not face-hardened. A more highly developed form 
of the gun-shield is to be found in the armoured cupola, which has 
been employed to a very considerable extent in permanent 
fortifications, and whose use is still strongly advocated by 
continental European military engineers. The majority of the 
cupolas to be found in continental forts are not, however, of very 
recent date, those erected in 1894 at Molsheim near Strassburg 
being comparatively modern instances. Any cupolas constructed 
nowadays would be of steel, either forged or .cast, and. would 
probably be face-hardened, but a large number of those extant 
are of compound or even of iron armour. Many of those on sea- 
fronts are made of chilled cast iron. Such armour, which was 
introduced by Gruson of Magdeburg in 1868, is extremely hard, 
and cannot be perforated, but must be destroyed by fracture. 
It is thus the antithesis of wrought iron, which, when of good 
quality, docs not break up under the impact of the shot but 
yields by perforation. Armour of the Gruson type is well 
adapted for curved surfaces such as cupolas, which on account 
of their shape are scarcely liable to receive a direct hit, except 
at distant ranges, and its extreme hardness would greatly assist 
it to throw off shot striking obliquely, which have naturally a 
tendency to glance. Chilled iron, on account of its liability to 
break up when subjected to a continuous bombardment by the 
armour-piercing steel projectiles of guns of even medium calibre, 
was usually considered unsuitable for employment in inland 
forts, where wrought iron, mild steel or compound armour was 
preferred. On the other hand , as pointed out by the late Captain 
C. Orde Browne, R.A., it was admirably adapted to resist the 
few rounds that the heavy guns of battleships might be expected 
to deliver during an attack of comparatively limited duration. 

Chilled iron was never employed for naval purposes, and 
warship armour continued to be made exclusively of wrought 
iron until 1876 when steel was introduced by Schneider. In an 
important trial at Spezzia in that year the superiority in resisting 
power of steel to wrought iron was conclusively proved, but, on 
the other hand, steel showed a great tendency to through- 
cracking, a defect which led Messrs Cammell of Sheffield in 1877 
to introduce compound armour consisting of a steel surface in 
intimate union with a wrought-iron foundation plate. In Cammell 
plates, which were made by the Wilson process, the steel face was 
formed by running molten steel on to a white-hot foundation 
plate of iron, while in the compound plates, made by Messrs 
John Brown & Co. according to the patent of J. D. Ellis, a thin 
steel surface plate was cemented on to the wrought-iron founda- 
tion by running in molten steel between. Compound armour 
possessed the advantages of a harder face than was then possible 
in a homogeneous steel plate, while, on the other hand, the back 
was softer and less liable to crack. Its weak point was the 
liability of the surface plate to crack through under fire and 
become detached from its iron backing. The manufacture of 
steel, however, continued to improve, so that in 1890 we find 
steel plates being made which were comparatively free from 
liability to through-cracking, while their power to resist perfora- 
tion was somewhat greater than that of the best compound. 
The difference, however, was at no time very marked, and 
between 1880 and 1890 the resistance to perforation of either 
steel or compound as compared with wrought iron may be taken 
as about 1-3 to 1. 

Compound armour required to be well backed to bring out its 
best qualities, and there is a case on record in 1883 when a 12-in. 
Cammell plate weighing 105 tons, backed by granite, stopped a 
16-in. Palliser shot with a striking energy of nearly 30,000 foot 
tons and a calculated perforation of 25 inches of wrought iron. 
As steel improved, efforts were made to impart an even greater 
hardness to the actual surface or skin of compound armour, and, 
with this object in view, Captain T. J. Tresidder, C.M.G., 
patented in 1887 a method of chilling the heated surface of a 
plate by means of jets of water under pressure. By this method 



it was found possible to obtain a degree of hardness which was 
prevented in ordinary plunging by the formation of a layer of 
steam between the water and the heated surface of the plate. 
Compound plates face-hardened on this system gave excellent 
results, and forged-steel armour-piercing projectiles were in some 
cases broken up on their surfaces as if they had been merely 
chilled iron. Attempts were also made to increase the toughness 
of the back by the substitution of mild nickel steel for wrought 
iron. The inherent defect of compound armour, however — its 
want of homogeneity, — remained, and in the year 1891 H. A. 
Harvey of Newark, N.J., introduced a process whereby an all 
steel plate could be face-hardened in such a way that the advaiv 
tages of the compound principle were obtained in a homogeneous 
plate. The process in question consisted in carburizing or 
cementing the surface of a steel plate by keeping it for a fortnight 
or so at a high temperature in contact with finely divided 
charcoal, so that the heated surface absorbed a certain amount 
of carbon, which penetrated to a considerable depth, thus causing 
a difference in chemical composition between the front and back 
of the plate. After it had been left a sufficient time in the 
cementation furnace, the plate was withdrawn and allowed to 
cool slowly until it reached a dull red heat, when it was suddenly 
chilled by the application of water, but by a less perfect method 
than that employed by Tresidder. Steel plates treated by the 
Harvey and Tresidder processes, which shortly became combined, 
possessed about twice the resisting power of wrought iron. The 
figure of merit, or resistance to penetration as compared with 
wrought iron, varied with the thickness of the plate, being rather 
more than 2 with plates from 6 to 8 in. thick and rather less for 
the thicker plates. In 1889 Schneider introduced the use of 
nickel in steel for armour plates, and in 1891 or 1892 the St 
Chamond works employed a nickel steel to which was added a 
small percentage of chromium. 

All modern armour contains nickel in percentages varying from 
3 to Si and from i-oto 2-0% of chromium is also employed as a 
general rule. Nickel in the above quantities adds greatly to the 
toughness as well as to the hardness of steel, while chromium 
enables it to absorb carbon to a greater depth during cementa- 
tion, and increases its susceptibility to tempering, besides con- 
ducing to a tough fibrous condition in the body of a plate. Alloy 
steels of this nature appear to be very susceptible to thermal 
treatment, by suitable variation of which,, with or without oil 
quenching, the physical condition of the same steel may be made 
to vary to an extraordinary extent, a peculiarity which is turned 
to good account in the manufacture of the modern armour plate. 

The principal modern process is that introduced by Krupp 
in 1893. Although it is stated that a few firms both in Great 
Britain and in other countries use special processes of their own, 
it is probable that they differ only in detail from the Krupp 
process, which has been adopted by the great majority of makers. 
Krupp plates are made of nickel-chrome steel and undergo a 
special heat treatment during manufacture which is briefly 
described below. They can either be cemented or, as was usual 
in England until about 1902 in the case of the thinner plates 
(4 in. and under) and those used for curved structures such as 
casemates, non-cemented. They are in either case face-hardened 
by chilling. Messrs Krupp have, however, cemented plates of 
3 in. and upward since 1895. Although the full process is now 
applied to plates of as little as '2 in. in thickness, there is some 
difference of opinion between manufacturers as to the value of 
cementing these very thin plates. The simple Harvey process is 
still employed to some extent in the case of plates between 
5 and 3 in. in thickness, and excellent results are also stated 
to have been obtained with plates from 2 to 4 in. in thickness, 
manufactured from a special steel by the process patented by 
M. Charpy of the St Jacques steel works at Montlucon. A 
Krupp cemented (K.C.) plate is not perhaps harder as regards 
surface than a good Harveyed plate, but the depth of hard face is 
greater, and the plate is very much tougher in the back, a quality 
which is of particular importance in the thicker plates. The 
figure of merit varies, as in Harveyed plates, with the thickness 
of the armour, being about 2-7 in the case of good 6-in. plates 



$8o 



ARMOUR PLATES 



while for the thicker plates the value gradually falls off to about 
2 -3 in the case of 1 2-in. armour. This figure of merit is as against 
uncapped armour-piercing shot of approximately the same 
calibre as the thickness of the plate. The resisting power of the 
non-cemented Krupp plates is usually regarded as being consider- 
ably less than that of the cemented plates, and may be taken on 
an average to be 2-25 times that of wrought iron. 

Figs. 3, 4 and 5 are illustrations of good cemented plates of 
the Krupp type. Fig. 3 shows an n-8-in. plate, tried by Messrs 
Krupp in 1895, after attack by three 12-in. steel armour-piercing 
projectiles of from 712-7 to 716-1 lb in weight. In the third 
round the striking velocity of the projectile was 1993 ft. per 
second, the calculated perforation of wrought iron by Tresidder's 
formula being 25-9 in. The attack was successfully resisted, all 
the projectiles being broken up without effecting perforation, 
while there were no serious cracks. The figure of merit of the 
plate was thus well in excess of 2-2. The great toughness of the 
plate is perhaps even more remarkable than its hardness; its 
width was only 6-28 ft., so that each shot head formed a wedge 
of approximately one-sixth of its width. The excellence of the 
metal which is capable of withstanding such a strain is apparent. 

Fig. 4 is of a 9-in. K.C. plate, made by Messrs Armstrong, 
Whitworth & Co. for the Japanese government, after undergoing 
an unusually severe official test. The fourth round was capable 
of perforating 22 in. of wrought iron, so that the figure of merit of 
the plate must have been considerably in excess of 2-45, as there 
were no through-cracks, and the limit of resistance was far from 
being reached. 

Fig. 5 shows the front of an excellent 6-in. cemented plate of 
Messrs Beardmore's manufacture, tried at Eskmeals on the nth 
of October 1901. It withstood the attack of four armour-piercing 
6-in. shot of 100 lb weight, with striking velocities varying from 
1996 to 2177 ft. per second. Its limit of resistance was just 
passed by the fifth round in which the striking velocity was no 
less than 2261 ft. per second. The projectile, which broke up in 
passing through the plate, did not get through the skin plate 
behind the wood backing, and evidently had no surplus energy 
left. The figure of merit of this plate was between 2-6 and 2-8, 
but was evidently much closer to the latter than to the former 
figure. A sixth round fired with a Johnson capped shot weighing 
105-9 lb easily perforated both plate and backing with a striking 
velocity of 1945 ft. per second, thus reducing the figure of merit 
of the plate to below 2-2 and illustrating very clearly the advan- 
tage given by capping the point of an armour-piercing projectile-. 
There were no through-cracks in the plate after this severe trial, 
the back being evidently as tough as the face was hard. 

Fig. 6 shows a 3 -in. K.N.C. plate of Messrs Vickers, Sons & 
Maxim's manufacture, tested privately by the firm in November 
1905. It proved to be of unusual excellence, its limit of resistance 
being just reached by a 125-lb armour-piercing shell of 3 in. 
calibre with a striking velocity of 2558 ft. per second, a result 
which, even if the projectiles used were not relatively of the same 
perforating power as those used in the proof of 6-in. and thicker 
plates, shows that its resisting power was very great. At a low 
estimate its figure of merit against 3-in. A. P. shot may be taken 
as about 2-6, which is exceptionally high for a non-cemented, or 
indeed for any but the best K.C. plates. 

The plate also withstood the attack of a 4-7-in. service pattern 
steel armour-piercing shell of 45 lb weight striking the unbacked 
portion with a velocity of 1599 ft. per second, and was only just 
beaten by a similar shell with a velocity of 1630 ft. per second. 
The effect of all the above-mentioned rounds is shown in the 
photograph. The same plate subsequently kept out two 6-in. 
common shell filled up to weight with salt and plugged, with 
striking velocities of 141 2 and 1739 ft. per second respectively, 
the former being against the unbacked and the latter against the 
backed half of the plate, — the only effect on the plate being that 
round 6 caused a fragment of the right-hand top corner of the 
plate to break off, and round 7 started a few surface cracks 
between the points of impact of rounds 1, 2 and 3. 

Within the limitations referred to below, the resisting power of 
all hard-faced plates is very much reduced when the armour- 



piercing projectiles used in the attack are capped, the average 
figure of merit of Krupp cemented plates not being more than 2 
against capped shot as.compared with about 2 • 5 against uncapped. 
So long ago as 1878 it was suggested by Lt.-Col. (then Captain) 
T. English, R.E., that armour-piercing projectiles would be 
assisted in attacking compound plates if caps of wrought iron 
could be fitted to their points. Experiments at Shoeburyness, 
however, did not show that any advantage was gained by 
this device, and nothing further was heard of the cap until 
1894, when experiments carried out in Russia with so-called 
" magnetic " shot against plates of Harveyed steel showed that 
the perforating power of an armour-piercing projectile was 
considerably augmented where hard-faced plates were concerned, 
if its point were protected by a cap of wrought iron or mild steel. 
The conditions of the Russian results (and of subsequent trials in 
various parts of the world which have confirmed them) differed 
considerably from the earlier English ones. The material of 
both projectiles and plates differed, as did also the velocities 
employed — the low velocities in the earlier trials probablyi 
contributing in large measure to the non-success of the cap. 
The cap, as now used, consists of a thimble of comparatively soft 
steel of from 3 to 5 % of the weight of the projectile, attached 
to the point of the latter either by solder or by being pressed 
hydraulically or otherwise into grooves or indentations in the 
head. Its function appears to be to support the point on impact, 
and so to enable it to get unbroken through the hard face layers 
of the plate. Once through the cemented portion with its point 
intact, a projectile which is strong enough to remain undeformed, 
will usually perforate the plate by a true boring action if its 
striking velocity be high enough. In the case of the uncapped 
projectile, on the other hand, the point is almost invariably 
crushed against the hard face and driven back as a wedge into 
the body of the projectile, which is thus set up so that, instead 
of boring, it acts as a punch and dislodges or tends to dislodge a 
coned plug or disk of metal, the greatest diameter of which may 
be as much as four times the calibre of the projectile. The dis- 
proportion between the maximum diameter of the disk and that 
of the projectile is particularly marked when the calibre of the 
latter is much in excess of the thickness of the plate. When plate 
and projectile are equally matched, e.g. 6" versus 6", the plug of 
metal dislodged may be roughly cylindrical in shape, and its 
diameter not greatly in excess of that of the projectile. In all 
cases the greatest width of the plug or disk is at the back of the 
plate. 

A stout and rigid backing evidently assists a plate very much 
more against this class of attack than against the perforating 
attack of a capped shot. Fig. 7 shows the back of a 6-in. plate 
attacked in 1898, and affords an excellent illustration of the 
difference in action of capped and uncapped projectiles. In 
round 7 the star-shaped opening made by the point of a capped 
shot boring its way through is seen, while rounds 2, 3, 4 and 5 
show disks of plate partially dislodged by uncapped projectiles. 
The perforating action of capped armour-piercing projectiles is 
even better shown in fig. 8, which shows a 250-mm. (9-8 in.) 
Krupp plate after attack by 150-mm. (5-9 in.) capped A.P. shot. 
In rounds 5 and 6 the projectiles, with striking velocities of 2302 
and 2281 ft. per second, perforated. Round 7, with a striking 
velocity of 2244 ft. per second, just got its point through and 
rebounded, while round 8, with a striking velocity of 2232, lodged 
in the plate. In many cases a capped projectile punches out a 
plug, usually more or less cylindrical in shape and of about the 
same diameter as the projectile, from a plate, and does not defeat 
it by a true boring action. In such cases it will probably be 
found that the projectile has been broken up, and that only the 
head, set up and in a more or less crushed condition, has got 
through the plate. This peculiarity of action can best be 
accounted for by attributing either abnormal excellence to the 
plate or to that portion of it concerned — for plates sometimes 
vary considerably and are not of uniform hardness throughout, 
— or comparative inferiority to the projectile. Whichever way 
it may be, what has happened appears to be that after the cap has 
given the point sufficient support to get it through the very hard 



ARMOUR PLATES 



Plate I. 





Plate II. 



ARMOUR PLATES 





ARMOUR PLATES 



58i 



surface layers, the point has been flattened in the region of extreme 
hardness and toughness combined, which exists immediately 
behind the deeply carburized surface. The action from this 
point becomes a punching one, and the extra strain tends to 
break up the projectile, so that the latter gets through wholly 
or partially, in a broken condition, driving a plug of plate in front 
of it. At low striking velocities, probably in the neighbourhood 
of 1700 ft. per second, the cap fails to act, and no advantage is 
given by it to the shot. This is probably because the velocity is 
sufficiently low to give the cap time to expand and so fail to grip 
the point as the latter is forced into it. The cap also fails as a 
rule to benefit the projectile when the angle of incidence is more 
than 30 to the normal. 

The laws governing the resistance of armour to perforation 
have been the subject of investigation for many years, and a 
considerable number of formulae have been put 
resistance, forward by means of which the thickness of armour 
perforable by any given projectile at any given striking 
velocity may -be calculated. Although in some cases based on 
very different theoretical considerations, there is a general 
agreement among them as far as perforation proper is concerned, 
and Tresidder's formula for the perforation of wrought iron, 
P = wv'/dA, may be taken as typical. Here / represents the 
thickness perforable in inches, w the weight of the projectile in 
pounds, v its velocity in foot seconds, d its diameter in inches 
and a the constant given by log a = 8-8410. 

For the perforation of Harveyed or Krupp cemented armour 
by capped armour-piercing shot, this formula may be employed 
in conjunction with a suitable constant according to the nature 
of armour attacked. In the case of K. C. armour the 
formula becomes f = vrtflj^dk. A useful rough rule is tjd = 21/1900. 

Hard armour, such as chilled cast iron, cannot be perforated 
but must be destroyed by fracture, and its destruction is appar- 
ently dependent solely upon the striking energy of the projectile 
And independent of its diameter.- The punching of hard-faced 
armour by uncapped projectiles is intermediate in character 
between perforation and cracking, but approaches the former 
more nearly than the latter. The formula most used in 
England in this case is Krupp's formula for K.C., viz. ^= W/rfA 1 , 
where t,w,v and d are the same as before, and log k l — 6-3532. 
This, if we assume the sectional density (w/d 3 ) of projectiles to be 
constant and equal to 0-46, reduces to the very handy rule of 
thumb tld = vJ22oo, which, within the limits of striking velocity 
obtainable under service conditions, is sufficiently accurate for 
practical purposes. For oblique attack up to an angle of 30 to 
the normal, the same formula may be employed, / sec0 being 
substituted for t, where d is the angle of incidence and t the 
normal thickness of the plate attacked. More exact results 
would be obtained, however, by the use of Tresidder's W.I. 
formula, given above, in conjunction with a suitable figure of 
merit, according to the nature and thickness of the plate. It 
should be remembered in this connexion that the figure of merit 
of a plate against a punching attack falls off very much when the 
thickness of the plate is considerably less than the calibre of the 
attacking projectile. For example, the F.M. of a 6-in. plate may 
be 2-6 against 6-in. uncapped A.P. projectiles, but only 2-2 
against o- 2-in. projectiles of the same character. In the case of the 
perforating action of capped projectiles, on the other hand, the 
ratio of d and t does not appear to affect the F.M. to any great 
extent, though according to Tresidder, the latter is inclined to fall 
when d is considerably less than /, which is the exact opposite of 
what happens with punching. 

Another method of measuring the quality of armour, which is 
largely employed upon the continent of Europe, is by the ratio, r, 
between the velocity requisite to perforate any given plate and 
that needed to pierce a plate of mild steel of the same thickness, 
according to the formula of Commandant Jacob de Marre, viz. 
D=Ae°7a°' 76 //> ' 5 where e= the thickness of the plate in centi- 
metres, <i= the calibre of the projectile in centimetres, p = the 
weight of the projectile in kilogrammes, v = the striking velocity 
of the projectile in metres per second, and log A= 1-7347. Con- 
verted into the usual English units and notation, this formula 



becomes v=A 1 t°'ld " !5 /w°' > , in which log A 1 = 3 -0094; in this 
form it constitutes the basis of the ballistic tests for the accept- 
ance of armour plates for the U.S. navy. 

Common shell, which are not strong enough to remain unde- 
formed on impact, derive little benefit from the cap and usually 
defeat a plate by punching rather than by perforation. Their 
punching power may be taken roughly as about f that of an 
uncapped armour-piercing shot. Shells filled with high explosives, 
unless special arrangements are made to deaden the bursting 
charge and So obviate detonation upon impact, are only effective 
against the thinnest armour. 

With regard to manufacture, a brief account of the Krupp 
process as applied in one of the great English armour plate 
works (omitting confidential details of temperature, 
&c.) will illustrate the great complexity of treatment tacture. 
which the modern armour plate has to undergo before 
its remarkable qualities of combined hardness and toughness can 
be developed. The composition of the steel probably differs 
slightly with the manufacturer, and also with the thickness of the 
armour, but it will usually contain from 3 to 4 % of nickel, from 
i-o to 2-0 % of chromium and about 0-25 to 0-35 % of carbon, 
together with from 0-3 to o- 7 % of manganese. After being cast, 
the ingot is first heated to a uniform degree of temperature 
throughout its mass and then generally forged under the hydraulic 
forging press. It is then reheated and passed through the rolls. 
After rolling, the plate is allowed to cool, and is then subjected to 
a thermal treatment preparatory to surfacing and cutting. Its 
surface is then freed from scale and planed. After planing, the 
plate is passed into the cementation furnace, where its face 
remains for some weeks in contact with specially prepared 
carbon, the temperature being gradually raised to that required 
for cementation and as gradually lowered after that is effected. 
After cementation the plate is heated to a certain temperature 
and is then plunged into an oil bath in order to toughen it. 
After withdrawal from the oil bath, the plate is cooled, reheated 
to a lower temperature, quenched again in water, reheated and 
passed to the bending press, where it is bent to shape while hot, 
proper allowance being made for the slight change of curve which 
takes place on the final chilling. After bending it is again heated 
and then allowed to get cold, when the final machining, drilling 
and cutting are carried out. The plate is now placed in a furnace 
and differentially heated so that the face is raised to a higher 
temperature than the back. After being thus heated for a 
certain period the plate is withdrawn, and both back and face 
are douched simultaneously with jets of cold water under 
pressure, the result being that the face is left glass-hard while the 
back is in the toughest condition possible for such hard steel. 

The cast-steel armour made by Hadfield has already been 
alluded to. That made by Krupp (the only other maker at 
present of this class of armour) is of face-hardened nickel steel. 
A 5-o-in. plate of this material tried in 1902 had a figure of merit 
of more than 2-2 against uncapped 5-9-in. armour-piercing 
projectiles of 112 lb in weight. The main advantage of cast 
armour is that it is well adapted to armoured structures of 
complicated design and of varying thickness, which it would 
be difficult or impossible to forge in one piece. It should also be 
cheaper than forged armour, and, should time be a consideration, 
could probably be turned out more quickly; on the other hand, 
it is improbable that heavy castings such as would be required 
could be as regular in quality and as free from flaws as is possible 
when forged material is used, and it is unlikely that the average 
resistance to attack of cast-steel armour will ever be equal to that 
of the best forged steel. 

Of recent years there has been a considerable demand for thin 
steel plating proof against small-arm bullets at close ranges. 
This class of steel is used for field-gun shields and for Defence 
sap shields, to afford cover for men in field-works, against 
for armoured trains, motor-cars and ambulances, and amaU- 
also very largely for armouring shallow-draught river- arms. 
gunboats. Holtzer made chrome steel breastplates in 1890, 
0-158 in. of which was proof against the o-43-im hard lead bullet 
1 of the Gras rifle at 10 metres range, while 0-236 in. was proof 



5 82 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



Classifi- 
cation. 



against the 032-in. 231-grain Lebel bullet at the same distance, 
the striking velocities being approximately 1490 and 2070 ft. 
per second respectively. The bullet-proof steel made by Messrs 
Cammell, Laird & Co. in Great Britain may be taken as typical of 
that produced by the best modern manufacturers. It is proof 
against the 215-grain Lee-Enfield bullet of 0-303 in. calibre 
striking directly, as under: 

Range. Thickness ofPlate. Striking Velocity. 
10 yards 0-187 inch 2050 f.s. 

100 „ 0-167 „ 1865 „ 

560 „ 0-080 „ 1080 „ 

The weight of the o-o8-in. plating is only 3-2 lb per sq. ft. 
The material is stated to be readily adaptable to the ordinary 
operation of bending, machining, drilling, &c, and is thus very 
suitable for the purposes indicated above. (W. E. E.) 

ARMS AND ARMOUR (Lat. arma, from the Aryan root ar, 
to join or fit; cf. Gr. apfibs, joint; the form armour, from Lat. 
armatura, should strictly be armure). Under this heading are 
included weapons of offence (arms) and defensive equipment 
(armour). The history of the development of arms and armour 
begins with that of the human race; indeed, combined with 
domestic implements, the most primitive weapons which have 
been found constitute the most important, if not the only, 
tangible evidence on which the history of primitive man is based. 
It is largely from the materials and characteristics of the 
weapons and utensils found in caves, tombs and various strata of 
the earth's crust, coupled with geological considerations, that the 
ethnological and chronological classifications of prehistoric man 
have been deduced. For a detailed account of this classifica- 
tion and the evidence see Archaeology; Bronze Age; Flint 
Implements, &c, and articles on special weapons. 

Offensive weapons may be classified roughly, according to their 
shape (i.e. the kind of blow or wound which they are intended 
to inflict), and the way in which they are used, as 
follows: — (1) Arms which are wielded by hand at 
close quarters. These are subdivided into (a) cleaving 
weapons, e.g. axes; (b) crushing, e.g. clubs, maces and all hammer- 
like arms; (c) thrusting, e.g. pointed swords and daggers; 

(d) cutting, e.g. sabres (such weapons frequently combine both 
the cut and the thrust, e.g. swords with both edge and point) ; 

(e) those weapons represented by the spear, lance, pike, &c, 
which deal a thrusting blow but are distinguished from .(c) by 
their greater length. (2) Purely missile weapons, e.g. darts, 
javelins and spears. Frequently these weapons are used also 
at close quarters as thrusting weapons; the typical example of 
these is the medium-length spear of not more than about 6 ft. in 
length. (3) Arms which discharge missiles, e.g. bows, catapults 
and fire-arms generally. (See Archery and section Fire-arms 
below.) The weapons in (2) and (3) are designed to avoid hand- 
to-hand fighting. 

Weapons are also classified in a variety of other ways. Thus 
we have small-arms, i.e. all weapons in classes (1) and (2) with 
those in (3) which do not require carriages. Side-arms are those 
which, when not in use, are worn at the side, e.g. daggers, swords, 
bayonets. Armes blanches is a term used for offensive weapons 
of iron and steel which are used at close quarters. 

Defensive armour consists of body armour, protections for the 
head and the limbs, and various types of shield. 

1. Stone Age. — One of the chief problems which have per- 
plexed archaeologists is that of finding a criterion which will 
enable them to distinguish the most primitive products 

s ory ' of human skill from similar objects whose form is due 
to the forces of nature. It is often impossible to say precisely 
whether a rough piece of flint is to be regarded as a weapon 
(except so far as it could be used as a missile) or merely as a 
fragment of rock. Passing over these doubtful cases, we come 
first to indubitable examples of weapons deliberately fashioned 
in stone for offensive purposes. The use of stone weapons 
appears to have been universally characteristic of the earliest 
races of mankind, as it is still distinctive of those savage races 
which are most nearly allied to primitive man. These weapons 
were naturally simple in form and structure. The earliest 



Fig. i.- 



-Leaf-shaped Flint 
Dagger. 



examples (Palaeolithic) found in river-drift gravel in various parts 
of Europe are merely chipped flints, celts, &c. Later on we find 
polished implements (Neolithic) progressively more elaborate in 
design and workmanship, such as socketed stones with wooden 
handles and knives or daggers of flaked flint with handles. 
Besides flint the commonest materials are diorite, greenstone, 
serpentine and indurated clay-slate; there are also weapons of 
horn and bone (daggers and spear-heads). Spear-heads and 
arrow-points (leaf-shaped, lozenge-shaped, tanged and tri- 
angular) were chipped in flint with such skill as to be little 
inferior to their metal successors. They have accurately flaked 
barbs and tangs, and in some cases their edges are minutely 
chipped. The heads appear to have been fastened to the shafts 
by vegetable fibre and bitumen. Knife^daggers of flint, though 
practically of one single type, exhibit much variety of form. 
They vary in size also, but seldom exceed 1 2 in. in length. They 
are sometimes obtuse-edged like a scraping-tool, sometimes 
delicately chipped to a straight edge, while the flakes are so 
regularly removed from the convex part of the blade as to give 
a wavy surface, and the corners of the handle are delicately 
crimped. The daggers attain their highest perfection in the short, 
leaf -shaped form— the precursor of the leaf -shaped sword which 
is peculiarly characteristic o'f the 
Bronze Age, — and the curved 
knives found especially in Great 
Britain and Russia, and also in 
Egypt. The precise object Of the 
sharpening of both convex and con- 
cave edges in the curved variety is not clear. There have also 
been found sling-stones, and, in Scotland and Ireland, balls of 
stone with their " surfaces divided into a number of more or less 
projecting circles with channels between them." These latter, 
Sir John Evans suggests, were attached to a thong which passed 
through the surface channels, and used like the bolas of South 
America. The weapon could thus deal a blow at close quarters, 
or could be thrown so as to entangle the limbs of an enemy. 
Of defensive, armour of stone there is none. The only approxi- 
mation is to be found in the small rectangular plates of slate, &c, 
perforated with holes at the corners, which are supposed to have 
been bound on to the arm to protect it from the recoil of the 
bow-string. Similar wristlets or bracers are in use among the 
Eskimos (of bone) and in India (of ivory). These plates measure 
generally about 4 in. by 15 in. 

2. Bronze Age. — It is impossible to assign any date as the 
beginning, of the Bronze Age; indeed, archaeology has shown 
that the adoption of metal for weapons was very gradual. TJie 
stone weapon perseveres alongside the bronze, and there exist 
stone axes which, by their shape, suggest that they have been 
copied from metal axes. In the earliest interments in which the 
weapons deposited with the dead are of other materials than 
stone, a peculiar form of bronze dagger occurs. It consists of a 



Fig. 2. — Leaf-shaped Bronze Sword. 

well-finished, thin, knife-like blade, usually about 6 in. in length, 
broad at the hilt and tapering to the point, and attached to the 
handle by massive rivets of bronze. It has been found associated 
with stone celts; both of the roughly chipped and the highly 
polished kind, showing that these had not been entirely disused 
when bronze became available. A later type of bronze dagger is 
a broad, heavy, curved weapon, usually from 9 to 1 5 in. in length, 
with massive rivets for attachment to an equally massive handle. 
The leaf-shaped sword, however, is the characteristic weapon of 
the Bronze Age. It is found all over Europe, from Lapland to the 
Mediterranean. No warlike weapon of any period is more graceful 
in form or more beautifully finished. The finish seems to have 
been given in the mould without the aid of hammer or file, the 
edge being formed by suddenly reducing the thickness of the 
metal, so as to produce a narrow border of extreme thinness along 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



5^3 



both sides of the blade from hilt to point. The handle-plate and 
blade were cast in one piece, and the handle itself was formed by- 
side plates of bone, horn or wood, riveted through the handle- 
plates. There was no guard, and the weapon, though short, was 
well balanced, but more fitted for stabbing and thrusting than 
for cutting with the edge. The Scandinavian variety is not so 
decidedly leaf-shaped, and is longer and heavier than the common 
British form; and instead of a handle-plate, it was furnished 
with a tang on which a round, flat-topped handle was fastened, 
like that of the modern Highland dirk, sometimes surmounted 
by a crescent-like ornamen-t of bronze. A narrow, rapier-shaped 
variety, tapering from hilt to point, was made without a handle- 
plate, and attached to the hilt by rivets like the bronze daggers 
already mentioned. This form is more common in the British 
Isles than in Scandinavia, and is most abundant in Ireland. The 
spear-heads of the Bronze Age present a considerable variety of 
form, though the leaf-shaped predominates, and barbed examples 
are extremely rare. Some British weapons of this form occasion- 
ally reach a length of 27 in. The larger varieties are often 
beautifully designed, having segmental openings on both sides of 
the central ridge of the blade, and elaborately ornamented with 




Fig. 3. — Bronze Spear-Head, length 19 inches. 

chevron patterns of chased or inlaid work both on the socket and 
blade. Arrow-points are much rarer in bronze than in flint. In 
all probability the flint arrow-point (which was equally effective 
and much more easily replaced when lost) continued to be used 
throughout the Bronze Age. Shields of bronze, circular, with 
hammered-up bosses, concentric ridges and rows of studs, were 
held in the hand by a central handle underneath the boss. The 
transition period between the Bronze and Iron Ages in central 
Europe is well defined by the 1 occurrence of iron swords, which are 
simple copies of the leaf-shaped weapon, sometimes with flat 
handle-plate of bronze. These have been found associated with 
articles assigned to the 3rd or 4th century B.C. 

An important distinction between the characteristic bronze 
swords peculiar to southern peoples and the swords both of iron 
and of bronze found together in the Hallstatt cemeteries 
weapons. ( m tne Salzkarnmergut, Austria, ancient Noricum) is 
that whereas the former invariably have short handles 
(21 to 25 in.), the latter are provided with handles from 3 to 3 \ in. 
long, terminating in a round or oval pommel; the grip of one 
of the bronze swords even reaches a length of 4 in. The hilts 
are decorated with ivory, amber, wood, bronze, horn, and the 
decoration of blade and scabbard is often elaborate. The length 
of these swords is sometimes as much as 30 to 33 in. Again at 
La Tene on Lake Neuchatel iron swords have been found to the 
number of one hundred, with handles of 4 to 7J in. long and a 
total length varying from 30 to 38 in. Similar remains have been 
found in France at Bibracte and Alesia, and even in Ireland 
(cf. Munro, The Luke-dwellings of Europe, pp. 282, 383). 

The occurrence at Hallstatt of bronze swords together with 
iron, having the characteristic long handle, has led to the hypo- 
thesis that the graves are those of an immigrant (probably Celtic) 
people of northern extraction which had conquered and overlaid 
a smaller-framed Bronze Age people, and had introduced the use 
of iron while continuing to use the bronze of their predecessors 
with the necessary modifications. This theory derived from 
tangible remains is corroborated by literary evidence. Thus 
Polybius (ii. 33, iii. 114) describes the Celtic peoples as fighting 
with a long pointless iron sword, which easily bent and was in 
any case too large to be used easily in a melee. 

The graves at Hallstatt yielded in addition to these important 
swords a much larger number of spears. Of these two only were 
of bronze, the head of the larger being 73 in. long. The much 
more numerous iron heads range up to as much as 2 ft. in length, 
and are all fastened to the shaft by rivets. All the arrow-heads 



found are of bronze, while of the axes the great majority are of 
iron ; a few have iron edges fitted in a bed of bronze. 

These examples are sufficient to show that the transition from 
bronze to iron was very slow. The fact that they were found in a 
district which is known to have been directly in the line of march 
pursued by invaders from the north tends to confirm the theory 
that the introduction of iron was the work of such invaders. 

See Sir John Evans, A ncient Stone Implements (2nd. ed., 1897), 
Bronze Implements; W. Ridgeway, Early Age of Greece; and works 
quoted under Archaeology. 

3. Early Greek Weapons. — The character of the weapons used 
by the early peoples of the Aegean in the periods known as 
Minoan, Mycenaean and Homeric is a problem which 
has given rise of recent years to much discussion. The Mycenaean 
controversy is an important part of the Homeric Homeric. 
question as a whole, and the various theories of the 
weapons used in the Trojan War hinge en wider theories as to the 
date and authorship of the Homeric poems. One widely accepted 
hypothesis, based on the important monograph by Dr Wolfgang 
Reichel, tjber homerische Waff en. Archdologische Unlersuchungen 
(Vienna, 1894), is that the Homeric heroes, like those who created 
the civilization known as Mycenaean, had no defensive armour 
except the Mycenaean shield, and used weapons of bronze. This 
view is derived to a great extent from the Homeric poems them- 
selves, in which the metal most frequently mentioned is xaXxos 
(bronze), and involves the assumption that all passages which 
describe the use of corslets, breastplates, small shields and 
greaves are later interpolations. It is maintained on the other 
hand (e.g. by Prof. W. Ridgeway, Early Age of Greece, i. chap. 3), 
that the Homeric Achaeans (whom he regards as the descendants 
of the central European peoples, the makers of the Hallstatt iron 
swords) were far advanced into the Iron Age, and that the use 
of bronze weapons is merely another instance of the fact that 
the introduction of a new element does not necessarily banish 
the older. This theory would separate the Homeric from the 
Mycenaean altogether, and is part of a much more comprehensive 
ethnological hypothesis. According to another hypothesis, the 
Homeric poems are true descriptions of a single age, or, in other 
words, the weapons of the Homeric age were far more diverse 
and elaborate than is supposed by Reichel. 

Very few traces of iron have been found in the Mycenaean 
settlements, nor have any examples of body armour been found 
except the ceremonial gold breastplates at Mycenae. The 
Mycenaean soldiers carried apparently a bronze spear, a bronze 
sword and a bow and arrows. The arrow-heads are first of 
obsidian and later of bronze. It would appear that only the chief 
warriors used spear and shield, while the majority fought with 
bows. The swords found at Mycenae are two-edged, of rigid 
bronze, and as long as 3 ft. or even more; from representations 
of battles it would peem that they were perhaps used for thrusting 
mainly. They are highly ornamented and some have hilts 
of wood, bone or ivory, or even gold mounting. Later swords 
became shorter and of a type like that of early iron swords found 
in Greece. Moreover in a few cases there have been found in pre- 
Mycenaean (late Minoan III.) tombs a few examples of short 
iron swords together with bronze remains. All Mycenaean spears 
are of bronze and, apparently, their shafts, unlike the Homeric, 
had no butt-piece. In the absence of any metal helmets in the 
tombs we may perhaps assume that the Mycenaean helmet was 
a leather cap, possibly strengthened with tusks, such as appears 
in Homer {Iliad, x.) also. The Mycenaean shield (generally, 
perhaps, made of leather) has given rise to much controversy, 
which hinges largely on the interpretation of the evidence 
provided by the representation on the Warrior Vase and the 
Painted Stele from Mycenae and pottery found at Tiryns. 
Professor Ridgeway regards these as describing post-Mycenaean 
conditions, and maintains that the true Mycenaean shield was 
always long (from neck to feet), and that it was either in the form 
of a figure-of-eight targe, or rectangular and sometimes incurved 
like the section of a cylinder; whereas the Homeric shield was 
round (e.g. nvMrepos, ewcu/cXos, &c). Dr Reichel's followers 
believe that the Homeric shield was long ("like a tower") and 



5 8 4 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



incurved in the centre like the Mycenaean, that Homer knew 
nothing of the small round shield, and that the epithets implying 
roundness used in the poems are to be explained as meaning 
" well-balanced " or as late interpolations. On the whole we 
must conclude that the Mycenaean age is by no means a single 
homogeneous whole (see Aegean Civilization), and that the 
weapons are not exclusively of bronze, nor of any single type. 

The Homeric warrior in full armour, according to the Homeric 
poems, wore: (i) shield (ao-irk, ctclkos), (2) greaves (KVTiffides), 
(3) band (f£,ua), (4) belt (fco<jri7p)and mitre, (5) tunic (xir6>v), 
(6) helmet (icopvs), (7) breastplate (dup-qg), (8) sword (£i$os). 
The \aiarfiov was a protection worn by the archers in place of a 
shield. According to the usual view, the Homeric shield was, as 
we have seen, bent in about half way up each side (in the form of 
a figure-of-eight) to give freedom to the arms, and large enough 
to protect the whole body. The two curves were held rigid by 
two Wooden (probably) staves inside. It was composed of layers 
of ox-hide overlaid with bronze, forming a boss in the centre, and 
sometimes had studs upon it. Reichel's view is that it was the 
weight of these huge shields which led to the use of the chariot as 
a means of going rapidly from one part of the field to another 
(though Professor Ridgeway and others contest this, and Helbig 
mentions more than one case of long journeys on foot under 
shield), and further that the round shield is entirely unknown 
to Homer. This large shield was clearly the natural protection 
against showers of missiles, rather than against enemies fighting 
with the sword. 

The greaves were, no doubt, generally of hide, protected the 
leg all round, and were fastened at the knee with cords. On 
the other hand Mycenaean bronze greaves have been found at 
Enkomi (Cyprus) and at Glassinatz (Glasinac), and therefore 
it is not necessary, following Reichel, to cut out Homer's 
references to the " bronze-greaved " Achaeans (Iliad, vii. 41), a 
phrase which has been taken as evidence for regarding the 
passage as spurious. The tin greaves of Achilles are obviously 
exceptional. 

The thorex again is the subject of controversy. Reichel, 
arguing that the great shield rendered any breastplate unneces- 
sary, regarded the word as a general term for body clothing, 
but Ridgeway strongly maintains the older theory that it was 
a bronze breastplate, and Andrew Lang points out that, on 
Reichel's theory, a word which originally meant the " breast " 
was transferred to mean " loin-cloth " (which, to judge from the 
artistic representations, was all that the Mycenaean warrior 
wore), and subsequently in historic times returned to its natural 
use for the breastplate — a most unlikely evolution. The passages 
in Homer which describe it as a breastplate are regarded by 
Reichel's school as later interpolations. Gilbert Murray thinks 
that the Homeric poems must be regarded as belonging to differ- 
ent periods of development, and therefore attributes the more 
elaborate armour to the " surface " (late Ionian) stratum. The 
zoma was probably a loin-cloth, and the mitre a metal band about 
a foot wide in front and narrow behind to protect the lower part 
of the body. As a matter of fact, however, the big shield does 
not exclude the use of body armour, and it is quite likely that the 
Homeric warrior wore a bronze corslet, i.e. a somewhat improved 
form of the \ivodwpr)%, or stiffened shirt. On the other hand, 
it is probable, as we gather from the poems, that this corslet was 
not strong enough to do more than stop a spent spear. The 
chiton was worn over the mitre, and reached the knees; it was held 
to the body by the zoster, a metal-plated belt. Helmets were both 
of metal on leather, and of leather throughout; the crests were 
of horsehair (not of metal like the later Greek helmets) and there 
were no cheek-pieces. 

The sword has already been mentioned. Ridgeway, in spite of 
the almost invariable mention of bronze as the material of the 
Homeric weapons, believes that it was generally of iron, but, 
while the presence of iron in the Homeric age is admitted in the 
case of implements, it is generally held that weapons were all of 
bronze. Except for one arrow-head {Iliad, iv. 123), and the mace 
of Areithoiis, mentioned as a unique example by Nestor {Iliad, 
vii. 141), no reference to an iron weapon proper occurs in the 



Homeric poems. Put the sword was used only when the favourite 
spear or javelin had failed to decide the contest. 

It must be admitted that the problem of pre-Homeric armour 
and Homeric armour must always be largely a matter of inference, 
based on a comparative study of the evidence literary and archaeo- 
logical. Unless we are prepared to adopt the theory that the 
Homeric poems consist of a mosaic of interpolation informed by 
an archaizing editor, we must assume that they describe a single 
period of transition intermediate between the Mycenaean prime 
and the dawn of history proper. In this case we shall believe that 
the Homeric warrior has so far adapted to changing conditions 
the simple appliances of the Mycenaean that he has evolved a 
feeble corslet with minor pieces of body armour, while retaining 
the big double-bellied shield as a protection against the arrows 
which are still the chief weapon of the rank and file and are even 
used on occasion by the chiefs. If we further believe that the 
iron at his disposal was similar to that used by the Celts of 
Polybius, it is natural to believe also that he preferred the 
harder bronze for his weapons, though iron was common for 
domestic and other implements. 

On early Greek arms in general see, besides Reichel and Ridgeway 
op. cit.: A. Lang, Homer and his Age (London, 1906; and criticisms 
in Classical Review, February 1907); G. G. A. Murray, The Rise of 
the Greek Epic (Oxford, 1907), chap, vi,; R. M. Burrows, Dis- 
coveries in Crete (2nd ed., London, 1907) ; Leaf and Bayfield, Iliad, 
i.-xii. Appendix A (follows Reichel) ; W. Helbig, Homerische Epos 
(1884 and 1899), and La Question mycenienne (1896); C. Robert, 
Studien zur Ilias (Berlin, 1901); Chr. Tsountas and J. I. Manatt, 
The Mycenaean Age (1897); V. Berard, Les Pheniciens et I'Odyssee 
(Paris, 1902); Cauer, Grundfrager d. Homerkritik (Leipzig, 1895); 
much valuable discussion will be found in articles in Journ. Hell, 
Stud., Classical Rev. and Journ. of Anthropol. Instil. ; see also editions 
of Iliad, and Odyssey (espec. D. B. Monro), and works quoted under 
Aegean Civilization ; Homer ; Mycenae. 

4. Greek, Historical. — The equipment does not differ generic- 
ally from that described in the Homeric poems, except when 
we come to the reforms of the Macedonians. The hoplites, who 
formed the main army, wore helmet, body armour, greaves and 
shield, and fought with pike and sword. The helmets were (1) 
the Corinthian, which covered the face to the chin, with slits for 
the eyes, and often had no plume or crest; (2) the Athenian, 
which did not cover the face (though sometimes it had cheek- 
plates which could be turned up if necessary) , had crests, some- 
times triple, with plumes of feathers, horsehair or leather; 
(3) a steel cap (ttTXos) without crest, plumes or cheek-plates. The 
last seems to have been most common in the Spartan army. 
The body armour consisted of breast and back plates fastened 
together by thongs or straps and buckles; sometimes poverty 
compelled a man to be content with a leather jerkin (o-iro\a.s) 
partly strengthened by metal plates, or even a quilted linen or 
stuffed shirt. Greaves were of pliant bronze fastened at the back 
above the ankle and below the knee. Shields were of the small 
round or oval type, adapted to the new conditions in which the 
bow and arrow had given place to hand-to-hand fighting. They 
were held by means of two handles (oxava) , the left hand being 
thrust through the first and grasping the second. In the 5th and 
4th centuries the shield bore a device or initial representing the 
state and also the individual's own crest. The hoplite's pike, 
about 8 ft. long, unlike the Homeric weapon, was hardly ever 
thrown. In the Macedonian phalanx a pike (aapiaaa), certainly 
18 ft., and perhaps later in the 3rd and 2nd centuries even 24 ft. 
long, was introduced. The sword was straight, sharp-pointed, 
short, sometimes less than 20 in., and rarely more than 2 ft. 
long. It was double-edged and used for both cut and thrust. 
A less common type was the p.kx<upo. or curved sabre used by 
the Spartans, with one sharp edge. The hoplite had no other 
offensive weapons. 

The cavalry were heavy-armed like the hoplites except that 
they carried a smaller shield, or, more usually, none at all. They 
were armed with a lance which they wielded freely (i.e. not " in 
rest ") and occasionally threw.- The Macedonian cavalry had a 
o-kpioaa. The light-armed (yvp,vfJTes, ^lXo'l) were (1) Lkovtio-tox, 
armed with a javelin (3 to 5 ft. long) and a small shield; (2) 
to|6toi, archers; and (3) o-<t>£v8ovrJTai, slingers, whose missiles 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



585 



were balls of lead, stones and hardened clay pellets. Between 
the heavy and the light armed were the peltasts. The pelta, 
from which they took the name, was a light shield or target, 
made of skin or leather on a wooden or wickerwork frame. The 
Athenian Iphicrates armed them with linen corslet and a larger 
spear and sword than those of the hoplites; he also invented a 
new footgear (called after him iphicratides) to replace the older 
greaves. * 

5. Roman. — The equipment of the Roman soldier, like the 
organization of the army (see Roman Army), passed through a 
great number of changes, and it is quite impossible to summarize 
it as a single subject. In the period of the kings the legion was 
the old Greek phalanx with Greek armour; the front ranks wore 
the Greek panoply and fought with long spears and the circular 
Argolic shield. The early Roman sword, like that of the Greeks, 
Egyptians and Etruscans, was of bronze. We have no direct 
statement as to its form, but in all probability it was of the 
ordinary leaf-shape. We gather from the monuments that, in the 
1st century B.C., the Roman sword was short, worn on the right 
side (except by officers, who carried no shield), suspended from 
a shoulder-belt (balteus) or a waist-belt (cingulum), and reach- 
ing from the hollow of the back to the middle of the thigh, 
thus representing a length of from 22 in. to 2 ft. The blade 
was straight, double-edged, obtusely-pointed. On the Trajan 
column (a.d. 114) it is considerably longer, and under the 
Flavian emperors the long, single-edged spatha appears fre- 
quently along with the short sword. 

The second period ending with the Punic wars witnessed a 
change. The hastati and the principes are both heavily armed, 
but the round shield has given way to the oblong {scutum), 
except for one-third of the hastati who bore only the spear and 
the light javelin (gaesa). The third period — that described by 
Polybius — is characterized by greater complexity of armour, due 
no doubt in part to the experience gained in conflicts with a 
wider range of peoples, and in part to the assimilation of the 
methods peculiar to the new Italian allies. Thus we find the 
skirmishers (velites) armed with a light javelin 3 ft. long and $ in. 
thick, with an iron point 9 in. long; this point was so fragile that 
it was rendered useless by the first cast. For defence they wore 
a hide-covered headpiece and a round buckler 3 ft. in diameter. 
The heavy-armed carried a scutum formed of two boards glued 
together, covered with canvas and skin, and incurved into the 
shape of a half-cylinder; its upper and lower edges were 
strengthened with iron rims and its centre with a boss (umbo). 
A greave was worn on the right leg, and the helmet was of bronze 
with a crest of three feathers. The wealthier soldiers wore the 
full cuirass of chain armour (lorica), the poorer a brass plate 
9 in. square. For offence they carried a sword and two javelins. 
The former was the Spanish weapon, straight, double-edged 
and pointed, for both thrust and cut, in place of the old Greek 
sword. 

The characteristic weapon, however, was the pilum (Gr. boobs). 
The form of this weapon and the mode of using it have been 
minutely described by Polybius (vi. 23), but his description has 
been much misunderstood in consequence of the rarity of repre- 
sentations or remains of the pilum. It is shown on a monument 
of St Remy, in Provence, assigned to the age of the first emperors, 
and in a bas-relief at Mainz, on the grave-stone of Quintus 
Petilius Secundus, a soldier of the 15th legion. A specimen of the 
actual weapon is in the museum at Wiesbaden. It is a javelin 
with a stout iron head (7 in.), carried on an iron rod, about 20 in. 
in length, which terminates in a tang for insertion in the wooden 
shaft. As represented on the monuments, the iron part of the 
weapon is about one-third of its entire length (6$ ft.). It was 
used primarily as a missile. When the point pierced the shield 
the weight of the stave pulled the shield downwards and rendered 
it useless. At close quarters it answered all the purposes, 
offensive and defensive, of the modern bayonet when " fixed." 
Vegetius, in his Rei militaris instituta, describes it in a modified 
form as used in the armies of the lower empire, and in a still more 
modified form it reappears as the " argon " of the Franks. This 
equipment was characteristic of hastati, principes and triarii 



(save that the latter used the hasta instead of the pilum) . W*» 
thus see how great is the change from the time when the hastati 
were the light-armed (from hasta) of the Greek phalanx. 

The cavalry, which had originally been protected only by a 
light ox-hide shield and the most fragile spears, adopted, about 
Polybius 's time, the full Greek equipment of buckler, strong spear 
and breastplate. 

In thelastperiod of the republic the pilum became the universal 
weapon of the heavy-armed, while the auxiliaries (all foreigners, 
the velites having disappeared) used the hasta and the long single- 
edged sword (spatha). Under the empire the heavy-armed, 
according to Josephus, had helmet, cuirass, a long sword worn 
on the left side, and a dagger on the right, pilum and scutum. 
The special detachment detailed to attend the commander had a 
round shield (clipeus) and a long spear. The cavalry wore armour 
like that of the infantry, with a broadsword, a buckler slung from 
the horse's side, a long pole for thrusting, and several javelins, 
almost as large as spears, in a sheath or quiver. Arrian, writing 
of a period some fifty years later, gives further particulars from 
which we gather that of the cavalry some were bowmen, some 
polemen, 'while others wielded lances and axes. 

For the arms and armour of other peoples of antiquity see e.g. 
Persia: History, Ancient, section v. " The Persian Empire of the 
Achaemenids " ; Britain, Anglo-Saxon, section v. "Warfare"; 
Etruria; Egypt, &c. (J. M. M.) 

6. English from the Norman Conquest. — It is unnecessary here 
to trace in detail the history of European armour in the middle 
ages and after, but its use and fashion in England may illustrate 
the broad lines of the gradual perfection and the hurried abandon- 
ment of the ancient war-harness. Each country gave its armour 
something of the national character, the Spanish harness being 
touched with the Moorish taste, the Italian with the classical 
note borrowed from the monuments of old time, and the German 
with the Teutonic feeling for the grotesque. 

To understand the development of English arms and armour 
it is well for us to consider carefully the fashion of these things 
at the time of that landmark of history, the Norman mfr- 
Conquest. Poets, chroniclers and law-makers give century 
us material for their description, and in the great Bayeux 
embroidery of Bayeux, with its more than six hundred tapestry. 
lively figures, we have pictured all the circumstances of war. 
We find that weapons and war gear have advanced little or 
nothing beyond the age which saw the Dacian warrior armed 
from crown to foot. A knight is reckoned fully armed if he have 
helmet, hawberk and shield; his weapons are sword and lance, 
although he sometimes carries axe or mace and, more rarely, 
a bo'w. The coat of fence, which the Norman called hawberk and 
the English byrnie, hangs from neck to knee, the sleeves loose and 
covering the elbow only, the skirt slit before and behind for ease 
in the saddle. The Bayeux artists (see fig. 4) commonly show 
these skirts as though they were short breeches, the hawberk 
taking the fashion at first sight of 
a man's swimming dress, but other 
authorities set us right, and to- 
wards the end of the tapestry we 
see men stripping hawberks from 
the slain by pulling them over 
the head. Back and front are so 
much alike that he who armed 
Duke William for the fight slipped 
on the armour hind side before, an 
omen that he should change his 
state of a duke for that of a king. 
The hawberk might be mail of 
woven rings, of rings sewn upon 
leather or cotton, of overlapping 
scales of leather, horn or iron, 
of that jazerant work which was 
formed of little plates sewn to 
canvas or linen, or of thick cotton 
and old linen padded and quilted 
in lozenges, square? qx lines, There are indications that the 




Fig. 4.- 



-From the Bayeux 
Tapestry. 



5 86 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



hawberk was sometimes reinforced at the breast probably by 
a small oblong plate fastened underneath. Its weight is shown 
in the scene where William's men carry arms to the ships, 
each hawberk being borne between two men upon a pole thrust 
through the sleeves. 

The helmet is a brimless and pointed cap, either all of metal or 
of leather or even wood framed and strengthened with metal. 
Its characteristic piece is the guard which protects the nose and 
brow from swinging cuts, so disguising the knight that William 
must needs take off his helmet to show his men that he had not 
fallen. Such a nasal appears in a 10th-century illumination; at 
the time of the Conquest it was all but universal. It grows rare 
and all but disappears in the 13th century, although examples are 
found to the end of the middle ages. The helmet is laced under the 
chin, and under it the knight often wore a hood of mail or quilting 
which covered the top of the head, the ears and neck, but left 
the chin free — in two or three cases he has this hood without 
the helmet. A close coif was probably worn beneath it when 
it was of ringed mail, to spare the fretting of the metal on the 
head. 

The knights' legs are shown in most cases as unprotected save 
by stout hose or leg-bands: only in two or three instances does 
the tapestry picture a warrior with armed legs, and it is perhaps 
significant of the rarity of this defence that the duke is so armed. 
The feet are covered only by the leather boot, the heels having 
prick spurs. 

Broad-bladed swords with cross-hilts of straight or drooping 
quills are fastened with a strap and buckle girdle to the left side. 
They have a short grip, and the blade would seem to be from 
25 to 3 ft. in length. The chieftain unarmed in his house is often 
seen with unbuckled and sheathed sword sceptre-wise in his 
hands, carrying it as an Indian raja will nurse his sheathed 
tulwar. The ash spears brandished or couched by the knights as 
they charge seem from 7 to 8 or 9 ft. in length. In a few cases 
a three-forked pennon flutters at the end. The axe, a weapon 
which the Normans, in spite of their Norse ancestry, do not 
carry in the battle, is of the type called the Danish axe, long- 
shafted, the large blade boldly curved out. Maces, such as that 
with which the bishop of Bayeux rallies his young men, seem 
knotted clubs of simple form. Short and strong bows are drawn 
to the breast by the Norman archers. 

Of the shields in the fight, four or five borne by the English are 
of the old English form — large, round bucklers of linden-wood, 
bossed and ribbed with iron. For the rest the horsemen bear 
the Norman shield, kite-shaped, with tapering foot, and long 
enough to carry a dead warrior from the field. On the inner side 
are straps for the hand to grip and a long strap allowed the knight 
to hang the shield from his neck. Let us note that although 
wyvern-like monsters, crosses, roundels and other devices appear 
on these shields, none of them has any indication of true armory, 
whose origins must be placed in the next century. 

The 1 2 th century, although an age of riding and warring, 
affects but little the fashion of armour. The picture of a king on 
his seal may well stand for the full-armed knight of his 
age, but Henry Beauclerc, Stephen and Henry II. are 
shown in harness not much unlike that of the Bayeux 
needlework. But the sleeve of the hawberk goes to the wrist, 
and the kite shield grows less, Stephen's shield being 30 in. long 
at the most. On Stephen's second seal the mail hood is drawn 
over the point of the chin, and Henry II. 's seals show the chin 
covered to the lips. At least one seal of this king has the legs 
and feet armed with hose of ringed mail, probably secured by 
lacing at the back of the leg as a modern boot is laced. The first 
seal of Richard Lionheart marks an important movement. His 
hawberk, hood and hose clothe him, like his father, from crown 
to toe, and to this equipment he adds gloves of mail. Under 
the hawberk flows out to the heels the skirt of a long gown slit 
in front. But helm and shield are the most remarkable points. 
The shield has become flatter at the top, and at last the shield 
of an English king bears those armorial devices whose beginnings 
are seen elsewhere a generation before. The earlier seal has the 
shield with a rampant lion ramping to the sinister side and closely 



12th 
ceatery. 



resembling that on the shield of Philip of Alsace, long believed 
to be the earliest example of true armory. But the shield in the 
second seal bears the three leopards which have been ever since 
the arms of the kings of England, and from this time to the end 
of the middle ages armorial devices become the common decora- 
tions of the knight's shield, coat, saddle and horse-trapper. 
The helmet of the first seal is a high thimble-topped cap, without 
a nasal guard, but the second has the king's head covered with 
the great helm, barrel-shaped and reinforced in front with a flat 
ventaile pierced in slits for the sight. This helm is crested with 
a semicircular ridge from which spring two wings, or rows of 
feathers fan-wise. On its side the ridge bears a single leopard, 
the forerunner of the coming crests. 

For 13th-century arms, although but poor scraps remain of 
original material, we have authority in plenty — pictures, seals 
and carving, and, above all, the effigies in stone or .„. 
brass which give us each visible link, strap and orna- century. 
ment. All these have for a commentary chronicles, 
poems and account books, so that the history of armour may be 
followed in detail. 

The long, sleeveless surcoat seen over King John's mail on his 
broad seal goes through the century and is often embroidered 
with arms. The shield becomes flat-topped the better to receive 
armorial charges. The great helm is common, although many 
knights on the day of battle like better the freedom of the mail 
hood with a steel cap worn over or under its crown, keeping for 
the tourney-yard the great helm which towards the century-end 
begins to carry its towering crest. Great variety is seen in the 
forms of the flat or round-topped helm, some being in one piece, 
pierced for sight and air, others having hinged or movable 
ventailes. At the end of the century a sugar-loaf type is the 
established form. The knight's hawberk is worn over a gambeson 
of linen, quilted linen or cotton, which lesser men wear with a 
steel cap for all defence. Breast and back plates also are some- 
times borne under the hawberk, and the first plates in sight at 
last appear in those knee-cops which protect the joining of the 
upper and lower hose, and in a few examples of bainbergs or 
greaves of metal or leather. At the end of Henry III.'s reign we 
have the admirable illustrations of a manuscript of Matthew 
Paris's Lives of the Of as, with many pictures of knights. (See 
fig 5.) Here we see knights with knee-cop and greave and a 




From The Ancestor, by permission of A. Constable & Co. Ltd. 
Fig. 5.— Knights' Armour, c. 1250. 

plenty of curious headpieces, the plain mail hood and mail hoods 
with a plate ventaile to cover the face, barrel-helms and round- 
topped helms and even round- topped helmets with the Norman 
nose-guard. 

In the last half of the 13th century appears the curious defence 
known as alettes. This name is given to a pair of leather plates 
generally oblong in form and tagged to the back of the shoulder. 
As a rule they are borne to display the wearer's arms, but being 
sometimes plain they may have had some slight defensive value, 
covering a weak spot at the armpit and turning a sweeping 
sword-cut at the neck. They . disappear in the earlier years of 
Edward III. 

Surcoat, shield and trapper have the arms of their owner. The 
rowel-spur makes a rare appearance. Weapons change little. 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



587 



Nth 
lentury, 



although the sword is often longer and heavier. Richard I. had 
favoured the cross-bow, in spite of papal denunciations of that 
weapon hateful to God, and its use is common through all the 
13th century, after which it makes way for the national weapon 
ef the long-bow. 

In the 14th century, the high-day of chivalry, the age of Crecy 
and Poitiers, of the Black Prince and Chandos, the age which saw 
enrolled the noble company of the Garter, the art of the 
armourer and weapon-smith strides forward. At its 
beginning we see many knights still clad in chain mail 
with no visible plate. At its end the knight is often locked 
in plates from head to foot, no chainwork showing save the 
camail edge under the helm and the fringe of the mail skirt or 
hawberk. 

Before the first quarter of the 14th century is past many of 
these plates are in common use. Sir John de Creke's brass, about 
I3 2 5~i33°, is a fair example (fig. 6). His helmet is a basinet, 
pointed at the top, probably worn over a com- 
plete hood of mail flowing to the mid-breast. 
This hood was soon to lose its crown, the later 
basinets having the camail, a defence of mail 
covering neck, cheeks and chin and secured to 
the basinet with eyelet holes and loops through 
which a lace was passed. A rerebrace of plate 
defends the outer side of the upper arm, plain 
elbow-cops the elbow, and round bosses in the 
form of leopard heads guard the shoulder and 
the crook of the elbow. The fore-arm is 
covered with the plates of a vambrace which 
appears from under the hawberk sleeve. Large 
and decorated knee-cops cover the knees, ridged 
greaves the shins, and the upper part of the foot 
from pointed toe to ankle is fenced with those 
articulated and overlapping plates the per- 
fection of which in the next century enabled 
the full-harnessed knight to move his body 
as freely as might an unarmed man. Under 
the plates the mail hose show themselves and 
the heels have rowelled spurs. He has a haw- 
berk of mail whose front skirt ends in a point 
between the knees, the loose sleeves between 
wrist and elbow. Under this is a haketon of 
some soft material whose folds fall to a line 
above the height of the knee. Over the 
hawberk is a garment, perhaps of leather with a dagged skirt- 
edge, and over this again is a sleeveless gambeson or pour- 
point of leather or quilted work, studded and enriched. Over 
all is the sleeveless surcoat, the skirt before cut squarely off 
at the height of the fork of the leg, the skirt behind falling 
to below the knee. The loose folds of this surcoat are 
gathered at the waist by a narrow belt, the sword hanging 
from a broader belt carried across the hip. Before 1350 the 
long surcoat of the 13th century was still further shortened, the 
tails being cut off squarely with the front. The fate of Sir John 
Chandos, who in 1369 stumbled on a slippery road, his long 
coat " armed with his arms " becoming tangled with his legs, 
points to the fact that an old soldier might cling to an old 
fashion. 

The desire for a better defence than a steel cap and camail 
and a less cumbrous one than the great helm, in which the knight 
rode half stifled and half blind, brought in as a fighting headpiece 
the basinet with a movable viser. This is found throughout this 
century, disappearing in the next when the salet and its varieties 
displaced it. But there were many knights who still fought with 
the great helm covering basinet and camail, a fact which speaks 
eloquently of the mighty blows given in this warlike age. The 
many monumental brasses of the last half of the 14th century 
show us for the most part knights in basinet and camail with the 
face exposed, but their heads are commonly pillowed on the great 
helm and in any case the viser would hinder the artist's desire 
to show the knight's features. 
The fully-armed man of the latter half of the 14th century 



Fig. 6. — Brassof 
Sir John de Creke. 

From Waller's Monu- 
mental Brasses. 




Fig. 7. — Brass of Sir 
John de Foxley. 

From Waller's Monumental 
Brasses. 



seems to have worn a rounded breastplate and a back-plate over 
his chain hawberk. Chaucer's Sir Thopas must always be cited 
for the defences of this age, the hero 
wearing the quilted haketon next his 
shirt, and over that the habergeon, a 
lesser hawberk of chain mail. His last 
defence is a fine hawberk " full strong of 
plate " showing that " hawberk " some- 
times served as a word for the body plates. 
Over all this is the " cote-armure " or 
surcoat. Many passages from the chroni- 
clers show that the three coats of fence 
one over the other were in common use 
in the field, and Froissart tells a tale of 
a knight struck by a dart in such wise that 
the head pierced through his plates, his 
coat of mail and his haketon stuffed with 
twisted silk. The surcoat in the age of 
Edward III. became a scanty garment 
sitting tightly to the body, laced up the 
back or sides, the close skirts ending 
at the fork of the leg with a dagged or 
slittered edge. The waistbelt is rarely in 
sight, but the broad belt across the hips, 
on which the dagger comes to hang as 
a balance to the sword, grows richer and 
heavier, the best work of the goldsmith or 
silversmith being spent upon it. Arms 
and legs and feet become cased in plate of 

steel or studded leather, and before the mid-century the 
shoulder-plates, like the steel shoes, are of overlapping pieces 
and the elbow also moves easily under the same defence. 
(See fig. 7.) 

Such harness, ever growing more beautiful in its rich details, 
serves our champions until the beginning of the 15th century, 
when the fashion begins to turn. The scanty surcoat 
tends to disappear. It may be that during the bitter 
feuds and fierce slaughters of the Wars of the Roses men 
were unwilling to display on their breasts the bearings by which 
their mortal foe might know them afar. The horseman's shield 
went with the surcoat, its disuse hastened by the perfection of 
armour, and the banners of leaders remained as the only armorial 
signs commonly seen in war. But at jousts and tourneys, where 
personal distinction was eagerly sought, the loose tabard, which, 
after the middle of the century, bore the arms of the wearer on 
back, front and both sleeves, was still to be 
seen, with the crest of parchment or leather 
towering above >■ helm whose mantle, from 
the ribbon-like strip of the early 13th century, 
had grown into a fluttering cloak with wildly 
slittered edge streaming out behind the charging 
knight. 

When a score of years of this 15th century 
had run we find the knight closed in with plates, 
no edge of chain mail remaining in sight. The 
surcoat being gone we see him armed in breast 
and back plate, his loins covered by a skirt of 
" tonlets," as the defence of overlapping hori- 
zontal bands comes to be named (fig. 8). The 
chain camail has gone out of fashion, the 
basinet continuing itself with a chin and cheek 
plate which joins a gorget of plate covering the 
collar-bone, a movable viser shutting in the 
whole head with steel. The gussets of chain 
mail sewn into the leathern or fustian doublet 
worn below the body armour are unseen even 
at the gap at the hollow of the arm where the 
plates must be allowed to move freely, for a 
little plate, round, oval or oblong, is tagged to 
each side to fence the weak point. These plates often differ in 
size and shape one from the other, the sword-arm side carrying 
the smaller one. 



15th 
century. 




Fig. 8.— Brass 
of Sir John Lisle 
at Thruxton. 



5 88 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



Soon after this the six or eight " tonlets " grow fewer, being 
continued on the lower edge by the so-called tuilles, small plates 
strapped to the tonlets and swinging with the movement of the 
legs. A fine suit of armour is shown in the monument of Count 
Otto IV. of Henneberg (fig. 9). Knightly armour takes perhaps 




Fig. 9. — Gothic Style of Armour. Monument of Count 
Otto IV. of Henneberg. 

its last expression of perfection in such a noble harness as that 
worn by Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick, whose armed 
effigy was wrought between 1451 and 1454 (fig. 10). In this we 
see the characteristic feature of the great elbow-cops, whose 
channelled and fluted edges overlapping vambrace and rerebrace 
become monstrous fan-like shapes in the brass of Richard 
Quartremayns, graven about 1460. At this time the harness of 
the left shoulder is often notably reinforced, as compared with 
that of the sword-arm shoulder. Towards the latter part of the 
century chain mail reappears as a skirt or breech of mail, showing 
itself under the diminished tonlets, and, when helm and gorget 
are removed, as a high-standing collar. The articulation by 
overlapping plates extends even to the breastplate, whose front 
is thus in two or more pieces. Very long-necked rowel-spurs are 
often found, and the toes of the sabbatons or steel shoes are 
sharply pointed. The characteristic helmet of the latter half of 
the century is the salet or salade, a large steel cap, whose edge is 
carried out from the brows and still more boldly at the back 
of the neck. 



Knights abandon the great helm in war, but it is perfected 
for use in the tilt-yard, taking for that purpose an enormous 
size, to enable two good inches of stuffing to come between head 
or face and the steel plate. Such a helm sits well down on the 
shoulders, to which it is locked before and behind by strong 
buckles or rivets. The note of the 15th 
century in armour is that of fantastically 
elaborate forms boldly outlined and a 
splendour of colour which gained much 
from the custom of wearing over the full 
harness short cloaks or rich coats turned 
up with furs, or from another fashion of 
covering the body plates or brigandines 
with rich velvets studded with gold. The 
details of the harness take a thousand 
curious shapes, and even amongst the 
simpler jacks and steel caps of the archers 
the same glorious variety is seen. 

If the note of the 15th century be 
variety of form, that of the 16th century, 
the last important chapter in the history 
of armour, is surface decoration, • 
the harness of great folk atoning 
in some measure for loss of the 
beautiful medieval sense of line by elabor- 
ate enrichment. Plain engraving, niello, 
russet work, golden inlay and beaten 
ornament are common methods of en- 
richment. The great plume of ostrich 
feathers flows from the helmet crown 
of leaders in war. As in the reign of 
Edward III., costume's fashion affects From stofonfojionummha 
the forms of armour, the broad toe of the 

Henry VIII. shoe being imitated in steel, as the wide fluted skirts 
of the so-called Maximilian armour imitate the German fashion 
in civil dress which the Imperial host popularized through 
northern Europe (fig. 11). These skirts have been called 
" lamboys " by modern writers on military antiquities, but the 



16th 
century. 




Fig. 10. — Brass of 
Richard Beauchamp, 
earl of Warwick. 









lllfflia 










S* tut 






ft 




flm 


sssS 


JR5Jj||^3||g|||fi0J|gi9|i 




MM 










gf§§P 


Vh r 




-\MMk 






at'ku 


All 


■lili-iia" 


— SSiLa 
jotwhIW 


Jj IliffiSrtf 


^^^P\@) * 






pS^s-mSt £5 J 










[ Ic3j| 








^s? <<*> 


^ as =l6 


W?mii>^!mHig/g/^ 


JjSeSb 


i=£^£ 



From Hewitt's Arms and Armour. 

Fig. 11. — Meeting of Henry VIII. and Maximilian. 

word seems an antiquarianism of no value, apparently a mis- 
reading of the word " jambeis " in some early document. So 
many notable examples of the armour of this 16th century are 
accessible in European collections, other illustrations occurring 
in great plenty, that its details call for little discussion; a fine 
and characteristic suit is that by the famous English armourer, 
Jacob Topf (fig. 12), which belonged to Sir Christopher Hatton. 
Into this century the arquebusier marches, demanding a chief 
place in the line of battle, although it is a common error that 
the improvement in fire-arms drove out the fully armed warrior, 
whose plates gave him no protection. Until the rifle came to the 
soldier's hands, plate armour could easily be made shot-proof. 



ARMS AND ARMOUR 



589 



It was driven from the field by the new strategy which asked 
for long marches and rapid movements of armies. This century's 
armour for the tilt-yard gives such protection to the champion, 
with its many reinforcing pieces, that unless the caged helm were 
used — the same which cost Henry II. of France his life — the 
risks of the tilt-yard must have fallen much below those of the 
polo-field. The horse with crinet, chafron and bards of steel was 

as well covered from 
harm. 

Before the end of the 
1 6th century the full 
suit of war harness is 
an antique survival. 
Long boots take the 
place of greaves and 
steel shoes, and early 
in the 16th century the 
military pedants are 
heard to bewail the 
common laying aside 
of other pieces. The 
mounted cavalier — 
cuirassierorpistolier — 
might take the field, 
even as late as the 
Great Rebellion,armed 
at all points save the 
backs of the thighs 
and the legs below the 
knee; but a combed 
and brimmed cap, 
breast and back plate 
and tassets equipped 
the pikeman, and the 
musketeer would 
march without any 
metal on him save his 
headpiece, for it was 
soon found that 
heavily armed mus- 
keteers, after a long 
trudge through 
summer dust or winter 
mud, were readier to 
rest than to shoot. 
Everywhere there was 
revolt against the 
burden of plates, and 
as early as 1593 Sir 
Richard Hawkins 
found that his adven- 
turers would not use 
-Suit by Jacob Topf, nearly eve n the light corslets 

. 0mP ^;.^ e th S eTcc d a ?e. S " 0t bd0nB t0 Provided by him " es- 

teeming a pot of wine 
a better defence." 
Gervase Markham, in his Souldi-er's Accidence of 1645, asks that 
at least the captain of cuirassiers should be armed " at all peeces, 
cap a pee, " but he would have found few such captains, and 
Markham is a great praiser of noble old custom. The famous 
figure of a pikeman of 1668 (fig. 13) in Elton's Art Military has 
steel cap, corslet and tassets, but he stands for a fashion dead 
or dying. The last noteworthy helmet was what is now termed 
the lobster-tail helmet, a headpiece with round top, flat brim 
before, a broad articulated brim behind, cheek-pieces hanging 
by straps and a grate of upright bars to cover the face, some 
having in place of the grate a movable nose-guard to be raised 
or lowered at will. The close resemblance of this helmet to 
that worn by the Japanese, with whom the Dutch were then 
trading, is worth remark, although each of the two pieces seems 
to have had its separate origin. Thus, save for a steel cap here 
and a corslet there, especially to be found amongst the guards 




Fig. 12.- 




Fig. 13. — Pikeman 

From The Compleat Body of 



the Art Military, 
Elton (1668). 



of sovereigns who must cling to something of antique tradition, 
armour departs out of the civilized world. 

When in the reign of Queen Victoria her mounted guardsmen 
were given back their breast and back plates, the last piece of 
body armour had been the tiny gilt crescent worn at 
the throat by officers of foot, which crescent was the _""' T* ° 

■ 111 armour* 

shrunken symbol of that great gorget of plate that 
came in with the 1 5th century. The shining plates of the Guards 
are parade pieces only, but a curious 
revival of an old defence was carried 
by English cavalry in the field at the 
end of the 19th century, when small 
gussets of chain mail were attached 
to the shoulders of certain cavalrymen 
as a defence against sword cuts. 
Through all the age of modern warfare 
inventors have pressed the claims of 
various bullet-proof breastplates, but 
where they have been effective against 
rifle fire their weight has made them 
too heavy an addition to the soldier's 
burden. (See, however, Armour 
Plates, ad fin.) Last of all we may 
reckon those secret coats of mail which 
are said to be worn on occasion by 
modern rulers in dread of the assassin. 
The London detective department has 
such coats of fence in its armoury ; 
and on the other side it may be 
remembered that the Kelly gang of 
bushrangers, driven to bay, were found 
to have forged suits of plate for them- 
selves out of sheets of boiler-iron. 

Ancient arms and armour are now 
eagerly sought by European and 
American collectors, and high prices are paid down for every 
noteworthy piece. The supply is assisted by the efforts of many 
forgers of false pieces, the most cunning of whom bring 
all archaeological skill to their aid, and few great 
national or private collections are free from some 
example of this industry. For the genuine pieces competition 
runs high. Suits of plate of the earliest period may be sought 
in vain, and the greatest collectors may hardly hope for such a 
panoply of the late Gothic period as that which is the ornament 
of the Wallace collection. Even this famous harness is not 
wholly free from suspicion of restoration. Armour of the latter 
half of the 16th century, however, often appears in the sale- 
rooms and is found in many private collections, although the 
" ancestral armour " which decorates so many ancient halls in 
England is generally the plates and pots which served the pike- 
men of the 17th-century militia. 

It is not hard to understand this scarcity of ancient pieces. In 
the first place it must be remembered that the fully armed man 
was always a rare figure in war, and only the rich could engage 
in the costly follies of the later tournaments. The novelists have 
done much to encourage the belief that most men of gentle rank 
rode to the wars lance in hand, locked up in full harness of plate; 
but the country gentleman, serving as light horseman or mounted 
archer, would hold himself well armed had he a quilted jack or 
brigandine and a basinet or salet. Men armed cap a pee crowd 
the illuminations of chronicle books, the artists having the 
same tastes as the boy who decorates his Latin grammar with 
battles which are hand-to-hand conflicts of epauletted generals. 
Monuments and brasses also show these fully armed men, but 
here again we must recognize the tendency which made the last 
of the cheap miniaturists endow their clients lavishly with heavy 
watch-chains and rings. As late as the 18th century the portrait 
painters drew their military or naval sitters in the breastplates 
and pauldrons, vambraces and rerebraces of an earlier age. 
Ancient wills and inventories, save those of great folk or military 
adventurers, have scanty reference to complete harnesses. 
Ringed hauberks, in a damp northern climate, will not survive 



by Lieut-Col. 



Collec- 
tions. 



59° 



ARMSTEAD— ARMSTRONG 



long neglect, and many of them must have been cut in pieces for 
burnishers or for the mail skirts and gussets attached to the 
later arming doublets. As the fashion of plate armour changed, 
the smith might adapt an old harness to the new taste, but more 
often it would be cast aside. Men to whom the sight of a steel 
coat called up the business of their daily life wasted no senti- 
mentality over an obsolete piece. The early antiquaries might 
have saved us many priceless things, but it was not until a few 
virtuosi of the 18th century were taken with the Gothic fancy that 
popular archaeology dealt with aught but Greek statuary and 
Roman inscriptions. The 19th century was well advanced before 
an interest in medieval antiquities became common amongst 
educated men, and for most contemporaries of Dr Johnson a 
medieval helm was a barbarous curiosity exciting the same 
measure of mild interest as does the Zulu knobkerry seen by 
us as we pass a pawnbroker's window. (O. Ba.) 

7. Fire-arms. (For the development of cannon, see 
Artillery and Ordnance.) — Hand-cannons appear almost 
simultaneously with the larger bombards. They were mad« by 
the Flemings in the 14th century. An early instance of the use of 
hand fire-arms in England is the siege of Huntercombe Manor in 
137 5. These were simply small cannon, provided with a stock of 
wood, and fired by the application of a match to the" touch-hole. 
During the 15th century the hand-gun was steadily improved, 
and its use became more general. Edward IV., landing in 
England in 147 1 to reconquer his throne, brought with him a 
force of Burgundian hand-gun men (mercenaries), and in 1476 
the Swiss at Morat had no less than 6000 of their men thus armed. 
The prototype of the modern military weapon is the arquebus 
(g.v.), a form of which was afterwards called in England the 
caliver. Various dates are given for the introduction of the 
arquebus, which owed many of its details to the perfected cross- 
bow which it superseded. The Spanish army in the Italian wars 
at the beginning of the 16th century was the first to make full 
and effective use of the new weapon, and thus to make the fire 
action of infantry a serious factor in the decision of battles. 
The Spaniards also took the next step in advance. The musket 
(g.v.) was heavier and more powerful than the arquebus, and, 
in the hands of the duke of Alva's army in the Netherlands, so 
conclusively proved its superiority that it at once replaced its 
rival in the armies of Europe. Both the arquebus and the 
musket had a touch-hole on the right side of the barrel, with 
a pan for the priming, with which a lighted quick match was 
brought in contact by pressing a trigger. The musket, on account 
of its weight, was provided with a long rest, forked in the upper 
part and furnished with a spike to stick in the ground. The 
matchlock (long-barrelled matchlocks are still used by various 
uncivilized peoples, notably in India) was the typical weapon 
of the soldier for two centuries. The class of hand; fire-arms 
provided with an arrangement for striking a spark j to ignite 
the powder charge begins with the tvheel-lock. This Ujck was in- 
vented at Nuremberg in 1 5 1 5, but was seldom applied to the arque- 
bus and musket on account of the costliness of its mechanism 
and the uncertainty of its action. The early forms of flint-lock 
(snaphance) were open to the same objections, and the fire-lock 
(as the flint-lock was usually called) remained for many years 
after its introduction the armament of special troops only, till 
about the beginning of the 18th century it finally superseded the 
old matchlock. Thenceforward the fire-lock (called familiarly 
in England " Brown Bess ") formed with the bayonet (g.v.) the 
armament of all infantry, and the fire-arms carried by other 
troops were constructed on the same principle. Flint-lock 
muskets were supplanted about 1830- 1840 by the percussion 
musket, in which a fulminate cap was used. A Scottish clergy- 
man, Alexander Forsyth, invented this method of ignition in 
1807, but it was not till 1820 that it began to come into general 
use. (See Gun.) The system of firing the charge by a fulmin- 
ate was followed by the invention of the needle-gun (q.v.). The 
muzzle-loading rifle, employed by special troops since about 1800, 
came into general use in the armies of Europe about 1854-1860. 
It was superseded, as a result of the success of the needle-gun in 
the war of 1866, by the breech-loading rifle, this in its turn giving 



way to the magazine rifle about 1886-1890. (See Rifle.) Neither 
breech-loaders nor revolvers, however, are inventions of modern 
date. Both were known in Germany as early as the close of the 
1 5th century. There are in the Musee d' Artillerie at Paris wheel- 
lock arquebuses of the 16th century which are breech-loaders; 
and there is, in the Tower armoury, a revolver with the old 
matchlock, the'date of which is about 1 5 50. A German arquebus 
of the 1 6th century, in the museum of Sigmaringen, is a revolver 
of seven barrels. Nor is rifling a new thing in fire-arms, for there 
was a rifled arquebus of the 1 5th century, in which the balls were 
driven home by a mallet, and a patent was taken out in England 
for rifling in 1635. All these systems were thus known at an early 
period in the history of fire-arms, but for want of the minutely 
accurate workmanship required and, above all, of a satisfactory 
firing arrangement, they were left in an undeveloped state until 
modern times. The earliest pistols were merely shorter hand- 
guns, modified for mounted men, and provided with a straight 
stock which was held against the breastplate (poitrinal or 
petronel). The long-barrelled pistol was the typical weapon of the 
cavalry of the 1 6th century. (See Cavalry.) With the revival 
of shock tactics initiated by Gustavus Adolphus the length of the 
pistol barrel became less and less, and its stock was then shaped 
for the hand alone. (See Pistol.) (C. F. A.) 

ARMSTEAD, HENRY HUGH (1828-1905), English sculptor, 
was first trained as a silversmith, and achieved the highest 
excellence with the " St George's Vase " and the " Outram 
Shield." He rose to the front rank among contemporary 
sculptors, his chief works being the external sculptural 
decorations of the colonial office in Whitehall, the sculptures 
on the southern and eastern sides of the podium of the Albert 
Memorial, the large fountain at King's College, Cambridge, and 
numerous effigies, such as " Bishop Wilberforce " at Winchester, 
and " Lord John Thynne " at Westminster, with smaller por- 
traiture and much ideal work. His sense of style and nobility 
was remarkable; and he was besides gifted with a fine 
power of design and draughtsmanship, which he put to good 
use in his early years for book illustration. He was elected 
associate of the Royal Academy in 1875 an d a full member 
in 1880. 

ARMSTRONG, ARCHIBALD (d. 1672), court jester, called 
" Archy," was a native of Scotland or of Cumberland, and 
according to tradition first distinguished himself as a sheep- 
stealer; afterwards he entered the service of James VI., with 
whom he became a favourite. When the king succeeded to the 
English throne, Archy was appointed court jester. In 161 1 he 
was granted a pension of two shillings a day, and in 1617 he 
accompanied James on his visit to Scotland. His influence was 
considerable and he was greatly courted and flattered, but his 
success appears to have turned his head. He became presumptu- 
ous, insolent and mischievous, excited foolish jealousies between 
the king and Henry, prince of Wales, and was much disliked by the 
members of the court. In 1623 he accompanied Prince Charles 
and Buckingham in their adventure into Spain, where he was 
much caressed and favoured by the Spanish court and, according 
to his own account, was granted a pension. His conduct here 
became more intolerable than ever. He rallied the infanta on 
the defeat of the Armada and censured the conduct of the 
expedition to Buckingham's face. Buckingham declared he 
would have him hanged, to which the jester replied that " dukes 
had often been hanged for insolence but never fools for talking." 
On his return he gained some complimentary allusions from Ben 
Jonson by his attacks upon the Spanish marriage. He retained 
his post on the accession of Charles I., and accumulated a con- 
siderable fortune, including the grant by the king of 1000 acres 
inTreland. After the death of Buckingham in 1628, whom he 
declared " the greatest enemy of three kings," the principal 
object of his dislike and rude jests was Laud, whom he openly 
vilified and ridiculed. He pronounced the following grace at 
Whitehall in Laud's presence: " Great praise be given to God 
and little laud to the devil," and after the news of the rebellion 
in Scotland in 1637 he greeted Laud on his way to the council 
chamber at Whitehall with: " Who's fool now ? Does not your 



ARMSTRONG 



591 



Grace hear the news from Stirling about the liturgy ? " On 
Laud's complaint to the council, Archy was sentenced the same 
day " to have his coat pulled over his head and be discharged the 
king's service and banished the king's court." He settled in 
London as a money-lender, and many complaints were made to 
the privy council and House of Lords of his sharp practices. In 
164 1 on the occasion of Laud's arrest, he enjoyed a .mean revenge 
by publishing Archy' s Dream; sometimes Jester to his Majeslie, 
but exiled the Court by Canterburie's malice. Subsequently he 
resided at Arthuret in Cumberland, according to some accounts 
his birthplace, where he possessed an estate, and where he died in 
1672, his burial taking place en the 1st of April. He was twice 
married, his second wife being Sybilla Bell. There is no record 
of any legal offspring, but the baptism of a " base son " of 
Archibald Armstrong is entered in the parish register of the 17th 
of December 1643. A Banquet of Jests: A change of Cheare, 
published about 1630, a collection chiefly of dull, stale jokes, 
is attributed to him, and with still less reason probably A 
choice Banquet of Witty Jests . . . Being an. addition to Archee's 
Jests, taken out of his Closet but never published in his Lifetime 
(1660). 

ARMSTRONG, JOHN (1709-1779), British physician and 
writer, was born about 1709 at Castletown, Roxburghshire, 
where his father was parish minister. He graduated M.D. (1732) 
at Edinburgh University, and soon afterwards settled in London, 
where he paid more attention to literature than to medicine. He 
was, in 1746, appointed one of the physicians to the military 
hospital behind Buckingham House; and, in 1760, physician 
to the army in Germany, an appointment which he held till the 
peace of 1763, when he retired on half-pay. For many years he 
was closely associated with John Wilkes, but quarrelled with him 
in 1763. He died on the 7th of September 1779. Armstrong's 
first publication, an anonymous one, entitled An Essay for 
A bridging the Study of Physic (1735), was a satire on the ignorance 
of the apothecaries and medical men of his day. This was 
followed two years after by the Economy of Love, a poem the 
indecency of which damaged his professional practice. In 1744 
appeared his Art of Preserving Health, a very successful didactic 
poem, and the one production on which his literary reputation 
rests. His Miscellanies (1770) contains some shorter poems 
displaying considerable humour. 

ARMSTRONG, JOHN (1738-1843), American soldier, diplo- 
matist and political leader, born at Carlisle, Pennsylvania, on the 
25th of November 1758. His father, also named John Armstrong 
(1725-1795), a native of the north of Ireland, who had emigrated 
to the Pennsylvania frontier between 1745 and 1748, served 
successively as a brigadier-general in the Continental army 
(1776-77), as brigadier-general and then major-general of the 
Pennsylvania militia (1777-83), during the War of Independ- 
ence, and was a member of the Continental Congress in 1779- 
1780 and again in 1 787-1 788. The son studied for a time at the 
College of New Jersey (now Princeton University), and served 
as a major in the War of Independence. In March 1783, while 
the Continental army was stationed at Newburgh (q.v.), New 
York, he wrote and issued, anonymously, the famous " Newburgh 
Addresses." In 1784 he led a force of Pennsylvania militia 
against the Connecticut settlers in Wyoming Valley, and treated 
them in such a high-handed manner as to incur the disapproval 
even of the Pennsylvania legislature. In 1789 he married the 
sister of Chancellor Robert R. Livingston of New York, and 
removed to New York city, where his own ability and his family 
connexion gave him great political influence. In 1801-2 and 
a^ain in 1803-4 he was a member of the United States Senate. 
From 1804 to 1810 he was the United States minister to France, 
and in March 1806 he was joined with James Bowdoin as a 
special minister to treat through France with Spain concerning 
the acquisition of Florida, Spanish spoliations of American 
commerce, and the " Louisiana " boundary. During the War 
of 181 2, he was a brigadier-general in the United States army 
from July 1812 until January 1813, and from then until August 
1814 secretary of war in the cabinet of President Madison, when 
his unpopularity forced him to resign. " In spite of Armstrong's 



services, abilities and experience," says Henry Adams, " some- 
thing in his character always created distrust. He had every 
advantage of education, social and political connexion, ability 
and self-confidence; . . . but he suffered from the reputation of 
indolence and intrigue." Nevertheless, he " introduced into the 
army an energy wholly new," an energy the results of which were 
apparent " for half a century." After his resignation he lived 
in retirement at Red Hook, New York, where he died on the 
1 st of April 1843. He published Notices of the War of 18 12 
(2 vols., 1836; new ed., 1840), the value of which is greatly 
impaired by its obvious partiality. 

The best account of Armstrong's career as minister to France and 
as secretary of war may be found in Henry Adams's History of the 
United Stales, 1801-1817 (9 vols., New York, 1889-1890). 

ARMSTRONG, SAMUEL CHAPMAN (1839-1893), American 
soldier, philanthropist and educator, was born on Maui, one of 
the Hawaiian Islands, on the 30th of January 1839, his parents 
Richard and Clarissa Armstrong, being American missionaries. 
He was educated at the Punahou school in Honolulu, at Oahu 
College, into which the Punahou school developed in 1852, and 
at Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts, where he 
graduated in 1862. He served in the Civil War, on the Union 
side, from 1862 to 1865, rising in the volunteer service to the? 
regular rank of colonel and the brevet rank of brigadier-general, 
and, after December 1863, acted as one of the officers of the 
coloured troops commanded by General William Birney. In 
November 1865 he was honourably mustered out of the volunteer 
service. His experience as commander of negro troops had added 
to his interest, always strong, in the negroes of the south, and in 
March 1866 he became superintendent of the Ninth District of 
Virginia, under the Freedman's Bureau, with headquarters near 
Fort Monroe. While in this position he became convinced that 
the only permanent solution of the manifold difficulties which the 
f reedmen encountered lay in their moral and industrial education. 
He remained in the educational department of the Bureau until 
this work came to an end in 1872; though five years earlier, at 
Hampton, Virginia, near Fort Monroe, he had founded, with 
the aid principally of the American Missionary Association, 
an industrial school for negroes, Hampton Institute, which was 
formally opened in 1868, and at the head of which he remained 
until his death, there, on the nth of May 1893. After 1878 
Indians were also admitted to the Institute, and during the last 
fifteen years of his life Armstrong took a deep interest in the 
" Indian question." Much of his time after 1868 was spent in the 
Northern and Eastern states, whither he went to raise funds for 
the Institute. See Samuel Chapman Armstrong, a Biographical 
Study (New York, 1904), by his daughter, Edith Armstrong 
Talbot. 

His brother, William N. Armstrong, was attorney-general 
in the cabinet of the Hawaiian king Kalakaua I. He ac- 
companied that monarch on a prolonged foreign tour in 1881, 
visiting Japan, China, Siam, India, Europe and the United States, 
and in 1904 published an amusing account of the journey, called 
Round the World with a King. 

ARMSTRONG, WILLIAM GEORGE ARMSTRONG, Baron 
(1810-1900), British inventor, founder of the Elswick manufac- 
turing works, was born on the 26th of November 1810, at New- 
castle-on-Tyne, and was educated at a school in Bisnop Auckland. 
The profession which he adopted was that of a solicitor, and from 
1833 to 1847 ne was engaged in active practice in Newcastle as 
a member of the firm of Donkin, Stable & Armstrong. His 
sympathies, however, were always with mechanical and scientific 
pursuits, and several of his inventions date from a time anterior 
to his final abandonment of the law. In 1841-1843 he published 
several papers on the electricity of effluent steam. This subject 
he was led to study by the experience of a colliery engineman, 
who noticed that he received a sharp shock on exposing one 
hand to a jet of steam issuing from a boiler with which his 
other hand was in contact, and the inquiry was followed by the 
invention of the " hydro-electric " machine, a powerful generator 
of electricity, which was thought worthy of careful investigation 
by Faraday. The question of the utilization of water-power 



592 



ARMY 



had engaged his attention even earlier, and in 1839 he invented 
an improved rotary water motor. Soon afterwards he designed 
a hydraulic crane, which contained the germ of all the hydraulic 
machinery for which he and Elswick were subsequently to become 
famous. This machine depended simply on the pressure of 
water acting directly in a cylinder on a piston, which was con- 
nected with suitable multiplying gear. In the first example, 
which was erected on the quay at Newcastle in 1846, the necessary 
pressure was obtained from the ordinary water mains of the 
town; but the merits and advantages of the device soon became 
widely appreciated, and a demand arose for the erection of 
cranes in positions where the pressure afforded by the mains was 
insufficient. Of course pressure could always be obtained by the 
aid of special reservoirs, but to build these was not always de- 
sirable, or even practicable. Hence, when in 1850 a hydraulic 
installation was required for a new ferry station at New Holland, 
on the Humber estuary, the absence of water mains of any kind, 
coupled with the prohibitive cost of a special reservoir owing to 
the character of the soil, impelled him to invent a fresh piece of 
apparatus, the " accumulator," which consists of a large cylinder 
containing a piston that can be loaded to give any desired pressure, 
the water being pumped in below it by a steam-engine or other 
prime mover. This simple device may be looked upon as the 
crown of the hydraulic system, since by its various modifications 
the installation of hydraulic power became possible in almost 
any situation. In particular, it was rendered practicable on 
board ship, and its application to the manipulation of heavy 
naval guns and other purposes on warships was not the least 
important of Armstrong's achievements. 

The Elswick works were originally founded for the manufacture 
of this hydraulic machinery, but it was not long before they 
became the birthplace of a revolution in gunmaking; indeed, 
could nothing more be placed to Armstrong's credit than their 
establishment, his name would still be worthy of remembrance. 
Modern artillery dates from about 1855, when Armstrong's 
first gun made its appearance. This weapon embodied all the 
essential features which distinguish the ordnance of to-day from 
the cannon of the middle ages — it was built up of rings of metal 
shrunk upon an inner steel barrel; it was loaded at the breech; 
it was rifled; and it threw, not a round ball, but an elongated 
projectile with ogival head. The guns constructed on this 
principle yielded such excellent results, both in range and 
accuracy, that they were adopted by the British government 
in 1859, Armstrong himself being appointed engineer of rifled 
ordnance and receiving the honour of knighthood. At the same 
time the Elswick Ordnance Company was formed to manufacture 
the guns under the supervision of Armstrong, who, however, 
had no financial interest in the concern; it was merged in the 
Elswick Engineering Works four years later. Great Britain thus 
originated a principle of gun construction which has since been 
universally followed, and obtained an armament superior to that 
possessed by any other country at that time. But while there 
was no doubt as to the shooting capacities of these guns, defects 
in the breech mechanism soon became equally patent, and in a 
few years caused a reversion to muzzle-loading. Armstrong 
resigned his position in 1863, and for seventeen years the govern- 
ment adhered to the older method of loading, in spite of the 
improvements which experiment and research at Elswick and 
elsewhere had during that period produced in the mechanism 
and performance of heavy guns. But at last Armstrong's 
results could no longer be ignored; and wire-wound breech- 
loading guns were received back into the service in 1880. The 
use of steel wire for the construction of guns was one of Arm- 
strong's early ideas. He perceived that to coil many turns of thin 
wire round an inner barrel was a logical extension of the large 
hooped method already mentioned, and in conjunction with 
I. K. Brunei, was preparing to put the plan to practical test 
when the discovery that it had already been patented caused 
him to abandon his intention, until about 1877. This incident 
well illustrates the ground of his objection to the British system 
of patent law, which he looked upon as calculated to strifle 
Invention and impede progress; the patentees in this case did 



not manage to make a practical success of their invention 
themselves, but the existence of prior patents was sufficient to 
turn him aside from a path which conducted him to valuable 
results when afterwards, owing to the expiry of those patents, 
he was free to pursue it as he pleased. 

Lord Armstrong, who was raised to the peerage in 1887, was 
the author of A Visit to Egypt (1873), and Electric Movement 
in Air and Water (1897), besides many professional papers. He 
died on the 27 th of December 1900, at Rothbury, Northumber- 
land. His title became extinct, but his grand-nephew and heir, 
W. H. A. F. Watson-Armstrong (b. 1863), was in 1903 created 
Baron Armstrong of Bamburgh and Cragside. 

ARMY (from Fr. armee, Lat. armata), a considerable body 
of men armed and organized for the purpose of warfare on land 
(Ger. Armee), or the whole armed force at the disposal of a state 
or person for the same purpose (Ger. fleer = host). The appli- 
cation of the term is sometimes restricted to the permanent, 
active or regular forces of a state. The history of the develop- 
ment of the army systems of the world is dealt with in this 
article in sections 1 to 38, being followed by sections 39 to 59 
on the characteristics of present-day armies. The remainder of 
the article is devoted to sections on the history of the principal 
armies of Europe, and that of the United States. For the 
Japanese Army see Japan, and for the existing condition of 
the army in each country see imder the country heading. 

General History 

1. Early Armies. — It is only with the evolution of the speci- 
ally military function in a tribe or nation, expressed by the 
separation of a warrior-class, that the history of armies (as now 
understood) commences. Numerous savage tribes of the present 
day possess military organizations based on this system, but 
it first appears in the history of civilization amongst the 
Egyptians. By the earliest laws of Egypt, provision was made 
for the support of the warriors. The exploits of her armies 
under the legendary Sesostris cannot be regarded as historical, 
but it appears certain that the country possessed an army, 
capable of waging war in a regular fashion, and divided thus 
early into separate arms, these being chariots, infantry and 
archers. The systems of the Assyrians and Babylonians present 
no particular features of interest, save that horsemen, as distinct 
from charioteers, appear on the scene. The first historical 
instance of a military organization resembling those of modern 
times is that of the Persian empire. 

2. Persia. — Drawn from a hardy and nomadic race, the armies 
of Persia at first consisted mainly of cavalry, and owed much 
of their success to the consequent ease and rapidity of their 
movements. The warlike Persians constantly extended their 
power by fresh conquests, and for some time remained a dis- 
tinctly conquering and military race, attaining their highest 
power under Cyrus and Cambyses. Cyrus seems to have been the 
founder of a comprehensive military organization, of which we 
gather details from Xenophon and other writers. To each 
province was allotted a certain number of soldiers as standing 
army. These troops, formed originally of native Persians only, 
were called the king's troops. They comprised two classes, the 
one devoted exclusively to garrisoning towns and castles, the 
other distributed throughout the country. To each province 
was appointed a military commander, responsible for the number 
and efficiency of the troops in his district, while the civil governor 
was answerable for their subsistence and pay. Annual musters 
were held, either by the king in person or by generals deputed 
for the purpose and invested with full powers. This organization 
seems to have fully answered its original purpose, that of holding 
a vast empire acquired by conquest and promptly repelling 
inroads or putting down insurrections. But when a great 
foreign war was contemplated, the standing army was aug- 
mented by a levy throughout the empire. The extent of the 
empire made such a levy a matter of time, and the heterogeneous 
and unorganized mass of men of all nations so brought together 
was a source of weakness rather than strength. Indeed, the 
vast hosts over which the Greeks gained their victories comprised 



ARMY 



593 



but a small proportion of the true Persians. The cavalry 
alone seems to have retained its national character, and with 
it something of its high reputation, even to the days of 
Alexander. 

3. Greece. — The Homeric armies were tribal levies of foot, 
armed with spear, sword, bow, &c, and commanded by the 
chiefs in their war-chariots. In historic times all this is changed. 
Greece becomes a congeries of city-states, each with its own 
citizen-militia. Federal armies and permanent troops are rare, 
the former owing to the centrifugal tendency of Greek politics, 
the latter because the " tyrannies," which must have relied 
very largely on standing armies to maintain themselves, had 
ultimately given way to democratic institutions. But the 
citizen-militia of Athens or Sparta resembled rather a modern 
" nation in arms " than an auxiliary force. Service was com- 
pulsory in almost all states, and as the young men began their 
career as soldiers with a continuous training of two or three 
years, Hellenic armies, like those of modern Europe, consisted 
of men who had undergone a thorough initial training and were 
subsequently called up as required. Cavalry, as always in the 
broken country of the Peloponnesus, was not of great importance, 
and it is only when the theatre of Greek history is extended to 
the plains of Thessaly that the mounted men become numerous. 
In the 4U1 century the mainstay of Greek armies was the hoplite 
(inrXirris), the heavy-armed infantryman who fought in the corps 
de bataille; the light troops were men who could not provide 
the full equipment of the hoplite, rather than soldiers trained 
for certain special duties such as skirmishing. The fighting 
formation was that of the phalanx, a solid corps of hoplites armed 
with long spears. The armies were recruited for each war by 
calling up one or more classes of men in reserve according to 
age. It was the duty and privilege of the free citizen to bear 
arms; the slaves were rarely trusted with weapons. 

4. Sparta. — So much is common to the various states. In 
Sparta the idea of the nation in arms was more thoroughly 
carried out than in any other state in the history of civilization. 
In other states the individual citizen often lived the life of a 
soldier, here the nation lived the life of a regiment. Private 
homes resembled the " married quarters " of a modern army; 
the unmarried men lived entirely in barracks. Military exer- 
cises were only interrupted by actual service in the field, and 
the whole life of a man of military age was devoted to them. 
Under these circumstances, the Spartans maintained a practi- 
cally unchallenged supremacy over the armies of other Greek 
states; sometimes their superiority was so great that, like the 
Spanish regulars in the early part of the Dutch War of Inde- 
pendence, they destroyed their enemies with insignificant loss 
to themselves. The surrender of a Spartan detachment, hope- 
lessly cut off from all assistance, and the victory of a body of 
well-trained and handy light infantry over a closed battalion of 
Spartiates were events so unusual as seriously to affect the course 
of Greek history. 

5. Greek Mercenaries. — The military system of the 4th century 
was not called upon to provide armies for continuous service 
on distant expeditions. When, after the earlier campaigns of 
the Peloponnesian War, the necessity for such expeditions 
arose, the system was often strained almost to breaking 'point, 
(e.g. in the case of the Athenian expedition to Syracuse), and 
ultimately the states of Greece were driven to choose between 
unprofitable expenditure of the lives of citizens and recruiting 
from other sources. Mercenaries serving as light troops, and 
particularly as peltasts (a new form of disciplined " light in- 
fantry ") soon appeared. The corps de bataille remained for 
long the old phalanx of citizen hoplites. But the heavy losses 
of many years told severely on the resources of every state, and 
ultimately non-national recruits — adventurers and soldiers of 
fortune, broken men who had lost their possessions in the wars, 
political refugees, runaway slaves, &c. — found their way even 
into the ranks of the hoplites, and Athens at one great crisis 
(407) enlisted slaves, with the promise of citizenship as their 
reward. The Arcadians, like the Scots and the Swiss in modern 
history, furnished the most numerous contingent to the new 



professional armies. A truly national army was indeed to appear 
once more in the history of the Peloponnesus, but in the mean- 
time the professional soldier held the field. The old bond of 
strict citizenship once broken, the career of the soldier of fortune 
was open to the adventurous Greek. Taenarum and Corinth 
became regular entrepots for mercenaries. The younger Cyrus 
raised his army for the invasion of Persia precisely as the em- 
perors Maximilian and Charles V. raised regiments of Lands- 
knechte — by the issue of recruiting commissions to captains of 
reputation. This army became the famous Ten Thousand. It 
was a marching city-state, its members not desperate adventurers, 
but men with the calm self-respect of Greek civilization. On 
the fall of its generals, it chose the best officers of the army 
to command, and obeyed implicitly. Cheirisophus the Spartan 
and Xenophon the Athenian, whom they chose, were not plausible 
demagogues; they were line officers, who, suddenly promoted 
to the chief command under circumstances of almost over 
whelming difficulty, proved capable of achieving the impossible. 
The merit of- choosing such leaders is not the least title to fame 
of the Ten Thousand mercenary Greek hoplites. About the 
same time Iphicrates with a body of mercenary peltasts destroyed 
a mora or corps of Spartan hoplites (391 B.C.). 

6. Epaminondas. — Not many years after this, Spartan 
oppression roused the Theban revolt, and the Theban revolt 
became the Theban hegemony. The army which achieved this 
under the leadership of Epaminondas, one of the great captains 
of history, had already given proofs of its valour against 
Xenophon and the Cyreian veterans. Still earlier it had won the 
great victory of Delium (424 B.C.). 

It was organized, as were the professional armies, on the 
accepted model of the old armies, viz. the phalangite order, but 
the addition of peltasts now made a Theban army, unlike the 
Spartans, capable of operating in broken country as well as in 
the plain. The new tactics of the phalanx, introduced by 
Epaminondas, embodied, for the first time in the history of war, 
the modern principle of local superiority of force, and suggested 
to Frederick the Great the famous " oblique order of battle." 
Further, the cavalry was more numerous and better led than 
that of Peloponnesian states. The professional armies had well 
understood the management of cavalry; Xenophon's handbook of 
the subject is not without value in the 20th century. In Greek 
armies the dearth of horses and the consequent numerical weak- 
ness of the cavalry prevented the bold use of the arm on the 
battlefield (see Cavalry). But Thebes had always to deal 
with nations which possessed numerous horsemen. Jason of 
Pherae, for instance, put into the field against Thebes many 
thousands of Thessalian horse; and thus at the battle of Tegyra 
in 375 the Theban cavalry under Pelopidas, aided by the corps 
d' elite of infantry called the Sacred Band, carried all before them. 
At Leuctra Epaminondas won a glorious victory by the use of 
his " oblique order " tactics; the same methods achieved the 
secondgreatvictoryofMantineia (362 B.c.)at which Epaminondas 
fell. Pelopidas had already been slain in a battle against the 
Thessalians, and there was no leader to carry on their work. 
But the new Greek system was yet to gain its greatest triumphs 
under Alexander the Great. 

7. Alexander. — The reforms of Alexander's father, Philip of 
Macedon, may most justly be compared to those of Frederick 
William I. in Prussia. Philip had lived at Thebes as a hostage, 
and had known Iphicrates, Epaminondas and Pelopidas. He 
grafted the Theban system of tactics on to the Macedonian 
system of organization. That the latter — a complete territorial 
system— was efficient was shown by the fact that Philip's blow 
was always struck before his enemies were ready to meet it. 
That the new Greek tactics, properly used, were superior to the 
old was once more demonstrated at Chaeronea (338 B.C.), where 
the Macedonian infantry militia fought in phalanx, and the 
cavalry, led by the young Alexander, delivered the last crushing 
blow. On his accession, like Frederick the Great, Alexander 
inherited a well-trained and numerous army, and was not slow 
to use it. The invasion of Asia was carried out by an army 
of the Greek pattern, formed both of Hellenes and of 



594- 



ARMY 



non-Hellenes on an exceedingly strong Macedonian nucleus. 
Alexander's own guard was composed of picked horse and foot. 
The infantry of the line comprised Macedonian and Greek hop- 
lites, the Macedonians being subdivided into heavy and medium 
troops. These fought in a grand phalanx, which was subdivided 
into units corresponding to the modern divisions, brigades and 
regiments, the fighting formation being normally a line of 
battalion masses. The arm of the infantry was the 1 8-foot pike 
(sarissa). The peltasts, Macedonian and Greek, were numerous 
and well trained, and there was the usual mass of irregular light 
troops, bowmen, slingers, &c. The cavalry included the Guard 
(ayijiia), a body of heavy cavalry composed of chosen Mace- 
donians, the line cavalry of Macedonia (ercupoi) and Thessaly, 
the numerous small contingents of the Greek states, mercenary 
corps and light lancers for outpost work. The final blow and 
the gathering of the fruits of victory were now for the first time 
the work of the mounted arm. The solid phalanx was almost 
unbreakable in the earlier stages of the battle, but after a long 
infantry fight the horsemen had their chance. In former wars 
they were too few and too poorly mounted to avail themselves 
of it, and decisive victories were in consequence rarely achieved 
in battles of Greek versus Greek. * Under Epaminondas, and still 
more under Philip and Alexander, the cavalry was strong enough 
for its new work. Battles are now ended by the shock action 
of mounted men, and in Alexander's time it is noted as a novelty 
that the cavalry carried out the pursuit of a beaten army. There 
were further, in Alexander's army, artillerymen with a battering 
train, engineers and departmental troops, and also a medical 
service, an improvement attributed to Jason of Pherae. The 
victories of this army, in close order and in open, over every kind 
of enemy and on every sort of terrain, produced the Hellenistic 
world, and in that achievement the history of Greek armies 
closes, for after the return of the greater part of the Europeans 
to their homes the armies of Alexander and his successors, while 
preserving much of the old form, become more and more 
orientalized. 

The decisive step was taken in 323, when a picked contingent 
of Persians, armed mainly with missile weapons, was drafted 
into the phalanx, in which henceforward they formed the middle 
ranks of each file of sixteen men. But, like the third rank of 
Prussian infantry up to 1888, they normally fought as skirmishers 
in advance, falling into their place behind the pikes of the Mace- 
donian file-leaders only if required for the decisive assault. The 
new method, of course, depended for success on the steadiness 
of the thin three-deep line of Macedonians thus left as the line 
of battle. Alexander's veterans were indeed to be trusted, but 
as time went on, and little by little the war-trained Greeks left 
the service, it became less and less safe to array the Hellenistic 
army in this shallow and articulated order of battle. The purely 
formal organization of the phalanx sixteen deep became thus 
the actual tactical formation, and around this solid mass of 
16,384 men gathered the heterogeneous levies of a typical 
oriental army. Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, retained far more of 
the tradition of Alexander's system than his contemporaries 
farther east, yet his phalanx, comparatively light and mobile 
as it was, achieved victories over the Roman legion only at 
the cost of self-destruction. Even elephants quickly became a 
necessary adjunct to Hellenistic armies. 

8. Carthage. — The military systems of the Jews present few 
features of unusual interest. The expedient of calling out 
successive contingents from the different tribes, in order to ensure 
continuity in military queries, should, however, be noticed.
David and Solomon possessed numerous permanent troops 
which served as guards and garrisons; in principle this organ- 
ization was identical with that of the Persians, and that of 
Europe in the 16th and 17th centuries. Particular interest 
attaches to the Carthaginian military forces of the 3rd century 
B.C. Rarely has any army achieved such renown in the short 
spare or sixty years (264-202 B.C.). Carthage produced a 
aeries of great generals, culminating in Hannibal, who is marked 
out, even by the little that is known of him, as the equal of 
Napoleon. But Napoleon was supported by a national army, 



Hannibal and his predecessors were condemned to work with 
armies of mercenaries. For. the first time in the world's history 
war is a matter with which the civil population has no concern. 
The merchants of Carthage fought only in the last extremity; 
the wars in which their markets were extended were conducted 
by non-national forces and directed by the few Carthaginian 
citizens who possessed military aptitudes. The civil authorities 
displayed towards their instruments a spirit of hatred for which 
it is difficult to find a parallel. Unsuccessful leaders were 
crucified, the mercenary soldiers were cheated of their pay, and 
broke out into a mutiny which shook the empire of Carthage 
to its foundations. But the magnetism of a leader's personality 
infused a corporate military spirit into these heterogeneous 
Punic armies, and history has never witnessed so complete an 
illustration of the power of pure and unaided esprit de corps 
as in the case of Hannibal's army in Italy, which, composed 
as it was of Spaniards, Africans, Gauls, Numidians, Italians 
and soldiers of fortune of every country, was yet welded by him 
into thorough efficiency. The army of Italy was as great in its 
last fight at Zama as the army of Spain at Rocroi; its victories 
of the Trebia, Trasimene and Cannae were so appalling that, 
two hundred years later, the leader to whom these soldiers 
devoted their lives was still, to a Roman, the " dire " Hannibal. 

In their formal organization the Carthaginian armies re- 
sembled the new Greek model, and indeed they were created 
in the first instance by Xanthippus, a Spartan soldier in the 
service of Carthage, who was called upon to raise and train an 
army when the Romans were actually at the gates of Carthage, 
and justified his methods in the brilliant victory of Tunis 
(255 B.C.). For the solid Macedonian phalanx of 16,000 spears 
Xanthippus substituted a line of heavy battalions equal in its 
aggregate power of resistance to the older form, and far more 
flexible. The triumphs of the cavalry arm in Hannibal's battles 
far excelled those of Alexander's horsemen. Hannibal chose 
his fighting ground whenever possible with a view to using their 
full power, first to defeat the hostile cavalry, then to ride down 
the shaken infantry masses, and finally to pursue an fond. At 
Cannae, the greatest disaster ever suffered by the Romans, the 
decisive blow and the slaughter were the work of Hannibal's 
line cavalry, the relentless pursuit that of his light horse. But 
a professional long-service army has always the greatest diffi- 
culty in making good its losses, and in the present case it was 
wholly unable to do so. Even Hannibal failed at last before the 
sustained efforts of the citizen army of Rome. 

9. Roman Army under the Republic. — The earliest organiza- 
tion of the Roman army is attributed to Romulus, who formed it 
on the tribal principle, each of the three tribes contributing its 
contingent of horse and foot. But it was to Servius Tullius 
that Rome owed, traditionally, the complete classification of 
her citizen-soldiers. For the details of the Roman military 
system, see Roman Army. During the earlier period of Roman 
history the army was drawn entirely from the first classes of the 
population, who served without pay and provided their own 
arms and armour. The wealthiest men (equites) furnished the 
cavalry, the remainder the infantry, while the poorer classes 
either fought as light troops or escaped altogether the privilege 
and burden of military service. Each " legion " of 3000 heavy 
foot was at first formed in a solid phalanx. The introduction of 
the elastic and handy three-line formation with intervals (similar 
in many respects to Alexander's) was brought about by the 
Gallic wars, and is attributed to M. Furius Camillus, who also, 
during the siege of Veii, introduced the practice of paying the 
soldiers, and thus removed the chief obstacle to the employment 
of the poorer classes. The new order of battle was fully developed 
in the Pyrrhic Wars, and the typical army of the Republic mav 
be taken as dating from the latter part of the 3rd century B.C. 
The legionary was still possessed of a property qualification, but 
it had become relatively small. An annual levy was made at 
Rome to provide for the campaign of the year. Discipline was 
severe, and the rewards appealed as much to the soldier's honour 
as to his desire of gain. A legion now consisted of three lines 
(Hastati, Pxincipes, Triarii), each line composed of men of 



ARMY 



595 



similar age and experience, and was further subdivided into 
thirty " maniples," each of two " centuries." The normal 
establishment of 300 cavalry, 3000 heavy and 1 200 light infantry 
was still maintained, though in practice these figures were often 
exceeded. In place of the old light-armed and somewhat 
inferior rorarii, the new velites performed light infantry duties 
(211 B.C.), at the same time retaining their place in the maniples, 
of which they formed the last ranks (compare the Macedonian 
phalanx as reorganized in 323, § 7 above). The 300 cavalry 
of the legion were trained for shock action. But the strength 
of the Roman army lay in the heavy legionary infantry of citizens. 
The thirty maniples of each legion stood in three lines of battle, 
but the most notable point of their formation was that each 
maniple stood by itself on its own small manceuvre-area, free to 
take ground to front or flank. To the Roman legion was added 
a legion of allies, somewhat differently organized and possessing 
more cavalry, and the whole force was called a " double legion " 
or briefly a " legion." A consul's army consisted nominally of 
two double legions, but in the Punic wars military exigencies 
rather than custom dictated the numbers of the army, and the 
two consulsat Cannae (216B.C.) commanded two double consular 
armies, or eight double legions. 

10. Characteristics of the Roman Army. — Such in outline was 
the Roman military organization at the time when it was put 
to the severe test of the Second Punic War. Its elements were 
good, its military skill superior to that of any other army of 
ancient history, while its organization was on the whole far better 
than any that had gone before. The handy formation of 
maniples at open order was unique in the ancient world, and it 
did not reappear in history up to the advent of Gustavus Adol- 
phus. In this formation, in which everything was entrusted to 
the skill of subordinates and the individual courage of the rank 
and file, the Romans met and withstood with success every type 
of impact, from the ponderous shock of the Macedonian phalanx 
and the dangerous rush of Celtic savages to the charge of ele- 
phants. Yet it was no particular virtue in the actual form 
employed that carried the Roman arms to so many victories. 
There would have been positive danger in thus articulating the 
legion had it been composed of any but the most trustworthy 
soldiers. To swiftness and precision of manoeuvre they added 
a dogged obstinacy over which nothing but overwhelming 
disaster prevailed. It is, therefore, not unnatural to ask wherein 
the system which produced these soldiers failed, as it did within 
a century after the battle of Zama. The greatest defect was the 
want of a single military command. The civil magistrates of 
Rome were ex officio leaders of her armies, and though no Roman 
officer lacked military training, the views of a consul or praetor 
were almost invariably influenced by the programme of his 
political party. When, as sometimes happened, the men under 
their command sided in the political differences of their leaders, 
all real control came to an end. The soldiers of the Republic 
hardly ever forgot that they were citizens with voting powers; 
they served as a rule only during a campaign; and, while there 
could be little question as to their patriotism and stubbornness, 
they lacked almost entirely that esprit de corps which is found 
only amongst the members of a body having a permanent cor- 
porate existence. Thus they had the vices as well as the virtues 
of a nation in arms, and they fell still further short of the ideal 
because of the dubious and precarious tenure of their generals' 
commands. The great officers were usually sent home at the 
end of a campaign, to be replaced by their elected successors, 
and they showed all the hesitation and fear of responsibility 
usually found in a temporary commander. Above all, when 
two armies, each under its own consul or praetor, acted together, 
the command was either divided or exercised on alternate days. 

11. Roman Empire. — The essential weaknesses of militia 
forces and the accidental circumstances of that under con- 
sideration led, even in earlier times, to the adoption of various 
expedients which for a time obviated the evils to which allusion has 
been made. But a change of far greater importance followed 
the final exploits of the armies of the old system. The increasing 
dominions of the Republic, the spread of wealth and luxury, 



the gradual decadence of the old Roman ideas, all tended to 
produce an army more suited to the needs of the newer time 
than the citizen militia of the 3rd century. Permanent troops 
were a necessity; the rich, in their newly acquired dislike of 
personal effort, ceased to bear their share in the routine life of 
the army, and thus the proletariat began to join the legions 
with the express intention of taking to a military career. The 
actual change from the old regime to the new was in the main 
the work of Gaius Marius. The urgent demand for men at the 
time of the Teutonic invasions caused the service to be thrown 
open to all Roman citizens irrespective of census. The new 
territories furnished cavalry, better and more numerous than 
the old equites, and light troops of various kinds to replace the 
velites. Only the heavy foot remained a purely Italian force, and 
the spread of the Roman citizenship gradually abolished the 
distinction between a Roman and an allied legion. The higher 
classes had repeatedly shown themselves unwilling to serve under 
plebeians (e.g. Varro and Flaminius); Marius preferred to have 
as soldiers men who did not despise him as an inferior. Under 
all these influences for good or for evil, the standing army was 
developed in the first half of the 1st century B.C. The tactical 
changes in the legion indicate its altered character. The small 
maniples gave way to heavy " cohorts," ten cohorts forming 
the legion ; as in the Napoleonic wars, light and handy formations 
became denser and more rigid with the progressive decadence 
in moral of the rank and file. It is more significant still that in 
the days of Marius the annual oath of allegiance taken by 
the soldier came to be replaced by a personal vow, taken once 
and for all, of loyalty to the general. Ubi bene, ibi patria was 
an expression of the new spirit of the army, and Caesar had but 
to address his men as quirites (civilians) to quell a mutiny. 
Hastati, principes and triarii were now merely expressions in 
drill and tactics. But perhaps the most important of all these 
changes was the growth of regimental spirit and tradition. The 
legions were now numbered throughout the army, and the 
Tenth Legion has remained a classic instance of a " crack " 
corps. The moral of the Roman army was founded no longer 
on patriotism, but on professional pride and esprit de corps. 

With this military system Rome passed through the era of 
the Civil Wars, at the end of which Augustus found himself 
with forty-five legions on his hands. As soon as possible he 
carried through a great reorganization, by which, after ruthlessly 
rejecting inferior elements, he obtained a smaller picked force 
of twenty-five legions, with numerous auxiliary forces. These 
were permanently stationed in the frontier provinces of the 
Empire, while Italy was garrisoned by the Praetorian cohorts, 
and thus was formed a regular long-service army, the strength 
of which has been estimated at 300,000 men. But these measures, 
temporarily successful, produced in the end an army which not 
only was perpetually at variance with the civil populations it 
was supposed to protect, but frequently murdered the emperors 
to whom it had swern allegiance when it raised them to the 
throne. The evil fame of the Italian cohorts has survived in the 
phrase " praetorianism " used to imply a venal military despotism. 
The citizens gradually ceased to bear arms, and the practice of 
self-mutilation became common. The inevitable denouement 
was delayed from time to time by the work of an energetic 
prince. But the ever-increasing inefficiency and factiousness 
of the legions, and the evanescence of all military spirit in the 
civil population, made it easy for the barbarians, when once 
the frontier was broken through, to overrun the decadent 
Empire. The end came when the Gothic heavy horse annihilated 
the legions of Valens at Adrianople (a.d. 37S). 

There was now no resource but to take the barbarians into 
Roman pay. Under the name of foederati, the Gothic mercenary 
cavalry played the most conspicuous part in the succeeding 
wars of the Empire, and began the reign of the heavy cavalry 
arm, which lasted for almost a thousand years. Even so soon as 
within six years of the death of Valens twenty thousand Gothic 
horse decided a great battle in the emperor's favour. These men, 
however, became turbulent and factious, and it was not until 
the emperor Leo I. had regenerated the native Roman soldier 



59 6 



ARMY 



that the balance was maintained between the national and the 
hired warrior. The work of this emperor and of his successors 
found eventual expression in the victories of Belisarius and 
Narses, in which the Romans, in the new r61e of horse-archers, 
so well combined their efforts with those of the foederati that 
neither the heavy cavalry of the Goths nor the phalanx of 
Frankish infantry proved to be capable of resisting the imperial 
forces. At the battle of Casilinum (553) Roman foot-archers 
and infantry bore no small part of the work. It was thus in the 
Eastern Empire that the Roman military spirit revived, and the 
Byzantine army, as evolved from the system of Justinian, 
became eventually the sole example of a fully organized service 
to be found in medieval history. 

12. The " Dark Ages." — In western Europe all traces of 
Roman military institutions quickly died out, and the conquerors 
of the new kingdoms developed fresh systems from the simple 
tribal levy. The men of the plains were horsemen, those of 
marsh and moor were foot, and the four greater peoples retained 
these original characteristics long after the conquest had been 
completed. In organization the Lombards and Franks, Visigoths 
and English scarcely differed. The whole military population 
formed the mass of the army, the chiefs and their personal 
retainers the elite. The Lombards and the Visigoths w,ere natur- 
ally cavalry; the Franks and the English were, equally naturally, 
infantry, and the armies of the Merovingian kings differed but 
little from the English fyrd with which Off a and Penda fought 
their battles. But in these nations the use of horses and armour, 
at first confined to kings and great chiefs, gradually spread 
downwards to the ever-growing classes of thegns, comites, &c. 
Finally, under Charlemagne were developed the general lines 
of the military organization which eventually became feudalism. 
For his distant wars he required an efficient and mobile army. 
Hence successive " capitularies " were issued dealing with 
matters of recruiting, organization, discipline and field service 
work. Very noticeable are his system of forts (burgi) with 
garrisons, his military train of artillery and supplies, and the 
reappearance of the ancient principle that three or four men 
should equip and maintain one of themselves as a warrior. These 
and other measures taken by him tended to produce a strong 
veteran army, very different in efficiency from the tumultuary 
levy, to which recourse was had only in the last resort. While 
war (as a whole) was not yet an art, fighting (from the indi- 
vidual's point of view) had certainly become a special function; 
after Charlemagne's time the typical feudal army, composed 
of well-equipped cavalry and ill-armed peasantry serving on 
foot, rapidly developed. Enemies such as Danes and Magyars 
could only be dealt with by mounted men who could ride round 
them, compel them to fight, and annihilate them by the shock 
of the charge; consequently the practice of leaving the infantry 
in rear, and even at home, grew up almost as a part of the feudal 
system of warfare. England, however, sought a different remedy, 
and thus diverged from the continental methods. This remedy 
was the creation of a fleet, and, the later Danish wars being 
there carried out, not by bands of mounted raiders, but by large 
armies of military settlers, infantry retained its premier position 
in England up to the day of Hastings. Even the thegns, who 
there, as abroad, were the mainstay of the army, were heavy- 
armed infantry. The only contribution made by Canute to the 
military organization of England was the retention of a picked 
force of hus carles (household troops) when the rest of the army 
with which he had conquered his realm was sent back to Scandi- 
navia. At Hastings, the forces of Harold consisted wholly of 
infantry. The English array was composed of the king and his 
personal friends, the hus carles, and the contingents of the fyrd 
under the local thegns; though better armed, they were organized 
after the manner of their forefathers. On that field there perished 
the best infantry in Europe, and henceforward for three centuries 
there was no serious rival to challenge the predominance of the 
heavy cavalry. 

13. The Byzantines (cf. article Roman Empire, Later). — 
While the west of Europe was evolving feudalism, the Byzantine 
empire was acquiring an army and military system scarcely 



surpassed by any of those of antiquity and not often equalled 
up to the most modern times. The foederati disappeared after 
the time of Justinian, and by a.d. 600 the army had become 
at once professional and national. For generations, regiments 
had had a corporate existence. Now brigades and divisions also 
appeared in war, and, somewhat later, in peace likewise. With 
the disappearance of the barbarians, the army became one 
homogeneous service, minutely systematized, and generally 
resembling an army in the modern sense of the word. The 
militia of the frontier districts performed efficiently the service 
of surveillance, and the field forces of disciplined regulars were 
moved and employed in accordance with well-reasoned principles 
of war; their maintenance was provided for by a scutage, levied, 
in lieu of service, on the central provinces of the empire. Later, 
a complete territorial system of recruiting and command was 
introduced. Each " theme " (military district) had its own 
regular garrison, and furnished a field division of some 5000 
picked troopers for a campaign in any theatre of war. Provision 
having been made in peace for a depot system, all weakly men 
and horses could be left behind, and local duties handed over 
to second line troops; thus the field forces were practically 
always on a war footing. Beside the " themes " under their 
generals, there were certain districts on the frontiers, called 
" clissuras," placed under chosen officers, and specially organized 
for emergency service. The corps of officers in the Byzantine 
army was recruited from the highest classes, and there were 
many families (e.g. that from which came the celebrated Nice- 
phorus Phocas) in which soldiering was the traditional career. 
The rank and file were either military settlers or men of the 
yeoman class, and in either case had a personal interest in the 
safety of the theme which prevented friction between soldiers 
and civilians. The principal arm was, of course, cavalry, and 
infantry was employed only in special duties. Engineer, train 
and medical services were maintained in each theme. Of the 
ensemble of the Byzantine army it has been said that " the art 
of war as it was understood at Constantinople . . . was the only 
system of real merit existing. No western nation could have 
afforded such a training to its officers till the 16th or . . . 17th 
century." The vitality of such an army remained intact long 
after the rest of the empire had begun to decay, and though the 
old army practically ceased to exist after the great disaster of 
Manzikert. (1071), the barbarians and other mercenaries who 
formed the new service were organized, drilled and trained to 
the same pitch of military efficiency. Indeed the greatest 
tactical triumph of the Byzantine system (Calavryta, 1079) 
was won by an army already largely composed of foreigners. 
But mercenaries in the end developed praetorianism, as usual, 
and at last they actually mutinied, in the presence of the enemy, 
for higher pay (Constantinople, 1 204) . 

14. Feudalism. — From the military point of view the change 
under feudalism was very remarkable. For the first time in the 
history of western Europe there appears, in however rough a 
form, a systematized obligation to serve in arms, regulated on a 
territorial basis. That army organization in the modern sense 
• — organization for tactics and command — did not develop in 
any degree commensurate with the development of military 
administration, was due to the peculiar characteristics of the 
feudal system, and the virtues and weaknesses of medieval 
armies were its natural outcome. Personal bravery, the primary 
virtue of the soldier, could not be wanting in the members of a 
military class, the mitier of which was war and manly exercises. 
Pride of caste, ambition and knightly emulation, all helped to 
raise to a high standard the individual efficiency of the feudal 
cavalier. But the gravest faults of the system, considered as an 
army organization, were directly due to this personal element. 
Indiscipline, impatience of superior control, and dangerous 
knight-errantry, together with the absence of any chain of 
command, prevented the feudal cavalry from achieving results 
at all proportionate to the effort expended and the potentialities 
of a force with so many soldierly qualities. If such defects were 
habitually found in the best elements of the army— the feudal 
tenants and subtenants who formed the heavy cavalry arm — 



ARMY 



597 



little could be expected of the despised and ill-armed foot- 
soldiery of the levy. The swift raids of the Danes and others 
(see above) had created a precedent which in French and German 
wars was almost invariably followed. The feudal levy rarely 
appeared at all on the battlefield, and when it was thus employed 
it was ridden down by the hostile knights, and even by those 
of its own party, without offering more than the feeblest re- 
sistance. Above all, one disadvantage, common to all classes of 
feudal soldiers, made an army so composed quite untrustworthy. 
The service which a king was able to exact from his feudatories 
was so slight (varying from one month to three in the year) that 
no military operation which was at all likely to be prolonged 
could be undertaken with any hope of success. 

15. Medieval Mercenaries. — It was natural, therefore, that a 
sovereign who contemplated a great war should employ mer- 
cenaries. These were usually foreigners, as practically all national 
forces served on feudal terms. While the greater lords rode with 
him on all his expeditions, the bulk of his army consisted of pro- 
fessional soldiers, paid by the levy of sculage imposed upon the 
feudal tenantry. There had always been soldiers of fortune. 
William's host at Hastings contained many such men; later, 
the Flemings who invaded England in the days of Henry I. sang 
to each other — 

" Hop, hop, Willeken, hop! England is mine and thine," — 
and from all the evidence it is clear that in earlier days the hired 
soldiers were adventurers seeking lands and homes. But these 
men usually proved tobe most undesirable subjects,and sovereigns 
soon began to pay a money wage for the services of mercenaries 
properly so called. Such were the troops which figured in 
English history under Stephen. Such troops, moreover, formed 
the main part of the armies of the early Plantagenets. They 
were, as a matter of course, armed and armoured like the knights, 
with whom they formed the men-at-arms (gendarmes) of the 
army. Indeed, in the nth and 12th centuries, the typical army 
of France or the Empire contains a relatively small percentage of 
" knights," evidence of which fact may be found even in so 
fanciful a romance as Aucassin and Nicolete. It must be noted, 
however, that not all the mercenaries were heavy cavalry; the 
Brabancon pikeman and the Italian crossbowman (the value of 
whose weapon was universally recognized) often formed part of a 
feudal army. 

16. Injantry in Feudal Times. — These mercenary foot soldiers 
came as a rule from districts in which the infantry arm had 
maintained its ancient predominance in unbroken continuity. 
The cities of Flanders and Brabant, and those of the Lombard 
plain, had escaped feudal interference with their methods of 
fighting, and their burgher militia had developed into solid 
bodies of heavy -armed pikemen. These were very different from 
those of the feudal levy, and individual knightly bravery usually 
failed to make the slightest impression on a band of infantry 
held together by the stringent corporate feeling of a trade- 
gild. The more adventurous of the young men, like those of the 
Greek cities, took service abroad and fought with credit in their 
customary manner. The reign of the " Brabancon " as a mer- 
cenary was indeed short, but he continued, in his own country, 
to fight in the old way, and his successor in the profession of 
arms, the Genoese crossbowman, was always highly valued. In 
England, moreover, the infantry of the old fyrd was not suffered 
to decay into a rabble of half-armed countrymen, and in France 
a burgher infantry was established by Louis VI. under the name 
of the milice des communes, with the idea of creating a counter- 
poise to the power of the feudatories. Feudalism, therefore, as 
a military system, was short-lived. Its limitations had always 
necessitated the employment of mercenaries, and in several 
places a solid infantry was coming into existence, which was 
drawn from the sturdy and self-respecting middle classes, and 
in a few generations was to prove itself a worthy opponent not 
only to the knight, but to the professional man-at-arms. 

17. The Crusades. — It is an undoubted fact that the long wars 
of the Crusades produced, directly, but slight improvement in the 
feudal armies of Europe. In the East large bodies of men were 
successfully kept under arms for a considerable period, but the 



application of crusading methods to European war was altogether 
impracticable. In the first place, much of the permanent force of 
these armies was contributed by the military orders, which had 
no place in European political activities. Secondly, enthusiasm 
mitigated much of the evil of individualism. In the third place, 
there was no custom to limit the period of service, since the 
Crusaders had undertaken a definite task and would merely have 
stultified their own purpose in leaving the work only half done. 
There were, therefore, sharp contrasts between crusading and 
European armies. In the latter, systematization was confined to 
details of recruiting; in the armies of the Cross, men were from 
time to time obtained by the accident of religious fervour, while 
at the same time continuous service produced a relatively high 
system of tactical organization. Different conditions, therefore, 
produced different methods, and crusading unity and discipline 
could not have been imposed on an ordinary army, which indeed 
with its paid auxiliaries was fairly adequate for the somewhat 
desultory European wars of that time. The statement that the 
Crusaders had a direct influence on the revival of infantry is 
hardly susceptible of convincing demonstration, but it is at any 
rate beyond question that the social and economic results of the 
Crusades materially contributed to the downfall of the feudal 
knight, and in consequence to a rise in the relative importance 
of the middle classes. Further, not only were the Crusading 
knights compelled by their own want of numbers to rely on the 
good qualities of the foot, but the foot themselves were the 
" survivors of the fittest," for the weakly men died before they 
reached the Holy Land, and with them there were always 
knights who had lost their horses and could not obtain remounts. 
Moreover, when " simple " and " gentle " both took the Cross 
there could be no question of treating Crusaders as if they were 
the mere feudal levy. But the little direct influence of the whole 
of these wars upon military progress in Europe is shown clearly 
enough by the fact that at the very close of the Crusades a great 
battle was lost through knight-errantry of the true feudal type 
(Mansurah). 

18. The Period of Transition (1200-1490). — Besides the 
infantry already mentioned, that of Scotland and that of the 
German cities fought with credit on many fields. Their arm was 
the pike, and they were always formed in solid masses (called in 
Scotland, schiltrons). The basis of the medieval commune being 
the suppression of the individual in the social unit, it was natural 
that the burgher infantry should fight " in serried ranks and 
in better order " than a line of individual knights, who, more- 
over, were almost powerless before walled cities. But these 
forces lacked offensive power, and it was left for the English 
archers, whose importance dates from the latter years of the 
13th century, to show afresh, at Crecy, Poitiers and Agincourt, 
the value of missile action. When properly supported by other 
arms, they proved themselves capable of meeting both the 
man-at-arms and the pikeman. The greatest importance 
attaches to the evolution of this idea of mutual support and 
combination. Once it was realized, war became an art, and 
armies became specially organized bodies of troops of different 
arms. It cannot be admitted, indeed, as has been claimed, 
that the 14th century had a scientific system of tactics, or that 
the campaign of Poitiers was arranged by the French " general 
staff." Nevertheless, during this century armies were steadily 
coming to consist of expert soldiers, to the exclusion of national 
levies and casual mercenaries. It,is true that, by his system of 
" indents," Edward IIL of England raised national armies 
of a professional type, but the English soldier thus enrolled, 
when discharged by his own sovereign, naturally sought similar 
employment elsew r here. This system produced, moreover, a 
class of unemployed soldiers, and these, with others who became 
adventurers from choice or necessity, and even with foreign 
troops, formed the armies which fought in the Wars of the Roses 
— armies which differed but slightly from others of the time. 
The natural result of these wars was to implant a hatred of 
soldiery in the heart of a nation which had formerly produced 
the best fighting men in Europe, a hatred which left a deep 
imprint on the constitutional and social life of the people. In 



598 



ARMY 



France, where Joan of Arc passed like a meteor across the 
military firmament, the idea of a national regular army took a 
practical form in the middle of the 15th century. Still, the 
forces thus brought into existence were not numerous, and the 
soldier of fortune, in spite of such experiences of his methods 
as those of the Wars of the Roses, was yet to attain the zenith 
of his career. 

19. The Condottieri. — The immediate result of this confused 
period of destruction and reconstruction was the condottiere, 
who becomes important about 1300. In Italy, where the 
condottieri chiefly flourished, they were in demand owing to the 
want of feudal cavalry, and the inability of burgher infantry 
to undertake wars of aggression. The " free companies " (who 
served in great numbers in France and Spain as well as in Italy) 
were " military societies very much like trade-gilds," which 
(so to speak) were hawked from place to place by their managing 
directors, and hired temporarily by princes who needed their 
services. Unlike the older hirelings, they were permanently 
organized, and thus, with their experience and discipline, 
became the best troops in existence. But the carrying on of 
war " in the spirit of a handicraft " led to bloodless battles, 
indecisive campaigns, and other unsatisfactory results, and the 
reign of the condottieri proper was over by 1400, subsequent 
free companies being raised on a more strictly national basis. 
With all their defects, however, they were the pioneers of 
modern organization. In the inextricable tangle of old and 
new methods which constitutes the military system of the 
15th century, it is possible to discern three marked tendencies. 
One is the result of a purely military conception of the now 
special art of war, and its exposition as an art by men who 
devote their whole career to it. The second is the idea of a 
national army, resulting from many social, economical and 
political causes. The third is the tendency towards minuter 
organization and subdivision within the army. Whereas the 
individual feudatories had disliked the close supervision of a 
minor commander, and their army had in consequence remained 
always a loosely-knit unit, the men who made war into an art 
belonged to small bands or corps, and naturally began their 
organization from the lower units. Herein, therefore, was the 
germ of the regimental system of the present day.. 

20. The Swiss. — The best description of a typical European 
army at the opening of the new period of development is that 
of the French army in Italy in 1494, written by Paolo Giovio. 
He notes with surprise that the various corps of infantry and 
cavalry are distinct, the usual practice of the time being to 
combine one lancer, one archer, one groom, &c, into a small 
unit furnished and commanded by the lancer. There were 
Swiss and German infantry, armed with pike and halbert, with 
a few " shot," who marched in good order to music. There 
were the heavy men-at-arms (gendarmes), accompanied as of old 
by mounted archers, who, however, now fought independently. 
There were, further, Gascon slingers and crossbowmen, who 
had probably acquired, from contact with Spain, some of the 
lightness and dash of their neighbours. The artillery train was 
composed of 140 heavy pieces and a great number of lighter 
guns; these were then and for many generations thereafter 
a special arm outside the military establishments (see Artil- 
lery). In all this the only relic of the days of Crecy is the 
administrative combination of the men-at-arms and the horse 
archers, and even this is no longer practised in action. The 
most important element in the army is the heavy infantry of 
Swiss and Germans. The Swiss had for a century past gradually 
developed into the most formidable troops of the day. The 
wars of Zizka (q.v.) in Bohemia (1420) materially assisted in the 
downfall of the heavy cavalry; and the victories of the Swiss, 
beginning with Sempach (1382), had by 1480 proved that their 
solid battalions, armed with the long pike and the halberd, 
were practically invulnerable to all but missile and shock action 
combined. By fortune of war, they never met the English, who 
had shown the way to deal with the schiltron as early as Falkirk. 
So great was their confidence against ordinary troops, that on 
one occasion (1444) they detached 1600 men to engage 50,000. 



It was natural that a series of victories such as Granson, Morat 
and Nancy should place them in the forefront of the military 
nations of Europe. The whole people devoted itself thereupon 
to professional soldiering, particularly in the French service, 
and though their monopoly of mercenary employment lasted 
a short time only, they continued to furnish regiments to the 
armies of France, Spain and the Pope up to the most modern 
times. But their efficiency was thoroughly sapped by the growth 
of a mutinous and insubordinate spirit, the memory of which 
has survived in the proverb Point d'argent, point de Suisse, 
and inspired Machiavelli with the hatred of mercenaries which 
marks every page of his work on the art of war. One of their 
devices for extorting money was to appear at the muster with 
many more soldiers than had been contracted for by their em- 
ployers, who were forced to submit to this form of blackmail. 
At last the French, tired of these caprices, inflicted on the Swiss 
the crushing defeat of Marignan (q.v.), and their tactical system 
received its death-blow from the Spaniards at Pa via (1525). 

2 1 . The Lands knechts. — The modern army owes far more of its 
organization and administrative methods to the Landsknechts 
("men of the country," as distinct from foreigners) than to the 
Swiss. As the latter were traditionally the friends of France, 
so these Swabians were the mainstay of the Imperial armies, 
though both were mercenaries. The emperor Maximilian exerted 
himself to improve the new force, which soon became the model 
for military Europe. A corps of Landsknechts was usually 
raised by a system resembling that of " indents," commissions 
being issued by the sovereign to leaders of repute to enlist men. 
A " colour " (Fdhnlein) numbered usually about 400 men, a 
corps consisted of a varying number of colours, some corps 
having 12,000 men. From these troops, with their intense 
pride, esprit de corps and comradeship, there has come down 
to modern times much of present-day etiquette, interior economy 
and " regimental customs " — in other words, nearly all that 
is comprised in the " regimental " system. Amongst the most 
notable features of their system were the functions of the provost, 
who combined the modern offices of provost-marshal, transport 
and supply officer, and canteen manager; the disciplinary code, 
which admitted the right of the rank and file to judge offences 
touching the honour of the regiment; and the women who, 
lawfully or unlawfully attached to the soldiers, marched with 
the regiment and had a definite place in its corporate life. The 
conception of the regiment as the home of the soldier was thus 
realized in fact. 

22. The Spanish Army. — The tendencies towards professional 
soldiering and towards subdivision had now pronounced them- 
selves. At the same time, while national armies, as dreamed of 
by Machiavelli; were not yet in existence, two at least of the 
powers were beginning to work towards an ideal. This ideal 
was an army which was entirely at the disposal of its own 
sovereign, trained to the due professional standard, and organized 
in the best way found by experience to be applicable to military 
needs. On these bases was formed the old Spanish army which, 
from Pavia (1525) to Rocroi (1643), was held by common consent 
to be the finest service in existence. Almost immediately after 
emerging from the period of internal development, Spain found 
herself obliged to maintain an army for the Italian wars. In 
the first instance this was raised from amongst veterans of the 
war of Granada, who enlisted for an indefinite time. Probably 
the oldest line regiments in Europe are those descended from the 
famous tercios, whose formation marks the beginning of military 
establishments, just as the Landsknechts were the founders of 
military manners and customs. The great captains who led the 
new army soon assimilated the best points of the Swiss system, 
and it was the Spanish army which evolved the typical com- 
bination of pike and musket which flourished up to 1 700. Out- 
side the domain the tactics, it must be credited with an important 
contribution to the science of army organization, in the depot 
system, whereby the tercios in the field were continually " fed " 
and kept up to strength. The social position of the soldier was 
that of a gentleman, and the young nobles (who soon came to 
prefer the tercios to the cavalry service) thought it no shame, 



ARMY 



599 



when their commands were reduced, to " take a pike " in 
another regiment. The provost and his gallows were as much 
in evidence in a Spanish camp as in one of Landsknechts, but 
the comradeship and esprit de corps of a tercio were the admira- 
tion of all contemporary soldiers. With all its good qualities, 
however, this army was not truly national; men soon came from 
all the various nations ruled by the Habsburgs, and the soldier 
of fortune found employment in a tercio as readily as elsewhere. 
But it was a great gain that corps, as such, were fully recognized 
as belonging to the government, however shifting the personnel 
might be. Permanence of regimental existence had now been 
attained, though the universal acceptance and thorough appli- 
cation of the principle were still far distant. During the 16th 
century, the French regular army (originating in the compagnies 
d'ordonnance of 1445), which was always in existence, even when 
the Swiss and gendarmes were the best part of the field forces, 
underwent a considerable development, producing amongst 
other things the military terminology of the present day. But 
the wars of religion effectually checked all progress in the latter 
part of the century, and the European reputation of the French 
army dates only from the latter part of the Thirty Years' War. 

23. The Sixteenth Century. — The battle of St Quentin (1557) 
is usually taken as the date from which the last type of a purely 
mercenary arm (as distinct from corps) comes into prominence. 
" Brabancon " or " Swiss " implied pikemen without further 
qualification, the new term "Reiter" similarly implied mercenary 
cavalry fighting with the pistol. Heavy cavalry could disperse 
arquebusiers and musketeers, but it was helpless" against solid 
masses of pikemen; the Reiters solved the difficulty by the use 
of the pistol. They were well armoured and had little to fear 
from musket-balls. Arrayed in deep squadrons, therefore, 
they rode up to the pikes with impunity, and fired methodically 
dans le tas, each rank when it had discharged its pistols filing 
to the rear to reload. These Reiters were organized in squadrons 
of variable strength, and recruited in the same manner as were 
the Landsknechts. They were much inferior, however, to the 
latter in their discipline and general conduct, for cavalry had 
many more individual opportunities of plunder than the foot, 
and the rapacity and selfishness of the Reiters were consequently 
in marked contrast to the good order and mutual helpfulness 
in the field and in quarters which characterized the regimental 
system of the Landsknechts. 

24. Dutch System. — The most interesting feature of the Dutch 
system, which was gradually evolved by the patriots in the long 
War of Independence, was its minute attention to detail. In 
the first years of the war, William the Silent had to depend, 
for field queries, on mutinous and inefficient mercenaries
and on raw countrymen who had nothing but devotion to oppose 
to the discipline and skill of the best regular army in the world. 
Such troops were, from the point of view of soldiers like Alva, 
mere canaille, and the ludicrous ease with which their armies 
were destroyed (as at Jemmingen and Mookerheyde), at the cost 
of the lives of perhaps a dozen Spanish veterans, went far to 
justify this view. But, fortunately for the Dutch, their fortified 
towns were exceedingly numerous, and the individual bravery 
of citizen-militia, who were fighting for the lives of every soul 
within their walls, baffled time after time all the efforts of Alva's 
men. In the open, Spanish officers took incredible liberties with 
the enemy; once, at any rate, they marched for hours together 
along submerged embankments with hostile vessels firing into 
them from either side. Behind walls the Dutch were practically 
a match for the most furious valour of the assailants. 

The insurgents' first important victory in the open field, that 
of Rymenant near Malines (1577), was won by the skill of 
" Bras de Fer," de la Noue, a veteran French general, and the 
stubbornness of the English contingent of the Dutch army — 
for England, from 1572 onwards, sent out an ever-increasing 
number of volunteers. This battle was soon followed by the 
great defeat of Gembloux (1578), and William the Silent was 
not destined to see the rise of the Dutch army. Maurice of 
Nassau was the real organizer of victory. In the wreck of all 
feudal and burgher military institutions, he turned to the old 



models of Xenophon, Polybius, Aelian and the rest. Drill, as 
rigid and as complicated as that of the Macedonian phalanx, 
came into vogue, the infantry was organized more strictly into 
companies and regiments, the cavalry into troops or cornets. 
The Reiter tactics of the pistol were followed by the latter, the 
former consisted of pikes, halberts and " shot." This form was 
generally followed in central Europe, as usual, without the spirit, 
but in Holland it was the greater trustworthiness of the rank and 
file that allowed of more flexible formations, and here we no longer 
see the foot of an army drawn up, as at Jemmingen, in one solid 
and immovable " square." In their own country and with the 
system best suited thereto, the Dutch, who moreover acquired 
greater skill and steadiness day by day, maintained their ground 
against all the efforts of a Parma and a Spinola. Indeed, it 
is the best tribute to the vitality of the Spanish system that 
the inevitable debdele was so long delayed. The campaigns of 
Spinola in Germany demonstrated that the " Dutch " system, as 
a system for general use, was at any rate no better than the 
system over which it had locally asserted its superiority, and 
the spirit, and not the form, of Maurice's practice achieved the 
ultimate victory of the Netherlanders. In the Thirty Years' War, 
the unsuccessful armies of Mansfeld and many others were 
modelled on the Dutch system, — the forces of Spinola, of Tilly 
and of Wallenstein, on the Spanish. In other words, these 
systems as such meant little; the discipline and spirit behind 
them, everything. Yet the contribution made by the Dutch 
system to the armies of to-day was not small; to Maurice and 
his comrades we owe, first the introduction of careful and 
accurate drill, and secondly the beginnings of an acknowledged 
science of war, the groundwork of both being the theory and 
practice of antiquity. The present method of "forming fours" 
in the British infantry is ultimately derived from Aelian, just as 
the first beats of the drums in a march represent the regimental 
calls of the Landsknechts, and the depots and the drafts for the 
service battalions date from the Italian wars of Spain. 

25. The Thirty Years' War. — Hitherto all armies had been 
raised or reduced according to the military and political situation 
of the moment. Spain had indeed maintained a relatively high 
effective in peace, but elsewhere a few personal guards, small 
garrisons, and sometimes a small regular army to serve as a 
nucleus, constituted the only permanent forces kept under arms 
by sovereigns, though, in this era of perpetual wars, armies were 
almost always on a war footing. The expense of maintenance 
at that time practically forbade any other system than this, 
called in German Werbe-system, a term for which in English there 
is no nearer equivalent than " enlistment " or " levy " system. 
It is worth noticing that this very system is identical in principle 
with that of the United States at the present day, viz., a small 
permanent force, inflated to any required size at the moment of 
need. The exceptional conditions of the Dutch army, indeed, 
secured for its regiments, a long life; yet when danger was 
finally over, a large portion of the army was at once reduced. 
The history of the British army from about 1740 to 1820 is a 
most striking, if belated, example of the Werbe-system in practice. 
But the Thirty Years' War naturally produced an unusual con- 
tinuity of service in corps raised about 1620-1630, and fifty 
years later the principle of the standing army was universally 
accepted. It is thus that the senior regiments of the Prussian 
and Austrian armies date from about 1630. At this time an 
event took place which was destined to have a profound influence 
on the military art. Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden landed in 
Germany with an army better organized, trained and equipped 
than any which had preceded it. This army, by its great victory 
of Breitenfeld (163 1), inaugurated the era of " modern " warfare, 
and it is to the system of Gustavus that the student must turn 
for the initial point of the progressive development which has 
produced the armies of to-day. Spanish and Dutch methods 
at once became as obsolete as those of the Landsknechts.. 

26. The Swedish Army. — The Swedish army was raised by a 
carefully regulated system of conscription, which was " preached 
in every pulpit in Sweden." There were indeed enlisted 
regiments of the usual type, and it would seem that Gustavus 



6oo 



ARMY 



obtained the best even of the soldiers of fortune. But the 
national regiments were raised on the Indelta system. Each 
officer and man, under this scheme, received a land grant within 
the territorial district of his corps, and each of these districts 
supplied recruits in numbers proportionate to its population. 
This curious mixture of feudal and modern methods produced 
the best elements of an army, which, aided by the tactical and 
technical improvements introduced by Gustavus, proved itself 
incomparably superior to its rivals. Of course the long and 
bloody campaigns of 1630-34 led to the admission of great 
numbers of mercenaries even into the Swedish corps; and 
German, Scottish and other regiments figured largely, not only 
in the armies of Duke Bernhard and his successors, but in the 
army of Gustavus' own lifetime. As early as 1632 one brigade 
of the army was distinguished by the title " Swedish," as alone 
containing no foreigners. Yet the framework was much the 
same as it had been in 1630. The battle-organization of two 
lines and two wings, which was typical of the later " linear " 
tactics, began to supplant the system of the tercios. How cum- 
brous the latter had become by 1630 may be judged from any 
battle-plan of the period, and notably from that of Lutzen. 
Gustavus' cavalry fought four or three deep only, and depended 
as little as possible on the pistol. The work of riding down the 
pikes was indeed rendered easier by the improved tactical 
handiness of the musketeers, but it was fiery leading which 
alone compelled victory, for there were relatively few Swedish 
horse and many squadrons of Germans and others, who in 
themselves were far less likely to charge boldly than the 
" Pappenheimers " and other crack corps of the enemy. The 
infantry was of the highest class, and only on that condition 
could loose and supple lines be trusted to oppose the solid 
tercios of Tilly and Wallenstein. Cumbrous indeed these were, 
but by long practice they had acquired no small manoeuvring 
power, of which Breitenfeld affords a striking example. The 
Swedes, however, completely surpassed them. The progress 
thus made may be gauged from the fact that under Gustavus 
the largest closed body of infantry was less than 300 strong. 
Briefly, the genius of a great commander, the ardour of a born 
cavalry leader, better arms and better organization, carried the 
Swedes to the end of their career of victory, but how personal 
was the vis viva which inspired the army was quickly noticeable 
after the death of Gustavus. Even a Bernhard could, in the 
end, evoke no more heroism from a Swedish army than from 
any other, and the real Swedish troops fought their last battle 
at Nordlingen (1634). After this, little distinguished the 
" Swedish " forces from the general mass of the armies of the 
time, save their system, to which, and to its influence on the 
training of such leaders as Baner, Torstensson and Wrangel, 
all their later victories were due. So much of Gustavus' work 
survived even the carnage of Nordlingen, and his system always 
obtained better results, even with the heterogeneous troops of 
this later period, than any other of the time. 

27. The English Civil War (see Great Rebellion). — The 
armies on either side which, about the same time, were fighting 
out the constitutional quarrel in England were essentially 
different from all those of the continent, though their formal 
organization was similar to that of the Swedes. The military 
expression of a national conscience had appeared rarely indeed 
in the Thirty Years' War, which was a means of livelihood for, 
rather than an assertion of principle by, those who engaged in it. 
In England, on the other hand, there were no mercenaries, and 
the whole character of the queries was settled by the burning
desire of a true " nation in arms " to decide at once, by the 
arbitrament of battle, the vital points at issue. A German 
critic (Fritz Hoenig) has indicated Worcester as the prototype 
of Sedan; at any rate, battles of this kind invariably resulted in 
failure when entrusted to a "standing" army of the 18th cen- 
tury. But the national armies disappeared at the end of the 
struggle; after the Restoration, English political aims became, 
so far as military activity was concerned, similar in scope and 
execution to those of the continent; and the example of Cromwell 
and the " New Model," which might have revolutionized 



military Europe, passed away without having any marked 
influence on the armies of other nations. 

28. Standing Armies. — Nine years after Nordlingen, the old 
Spanish army fought its last and most honourable battle at 
Rocroi. Its conquerors were the new French troops, whose 
victory created as great a sensation as Pavia and Cregy had done. 
Infusing a new military spirit into the formal organization of 
Gustavus' system, the French army was now to " set the fashion " 
for a century. France had been the first power to revive regular 
forces, and the famous " Picardie " regiment disputed for pre- 
cedence even with the old tercios. The country had emerged 
from the confusion of the past century with the foreign and 
domestic strength of a practically absolute central power. The 
Fronde continued the military history of the army from the 
end of the Thirty Years' War; and when the period of consolida- 
tion was finally closed, all was prepared for the introduction 
of a " standing army," practically always at war strength, and 
entirely at the disposal of the sovereign. The reorganization 
of the military establishments by Louvois may be taken as the 
formal date at which standing armies came into prominence 
(see historical sketch of the French army below). Other powers 
rapidly followed the lead of France, for the defects of enlisted 
troops had become very clear, and the possession of an army 
always ready for war was an obvious advantage in dynastic 
politics. The French proprietary system of regiments, and the 
general scheme of army administration which replaced it, may 
be taken as typical of the armies of other great powers in the 
time of Louis XIV. 

29. Character of the Standing Armies. — A peculiar character 
was from the first imparted to the new organizations by the 
results of the Thirty Years' War. A well-founded horror of 
military barbarity had the effect of separating the soldier from 
the civilian by an impassable gulf. The drain of thirty years on 
the population, resources and finances of almost every country 
in middle Europe, everywhere limited the size of the new armies ; 
and the decision in 1648 of all questions save those of dynastic 
interest dictated the nature of their employment. The best 
soldiers of the time pronounced in favour of small field armies, for 
in the then state of communications and agriculture large forces 
proved in practice too cumbrous for good work. In every 
country, therefore, the army took the form of a professional body, 
nearly though not quite independent of extra recruits for war, 
set apart entirely from all contact with civil life, rigidly restricted 
as to conduct in peace and war, and employed mostly in the 
" maintenance " of their superiors' private quarrels. Iron 
discipline produced splendid tenacity in action, and wholesale 
desertion at all times. In the Seven Years' War, for instance, 
the Austrians stated one-fifth of their total loss as due to desertion, 
and Thackeray's Barry Lyndon gives no untrue picture of the 
life of a soldier under the old regime. Further, since men were 
costly, rigid economy of their lives in action, and minute care 
for their feeding and shelter on the march, occupied a dispro- 
portionate amount of the attention of their generals. Armies 
necessarily moved slowly and remained concentrated to facilitate 
supply and to check desertion, and thus, when a commander 
had every unit of his troops within a short ride of his head- 
quarters, there was little need for intermediate general officers, 
and still less for a highly trained staff. 

30. Organization in the 18th Century. — All armies were now 
almost equal in fighting value, and war was consequently reduced 
to a set of rules (not principles) , since superiority was only to be 
gained by methods, not by men. Soldiers such as Marlborough, 
who were superior to these jejune prescriptions, met indeed 
with uniform success. But the methods of the 18th century 
failed to receive full illustration, save by the accident of a great 
captain's direction, even amidst the circumstances for which 
they were designed. It is hardly to be wondered at, therefore, 
that they failed, when forced by a new phase of development 
to cope with events completely beyond their element. The inner 
organization was not markedly altered. Artillery was still out- 
side the normal organization of the line of battle, though in 
the period 1660-1740 much was done in all countries to improve 



ARMY 



601 



the material, and above all to turn the personnel into disciplined 
soldiers. Cavalry was organized in regiments and squadrons, 
and armed with sabre and pistol. Infantry had by 1703 begun 
to assume its three-deep line formation and the typical weapons 
of the arm, musket and bayonet. Regiments and battalions 
were the units of combat as well as organization. In the fight 
the company was entirely merged in the higher unit, but as an 
administrative body it still remained. As for the higher organ- 
ization, an army consisted simply of a greater or less number 
of battalions and squadrons, without, as a rule, intermediate 
commands and groupings. The army was arrayed as a whole 
in two lines of battle, with the infantry in the centre and the 
cavalry on the flanks, and an advanced guard; the so-called 
reserve consisting merely of troops not assigned to the regular 
commands. It was divided, for command in action, into right 
and left wings, both of cavalry and infantry, of each line. This 
was the famous " linear " organization, which in theory produced 
the maximum effort in the minimum time, but in practice, 
handled by officers whose chief care was to avoid the expenditure 
of effort, achieved only negative results. To see its defects one 
need only suppose a battalion of the first line hard pressed by 
the enemy. A battalion of the second line was directly behind it, 
but there was no authority, less than that of the wing commander, 
which could order it up to support the first. All the conditions 
of the time were opposed to tactical subdivision, as the term is 
now understood. That the 18th century did not revive schiltrons 
was due to the new fire tactics, to which everything but control 
was sacrificed. This "control," as has been said, implied not 
so much command as police supervision. But far beyond any 
faults of organization and recruiting, the inherent vice of these 
armies was, as Machiavelli had pointed out two centuries pre- 
viously, and as Prussia was to learn to her cost in 1806, that 
once they were thoroughly defeated, the only thing left to be 
done was to make peace at once, since there was no other armed 
force capable of retrieving a failure. 

31. Frederick the Great. — The military career of Frederick 
the Great is very different from those of his predecessors. With 
an army organized on the customary system, and trained and 
equipped, better indeed, but still on the same lines as those of 
his rivals, the king of Prussia achieved results out of all propor- 
tion to those imagined by contemporary soldiers. It is to his 
campaigns, therefore, that the student must refer for the real, 
if usually latent, possibilities of the army of the 18th century. 
The prime secret of his success lay in the fact that he was his 
own master, and responsible to no superior for the uses to which 
he put his men. This position had never, since the introduction 
of standing armies, been attained by any one, even Eugene and 
Leopold of Dessau being subject to the common restriction; 
and with this extraordinary advantage over his opponents, 
Frederick had further the firmness and ruthless energy of a 
great commander. Prussia, moreover, was more strictly organized 
than other countries, and there was relatively little of that 
opposition of local authorities to the movement of troops which 
was conspicuous in Austria. The military successes of Prussia, 
therefore, up to 1757, were not primarily due to the system and 
the formal tactics, but were the logical outcome of greater energy 
in the leading, and less friction in the administration, of her 
armies. But the conditions were totally different in 1758-1762, 
when the full force of the alliance against Prussia developed 
itself in four theatres of war. Frederick was driven back to the 
old methods of making war, and his men were no longer the 
soldiers of Leuthen and Hohenfriedberg. If discipline was 
severe before, it was merciless then; the king obtained men by 
force and fraud from every part of Germany, and had both to 
repress and to train them in the face of the enemy. That under 
such conditions, and with such men, the weaker party finally 
emerged triumphant, was indeed a startling phenomenon. Yet 
its result for soldiers was not the production of the national 
army, though the dynastic forces had once more shown them- 
selves incapable of compassing decisive victories, nor yet the 
removal of the barrier between army and people, for the opera- 
tions of Frederick's recruiting agents made a lasting impression, 



and, further, large numbers of men who had thought to make 
a profession of arms were turned adrift at the end of the war. 
On the contrary, all that the great and prolonged tour de force 
of these years produced was a tendency, quite in the spirit of 
the age, to make a formal science out of the art of war. Better 
working and better methods were less sought after than system- 
atization of the special practices of the most successful com- 
manders. Thus Frederick's methods, since 1758 essentially the 
same as those of others, were taken as the basis of the science 
now for the first time called " strategy," the fact that his 
opponents had also practised it without success being strangely 
ignored. Along with this came a mania for imitation. Prussian 
drill, uniforms and hair-powder were slavishly copied by every 
state, and for the next twenty years, and especially when the 
war-trained officers and men had left active service, the purest 
pedantry reigned in all the armies of Europe, including that of 
Prussia. One of the ablest of Frederick's subordinates wrote 
a book in which he urged that the cadence of the infantry step 
should be increased by one pace per minute. The only excep- 
tions to the universal prevalence of this spirit were in the Austrian 
army, which was saved from atrophy by its Turkish wars, and 
in a few British and French troops who served in the Ameri- 
can War of Independence. The British regiments were sent to 
die of fever in the West Indies; when the storm of the French 
Revolution broke over Europe, the Austrian army was the only 
stable element of resistance. 

32. The French Revolution. — Very different were the armies of 
the Revolution. Europe, after being given over to professional 
soldiers for five hundred years, at last produced the modern 
system of the "nation in arms." The French volunteers of 
1792 were a force by which the routine generals of the enemy, 
working with instruments and by rules designed for other 
conditions, were completely puzzled, and France gained a short 
respite. The year 1793 witnessed the most remarkable event 
that is recorded in the history of armies. Raw enthusiasm was 
replaced, after the disasters and defections which marked the 
beginning of the campaign, by a systematic and unsparing 
conscription, and the masses of men thus enrolled, inspired by 
ardent patriotism and directed by the ferocious energy of the 
Committee of Public Safety, met the disciplined formalists with 
an opposition before which the attack completely collapsed. It 
was less marvellous in fact than in appearance that this should 
be so. Not to mention the influence of pedantry and senility 
on the course of the queries, it may be admitted that Frederick
and his army at their best would have been unable to accomplish 
the downfall of the now thoroughly roused French. Tactically, 
the fire of the regulars' line caused the Revolutionary levies to 
melt away by thousands, but men were ready to fill the gaps. 
No complicated supply system bound the French to magazines 
and fortresses, for Europe could once more feed an army with- 
out convoys, and roads were now good and numerous. No fear 
of desertion kept them concentrated under canvas, for each 
man was personally concerned with the issue. If the allies tried 
to oppose them on an equal front, they were weak at all points, 
and the old organization had no provision for the working of a 
scattered army. While ten victorious campaigns had not carried 
Marlborough nearer to Paris than some marches beyond the 
Sambre, two campaigns now carried a French army to within 
a few miles of Vienna. It was obvious that, before such forces 
and such mobility, the old system was doomed, and with each 
successive failure the old armies became more discouraged. 
Napoleon's victories finally closed this chapter of military 
development, and by 1808 the only army left to represent it 
was the British. Even to this the Peninsular War opened a 
line of progress, which, if different in many essentials from 
continental practice, was in any case much more than a copy of 
an obsolete model. 

33. The Conscription. — In 1793, at a moment when the danger 
to France was so great as to produce the rigorous emergency 
methods of the Reign of Terror, the combined enemies of the 
Republic had less than 300,000 men in the field between Basel 
and Dunkirk. On the other hand, the call of the " country in 



6o2 



ARMY 



danger " produced more than four times this number of men 
for the French armies within a few months. Louis XIV., even 
when all France had been awakened to warlike enthusiasm by 
a similar threat (1709), had not been able to put in the field 
more than one-fifth of this force. The methods of the great 
war minister Carnot were enforced by the ruthless committee, 
and when men's lives were safer before the bayonets of the 
allies than before the civh tribunals at home, there was no 
difficulty in enlisting the whole military spirit of France. There 
is therefore not much to be said as to the earliest application 
of the conscription, at least as regards its formal working, since 
any system possessing elasticity would equally have served the 
purpose. In the meanwhile, the older plans of organization had 
proved inadequate for dealing with such imposing masses of 
men. Even with disciplined soldiers they had long been known 
as applicable only to small armies, and the deficiencies of the 
French, with their consequences in tactics and strategy, soon 
produced the first illustrations of modern methods. Unable 
to meet the allies in the plain, they fought in broken ground 
and on the widest possible front. This of course produced 
decentralization and subdivision; and it became absolutely 
necessary that each detachment on a front of battle 30 m. long 
(e.g. Stokach) should be properly commandedand self-sufficing. 
The army was therefore constituted in a number of divisions, 
each of two or more brigades with cavalry arid artillery sufficient 
for its own needs. It was even more important that each 
divisional general, with his own staff, should be a real commander, 
and not merely the supervisor of a section of the line of battle, 
for he was almost in the position that a commander-in-chief 
had formerly held. The need of generals was easily supplied 
when there was so wide a field of selection. For the allies the 
mere adoption of new forms was without result, since it was 
contrary both to tradition and to existing organization. The 
attempts which were made in this direction did not tend to 
mitigate the evils of inferior numbers and moral. The French 
soon followed up the divisional system with the further organ- 
ization of groups of divisions under specially selected general 
officers; this again quickly developed into the modern army 
corps. 

34. Napoleon. — Revolutionary government, however, gave 
way in a few years to more ordinary institutions, and the spirit 
of French politics had become that of aggrandizement in the 
name of liberty. The ruthless application of the new principle 
of masses had been terribly costly, and the disasters of 1799 
reawakened in the mass of the people the old dislike of war 
and service. Even before this it had been found necessary to 
frame a new act, the famous law proposed by General Jourdan 
(1798). With this the conscription for general service began. 
The legal term of five years was so far exceeded that the service 
came to be looked upon as a career, or servitude, for life; it 
was therefore both unavoidable and profitable to admit substi- 
tutes. Even in 1806 one quarter of Napoleon's conscripts failed 
to come up for duty. The Grande Armee thus from its inception 
contained elements of doubtful value, and only the tradition of 
victory and the 50 % of veterans still serving aided the genius 
of Napoleon to win the brilliant victories of 1805 and 1806. 
But these veterans were gradually eliminated by bloodshed and 
service exposure, and when, after the peace of Tilsit, " French " 
armies began to be recruited from all sorts of nations, decay 
had set in. As early as 1806 the emperor had had to " antici- 
pate " the conscription, that is, call up the conscripts before 
their time, and by 18 10 the percentage of absentees in France 
had grown to about 80, the remainder being largely those who 
lacked courage to oppose the authorities. Finally, the armies 
of Napoleon became masses of men of all nations fighting even 
more unwillingly than the armies of the old regime. Little 
success attended the emperor's attempt to convert a " nation 
in arms " into a great dynastic army. Considered as such, 
it had even fewer elements of solidity than the standing armies 
of the 18th century, for it lacked the discipline which had made 
the regiments of Frederick invincible. After 1812 it was at- 
tacked by huge armies of patriots which possessed advantages 



of organization and skilful direction that the levie en masse 01 
1793 had lacked. Only the now fully developed genius and 
magnificent tenacity of Napoleon staved off for a time the 
debdcle which was as inevitable as had been that of the old 
regime. 

35. The Grande Armie. — In 1805-1806, when the older spirit 
of the Revolution was already represented by. one-half only 
of French soldiers, the actual steadiness and manceuvring 
power of the Grande Armee had attained its highest level. The 
army at this time was organized into brigades, divisions and 
corps, the last-named unit being as a rule a marshal's command, 
and always completed as a small army with all the necessary 
arms and services. Several such corps (usually of unequal 
strength) formed the army. The greatest weakness of the 
organization, which was in other respects most pliant and 
adaptable, was the want of good staff-officers. The emperor 
had so far cowed his marshals that few of them could take 
the slightest individual responsibility, and the combatant staff- 
officers remained, as they had been in the 18th century, either 
confidential clerks or merely gallopers. No one but a Napoleon 
could have managed huge armies upon these terms ; in fact 
the marshals, from Berthier downwards, generally failed when 
in independent commands. Of the three arms, infantry and 
cavalry regiments were organized in much the same way as in 
Frederick's day, though tactical methods were very different, 
and discipline far inferior. The greatest advance had taken 
place in the artillery service. Field and horse batteries, as 
organized and disciplined units, had come into general use 
during the Revolutionary wars, and the division, corps and 
army commanders had always batteries assigned to their several 
commands as a permanent and integral part of the fighting troops. 
Napoleon himself, and his brilliant artillery officers Senarmont 
and Drouot, brought the arm to such a pitch of efficiency that 
it enabled him to win splendid victories almost by its own 
action. As a typical organization we may take the III. corps of 
Marshal Davout in 1806. This was formed of the following 
troops: — 

Cavalry brigade — General Vialannes — three regiments, .1538 men. 
Corps artillery, 12 guns. 

1st Division — General Morand — five infantry regiments in three 
brigades, 12 guns, 10,820 men. 

2nd Division — General Friant — five regiments in three brigades, 
8 guns, 8758 men. 

3rd Division — General Gudin — four regiments in three brigades, 
12 guns, 9077 men. 

A comparison of this ordre de bataille with that of a modern 
army corps will show that the general idea of corps organization 
has undergone but slight modification since the days of Napoleon. 
More troops allotted to departmental duties, and additional 
engineers for the working of modern scientific aids, are the only 
new features in the formal organization of a corps in the 20th 
century. Yet the spirit of 1806 and that of 1906 were essentially 
different, and the story of the development of this difference 
through the 19th century closes for the present the history of 
progress in tactical organization. 

36. The Wars of Liberation. — The Prussian defeat at Jena was 
followed by a national surrender so abject as to prove conclusively 
the eternal truth, that a divorce of armies from national interests 
is completely fatal to national well-being. But the oppression of 
the victors soon began to produce a spirit of ardent patriotism 
which, carefully directed by a small band of able soldiers, led in 
the end to a national uprising of a steadier and more lasting kind 
than that of the French Revolution. Prussia was compelled, by 
the rigorous treaty of peace, to keep a small force only under arms, 
and circumstances thus' drove her into the path of military 
development which she subsequently followed. The stipulation 
of the treaty was evaded by the Kriimper system, by which men 
were passed through the ranks as hastily as possible and dis- 
missed to the reserve, their places being taken by recruits. 
The regimental establishments were therefore mere cadres, and 
the personnel, recruited by universal service with few exemp- 
tions, ever-changing. This system depended on the willingness 
of the reserves to come up when called upon, and the arrogance of 



ARMY 



603 



the French was quite sufficient to ensure this. The denouement of 
the Napoleonic wars came too swiftly for the full development of 
the armed strength of Prussia on these lines; and at the outbreak 
of the Wars of Liberation a newly formed Landwehr and numerous 
volunteer corps took the field with no more training than the 
French had had in 1793. Still, the principles of universal 
service iallgemeine Wehrpflicht) and of the army reserve were, 
for the first time in modern history, systematically put into 
action, and modern military development has concerned itself 
more with the consolidation of the Kriimper system than with 
the creation of another. The debut of the new Prussian army was 
most unsuccessful, for Napoleon had now attained the highest 
point of soldierly skill, and managed to inflict heavy defeats on 
the allies. But the Prussians were not discouraged; like the 
French in 1793 they took to broken ground, and managed to win 
combats against all leaders opposed to them except Napoleon 
himself. The Russian army formed a solid background for the 
Prussians, and in the end Austria joined the coalition. Recon- 
stituted on modern lines, the Austrian army in 1813, except in the 
higher leading, was probably the best-organized on the continent. 
After three desperate campaigns the Napoleonic regime came to 
an end, and men felt that there would be no such struggle again 
in their lifetime. Military Europe settled down into grooves 
along which it ran until 1 866. France, exhausted of its manhood, 
sought a field for military activities in colonial wars waged by 
long-service troops. The conscription was still in force, but the 
citizens served most unwillingly, and substitution produced a 
professional army, which as usual became a dynastic tool. 
Austria, always menaced with foreign war and internal disorder, 
maintained the best army in Europe. The British army, though 
employed far differently, retained substantially the Peninsular 
system. 

37. European Armies i8i$-i8fo. — The events of the period 
1815-1859 showed afresh that such long-service armies were 
incomparably the best form of military machine for the purpose 
of giving expression to a hostile " view " (not " feeling "). 
Austrian armies triumphed in Italy, French armies in Spain, 
Belgium, Algeria, Italy and Russia, British in innumerable and 
exacting colonial wars. Only the Prussian forces retained the 
characteristics of the levies of 1813, and the enthusiasm which 
had carried these through Leipzig and the other great battles 
was hardly to be expected of their sons, ranged on the side of 
despotism in the troubled times of 1 848-1 8 50. But the principle 
was not permitted to die out. The Bronnzell-Olmutz incident 
of 1850 (see Seven Weeks' War) showed that the organization 
of 1 813 was defective, and this was altered in spite of the fiercest 
opposition of all classes. Soon afterwards, and before the new 
Prussian army proved itself on a great battlefield, the American 
Civil War, a fiercer struggle than any of those which followed 
it in Europe, illustrated the capabilities and the weaknesses 
of voluntary-service troops. Here the hostile " view " was 
replaced by a hostile " feeling," and the battles of the disciplined 
enthusiasts on either side were of a very different kind from 
those of contemporary Europe. But, if the experiences of 
1861-1865 proved that armies voluntarily enlisted "for the 
war " were capable of unexcelled feats of endurance, they 
proved further that such armies, whose discipline and training 
in peace were relatively little, or indeed wholly absent, were 
incapable of forcing a swift decision. The European " nation 
in arms," whatever its other failings, certainly achieved its 
task, or failed decisively to do so, in the shortest possible time. 
Only the special characteristics of the American theatre of war 
gave the Union and Confederate volunteers the space and time 
necessary for the creation of armies, and so the great struggle 
in North America passed without affecting seriously the war 
ideas and preparations of Europe. The weakness of the staff 
work with which both sides were credited helped further 
to confirm the belief of the Prussians in their system, and in 
this instance they were justified by the immense superiority 
of their own general staff to that of any army in existence. It 
was in this particular that a corps of 1870 differed so essentially 
from a corps of Napoleon's time. The formal organization had 



not been altered save as the varying relative importance of 
the separate arms had dictated. The almost intangible spirit 
which animates the members of a general staff, causes them not 
merely to " think " — that was always in the quartermaster- 
general's department — but to " think alike," so that a few 
simple orders called " directives " sufficed to set armies in 
motion with a definite purpose before them, whereas formerly 
elaborate and detailed plans of battle had to be devised and 
distributed in order to achieve the object in view. A comparison 
of the number of orders and letters written by a marshal and 
by his chief of staff in Napoleon's time with similar documents 
in 1870 indicates clearly the changed position of the staff. In 
the Grande Armee and in the French army of 1870 the officers 
of the general staff were often absent entirely from the scene 
of action. * In Prussia the new staff system produced a far 
different result — indeed, the staff, rather than the Prussian 
military system, was the actual victor of 1870. Still, the system 
would probably have conquered in the end in any case, and 
other nations, convinced by events that their departure from 
the ideal of 1813, however convenient formerly, was no longer 
justified, promptly copied Prussia as exactly, and, as a matter 
of fact, as slavishly, as they had done after the Seven Years' 
War. 

38. Modern Developments. — Since 1870, then, with the single 
exception of Great Britain, all the major European powers have 
adopted the principle of compulsory short service with reserves. 
Along with this has come the fullest development of the terri- 
torial system (see below). The natural consequence therefore 
of the heavy work falling upon the shoulders of the Prussian 
officer, who had to instruct his men, was, in the first place, a 
general staff of the highest class, and in the second, a system of 
distributing the troops over the whole country in such a way 
that the regiments were permanently stationed in the district in 
which they recruited and from which they drew their reserves. 
Prussia realized that if the reservists were to be obtained when 
required the unit must be strictly localized; France, on the 
contrary, lost much time and spent much trouble, in the mobil- 
ization of 1870, in forwarding the reservists to a regiment 
distant, perhaps, 300 m. The Prussian system did not work 
satisfactorily at first, for until all the district staff-officers were 
trained in the same way there was great inequality in the 
efficiency of the various army corps, and central control, before 
the modern development of railways, was relatively slight. 
Further, the mobilization must be completed, or nearly so, 
before concentration begins, and thus an active professional 
army, always at war strength, might annihilate the frontier 
corps before those in the interior were ready to move. But the 
advantages far outweighed the defects of the system, and, 
such professional armies having after 1870 disappeared, there 
was little to fear. Everywhere, therefore, save in Great Britain 
(for at that time the United States was hardly counted as a 
great military power, in spite of its two million war-trained 
veterans in civil life), the German model was followed, and is 
now followed, with but slight divergence. The period of reforms 
after the Prussian model (about 1873-1890) practically estab- 
lished the military systems which are treated below as those of 
the present day. The last quarter of the century witnessed a 
very great development of military forces, without important 
organic changes. The chief interest to the student of this' 
period lies in the severe competition between the great military 
powers for predominance in numbers, expressed usually in the 
reduction of the period of service with the colours to a minimum. 
The final results of this cannot well be predicted: it is enough 
to say that it is the Leitmotiv in the present stage in the develop- 
ment of armies. Below will be found short historical, sketches 
of various armies of the present day which are of interest in 
respect of their historical development. Details of existing 
forces are given in articles dealing with the several states to 
which they belong. Historical accounts of the armies of Japan 
and of Egypt will be found in the articles on those states. 
The Japanese wars of 1894-95 and 1904-5 contributed little 
to the history of military organization as a pure science. The 



604 



ARMY 



true lessons of this war were the demonstration of the wide 
applicability of the German methods, upon which exclusively the 
Japanese army had formed itself, and still more the first illustra- 
tion of the new moral force of nationalities as the decisive 
factor. The form of armies remained unaltered. Neither the 
events of the Boer War of 1890-1902 nor the Manchurian 
queries were held by European soldiers to warrant any
serious modifications in organization. It is to the moral force 
alluded to above, rather than to mere technical improvements, 
that the best soldiers of Europe, and notably those of the French 
general staff (see the works of General H. Bonnal), have of late 
years devoted their most earnest attention. 

Present-Day Armies 

39. The main principles of all military organization as de- 
veloped in history would seem to be national recruiting and 
allegiance, distinctive methods of training and administration, 
continuity of service and general homogeneity of form. The 
method of raising men is of course different in different states. In 
this regard armies may conveniently be classed as voluntarily en- 
listed, levied or conscript, and militia, represented respectively 
by the forces of Great Britain, Germany and Switzerland. It 
must not be forgotten, however, that voluntary troops may 
be and are maintained even in states in which the bulk of the 
army is levied by compulsion, and the simple militia obligation 
of defending the country is universally recognized. 

40. Compulsory Service. — Universal liability to service (all- 
gemeine Wehrpflicht) draws into the active army all, or nearly 
all, the men of military age for a continuous period of short 
service, after which they pass successively to the reserve, the 
second and the third line troops (Landwehr, Landsturm, &c). 
In this way the greatest number of soldiers is obtained at the 
cheapest rate and the number of trained men in reserve available 
to keep the army up to strength is in theory that of the able- 
bodied manhood of the country. In practice the annual levy 
is, however, not exhaustive, and increased numerical strength 
is obtained by reducing the term of colour-service to a minimum. 
This may be less in a hard-worked conscript army than in one 
which depends upon the attractions of the service to induce 
recruits to join. In conscript armies, training for war is carried 
out with undeviating rigour. In these circumstances the recruits 
are too numerous and the time available is too limited for the 
work of training to be committed to a few selected instructors, 
and every officer has therefore to instruct his own men. The 
result is usually a corps of officers whose capacity is beyond 
question, while the general staff is composed of men whose ability 
is above a high general average. As to the rank and file, the 
men taken for service are in many respects the best of the nation, 
and this superiority is progressively enhanced, since increase of 
population is not often accompanied by a corresponding increase 
in the military establishments. In Germany in 1905, it is stated, 
nearly half the contingent was excused from serving in peace 
time, over and above the usual numbers exempted or medically 
rejected. The financial aspect of compulsory service may be 
summed up in a few words. The state does not offer a wage, 
the pay of the soldier is a mere trifle, and, for a given expendi- 
ture, at least three times as many men may be kept under arms 
as under any known " voluntary " system. Above all, the state 
has at its disposal for war an almost inexhaustible supply of 
trained soldiers. This aspect of compulsory service has indeed 
led its admirers sometimes to sacrifice quality to quantity; 
but, provided always that the regular training is adequate, it 
may be admitted that there is no limit to the numbers which 
are susceptible of useful employment. There are, however, 
many grave defects inherent in all armies raised by compulsory 
levy (see Conscription, for a discussion of the chief economical 
and social questions involved). Most of the advantages of 
universal service result, not from the compulsory enlistment, 
but from the principle of short service and ieserves. But the 
cost of maintaining huge armies of the modern European type 
on the voluntary system would be entirely prohibitive, and those 
nations which have adopted the allgemeine Wehrpflicht have 



done so with full cognizance of the evil as well as of the good 
points of the system. 

The chief of these evils is the doubtful element which exists in 
all such armies. Under the merciless discipline of the old regime 
the most unwilling men feared their officers more than the 
enemy. Modern short service, however, demands the good-will 
of all ranks and may fail altogether to make recalcitrants into 
good soldiers, and it may be taken for granted that every 
conscript army contains many men who cannot be induced to 
fight. Herein lies the justification of the principle of " masses," 
and of reduced colour-service; by drawing into the ranks the 
maximum number of men, the government has an eventual 
residuum of the bravest men in the nation left in the ranks. 
What has been said of the officers of these armies cannot be 
applied to the non-commissioned officers. Their promotion is 
necessarily rapid, and the field of selection is restricted to those 
men who are willing to re-engage, i.e. to serve beyond their 
compulsory term of two or three years. Many men do so to 
avoid the struggles of civil life, and such " fugitive and cloistered 
virtue " scarcely fosters the moral strength required for com- 
mand. As the best men return to civil Hfe, there is no choice 
but to promote inferior men, and the latter, when invested 
with authority, not infrequently abuse it. Indeed in some armies 
the soldier regards his officer chiefly as his protector from the 
rapacity or cruelty of his sergeant or corporal. A true short- 
service army is almost incapable of being employed on peace 
service abroad; quite apart from other considerations, the cost 
of conveying to and from home annually one-third or one-half 
of the troops would be prohibitive. If, as must be the case, a 
professional force is maintained for oversea service many men 
would join it who would otherwise be serving as non-com- 
missioned officers at home and the prevailing difficulty would 
thus be enhanced. When colonial defence calls for relatively 
large numbers of men, i.e. an army, home resources are severely 
strained. 

41. Conscription in the proper sense, i.e. selection by lot of a 
proportion of the able-bodied manhood of a country, is now 
rarely practised. The obvious unfairness of selection by lot 
has always had the result of admitting substitutes procured by 
those on whom the lot has fallen; hence the poorer classes are 
unduly burdened with the defence of the country, while the rich 
escape with a money payment. In practice, conscription in- 
variably produces a professional long-service army in which each 
soldier is paid to discharge the obligations of several successive 
conscripts. Such an army is therefore a voluntary long-service 
army in the main, plus a proportion of the unwilling men found 
in every forced levy. The gravest disadvantage is, however, the 
fact that the bulk of the nation has not been through the regular 
army at all; it is almost impossible to maintain a large and costly 
standing army and at the same time to give a full training to 
auxiliary forces. The difference between a " national guard " 
such as that of the siege of Paris in 1870-71 and a Landwehr 
produced under the German system, was very wide. Regarded 
as a compromise between universal and voluntary service, 
conscription still maintains a precarious existence in Europe. 
As the cardinal principle of recruiting armies, it is completely 
obsolete. 

42. Voluntary Service. — Existing voluntary armies have 
usually developed from armies of the old regime, and seem to 
owe their continued existence either to the fact that only com- 
paratively small armaments are maintained in peace, other and 
larger armies being specially recruited during a war (a modi- 
fication of. the " enlistment system "), or to the necessities 
of garrisoning colonial empires. The military advantages and 
disadvantages of voluntary service are naturally the faults and 
merits of the opposite system. The voluntary army is available 
for general service. It includes few unwilling soldiers, and its 
resultant advantage over an army of the ordinary type has been 
stated to be as high as 30 %. At all events, we need only examine 
military history to find that with conscript armies wholesale 
shirking is far from unknown. That loss from this cause does 
not paralyse queries as it paralysed those of the 18th century.



ARMY 



605 



is due to the fact that such fugitives do not desert to the enemy, 
but reappear in the ranks of their own side; it must not there- 
fore be assumed that men have become braver because the 
" missing " are not so numerous. In colonial and savage warfare 
the superior personal qualities of the voluntary soldier often 
count for more than skill on the part of the officers. These' 
would be diminished by shortening the time of service, and this 
fact, with the expense of transport, entails that a reasonably 
long period must be spent with the colours. On the other hand, 
the provision of the large armies of modern warfare requires 
the maintenance of a reserve, and no reserve is possible if the 
whole period for which men will enlist is spent with the colours. 
The demand for long service in the individual, and for trained 
men in the aggregate, thus produces a compromise. The prin- 
ciple of long service, i.e. ten years or more with the colours, is 
not applicable to the needs of the modern grande guerre; it gives 
neither great initial strength nor great reserves. The force thus 
produced is costly and not lightly to be risked; it affords rela- 
tively little opportunity for the training of officers, and tends to 
become a class apart from the rest of the population. On the 
other hand, such a force is the best possible army for foreign 
and colonial service. A state therefore which relies on voluntary 
enlistment for its forces at home and abroad, must either keep an 
army which is adaptable to both functions or maintain a separate 
service for each. 

In a state where relatively small armaments are maintained 
in peace, voluntary armies are infinitely superior to any that 
could be obtained under any system of compulsion. The state 
can afford to give a good wage, and can therefore choose its 
recruits carefully. It can thus have either a few incomparable 
veteran soldiers (long-service), or a fairly large number of men 
of superior physique and intelligence, who have received an 
adequate short-service training. Even the youngest of such 
men are capable of good service, while the veterans are probably 
better soldiers than any to be found in conscript armies. This 
is, however, a special case. The raw material of any but a 
small voluntary army usually tends to be drawn from inferior 
sources; the cost of a larger force, paid the full wages of skilled 
labourers, would be very great, and numbers commensurate 
with those of an army of the other model could only be obtained 
at an exorbitant price. The short-service principle is therefore 
accepted. Here, however, as recruiting depends upon the 
good-will of the people, it is impossible to work the soldiers with 
any degree of rigour. Hence the voluntary soldier must serve 
longer than a conscript in order to attain the same proficiency. 
The reserve is thus weakened, and the total trained regular 
force diminished. Moreover, as fewer recruits are required 
annually, there is less work for the officers to do. In the par- 
ticular case of Great Britain it is practically certain that in future, 
reliance will be placed upon the auxiliary forces and the civil 
population for the provision of the enormous reserves required 
in a great war; this course is, however, only feasible in the case 
of an insular nation which has time to collect its strength for 
the final and decisive blow overseas. The application of the 
same principle to a continental military power depends on the 
capacity for stern and unflagging resistance displayed by the 
corps de couverture charged with the duty of gaining the time 
necessary for the development and concentration of the national 
masses. In Great Britain (except in the case of a surprise 
invasion) the place of this corps would be taken by " command 
of the sea." Abroad, the spirit of the exposed regiments them- 
selves furnishes the only guarantee, and this can hardly be 
calculated with sufficient certainty, under modern conditions, 
to justify the adoption of this new " enlistment system." Volun- 
tary service, therefore, with all its intrinsic merits, is only 
applicable to the conditions of a great war when the war reserve 
can be trained ad hoc. 

43. The militia idea (see Militia) has been applied most com- 
pletely in Switzerland, which has no regulararmy, but trainsalmost 
the whole nation as a militia. The system, with many serious 
disadvantages, has the great merit that the maximum number 
of men receives a certain amount of training at a minimum cost 



both to the state and to the individual. Mention should also be 
made of the system of augmenting the national forces by recruiting 
" foreign legions." This is, of course, a relic of the Werbe-system; 
it was practised habitually by the British governments of the 
18th and early 10th centuries. " Hessians " figured conspicu- 
ously in the British armies in the American War of Independence, 
and the " King's German Legion " was only the best and most 
famous of many foreign corps in the service of George III. 
during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. A new German 
Legion was raised during the Crimean War, but the almost 
universal adoption of the Krumper system has naturally put an 
end to the old method, for all the best recruits are now accounted 
for in the service of their own countries. 

Army Organization 

44. Arms of the Service. — Organization into " arms " is pro- 
duced by the multiplicity of the weapons used, their functions 
and their limitations. The " three arms " — a term universally 
applied to infantry (q.v.), cavalry (q.v.) and artillery (q.v.) — 
coexist owing to the fact that each can undertake functions 
which the others cannot properly fulfil. Thus cavalry can close 
with an enemy at the quickest pace, infantry can work in difficult 
ground, and artillery is effective at great ranges. Infantry 
indeed, having the power of engaging both at close quarters and 
at a distance, constitutes me chief part of a fighting force. 
Other " arms," such as mounted infantry, cyclists, engineers, &c, 
are again differentiated from the three chief arms by their 
proper functions. In deciding upon the establishment in peace, 
or the composition of a force for war, it is therefore necessary 
to settle beforehand the relative importance of these functions 
in carrying out the work in hand. Thus an army operating in 
Essex would be unusually strong in infantry, one on Salisbury 
Plain would possess a great number of guns, and an army 
operating on the South African veldt would consist very largely 
of mounted men. The normal European war has, however, 
naturally been taken as the basis upon which the relative 
proportions of the three arms are calculated. At the battle of 
Kolin (1757) the cavalry was more than half as strong as the 
infantry engaged. At Borodino (1812) there were 39 cavalry 
to 100 of other arms, and 5 guns per 1000 men. In 1870 the 
Germans had at the outset 7 cavalrymen to every 100 men of 
other arms, the French 10. As for guns, the German artillery 
had 3, the French 3^ per 1000 men. In more modern times the 
proportions have undergone some alteration, the artillery having 
been increased, and the cavalry brought nearer to the Napoleonic 
standard. Thus the relative proportions, in peace time, now 
stand at 5 or 6 guns per 1000 men, and 16 cavalry soldiers 
to 100 men of other arms. It must be borne in mind that cavalry 
and artillery are maintained in peace at a higher effective than 
infantry, the strength of the latter being much inflated in war, 
while cavalry and artillery are not easily extemporized. Thus 
in the Manchurian campaign these proportions were very different. 
The Russian army on the eve of the battle of Mukden (20th of 
February 1905) consisted of 370 battalions, 142 squadrons and 
1 S3 field batteries (1200 guns), with, in addition, over 200 heavy 
guns. The strength of this force, which was organized in three 
armies, was about 300,000 infantry and 18,000 cavalry and 
Cossacks, with 3J guns per 1000 men of other arms. The 
Japanese armies consisted of 300,000 infantry, 11,000 cavalry, 
900 field and 170 heavy guns, the proportion of field artillery 
being i\ guns per 1000 men. 

It is perhaps not superfluous to mention that all the smaller 
units in a modern army consist of one arm only. Formerly 
several dissimilar weapons were combined in the same unit. 
The knight with his four or five variously armed retainers 
constituted an example of this method of organization, which 
slowly died out as weapons became more uniform and their 
functions better defined. 

45. Command. — The first essential of a good organization is 
to ensure that each member of the organized body, in his own 
sphere of action, should contribute his share to the achievement 
of the common ohject. Further, it is entirely beyond the power 



6o6 



ARMY 



of one man, or of a few, to control every action and provide 
for every want of a great number of individuals. The modern 
system of command, therefore, provides for a system of grades, 
in which, theoretically, officers of each grade control a group 
of the next lower units. A lieutenant-colonel, for instance, 
may be in charge of a group of eight companies, each of which 
is under a captain. In practice, all armies are permanently 
organized on these lines, up to the colonel's or lieutenant-colonel's 
command, and most of them are permanently divided into various 
higher units under general officers, the brigade, division and 
army corps. The almost invariable practice is to organize 
infantry into companies, battalions and regiments. Cavalry is 
divided into troops, squadrons and regiments. Artillery is 
organized in batteries, these being usually grouped in various 
ways. The other arms and departments are subdivided in the 
same general way. The commands of general officers are the 
brigade of infantry, cavalry, and in some cases artillery, the 
division of two or more infantry brigades arid a force of artillery 
and mounted troops, or of cavalry and horse artillery, and the 
army corps of two or more divisions and " corps troops." Armies 
of several corps, and groups of armies are also formed. 

46. A brigade is the command of a brigadier or major-general, 
or of a colonel. It consists almost invariably of one arm only. 
In armies of the old regime it was not usual to assign troops of 
all arms to the subordinate generftls. Hence the brigade is a 
much older form of organization than the division of all arms, 
and in fact dates from the 16th century. The, infantry brigade 
consists, in the British service, of the brigadier and his staff, 
four battalions of infantry, and adminstrative and medical 
units, the combatant strength being about 4000 men. In 
Germany and France the brigade is composed of the staff, and 
two regiments (6 battalions) with a total of over 6000 combatants 
at war strength. The cavalry brigade is sometimes formed of 
three, sometimes of two regiments; the number of squadrons 
to a regiment on service is usually four, exceptionally three, 
and rarely five and six. The " brigade " of artillery in Great 
Britain is a lieutenant-colonel's command, and the term here 
corresponds to the Abtheihmg of the German, and the groupe of 
the French armies (see Artillery). In Germany and France, 
however, an artillery brigade consists of two or more regiments, 
or twelve batteries at least, under the command of an artillery 
general officer. 

47. A division is an organization containing troops of all 
arms. Since the virtual abolition of the " corps artillery " 
(see Artillery), the force of field artillery forming part of an 
infantry division is sometimes as high as 72 guns (Germany); 
in Great Britain the augmented division of 1906 has 54 field 
guns, 12 field howitzers, and 4 heavy guns, a fotal of 70. The 
term " infantry " division is, in strictness, no longer applicable, 
since such a unit is a miniature army corps of infantry, artillery 
and cavalry, with the necessary services for the supply of 
ammunition, food and forage, and for the care of the sick and 
wounded. A more exact title would be " army " division. In 
general it is composed, so far as combatants 'are concerned, 
of the divisional commander and his staff, two or more infantry 
brigades, a number of batteries of field artillery forming a regi- 
ment, brigade or group, a small force, varying from a squadron 
to a regiment, of cavalry (divisional cavalry) , with some engineers. 
The force of the old British division (1905) may be taken, on an 
average, as 10,000 men, increased in the 1906 reorganization 
to about 15,000 combatants. In other armies the fighting force 
of the division amounts to rather more than 14,000. The 
cavalry division (see Cavalry) is composed of the staff, two or 
three cavalry brigades, horse artillery, with perhaps mounted 
infantry, cyclists, or even light infantry in addition. In many, 
if not most, armies cavalry divisions are formed only in war. 
In the field the cavalry division is usually an independent unit 
with its own commander and staff. " Cavalry corps " of several 
divisions have very rarely been formed in the past, a division 
having been regarded as the largest unit capable of being led 
by one man. There is, however, a growing tendency in favour 
of the corps organization, at any rate in war. 



4&.Army Corps. — The " corps " of the 18th century was simply 
a large detachment, more or less complete in itself, organized 
for some particular purpose (e.g. to cover a siege), and placed 
for the time being under some general officer other than the chief 
commander. The modern army corps is a development from 
' the division of all arms, which originated in the French Revolu- 
tionary wars. It is a unit of considerable strength, furnished 
with the due proportion of troops of all arms and of the auxiliary 
and medical services, and permanently placed under the com- 
mand of one general. The corps organization (though a corps 
d'armee was often spoken of as an armee) was used in Napoleon's 
army in all the campaigns of the Empire. It may be mentioned, 
as a curious feature of Napoleon's methods, that he invariably 
constituted each corps d'armee of a different strength, so that the 
enemy would not be able to estimate his force by the simple 
process of counting the corps flags which marked the marshals' 
headquarters. Thus in 181 2 he constituted one corps of 72,000 
men, while another had but 18,000. After the fall of Napoleon 
a further advance was made. The adoption of universal service 
amongst the great military nations brought in its train the 
territorial organization, and the corps, representing a large 
district, soon became a unit of peace formation. For the smooth 
working of the new military system it was essential that the 
framework of the war army should exist in pe&ce. The Prussians 
were the first to bring the system to perfection; long before 1866 
Prussia was permanently divided into army corps districts, 
all the troops of the III. army corps being Brandenburgers; 
all those of the VI. Silesians, and so on, though political reasons 
required, and to some extent still require, modifications of this 
principle in dealing with annexed territory (e.g. Hanover and 
Alsace-Lorraine). The events of 1866 and of 1870-71 caused 
the almost universal adoption of the army corps regional system. 
In the case of the British army, operating as it usually did in 
minor wars, and rarely having more than sixty or seventy 
thousand men on one theatre even in continental wars, there 
was less need of so large a unit as the corps. Not only was a 
British army small in numbers, but it preserved high traditions 
of discipline, and was sufficiently well trained to be susceptible 
as a unit to the impulse given by one man. Even where the 
term " corps " does appear in Peninsular annals, the implication 
is of a corps in the old sense of a grand detachment. Neither 
cavalry nor artillery was assigned to any of the British " corps " 
at Waterloo. 

49. Constitution of the Army Corps. — In 1870-71 the III. 
German army corps (with which compare Marshal Davout's 
ordre de baiaille above) consisted of the following combatant 
units: (a) staff; (b) two infantry divisions (4 brigades, 8 
regiments or 24 battalions), with, in each division, a cavalry 
regiment, 4 batteries of artillery or 24 guns, and engineers; 
(c) corps troops, artillery (6 field batteries), pioneer battalion 
(engineers), train battalion (supply and transport). A rifle 
battalion was attached to one of the divisions. 

This ordre de bataille was followed more or less generally by all 
countries up to the most modern times, but between 1890 and 
1902 came a very considerable change in the point of view from 
which the corps was regarded as a fighting unit. This change was 
expressed in the abolition of the corps artillery. Formerly the 
corps commander controlled the greater part of the field artillery, 
as well as troops of other arms; at the present time he has a 
mere handful of troops. Unless battalions are taken from the 
divisions to form a corps reserve, the direct influence of the corps 
organization on the battle is due almost solely to the fact that 
the commander has at his disposal the special natures of artillery 
and also some horse artillery. Thus the (augmented) division 
is regarded by many as the fighting unit of the 20th, as the corps 
was that of the 19th century. In Europe there is even a tendency 
to substitute the ancient phrase " reserve artillery " for " corps 
artillery," showing that the role to be played by the corps 
batteries is subordinated to the queries of the masses of divi-
sional artillery, the whole being subject, of course, to the technical 
supervision of the artillery general officer who accompanies 
the corps headquarters. Thus limited, the army corps has now 



ARMY 



607 



come to consist of the staff, two or more divisions, the corps or 
reserve artillery (of special batteries), a small force of "corps" 
cavalry, and various technical and departmental troops. The 
cavalry is never very numerous, owing to the demands of the 
independent cavalry divisions on the one hand and those of the 
divisional cavalry on the other. The engineers of an army corps 
include telegraph, balloon and pontoon units. Attached to the 
corps are reserves of munitions and supplies in ammunition 
columns, field parks, supply parks, &c. The term and the organ- 
ization were discontinued in England in 1906, on the augmenta- 
tion of the divisions and the assignment of certain former 
"corps troops" to the direct control of the army commanders. 
It should be noticed that the Japanese, who had no corps 
organization during the war of 1904-5, afterwards increased 
the strength of their divisions from 15,000 to 20,000; the 
augmented " division," with the above peace strength, becomes 
to all intents and purposes a corps, and the generals commanding 
divisions were in 1906 given the title of generals-in-chief. 

50. Army. — The term " army " is applied, in war time, to any 
command of several army corps, or even of several divisions, 
operating under the orders of one commander-in-chief. The 
army in this sense (distinguished by a number or by a special 
title) varies, therefore, with circumstances. In the American 
Civil War, the Army of the Ohio consisted in 1864 only of the 
army staff and the XXIII. corps. At the other extreme we find 
that the German II. Army in 1870 consisted of seven army corps 
and two cavalry divisions, and the III. Army of six army corps 
and two cavalry divisions. The term " army " in this sense is 
therefore very elastic in its application, but it is generally held, 
that large groups of corps operating in one theatre of war should 
be subdivided into armies, and that the strength of an army 
should not exceed about 150,000 men, if indeed this figure is 
reached at all. This again depends upon circumstances. It 
might be advisable to divide a force of five corps into two armies, 
or on the other hand it might be impossible to find suitable 
leaders for more than two armies when half a million men were 
present for duty. In France, organization has been carried a 
step further. The bulk of the national forces is, in case of war, : 
organized into a " group of armies " under a commander, usually, i 
though incorrectly, called the generalissimo. This office, of 
course, does not exist in peace, but the insignia, the distinctive 
marks of the headquarters flag, &c, are stated in official publica- 
tions, and the names of the generalissimo and of his chief of staff 
are known. Under the generalissimo would be four or five army 
commanders, each with three or four army corps under him. 
Independent of this " group of armies " there would be other and 
minor " armies " where required. 

51. Chief Command. — The leading of the " group of armies " 
referred to above does not, in France, imply the supreme com- 
mand, which would be exercised by the minister of war in Paris. 
The German system, on the other hand, is based upon the leader- 
ship of the national forces by the sovereign in person, and even 
though the headquarters of the " supreme war lord " (fiber ste 
Kriegsherr) are actually in the field in one theatre of queries,
he directs the movements of the German armies in all quarters. 
Similarly, in 1864, General Grant accompanied and controlled 
as a " group " the Armies of the Potomac and the James, 
supervising at the same time the queries of other groups and
armies. In the same campaign a subordinate general, Sherman, 
commanded a " group " consisting of the Armies of the Tennessee, 
the Cumberland and the Ohio. The question as to whether the 
supreme command and the command of the principal group of 
armies should be in the same hands is very difficult of solution. 
In practice, the method adopted in each case usually grows out 
of the military and political conditions. The advantage of the 
German method is that the supreme commander is in actual 
contact with the troops, and can therefore form an accurate 
judgment of their powers. Under these conditions the risk of 
having cabinet strategy forced upon the generals is at its 
minimum, and more especially so if the supreme commander is 
the head of the state. On the other hand, his judgment is very 
liable to be influenced unduly by facts, coming under his own 



notice, which may in reality have no more than a local signifi- 
cance. Further, the supreme commander is at the mercy of 
distant subordinates to a far greater degree than he would be if 
free to go from one army to another. Thus, in 1870 the king 
of Prussia's headquarters before Paris were subjected to such 
pressure from subordinate army commanders that on several 
occasions selected staff-officers had to be sent to examine, for 
the king's private information, the real state of things at the 
front. The conduct of queries by one group commander in
the campaign of 1864 seemed, at a distance, so eccentric and 
dangerous that General Grant actually left his own group of 
armies and went in person to take over command at the 
threatened point. Balanced judgment is thus often impossible 
unless the supreme command is independent of, and in a position 
to exercise general supervision over, each and every group or 
army. At the other end of the scale is the system of command 
employed by the Turks in 1877, in which four armies, three of 
them being actually on the same theatre of war, were directed 
from Constantinople. This system may be condemned un- 
reservedly. It is recognized that, once the armies on either side 
have become seriously engaged, a commander-in-chief on the 
spot must direct them. Thus in 1904, while the Japanese and 
Russian armies were under the supreme command of their 
respective sovereigns, General Kuropatkin and Marshal Oya.ma 
personally commanded the chief groups of armies in the field. 
This is substantially the same as the system of the French army. 
It is therefore permissible to regard the system pursued by the 
Germans in 1870, and by the Union government in 1864, more 
as suited to special circumstances than as a general rule. As has 
been said above, the special feature of the German system of 
command is the personal leadership of the German emperor, and 
this brings the student at once to the consideration of another 
important part of the " superior leading." 

52. The Chief of the General Staff 13, as his title implies, the 
chief staff officer of the service, and as such, he has duties of the 
highest possible importance, both in peace and war. For the 
general subject of staff duties see Staff. Here we are concerned 
only with the peculiar position of the chief of staff under a system 
in which the sovereign is the actual commander-in-chief. It is 
obvious in the first place that the sovereign may not be a great 
soldier, fitted by mental gifts, training and character to be placed 
at the head of an army of, perhaps, a million men. Allowing 
that it is imperative that, whatever he may be in himself, the 
sovereign should ex officio command the armies, it is easy to see 
that the ablest general in these armies must be selected to act as 
his adviser, irrespective of rank, and seniority. This officer must 
therefore be assigned to a station beyond that of his army rank, 
and his orders are in fact those of the sovereign himself. Nor is it 
sufficient that he should occupy an unofficial position as adviser, 
or ad latus. If he were no more than this, the sovereign could act 
without his adviser being even aware of the action taken. As the 
staff is the machinery for the transmission of orders and des- 
patches, all orders of the commander-in-chief are signed by the 
chief of staff as a matter of course, and this position is therefore 
that in which the adviser has the necessary influence. The 
relations between the sovereign and his chief military adviser 
are thus of the first importance to the smooth working of the 
great military machine, and never have the possibilities of this 
apparently strange system been more fully exploited than by 
King William and his chief of staff von Moltke in 1866 and in 
1870-71. It is not true to say that the king was the mere 
figurehead of the German armies, or that Moltke was the real 
commander-in-chief. Those who have said this forget that the 
sole responsibility for the consequences of every order lay with the 
king, and that it is precisely the fear of this responsibilty that 
ha^ made so many brilliant subordinates fail when in chief 
command. The characters of the two men supplemented each 
other, as also in the case of Bliicher and Gneisenau and that of 
Radetzky and Hess. Under these circumstances, the German 
system of command works, on the whole, smoothly. Matters 
would, however, be different if either of the two officers failed to 
realize their mutual interdependence, and the system is in any 



6o8 



ARMY 



case only required when the self-sufficing great soldier is not 
available for the chief executive command. 

53. First and Second Lines.—Thz organization into arms and 
units is of course maintained in peace as well as for war. Military 
forces are further organized, in peace, into active and reserve 
troops, first and second lines, &c, according to the power pos- 
sessed by the executive over the men. Broadly speaking, the 
latter fall into three classes, regulars, auxiliary forces and 
irregular troops. The regulars or active troops are usually 
liable to serve at all times and in any country to which they 
may be sent. Auxiliary forces may be defined as all troops 
which undergo actual military training without being constantly 
under arms, and in Great Britain these were until 1908. repre- 
sented by the Militia, the Yeomanry and the Volunteers, and 
now by the Territorial Force and the Special Reserve. In a 
country in which recruiting is by voluntary enlistment the 
classification is, of course, very different Lorn that prevailing in 
a conscript army. The various " lines " are usually composed 
of separate organizations; the men are recruited upon different 
engagements, and receive a varying amount of training. Of 
the men not permanently embodied, only the reserve of the 
active army has actually served a continuous term with the 
colours. Other troops, called by various appellations, of which 
" militia " may be taken as generic, go through their military 
training at intervals. The general lines of army organization 
in the case of a country recruiting by universal service are as 
follows: — The male population is divided into classes, by ages, 
and the total period of liability to service is usually about 
25 years. Thus at any given time, assuming two years' colour- 
service, the men of 20 and 21 years of age would constitute the 
active army serving with the colours, those of, say, 22 and 23, 
the reserve. The Landwehr or second line army would consist 
of all men who had been through the active army and were now 
aged 24 to 36. The third line would similarly consist of men 
whose ages were between 36 and 44. Assuming the same annual 
levy, the active army would consist of 200,000 men, its reserve 
200,000, the second line of 1,300,000, and the third of 800,000. 
Thus of 2,500,000 men liable to, and trained for, military service, 
200,000 only would be under arms at any given time. The 
simple system here outlined is of course modified and compli- 
cated in practice owing to re-engagements by non-commissioned 
officers, the speedy dismissal to the reserve of intelligent and 
educated men, &c. 

54. War Reserves. — In war, the reserves increase the field 
armies to 400,000 men, the whole or part of the second line is 
called up and formed into auxiliary regiments, brigades and 
divisions, and in case of necessity the third line is also called 
upon, though usually this is only in the last resort and for home 
defence only. The proportion of reservists to men with the 
colours varies of course with the length of service. Thus in 
France or Germany, with two years' service in force, half of the 
rank and file of a unit in war would be men recalled from civil 
life. The true military value of reservists is often questioned, 
and under certain circumstances it is probable that units would 
take the field at peace strength without waiting for their reserv- 
ists. The frontier guards of the continental military powers, 
which are expected to move at the earliest possible moment 
after hostilities have begun, are maintained at a higher effective 
than other units, and do not depend to any great extent on 
receiving reservists. The peace footing of cavalry and artillery 
units is similarly maintained at an artificial level. An operation 
of the nature of a coup de main would in any case be carried 
out by the troops available at the moment, however large might 
be the force required — twenty weak battalions would, in fact, 
be employed instead of ten strong ones. There is another class 
of troops, which may be called depot troops. These consist of 
officers and men left behind when the active corps completed 
with reserves takes the field, and they have (a) to furnish drafts 
for the front — and (b) to form a nucleus upon which all later 
formations are built up. The troops of the second line undertake 
minor work, such as guarding railways, and also furnish drafts 
for the field army. Later, when they have been for some time 



under arms, the second line troops are often employed by them- 
selves in first line. A year's training under war conditions 
should bring such troops to the highest efficiency. As for 
irregulars, they have real military value only when the various 
permanent establishments do not take up the whole fighting 
strength of the nation, and thus states having universal service 
armies do not, as a rule, contemplate the employment of com- 
batants other than those shown on the peace rolls. The status 
of irregulars is ill defined, but it is practically agreed that com- 
batants, over whose conduct the military authorities have no 
disciplinary power, should be denied the privileges of recognized 
soldiers, and put to death if captured. So drastic a procedure 
is naturally open to abuse and is not always expedient. Still, 
it is perfectly right that the same man shall not be allowed, 
for example, to shoot a sentry at one moment, and to claim 
the privileges of a harmless civilian at the next. The division 
into first, second and third lines follows generally from the above. 
The first line troops, in a conscript army, are the " active army " 
or regulars, permanently under arms in peace time, and its 
reserves, which are used on the outbreak of war to complete 
the existing units to full strength. The German terms Landwehr 
and Landsturm are often applied to armies of the second and the 
third lines. 

55. The military characteristics of the various types of regular 
troops have been dealt with in considering the advantages and 
disadvantages of the several forms of recruiting. It only re- 
mains to give some indication of the advantages which such 
forces (irrespective of their time of service) possess over troops 
which only come up for training at intervals. Physically, the 
men with the colours are always superior to the rest, owing to 
their constant exercise and the regularity and order under 
which they live; as soldiers, they are more under the control of 
their officers, who are their leaders in daily life, in closer touch 
with army methods and discipline, and, as regards their formal 
training, they possess infinitely greater power of strategic and 
tactical manoeuvre. Their steadiness under fire is of course 
more to be relied upon than that of other troops. Wellington, 
speaking of the contrast between old and young soldiers 
(regulars), was of Opinion that the chief difference lay in the 
greater hardiness, power of endurance, and general campaigning 
qualities given by experience. This is of course more than ever 
true in respect of regular and auxiliary troops, as was strikingly 
demonstrated in the Spanish-American War. On the whole, it is 
true to say that only a regular army can endure defeat without 
dissolution, and that volunteers, reservists or militiamen fresh 
from civil life may win a victory but cannot make the fullest 
use of it when won. At the same time, when they have been 
through one or two arduous campaigns, raw troops become to 
all intents and purposes equal to any regulars. On the other 
hand, the greatest military virtue of auxiliary forces is their 
enthusiasm. With this quality were won the great victories of 
1792-94 in France, those of 1813 in Germany, and the beginnings 
of Italian unity at Calatafimi and Palermo. The earlier days of 
the American Civil War witnessed desperate fighting, of which 
Shiloh is the best example, between armies which had had but 
the slightest military training. In the same war the first battle 
of Bull Run illustrated what has been said above as to the 
weaknesses of unprofessional armies. Both sides, raw and un- 
trained, fought for a long time with the greatest determination, 
after which the defeated army was completely dissolved in rout 
and the victors quite unable to pursue. So far it is the relative 
military value of the professional soldier and the citizen-soldier 
that has been reviewed. A continental army of the French Or 
German stamp is differently constituted. It is, first of all, clear 
that the drilled citizen-soldier combines the qualities of training 
and enthusiasm. From this it follows that a hostile "feeling " 
as well as a hostile " view " must animate such an army if it is 
to do good service. If a modern " nation in arms " is engaged 
in a purely dynastic quarrel against a professional army of 
inferior strength, the result will probably be victory for the latter. 
But the active army of France or Germany constitutes but a 
small part of the " nation in arms," and the army for war is 



ARMY 



609 



composed in addition of men who have at some period in the 
past gone through a regular training. Herein lies the difference 
between continental and British auxiliary forces. In the French 
army, an ex-soldier during his ten years of reserve service was 
by the law of 1905 only liable for two months' training, and for 
the rest of his military career for two weeks' service only. The 
further reduction of this liability was proposed in 1907 and led 
to much controversy. The question of the value of auxiliary 
forces, then, as between the continous work of, say, English 
territorials, and the permanent though dwindling influence of 
an original period of active soldiering, is one of considerable 
importance. It is largely decided in any given case by the 
average age of the men in the ranks. 

56. The transfer of troops from the state of peace to that of 
war is called mobilization. This is, of course, a matter which 
primarily depends on good administration, and its minutest 
details are in all states laid down beforehand. Reservists have 
to be summoned, and, on arrival, to be clothed and equipped 
out of stores maintained in peace. Officers and men of the regular 
army on leave have to be recalled, the whole medically examined 
for physical fitness to serve, and a thousand details have to be 
worked out before the unit is ready to move to its concentration 
station. The concentration and the strategic deployment are, 
of course, dependent upon the circumstances of each war, and the 
peace organization ceases to be applicable. But throughout a 
war the depots at home, the recruiting districts of second-line 
troops, and above all the various arsenals, manufactories and 
offices controlled by the war department are continually at work 
in maintaining the troops in the field at proper strength and 
effectiveness. 

57. Territorial System. — The feudal system was of course a 
territorial system in principle. Indeed, as has been shown above, 
a feudal army was chiefly at fault owing to the dislocation of 
the various levies. Concentration was equally the characteristic 
of the professional armies which succeeded those of feudalism, 
and only such militia forces as remained in existence preserved 
a local character. The origin of territorial recruiting for first- 
line troops is to be found in the " cantonal " system, said to have 
been introduced by Louis XIV., but brought to the greatest 
perfection in Prussia under Frederick William I. But long 
service and the absence of a reserve vitiated the system in 
practice, since losses had to be made good by general recruiting, 
and even the French Revolution may hardly be said to have 
produced the territorial system as we understand it to-day. 
It was only in the deliberate preparation of the Prussian army 
on short-service lines that we find the beginning of the " terri- 
torial system of dislocation and command. " This is so intimately 
connected with the general system of organization that it cannot 
be considered merely as a method of recruiting by districts. 
It may be defined as a system whereby, for purposes of command 
in peace, recruiting, and of organization generally, the country is 
divided into districts, which are again divided and subdivided 
as may be required. In a country in which universal service 
prevails, an army corps district is divided into divisional districts, 
these being made up of brigade and of regimental districts. Each 
of these units recruits, and is in peace usually stationed, in its 
own area; the artillery, cavalry and special arms are recruited 
for the corps throughout the whole allotted area, and stationed 
at various points within the same. Thus in the German army 
the III. army corps is composed entirely of Brandenburgers. 
The infantry of the corps is stationed in ten towns, the cavalry 
in four and the artillery in five. In countries which adhere to 
voluntary recruiting, the system, depending as it does on the 
calculable certainty of recruiting, is not so fully developed, but 
in Great Britain the auxiliary forces have been reorganized in 
divisions of all arms on a strictly territorial basis. The advantage 
of the system as carried into effect in Germany is obvious. 
Training is carried out with a minimum of friction and expense, 
as each unit has an ample area for training. Whilst the brigadiers 
can exercise general control over the colonels, and the divisional 
generals over the brigadiers, there is little undue interference 
of superior authority in the work of each grade, and the men, 



if soldiers by compulsion, at any rate are serving close to their 
own homes. Most of the reservists required on mobilization 
reside within a few miles of their barracks. Living in the midst 
of the civil population, the troops do not tend to become a class 
apart. Small garrisons are not, as foimerly, allowed to stagnate, 
since modern communications make supervision easy. Further, 
it must be borne in mind that the essence of the system is the 
organizationand training for war of the whole military population. 
Now so great a mass of men could not be administered except 
through this decentralization of authority, and the corollary 
of short service universally applied is the full territorial system, 
in which the whole enrolled strength of the district is subjected 
to the authority of the district commander. Practice, however, 
falls short of theory, and the dangers of drawing whole units 
from disaffected or unmilitary districts are often foreseen and 
discounted by distributing the recruits, non-regionally, amongst 
more or less distant regiments. 

58. Army Administration. — The existing systems of command 
and organization, being usually based upon purely military 
considerations, have thus much, indeed almost all, in common. 
Administration differs from them in one important respect. 
While the methods of command and organization are the result 
of the accumulated experience of many armies through many 
hundred years, the central administration in each case is the 
product of the historical evolution of the particular country, 
and is dependent upon forms of government, constitutions 
and political parties. Thus France, after 1870, remodelled the 
organization of her forces in accordance with the methods which 
were presumed to have given Germany the victory, but the head- 
quarters staff at Paris is very different in all branches from that 
of Berlin. Great Britain adopted German tactics, and to some 
extent even uniform, but the Army Council has no counterpart 
in the administration of the German emperor's forces. 

The first point for consideration, therefore, is, what is the 
ultimate, and what is the proximate, authority supervising the 
administration? The former is, in most countries, the people 
or its representatives in parliament, for it is in their power to 
stop supplies, and without money the whole military fabric must 
crumble. The constitutional chief of the army is the sovereign, 
or, in republics, the president, but in most countries the direct 
control of army matters by the representatives of the people 
extends over all affairs into which the well-being of the civil 
population, the expenditure of money, alleged miscarriages of 
military justice, &c, enter, and it is not unusual to find grand 
strategy, and even the technical deficiencies of a field-gun or 
rifle, the subject of interpellation and debate. The peculiar 
influence of the sovereign is in what may be termed patronage 
(that is, the selection of officers to fill important positions and 
the general supervision of the officer-corps), and in the fact that 
loyalty is the foundation of the discipline and soldierly honour 
which it is the task of the officers to inculate into their men. In 
all cases the head of the state is ipso facto the head of the army. 
The difference between various systems may then be held to 
depend on the degree of power allowed to or held by him. This 
reacts upon the central administration of the army, and is the 
cause of the differences of system alluded to. For the civil chief 
of the executive is not necessarily a soldier, much less an expert 
and capable soldier; he must, therefore, be provided with technical 
advisers. The chief of the general staff is often the principal 
of these, though in some cases a special commander-in-chief, 
or the minister for war, or, as in France and England, a com- 
mittee or council, has the duty of advising the executive on 
technical matters. 

59. Branches of Administration. — In these circumstances the 
only general principle of army administration common to all 
systems is the division of the labour between two great branches. 
Military administration, in respect of the troops and material 
which it has to control, is divided between the departments 
of the War Office and the General Staff. In the staff work of 
subordinate units, e.g. army corps and divisions, the same classi- 
fication of duties is adopted, " general staff " duties being per- 
formed by one set of officers, " routine staff " duties by another. 

u 



6io 



ARMY 



The work of a General Staff may be taken as consisting in 
preparation for war, and this again, both in Great Britain 
and abroad, consists of military policy in all its branches, staff 
duties in war, the collection of intelligence, mobilization, plans 
of queries and concentration, training, military history
and geography, and the preparation of war regulations. These 
subjects are usually subdivided into four or five groups, each 
of which is dealt with by a separate section of the general staff, 
the actual division of the work, of course, varying in different 
countries. Thus, the second section of the French staff deals 
with " the organization and tactics of foreign armies, study of 
foreign theatres of war, and military missions abroad." A 
War Office is concerned with peace administration and with the 
provision of men and material in war. Under the former cate- 
gory fall such matters as " routine " administration, finance, 
justice, recruiting, promotion of officers (though not always), 
barracks and buildings generally, armament, equipment and 
clothing, &c, in fact all matters not directly relevant to the 
training of the troops for and the employment of the troops in 
war. In war, some of the functions of a war office are suspended, 
but on the other hand the work necessary for the provision of 
men and material to augment the army and to make good its 
losses is vastly increased. In 1870 the minister of war, von 



and the quartermaster-general's branch, which supervises the 
provision and issue of supplies, stores and materiel of all kinds. 
Over and above these, provision has to be made for control 
of all the technical parts of administration, such as artillery 
and engineer services (in Great Britain, this, with a portion of 
the quartermaster-general's department, is under the- master- 
general of the ordnance) , and for military legislation, preparation 
of estimates, &c. These are, of course, special subjects, not 
directly belonging to the general administrative system. It 
is only requisite that the latter should be sufficiently elastic 
to admit of these departments being formed as required. How- 
ever these subordinate offices may be multiplied, the main work 
of the war office is in the two departments of the adjutant- 
general {personnel) and the quartermaster-general {materiel). 
Beyond and wholly distinct from these is the general staff, 
the creation of which is perhaps the most important, con- 
tribution of the past century to the pure science of military 
organization. 

British Army 

60. Prior to the Norman Conquest the armed force of England 
was essentially a national militia. Every freeman was bound to 
bear arms for the defence of the country, or for the maintenance 



Comparative Strength of Various Armies 
(a) Compulsory Service (1906). 





France. 


Germany. 


Russia. 


Austria- 
Hungary. 


Italy. 


{ Annual Contingent for the Colours 

Medically unfit and exempt 

Excused from Service in Peace, able-bodied 

Total of Men becoming liable for Service in 1907 . 


230,000 
90,000 


222,000 
127,000 
291,000 


254,000 
120,000 
606,000 


128,000 

57,000 

285,000 


83,000 
110,000 
122,000 


320,000 


540,000 


980,000 


470,000 


315,000 


Total Permanent Armed Force in Peace 


610,000 
(not includ- 
ing colonial 
troops) 


610,000 


1,226,000 


356,000 


269,000 


First-Line Troops, war-strength (estimated) .... 
Second-Line Troops, war-strength (estimated) .... 
Numbers available in excess of these (estimated) .... 

Total War Resources of all kinds 


1,350,000 

3;000,ooo 

450,000 


1,675,000 
2,275,000 
3,950,000 


2,187,000 
1 ,429,000 
9,384,000 


950,000 
1,450,000 
5,000,000 


800,000 
1,150,000 
1,200,000 


4,800,000 


7,900,000 


13,000,000 


7,400,000 


3,150,000 


Annual Military Expenditure — total 

Annual Military Expenditure — per head of population 
(approximate) 


£27,720,000 
13s. 9d. 


£32,228,000 
10s. 9d. 


£36,080,000 
5s- 3d- 


£15,840,000 
6s. 8d. 


£11,280,000 
6s. 5d. 



(b) Authorized Establishments and Approximate Military Resources of the British Empire (1906-1907). 





British 

Regular 

Army. 


Reserves 

for 

■Regular 

Army. 


Auxiliary 
Forces. 


Native 

Troops 

(Regular, 

Reserve, 

&c). 


Colonial 

Forces 

(various). 


Total. 


■ Great Britain 

Channel Islands, Malta, Bermuda, Colonies and Dependencies . 

India 

Canadian Forces 

Australian Forces (including New Zealand) 

South African Forces 

Totals 


117,000 
65,000 
75,000 


120,000 

■ • 


500,000 

6,000 

30,000 

46,000 

70,000 
(appr.) 
20,000 

(appr.) 


202,000 


30,000 

59,000 

(reserves) 


737,000 
101,000 
307,000 
105,000 

70,000 

20,000 


257,000 


120,000 


672,000 


202,000 


89,000 


1,340,000 



Note. — Ex-soldiers of regular and auxiliary forces, still fit for service, and estimated levees en masse, are not counted. Enlistment 
chiefly voluntary. 

(c) The Regular Army of the United States has a maximum authorized establishment (1906) of 60,000 enlisted men; the Organized 
Militia was at the same date 110,000 strong. Voluntary enlistment throughout. (See United States.) In 1906-1907 the total numbers 
available for a levee en masse were estimated at 13,000,000. 



Roon, accompanied the headquarters in the field, but this 
arrangement did not work well, and will not be employed again. 
The chief duties other than those of the general staff fall into 
two classes, the " routine staff," administration or adjutant- 
general's branch, which deals with all matters affecting personnel, 



of order. To give some organization and training to the levy, 
the several sheriffs had authority to call out the contingents of 
their shires for exercise. The " fyrd," as the levy was named, 
was available for home service only, and could not be moved 
even from its county except in the case of emergency; and it 



BRITISH] 



ARMY 



61 1 



was principally to repel oversea invasions that its services were, 
required. Yet even in those days the necessity of some more 
permanent force was felt, and bodies of paid troops were main- 
tained by the kings at their own cost. Thus Canute and his 
successors, and even some of the great earls kept up a household 
force (hiiscarlcs) . The English army at Hastings consisted of 
the fyrd and the corps of huscarles. 

The English had fought on foot; but the mailed horseman 
had now become the chief factor in war, and the Conqueror 
introduced into England the system of tenure by knight-service 
familiar in Normandy. This was based on the unit of the feudal 
host, the constabularies of ten knights, the Conqueror granting 
lands in return for finding one or more of these units (in the case 
of great barons) or some fraction of them (in the case of lesser 
tenants). The obligation was to provide knights to serve, with 
horse and arms, for forty days in each year at their own charges. 
This obligation could be handed on by sub-enfeoffment through 
a whole series of under-tenants. The system being based, 
not on the duty of personal service, but on the obligation to 
supply one or more knights (or it might be only the fraction of 
a knight), it was early found convenient to commute this for a 
money payment known as " scutage " (see Knight Service and 
Scutage). This money enabled the king to hire mercenaries, 
or pay such of the feudal troops as were willing to serve beyond 
the usual time. From time to time proclamations and statutes 
were issued reminding the holders of knights' fees of their duties; 
but the immediate object was generally to raise money rather 
than to enforce personal service, which became more and more 
rare. The feudal system had not, however, abrogated the old 
Saxon levies, and from these arose two national institutions — 
the posse comilalus, liable to be called out by the sheriff to 
maintain the king's peace, and later the militia (q.v.). The posse 
comitatus, or power of the county, included all males able to bear 
arms, peers and spiritual men excepted; and though primarily 
a police force it was also bound to assist in the defence of the 
country. This levy was organized by the Assize of Arms under 
Henry II. (1181), and subsequently under Edward I. (1285) by 
the so-called " Statute of Winchester," winch determined the 
numbers and description of weapons to be kept by each man 
according to his property, and also provided for their periodical 
inspection. The early Plantagenets made free use of mercenaries. 
But the weakness of the feudal system in England was preparing, 
through the 12th and 13th centuries, a nation in arms absolutely 
unique in the middle ages. The Scottish and Welsh wars were, of 
course, fought by the feudal levy, but this levy was far from 
being the mob of unwilling peasants usual abroad, and from the 
fyrd came the English archers, whose fame was established by 
Edward I.'s wars, and carried to the continent by Edward III. 
Edward III. realized that there was better material to be had 
in his own country than abroad, and the army with which he 
invaded France was an army of Jiational mercenaries, or, more 
simply, of English soldiers. The army at Crecy was composed 
exclusively of English, Welsh and Irish. From the pay list of 
the army at the siege of Calais (1346) it appears that all ranks, 
from the prince of Wales downward, were paid, no attempt being 
made to force even the feudal nobles to serve abroad at their own 
expense. These armies were raised mainly by contracts entered 
into " with some knight or gentleman expert in war, and of great 
revenue and livelihood in the country, to serve the' king in war 
with a number of men." Copies of the indentures executed when 
Henry V. raised his army for the invasion of France in 141 5 are in 
existence. Under these the contracting party agreed to serve the 
king abroad for one year, with a given number of men equipped 
according to agreement, and at a stipulated rate of pay. A 
certain sum was usually paid in advance, and in many cases 
the crown jewels and plate were given in pledge for the rest. 
The profession of arms seems to have been profitable. The 
pay of the soldier was high as compared with that of the 
ordinary labourer, and he had the prospect of a share of 
plunder in addition, so that it was not difficult to raise men 
where the commander had a good military reputation. Edward 
III. is said to have declined the services of numbers of foreign 



mercenaries who wished to enrol under him in his wars against 
France. 

The funds for the payment of these armies were provided 
partly from the royal revenues, partly from the fines paid in lieu 
of military service, and other fines arbitrarily imposed, and 
partly by grants from parliament. As the soldier's contract 
usually ended with the war, and the king had seldom funds to 
renew it even if he so wished, the armies disbanded of themselves 
at the close of each war. To secure the services of the soldier 
during his contract, acts were passed (18 Henry VI. c. 19; and 
7 Henry VII. c 1) inflicting penalties for desertion; and in 
Edward VI. 's reign an act " touching the true service of captains 
and soldiers " was passed, somewhat of the nature of a Mutiny 
Act. 

61. It is difficult to summarize the history of the army between 
the Hundred Years' War and 1642. The final failure of the 
English arms in France was soon followed by the Wars of the 
Roses, and in the long period of civil strife the only national 
force remaining to England was the Calais garrison. Henry Vlil. 
was a soldier-king, but he shared the public feeling for the old 
bow and bill, and English armies which served abroad did not, 
it seems, win the respect of the advanced professional soldiers 
of the continent. In 15 19 the Venetian ambassador described 
the English forces as consisting of 150,000 men whose peculiar, 
though not exclusive, weapon was the long bow (Fortescue 
l. 117). The national levy made in 1588 to resist the Armada 
and the threat of invasion produced about 750 lancers (heavy- 
armed cavalry), 2000 light horse and 56,000 foot, beside 20,000 
men employed in watching the coasts. The small proportion 
of mounted men is very remarkable in a country in which 
Cromwell was before long to illustrate the full power of cavalry 
on the battlefield. It is indeed not unfair to regard this army 
as a miscellaneous levy of inferior quality. 

It was in cavalry that England was weakest, and by three 
different acts it was sought to improve the breed of horses, though 
the light horse of the northern counties had a good reputation, 
and even won the admiration of the emperor Charles V. Perhaps 
the best organized force in England at this time was the London 
volunteer association which ultimately became the Honourable 
Artillery Company. At Floddon the spirit of the old English 
yeomanry triumphed over the outward form of continental 
battalions which the Scots had adopted, and doubtless the great 
victory did much to retard military progress in England. The 
chief service of Henry VIII. to the British army was the for- 
mation of an artillery train, in which he took a special interest. 
Before he died the forces came to consist of a few permanent 
troops (the bodyguard and the fortress artillery service), the 
militia or general levy, which was for home, and indeed for 
county, service only, and the paid armies which were collected 
for a foreign war and disbanded at the conclusion of peace, and 
were recruited on the same principle of indents which had 
served in the Hundred Years' War. In the reign of Mary, the 
old Statute of Winchester was revised (1553), and the new act 
provided for a readjustment of the county contingents and in 
some degree for the rearmament of the militia. But, from the 
fall of Calais and the expedition to Havre up to the battle of the 
Dunes a century later, the intervention of British forces in 
foreign wars was always futile and generally disastrous. During 
this time, however, the numerous British regiments in the service 
of Holland learned, in the long war of Dutch independence, the 
art of war as it had developed on the continent since 1450, and 
assimilated the regimental system and the drill and armament 
of the best models. Thus it was that in 1642 there were many 
hundreds of trained and war-experienced officers and sergeants 
available for the armies of the king and the parliament. By this 
time bows and bills had long disappeared even from the militia, 
and the Thirty Years' War, which, even more than the Low 
Countries, offered a career for the adventurous man, contributed 
yet more trained officers and soldiers to the English and Scottish 
forces. So closely indeed was war now studied by Englishmen 
that the respective adherents of the Dutch and the Swedish 
systems quarrelled on the eve of the battle of Edgehill. Francis 



6l2 



ARMY 



[BRITISH 



and Horace Vere, Sir John Norris, and other Englishmen had 
become generals of European reputation. Skippon, Astley, 
Goring, Rupert, and many others soon to be famous were dis- 
tinguished as company and regimental officers in the battles 
and sieges of Germany and the Low Countries. 

The home forces of England had, as has been said, little or 
nothing to revive their ancient renown. Instead, they had come 
to be regarded as a menace to the constitution. In Queen 
Elizabeth's time the demands of the Irish wars had led to 
frequent forced levies, and the occasional billeting of the troops 
in England also gave rise to murmurs, but the brilliancy and 
energy of her reign covered a great deal, and the peaceful policy 
of her successor removed all immediate cause of complaint. 
But after the accession of Charles I. we find the army a constant 
and principal source of dispute between the king and parliament, 
until under William III. it is finally established on a constitutional 
footing. Charles, wishing to support the Elector Palatine in 
the Thirty Years' War, raised an army of 10,000 men. He was 
already encumbered with debts, and the parliament refused 
all grants, on which he had recourse to forced loans. The army 
was sent to Spain, but returned without effecting anything, 
and was not disbanded, as usual, but billeted on the inhabitants. 
The billeting was the more deeply resented as it appeared that 
the troops were purposely billeted on those who had resisted 
the loan. Forced loans, billeting and martial law — all directly 
connected with the maintenance of the army — formed the main 
substance of the grievances set forth in the Petition of Right. 
In accepting this petition, Charles gave up the right to maintain 
an army without consent of parliament; and when in 1639 he 
wished to raise one to act against the rebellious Scots, parliament 
was called together, and its sanction obtained, on the plea that 
the army was necessary for the defence of England. This army 
again became the source of dispute between the king and parlia- 
ment, and finally both sides appealed to arms. 

62. The first years of the Great Rebellion (g.v.) showed 
primarily the abundance of good officers produced by the wars 
on the continent, and in the second place the absolute inadequacy 
of the military system of the country; the commissions of array, 
militia ordinances, &c, had at last to give way to regular methods 
of enlistment and a central army administration. It was clear, 
at the same time, that when the struggle was one of principles 
and not of dynastic politics, excellent recruits, far different from 
the wretched levies who had been gathered together for the 
Spanish war, were to be had in any reasonable number. These 
causes combined to produce the " New Model " which, origin- 
ating in Cromwell's own cavalry and the London trained bands 
of foot, formed of picked men and officers, severely disciplined, 
and organized and administered in the right way, quickly 
proved its superiority over all other armies in the field, and in 
a few years raised its general to supreme civil power. The 1 5th 
of February 1645 was the birthday of the British standing army, 
and from its first concentration at Windsor Park dates the 
scarlet uniform. The men were for the most part voluntarily 
enlisted from existing corps, though deficiencies had immediately 
to be made good by impressment. 

Four months later the New Model decided the quarrel of king 
and parliament at Naseby. When Cromwell, the first lieutenant- 
general and the second captain-general of the army, sent his 
veterans to take part in the wars of the continent they proved 
themselves a match for the best soldiers in Europe. On the 
restoration of the monarchy in 1660 the army, now some 80,000 
strong, was disbanded. It had enforced the execution of 
Charles I., it had dissolved parliament, and England had been 
for years governed under a military regime. Thus the most 
popular measure of the Restoration was the dissolution of the 
army. Only Monk's regiment of foot(now the Coldstream Guards) 
survived to represent the New Model in the army of to-day. 
At the same time the troops (now regiments) of household 
cavalry, and the regiment of foot which afterwards became the 
Grenadier Guards, were formed, chiefly from Royalists, though 
the disbanded New Model contributed many experienced re- 
iruits. The permanent forces of the crown came to consist once 



more of the " garrisons and guards," maintained by the king 
from the revenue allotted to him for carrying on the govern- 
ment of the country. The " garrisons " were commissioned to 
special fortresses — the Tower of London, Portsmouth, &c. The 
" guards " comprised the sovereign's bodyguards (" the yeomen 
of the guard " and " gentlemen-at-arms," who had existed since 
the times of Henry VII. and VIII.) , and the regiments mentioned 
above. Even this small force, at first not exceeding 3000 men, 
was looked on with jealousy by parliament, and every attempt 
to increase it was opposed. The acquisition of Tangier and 
Bombay, as part of the dower of the infanta of Portugal, led to 
the formation of a troop of horse (now the 1st Royal Dragoons) 
and a regiment of infantry (the 2nd, now Queen's R.W. Surrey, 
regiment) for the protection of the former; and a regiment of 
infantry (afterwards transferred to the East India Company) 
to hold the latter (1661). These troops, not being stationed in 
the kingdom, created no distrust; but whenever, as on several 
occasions during Charles's reign, considerable armies were 
raised, they were mostly disbanded when the occasion ceased. 
Several regiments, however, were added to the permanent 
force, including Dumbarton's regiment (the 1st or Royal Scots, 
nicknamed Pontius Pilate's Bodyguard) — which had a long 
record of service in the armies of the continent, and represented 
the Scots brigade of Gustavus Adolphus's army — and the 3rd 
Buffs, representing the English regiments of the Dutch army and 
through them the volunteers of 1572, and on Charles's death 
in 1685 the total force of " guards and garrisons " had risen to 
16,500, of whom about one-half formed what we should now 
call the standing army. 

63. James II., an experienced soldier and sailor, was more 
obstinate than his predecessor in his efforts to increase the 
army, and Monmouth's rebellion afforded him the opportunity. 
A force of about 20,000 men was maintained in England, 
and a large camp formed at Hounslow. Eight cavalry and 
twelve infantry regiments (the senior of which was the 7 th 
" Royal " Fusiliers, formed on a new French model) were raised, 
and given the numbers which, with few exceptions, they still 
bear. James even proposed to disband the militia, which had 
not distinguished itself in the late rebellion, and further augment 
the standing army; and although the proposal was instantly 
rejected, he continued to add to the army till the Revolution 
deprived him of his throne. The army which he had raised was 
to a great extent disbanded, the Irish soldiers especially, whom 
he had introduced in large numbers on account of their religion, 
being all sent home. 

The condition of the army immediately engaged the attention 
of parliament. The Bill of Rights had definitely established that 
" the raising or keeping of a standing army within the kingdom, 
unless it be by the consent of parliament, is against the law," and 
past experience made them very jealous of such a force. But civil 
war was imminent, foreign war certain; and William had only 
a few Dutch troops, and the remains of James's army, with 
which to meet the storm. Parliament therefore sanctioned a 
standing army, trusting to the checks established by the Bill 
of Rights and Act of Settlement, and by placing the pay of the 
army under the control of the Commons. An event soon showed 
the altered position of the army. A regiment mutinied and 
declared for James. It was surrounded and compelled to lay 
down its arms; but William found himself without legal power 
to deal with the mutineers. He therefore applied to parliament, 
and in 1689 was passed the first Mutiny Act, which, after repeat- 
ing the provisions regarding the army inserted in the Bill of 
Rights, and declaring the illegality of martial law, gave power to 
the crown to deal with the offences of mutiny and desertion by 
courts-martial. From this event is often dated the history of 
the standing army as a constitutional force (but see Fortescue, 
British Army, i. 335). 

64. Under William the army was considerably augmented. 
The old regiments of James's army were reorganized, retaining, 
however, their original numbers, and three of cavalry and eleven 
of infantry (numbered to the 28th) were added. In 1690 parlia- 
ment sanctioned a force of 62,000 men, further increased to 



BRITISH] 



ARMY 



613 



65,000 in 1691 ; but on peace being made in 1697 the Commons 
immediately passed resolutions to the effect that the land forces 
be reduced to 7000 men in England and 12,000 in Ireland. The 
War of the Spanish Succession quickly obliged Great Britain 
again to raise a large army, at one time exceeding 200,000 men; 
but of these the greater number were foreign troops engaged for 
the continental war. Fortescue (op. cit. i. 555) estimates the 
British forces at home and abroad as 70,000 men at the highest 
figure. After the peace of Utrecht the force was again reduced 
to 8000 men in Great Britain and 11,000 in the plantations 
(i.e. colonies) and abroad. From that time to the present the 
strength of the army has been determined by the annual votes 
of parliament, and though frequently the subject of warm debates 
in both houses, it has ceased to be a matter of dispute between 
the crown and parliament. The following table shows the 
fluctuations from that time onward — the peace years showing 
the average peace strength, the war years the maximum to 
which the forces were raised:— 



Peace. 



War. 



Year. 


Number. 


Year. 


Number 


I750 . 


• • 18,857 


1745- 


• 74,187 


1793 • 


• 17.013 


1761 . 


. 67,776 


1822 . 


• 71,790 


1777 • • 


• 90,734 


1845 • • 


. 100,011 


1812 . 


• 245,996 


1857 • • 


• 156,995 


1856 . 


• 275,079 


1866 . 


. 203,404 


1858 . . 


. 222,874 



Note. — Prior to 1856 the British forces serving in India are not 
included. 

During William's reign the small English army bore an 
honourable part in the wars against Louis XIV., and especially 
distinguished itself under the king at Steinkirk, Neerwinden 
and Namur. Twenty English regiments took part in the 
campaign of 1694. In the great wars of Queen Anne's reign the 
British army under Marlborough acquired a European reputation. 
The cavalry, which had called forth the admiration of Prince 
Eugene when passed in review before him after its long march 
across Germany (1704), especially distinguished itself in the 
battle of Blenheim, and Ramillies, Oudenarde and Malplaquet 
were added to the list of English victories. But the army as 
usual was reduced at once, and even the cadres of old regiments 
were disbanded, though the alarm of Jacobite insurrections 
soon brought about the re-creation of many of these. During 
the reign of the first and second Georges an artillery corps was 
organized, and the army further increased by five regiments of 
cavalry and thirty-five of infantry. Fresh laurels were won at 
Dettingen (1743), in which battle twenty English regiments 
took part; and though Fontenoy (q.v.) was a day of disaster 
for the English arms, it did not lower their reputation, but 
rather added to it. Six regiments of infantry won the chief 
glory of Prince Ferdinand's victory of Minden (q.v.) in 1759, 
and throughout the latter part of the Seven Years' War the 
British contingent of Ferdinand's army served with almost 
unvarying distinction in numerous actions. About this time 
the first English regiments were sent to India, and the 39th 
shared in Clive's victory at Plassey. During the first half of 
George III.'s reign the army was principally occupied in America; 
and though the conquest of Canada may be counted with pride 
among its exploits, this page in its history is certainly the 
darkest. English armies capitulated at Saratoga and at York- 
town, and the war ended by the evacuation of the revolted 



or some of the officers, and recouped himself by selling the com- 
missions. This system— termed " raising men for rank " — was 
retained for many years, and originally helped to create the 
" purchase system " of promotion. For the maintenance of 
the regiment the colonel received an annual sum sufficient to 
cover the pay of the men, and the expenses of clothing and of 
recruiting. The colonel was given a " beating order," without 
which no enlistment was legal, and was responsible for maintain- 
ing his regiment at full strength. " Muster masters " were 
appointed to muster the regiments, and to see that the men for 
whom pay was drawn were really effective. Sometimes, when 
casualties were numerous, the allowance was insufficient to 
meet the cost of recruiting, and special grants were made. In 
war time the ranks were also filled by released debtors, pardoned 
criminals, and impressed paupers and vagrants.- Where the 
men were raised by voluntary enlistment, the period of service 
was a matter of contract between the colonel and the soldier, 
and the engagement was usually for life; but exceptional levies 
were enlisted for the duration of war, or for periods of three or 
five years. As for the officers, the low rate of pay and the 
purchase system combined to exclude all but men of independent 
incomes. Appointments (except when in the gift of the colonel) 
were made by the king at home, and by the commander-in-chief 
abroad; even in Ireland the power of appointment rested with 
the local commander of the forces until the Union. The soldier 
was clothed by his colonel, the charge being defrayed from the 
" stock fund." The army lived in barracks, camps or billets. 
The barrack accommodation in Great Britain at the beginning 
of the 18th century only sufficed for five thousand men; and 
though it had gradually risen to twenty thousand in 1792, a large 
part of the army was constantly in camps and billets — the latter 
causing endless complaints and difficulties. 

66. The first efforts of the army in the long war with France 
did not tend to raise its reputation amongst the armies of Europe. 
The campaigns of allied armies under the duke of York in the 
Netherlands, in which British contingents figured largely, 
were uniformly unsuccessful (1793-94 and 1799), though in 
this respect they resembled those of almost all soldiers who 
commanded against the " New French " army. The policy of 
the younger Pitt sent thousands of the best soldiers to un- 
profitable employment, and indeed to death, in the West Indies. 
At home the administration was corrupt and ineffective, and the 
people generally shared the contemptuous feeling towards the 
regular army which was then prevalent in Europe. But a 
better era began with the appointment of Frederick Augustus, 
duke of York, as commander-in-chief of the army. He did 
much to improve its organization, discipline and training, and 
was ably seconded by commanders of distinguished ability. 
Under Abercromby in Egypt, under Stuart at Maida, and under 
Lake, Wellesley and others in India, the British armies again 
attached victory to their standards, and made themselves feared 
and respected. . Later, Napoleon's threat of invading England 
excited her martial spirit to the highest pitch to which it had 
ever attained. Finally, her military glory was raised by the series 
of successful campaigns in the Peninsula, until it culminated 
in the great victory of Waterloo; and the army emerged from 
the war with the most solidly founded reputation of any in 
Europe. 

The events of this period belong to the history of Europe, 



states 0} America and the acknowiedgment of thejr independence. ) and hS outside the province oi 'an a/tick deaiing on)/ with tbe 
65. Before passing to the great French Revolutionary wars, I army. The great augmentations required during the war were 

effected partly by raising additional regiments, but principally 
by increasing the number of battalions, some regiments being 
given as many as four. On the conclusion of peace these 
battalions were reduced, but the regiments were retained, and 



- . „ „ Revolutionary „„.„, 

from which a fresh period in the history of the army may be 
dated, it will be well to review the general condition of the 
army in the preceding century, injured as it was by the distrust 
of parliament and departmental weakness and corruption which 
went far to neutralize the good work of the duke of Cumberland 
as commander-in-chief and of Pitt as war administrator. 
Regiments were raised almost as in the days of the Edwards. 
The crown contracted with a distinguished soldier, or gentleman 
of high position, who undertook to raise the men, receiving a 
certain sum as bounty-money for each recruit. In some cases, 
in lieu of money, the contractor received the nomination of all 



the army was permanently increased from about twenty thousand, 
the usual peace establishment before the war, to an average 
of eighty thousand. The duke of York, on first appointment 
to the command, had introduced a uniform drill throughout 
the army, which was further modified according to Sir David 
Dundas's system in 1800; and, under the direction of Sir John 
Moore and others, a high perfection of drill was attained. At 



6l4- 



ARMY 



[BRITISH 



the beginning of the war, the infantry, like that of the continental 
powers, was formed in three ranks; but a two-rank formation 
had been introduced in America and in India and gradually 
became general, and in 1809 was finally approved. In the Penin- 
sula the army was permanently organized in divisions, usually 
consisting of two brigades of three or four battalions each, 
and one or two batteries of artillery. The duke of Wellington 
had also brought the commissariat and the army transport to 
a high pitch of perfection, but in the long peace which followed 
these establishments were reduced or brokenup. 

67. The period which elapsed between Waterloo and the 
Crimean War is marked by a number of Indian and. colonial 
wars, but by no organic changes in the army, with perhaps the 
single exception of the Limited Service Act of 1847, by which 
enlistment for ten or twelve years, with power to re-engage to 
complete twenty-one, was substituted for the life enlistments 
hitherto in force. The army went to sleep on the laurels and 
recollections of the Peninsula. The duke of Wellington, for many 
years commander-in-chief, was too anxious to hide it away in 
the colonies in order to save it from further reductions or utter 
extinction, to attempt any great administrative reforms. The 
force which was sent to the Crimea in 1854 was an agglomeration 
of battalions, individually of the finest quality, but unused to 
work together, without trained staff, administrative departments 
or army organization of any kind. The lesson of the winter 
before Sevastopol was dearly bought, but was not thrown away. 
From that time successive war ministers and commanders-in- 
chief have laboured perseveringly at the difficult task of army 
organization and administration. Foremost in the work was 
Sidney Herbert (Lord Herbert of Lea), the soldier's friend, 
who fell a sacrifice to his labours (1861), but not before he had 
done much for the army. The whole system of administration 
was revised. In 1854 it was inconceivably complicated and 
cumbersome. The " secretary of state for war and colonies," 
sitting at the Colonial Office, had a general but vague control, 
practically limited to times of war. The " secretary at war " 
was the parliamentary representative of the army, and exercised 
a certain financial control, not extending, however, to the 
ordnance corps. The commander-in-chief was responsible to 
the sovereign alone in all matters connected with the discipline, 
command or patronage of the army, but to the secretary at 
war in financial matters. The master-general and board of 
ordnance were responsible for the supply of material on requisi- 
tion, but were otherwise independent, and had the artillery and 
engineers under them. The commissariat department had its 
headquarters at the treasury, and until 1852 the militia were 
under the home secretary. A number of minor subdepartments, 
more or less independent, also existed, causing endless confusion, 
correspondence and frequent collision. In 1854 the business of 
the colonies was separated from that of war, and the then secretary 
of state, the duke of Newcastle, assumed control over all the 
other administrative officers. In the following year the secretary 
of state was appointed secretary at war also, and the duties of 
the two offices amalgamated. The same year the commissariat 
office was transferred to the war department, and the Board of 
Ordnance abolished, its functions being divided between the 
commander-in-chief and the secretary of state. The minor 
departments were gradually absorbed, and the whole administra- 
tion divided under two great chiefs, sitting at the war office 
and Horse Guards respectively. In 1870 these two were welded 
. into one, and the war office now existing was constituted, 
Corresponding improvements were effected in every branch. 
The system of clothing the soldiers was altered, the contractu 
being taken from the colonels of regiments, who received a money 
allowance instead, and the clothing supplied from government 
manufactories. The pay, food and general condition of the 
soldier were improved; reading and recreation rooms, libraries, 
gymnasia and facilities for games of all kinds being provided. 
Barracks (q.v.) were built on improved principles, and a large' 
permanent camp was formed at Aldershot, where considerable 
forces were collected and manoeuvred together. Various educa- 
tional establishments were opened, a staff college was established 



for the instruction of officers wishing to qualify for the staff, 
and regimental schools were improved. 

68. The Iridian Mutiny of 1857, followed by the transference 
of the government of India, led to important changes. The 
East India Company's white troops were amalgamated with the 
Queen's army, and the whole reorganized (see Indian Army 
below). 

The fact that such difficulties as those of 1854 and 1857, 
not to speak of the disorders of 1848, had been surmounted by 
the weak, army which remained over from the reductions of 
forty years, coupled with the instantaneous and effective re- 
joinder to the threats of the French colonels in 1859 — the creation 
of the Volunteer Force — certainly lulled the nation and its repre- 
sentatives into a false sense of security. Thus the two obvious 
lessons Of the German successes of 1866 and 1870 — the power 
of a national army for offensive invasion, and the rapidity with 
which such an army when thoroughly organized could be moved 
— created the greatest sensation in England. The year 1870 is, 
therefore, of prime importance in the history of the regular 
forces of the crown. The strength of the home forces at different 
times between 1815 and 1870 is. given as follows (Biddulph, 
Lord Cardwell at the War Office) : — 





Regulars. 


Auxiliaries. 


Field Guns. 


1820 


64,426 


60,740 


22 


1830 


50,876 


34,6i4 


30 


1840 


53.379 


20,791 


30 


1850 


68,538 


29,868 


70 


i860 


100,701 


229,501 


180 


1870 


89,051 ■ 
(later 109,000) 


281,692 


180 



69. The period of reform commences therefore with 1870, and 
is connected indissolubly with the name of Edward, Lord 
Cardwell, secretary of state for war 1869-1874. In the matter of 
organization the result of his labours was seen in the perfectly 
arranged expedition to Ashanti (1874); as for recruiting, the 
introduction of short service and reserve enlistment together 
with many rearrangements of pay, &c, proved so far popular 
that the number of men annually enlisted was more than trebled 
(11,742 in 1869; 39,971 in 1885; 40,729 in 1898), and so far 
efficient that " Lord CardwelPs . . . system, with but small 
modification, gave us during the Boer War 80,000 reservists, 
of whom 96 or 97 % were found efficient, and has enabled. us to 
keep, an army of. 150,000 regulars in the field lor 15 months" 
(Rt. Hon. St John Brodrick, House of Commons, 8th of March 
1901). The localization of the army, subsequently completed 
by the territorial system of 1882, was commenced under Card- 
well's regime, and a measure which encountered much powerful 
opposition at the time, the abolition of the purchase of com- 
missions, was also effected by him (187 1). The .machinery of 
administration was improved, and autumn manoeuvres were 
practised on a scale hitherto unknown in England. In 1871 
certain powers over the militia, formerly held by lords-lieutenant, 
were transferred to the crown, and the auxiliary forces were 
placed: directly under the generals commanding districts. In 
1881 came an important change in the infantry of the line, which 
was entirely remodelled in two-battalion regiments bearing 
territorial titles. This measure (the " linked battalion " system) 
aroused great opposition; it was dictated chiefly by the neces- 
sity of maintaining the Indian and colonial garrisons at full 
strength, and was begun during Lord Cardwell's tenure of office, 
the principle being that each regiment should have one battalion 
at home and one abroad, the latter being fed by the former, 
which in its turn drew ,upon the reserve to complete it for war. 
The working of the system is to be considered as belonging to 
present practice rather than to history, and the reader is there- 
fore referred to the article United Kingdom. On these general 
lines the, army progressed up to 1899, when the Boer War called 
into the field on a distant theatre of war all the resources of 
the regular army, and in addition drew largely upon the existing 
auxiliary forces, and -even upon wholly untrained civilians, 
for the numbers required to make war in an area which 



BRITISH-INDIAN] 



ARMY 



615 



comprised nearly all Africa south of the Zambezi. As the result 
of this war (see Transvaal) successive schemes of reform were 
undertaken by the various war ministers, leading up to Mr 
Haldane's "territorial" scheme (1008), which put the organiza- 
tion of the forces in the United Kingdom (q.v.) on a new basis. 
Innovations had not been unknown in the period immediately 
preceding the war; as a single example we may take the develop- 
ment of the mounted infantry (q.v.) It was natural that the war 
itself, and especially a war of so peculiar a character, should 
intensify the spirit of innovation. The corresponding period in 
the German army lasted from 1871 to 1888, and such a period 
of unsettlement is indeed the common, practically the universal, 
result of a war on a large scale. Much that was of value in 
the Prussian methods, faithfully and even slavishly copied by 
Great Britain as by others after 1870, was temporarily forgotten, 
but the pendulum swung back again, and the Russo-Japanese 
War led to the disappearance, so far as Europe was concerned, 
of many products of the period of doubt and controversy which 
followed the struggle in South Africa. Side by side with con- 
tinuous discussions of the greater questions of military policy, 
amongst these being many well-reasoned proposals for universal 
service, the technical and administrative efficiency of the service 
has undergone great improvement, and this appears to be of more 
real and permanent value than the greater part of the solutions 
given for the larger problems. The changes in the organization 
of the artillery afford the best evidence of this spirit of practical 
and technical reform. In the first place the old " royal regi- 
ment " was divided into two branches. The officers for the field 
and horse artillery stand now on one seniority list for promotion, 
the garrison, heavy and mountain batteries on another. In each 
branch important changes of organization have been also made. 
In the field branch, both for Royal Field and Royal Horse 
Artillery, the battery is no longer the one unit for all purposes. 
A lieutenant-colonel's command, the " brigade," has been 
created. It consists of a group, in the horse artillery of two, in 
the field artillery of three batteries. For the practical training 
of the horse and field artillery a large area of ground on the 
wild open country of Dartmoor, near Okehampton, has for some 
years been utilized. A similar school has been started at Glen 
Imaal in Ireland, and a new training ground has been opened 
on Salisbury Plain. Similarly, with the Royal Garrison Artillery 
a more perfect system has been devised for the regulation and 
practice of the fire of each fortress, in accordance with the vary- 
ing circumstances of its position, &c. A practice school for the 
garrison artillery has been established at Lydd, but the various 
coast fortresses themselves carry out regular practice with 
service ammunition. 

Indian Army 
70. Historically, the Indian army grew up in three distinct 
divisions, the Bengal, Madras and Bombay armies. This separa- 
tion was the natural result of the original foundation of separate 
settlements and factories in India; and each retains to the 
present day much of its old identity. 

Bengal. — The English traders in Bengal were long restricted by 
the native princes to a military establishment of an ensign and 30 
men; and this force may be taken as the germ of the Indian army. 
In 1681 Bengal received the first reinforcement from Madras, and 
two years later a company was sent from Madras, raising the little 
Bengalarmy to a strength of 250 Europeans. In 1695 native soldiers 
were first enlisted. In 1701-1702 the garrison of Calcutta consisted 
of 120 soldiers and seamen gunners. In 1756 occurred the defence 
of Calcutta against Suraj-ud-Dowlah, and the terrible tragedy of 
the Black Hole. The work of reconquest and punishment was carried 
out by an expedition from Madras, and in the little force with which 
Clive gained the great victory of Plassey the Bengal army was 
represented by a few hundred men only (the British 39th, now 
Dorsetshire regiment, which was also present, was the first King's 
regiment sent to India, and bears the motto Primus in Indis) ; but 
from this date the military power of the Company rapidly increased. 
A company of artillery had been organized in 1748; and in 1757, 
shortly before Plassey, the 1st regiment of Bengal native infantry 
was raised. Next, in 1759 the native infantry was augmented, in 
1760 dragoons were raised, and in 1763 the total forces amounted 
to 1500 Europeans and 12 battalions of native infantry (11,500 men). 
In 1765 the European infantry was divided into 3 regiments, and 



the whole force was organized in 3 brigades, each consisting of 
1 company of artillery, 1 regiment European infantry, 1 troop of 
native cavalry, and 7 battalions of sepoys. In 1 766, on the reduction 
of some money allowances, a number of officers of the Bengal army 
agreed to resign their commissions simultaneously. This dangerous 
combination was promptly put down by Clive, to whom the Bengal 
army may be said to owe its existence. 

The constant wars and extensions of dominion of the next thirty 
years led to further augmentations; the number of brigades and of 
European regiments was increased to 6; and in 1794 the Bengal 
army numbered about 3500 Europeans and 24,000 natives. 

71. Madras. — The first armed force in the Madras presidency was 
the little garrison of Armegon on the Coromandel coast, consisting 
of 28 soldiers. In 1644 Fort St George was built and garrisoned, 
and in 1653 Madras became a presidency. In 1745 the garrison of 
Fort St George consisted of 200 Europeans, while a similar number, 
with the addition of 200 " Topasses " (descendants of the Portu- 
guese), garrisoned Fort St David. In 1748 the various independent 
companies on the Coromandel coast and other places were con- 
solidated into the Madras European regiment. From this time the 
military history of the Madras army was full of incident, and it 
bore the principal part in Clive's victories of Arcot, Kavaripak and 
Plassey. In 1754 the 39th regiment of the Royal army was sent to 
Madras. In 1758 three others followed. In 1772 the Madras army 
numbered 3000 European infantry and 16,000 natives, and in 1784 
the number of native troops had risen to 34,000. 

72. Bombay. — The island of Bombay formed part of the marriage 
portion received by Charles II. with the infanta of Portugal, and in 
1662 the Bombay regiment of Europeans was raised to defend it. 
In 1668 the island was granted to the Company, and the regiment 
af the same time transferred to them. In 1708 Bombay became a 
presidency, but it did not play so important a part as the others 
in the early extension of British power, and its forces were not so 
rapidly developed. It is said, however, to have been the first to 
discipline native troops, and Bombay sepoys were sent to Madras in 
1747, and took part in the battle of Plassey in 1757. In 1772 the 
Bombay army consisted of 2500 Europeans and 3500 sepoys, but in 
1794, in consequence of the struggles with the Mahratta power, the 
native troops had been increased to 24,000. 

73. Consolidation of the Army. — In 1796 a general reorganization 
took place. Hitherto the officers in each presidency had been borne 
on general " lists," according to branches of the service. These 
lists were now broken up and cadres of regiments formed. The 
colonels and lieutenant-colonels remained on separate lists, and an 
establishment of general officers was created, while the divisional 
commands were distributed between the royal and Company's 
officers. Further augmentations took place, consequent on the 
great extension of British supremacy. In 1798 the native infantry 
in India numbered 122 battalions. In 1808 the total force in India 
amounted to 24,500 Europeans and 154,500 natives. 

The first half of the 19th century was filled with wars and annexa- 
tions and the army was steadily increased. Horse artillery was 
formed, and the artillery in general greatly augmented. " Irregular 
cavalry " was raised in Bengal and Bombay, and recruited from a 
better class of troopers, who received high pay and found their own 
horses and equipment. " Local forces " were raised in various parts 
from time to time, the most important being the Punjab irregular 
force (raised after the annexation of the Punjab in 1849), consisting 
of 3 field batteries, 5 regiments of cavalry, and 5 of infantry, and 
the Nagpur and Oudh irregular, forces. Another kind of force, 
which had been gradually formed, was that called " contingents " — 
troops raised by the protected native states. The strongest of these 
was that of Hyderabad, originally known as the nizam's army. 
Changes were also made in the organization of the army. Sanitary 
improvements were effected, manufacturing establishments instituted 
or increased, and the administration generally improved. 

74. The Army before the Mutiny. — The officering and recruiting of 
the three armies were in all essentials similar. The officers were 
mainly supplied by the Company's military college at Addiscombe 
in Surrey (established in 1809), and by direct appointments. The 
Bengal army was recruited from Hindustan,' the infantry being 
mostly drawn from Oudh and the great Gangetic plains. The 
soldiers were chiefly high-caste Hindus, a sixth being Mahommedans. 
The cavalry was composed mainly of Mahommedans, recruited 
from Rohilkhand and the Gangetic Doab. The only other elements 
in the army were four Gurkha regiments, enlisted from Nepal, and 
the local Punjab irregular force. The Madras army was chiefly 
recruited from that presidency, or the native states connected with 
it, and consisted of Mahommedans, Brahmans, and of the Mahratta, 
Tamil and Telugu peoples. The Bombay army was recruited from 
its own presidency, with some Hindustanis,, but* chiefly formed of 
Mahrattas arid Mahommedans; the Bombay light cavalry mainly 
from Hindustan proper. 

Including the local and irregular troops (about 100,000 strong), the 
total strength amounted to 38,000 Europeans of all arms, with 276 
field guns, and 348,000 native troops, .with 248 field guns, — truly a 
magnificent establishment, and, outwardly, worthy of the great 
empire which England had created for herself in the East, but in- 
wardly unsound, and on the very verge of the great mutiny of 
1857- 



6i6 



ARMY 



[CANADIAN 



In 1856 the establishment in the several presidencies was as 
follows: — 





Bengal. 


Madras. 


Bombay. 


Total. 


British Cavalry Regiments 
British Infantry Battalions 
Company's European Battalions 
European and Native Artillery 

Battalions .... 
Native Infantry Battalions 
Native Cavalry Regiments 


2 

15 

3 

12 

74 
28 


1 
3 
3 

7 
52 
■8 


1 

4 
3 

5 
29 

3 


4 
22 

9 

24 

155 

39 



An account of the events of 1857-58 will be found under Indian 
Mutiny. After the catastrophe the reorganization of the military 
forces on different lines was of course unavoidable. Fortunately, 
the armies of Madras and Bombay had been almost wholly untouched 
by the spirit of disaffection, and in the darkest days the Sikhs, 
though formerly enemies of the British, had not only remained 
faithful to them, but had rendered them powerful assistance. 

75. The Reorganization. — By the autumn of 1 858 the mutiny was 
virtually crushed, and the task of reorganization commenced. On 
the 1st of September 1858 the East India Company ceased to rule, 
and Her Majesty's government took up the reins of power. On the 
important question of the army, the opinions and advice of the most 
distinguished soldiers and civilians were invited. Masses of reports 
and evidence were collected in India, and by a royal commission in 
England. On the report of this commission the new system was 
based. The local European army was abolished., and its personnel 
amalgamated with the royal army. The artillery became wholly 
British, with the exception of a few native mountain batteries. 
The total strength of the British troops, all of the royal army, 
was largely increased, while that of the native troops was largely 
diminished. Three distinct native armies — those of Bengal, Madras 
and Bombay — were still maintained. The reduced Indian armies 
consisted of cavalry and infantry only, with a very few artillery, 
distributed as follows: — 





Battalions 


Regiments 




Infantry. 


Cavalry. 


Bengal 


49 


19 


Madras 


40 


4 


Bombay 


3° 


7 


Punjab Force 


12 


6 



Total ... 131 36 

There were also three sapper battalions, one to each army. 

The Punjab force, which had 5 batteries of native artillery attached 
to it, continued under the Punjab government. In addition, the 
Hyderabad contingent of 4 cavalry, 6 infantry regiments and 4 
batteries, and a local force in central India of 2 regiments cavalry 
and 6 infantry, were retained under the government of India. 
After all the arrangements had been completed the army of India 
consisted of 62,000 British and 125,000 native troops. 

76. The Modern Army. — The college at Addiscombe was closed in 
i860, and the direct appointment of British officers to the Indian 
local forces ceased in 1861. In that year a staff corps was formed by 
royal warrant in each presidency " to supply a body of officers for 
service in India, by whom various offices and appointments hitherto 
held by officers borne on the strength of the several corps in the 
Indian forces shall in future be held. Special rules were laid down. 
The corps was at first recruited partly from officers of the Company's 
service and partly from the royal army, holding staff appointments 
(the new regimental employment being considered as staff duty) 
and all kinds of political and civil posts; for the system established 
later see India : Army. The native artillery and sappers and miners 
were to be officered from the Royal Artillery and Royal Engineers. 
The only English warrant and non-commissioned officers now 
to be employed in the native army were to be those of the Royal 
Engineers with the sappers and miners. 

A radical change in the regimental organization of all the native 
armies was effected in 1863. The Punjab Frontier Force was from 
the first organized on the irregular system, which was there seen 
at its best, as also were the new regiments raised during the Mutiny. 
This system was now applied to the whole army, each regiment and 
battalion having seven British officers attached to it for command 
and administrative duties, the immediate command of troops and 
companies being left to the native officers. Thus was the system 
reverted to, which was initiated by Clive, of a few British officers 
only being attached to each corps for the higher regimental duties 
of command and. control. Time had shown that this was more 
effective than the regular system instituted in 1 796 of British officers 
commanding troops and companies. 

A new spirit was breathed into the army. The supremacy of the 
commandant was the main principle. He was less hampered by 
the unbending regulations enjoined upon the old regular regiments, 
had greater powers of reward and punishment, was in a position to 
assume larger responsibility and greater freedom of action, and 
was supported in the full exercise of his authority. The system 
made the officers. 



Up to 1881 the native army underwent little change, but in that 
year 18 regiments of infantry and 4 of cavalry were broken up, 
almost the same total number of men being maintained in fewer and 
stronger regiments. The only reduction made in the British troops 
was in the Royal Artillery, which was diminished by II batteries. 
The events of 1885, however, on the Russo- Afghan frontier, led 
to augmentations. The 11 batteries Royal Artillery were brought 
back from England; each of the 9 British cavalry regiments in India 
received a fourth squadron ; each of the British infantry battalions 
was increased by 100 men, and 3 battalions were added. The native 
cavalry had a fourth squadron added to each regiment ; three of the 
four regiments broken up in 1881 were re-raised, while the native 
infantry was increased in regimental strength, and 9 new battalions 
raised composed of Gurkhas, Sikhs and Punjabis. The addition in 
all amounted to 10,600 British and 21,200 native troops. In 1890 
the strength of the army of India was 73,000 British and, including 
irregulars, 147,500 native troops. For the Indian volunteers, see 
Volunteers. 

Many important changes took place between 1885 and 1904. 
Seven Madras infantry regiments were converted into regiments for 
service in Burma, composed of Gurkhas and hardy races from 
northern India; six Bengal and Bombay regiments were similarly 
converted into regiments of Punjabis, Pathans and Gurkhas; the 
native mountain batteries have been increased to ten ; a system of 
linked battalions has been introduced with the formation of regi- 
mental centres for mobilization; and reserves for infantry and 
mountain artillery have been formed. The number of British officers 
with each regiment has been increased to nine, and the two wing 
commands in battalions have been converted into 4 double-company 
commands of 250 men each, under a British commander, who is 
responsible to the commandant for their training and efficiency, 
the command of the companies being left to the native officers. 
This system, which is analogous to the squadron command in the 
cavalry, admits of closer individual attention to training, and 
distributes among the senior British regimental officers effective 
responsibility of a personal kind. 

An addition (at the imperial expense) of five battalions of Sikhs, 
Punjabi Mahommedans, Jats and hillmen in northern India was 
made in 1900, as the result of India being called upon to furnish 
garrisons for Mauritius and other stations overseas. 

The unification of the triplicate army departments in the different 
presidential armies was completed in 189 1, all being brought directly 
under the supreme government ; and the three separate staff corps 
of Bengal, Madras and Bombay were fused into one in 1891 as the 
Indian Staff Corps. The term " Indian Staff Corps " was in turn 
replaced by that of " Indian Army " in 1903. These measures 

Prepared the way for the new system of army organization which, 
y authority of parliament, abolished divided control and placed 
the whole army of India under the governor-general and the 
commander-in-chief in India. 

Canadian Forces 
77. In the earliest European settlements in Canada, the necessity 
of protection against Indians caused the formation of a militia, 
ancyin 1665 companies were raised in every parish. The military 
history of the Canadian forces under French rule is full of incident, 
and they served not only against Indian raiders but also against 
the troops of Great Britain arid of her North American colonies. 
Six militia battalions took part in the defence of Quebec in 1759, 
and even the transfer of Canada from the French to the British 
crown did not cause the disbandment of the existing forces. The 
French Canadians distinguished themselves not less than the British 
settlers in the War of American Independence, and in particular in 
the defence of Quebec against Montgomery and Arnold. In 1787 
an ordinance was made whereby three battalions of the militia were 
permanently embodied, each contingent serving for two years, 
at the end of which time a fresh contingent relieved it, and after 
this a succession of laws and regulations were made with a view to 
complete organization of the force. The brunt of the fighting on 
the American frontier in the war of 1812 was borne very largely by 
the permanent force of three battalions and the fresh units called 
out, all these being militia corps. Up to 1828 a distinction had 
been made between the British and the French regiments: this was 
then abolished. The militia was again employed on active service 
during the disturbances of 1837, and the " Active Militia " in 1863 
had grown to a strength of 25,000 men. The Fenian troubles of 
1864 and 1866 caused the embodiment of the Canadian forces once 
more. In 1867 took place the unification of Canada, after which the 
whole force was completely organized on the basis of a militia act 
(1868). A department of Militia and Defence with a responsible 
minister was established, and the strength of the active militia of all 
arms was fixed at 40,000 rank and file. Two years later the militia 
furnished 6000 men to deal with the Fenian Raid of 1870, and took 
part in Colonel (Lord) Wolseley's Red River expedition. In 1871 
a permanent force, serving the double purpose of a regular nucleus 
and an instructional cadre, was organized in two troops of cavalry, 
two batteries of artillery and one regiment of infantry, and in 1876 
the Royal Military College of Canada was founded at Kingston. 
In 1885 the Riel rebellion was dealt with, and the important action 
of Batoche won, by the militia, without assistance from regular 



AUSTRIAN: FRENCH] 



ARMY 



617 



troops. In the same year Canada contributed a force of voyageurs 
to the Nile expedition of Lord Wolseley ; the experience of these 
men was admittedly of great assistance in navigating the Rapids. 
The militia sent contingents of all arms to serve in the South African 
War, 1899-1902, including " Strathcona's Horse," a special corps, 
recruited almost entirely from the Active Militia and the North-west 
Mounted Police. The latter, a permanent constabulary of mounted 
riflemen, was formed in 1873. 

After the South African War an extensive scheme of reorganization 
was taken in hand, the command being exercised for two years 
(i902-i904)by Major-General Lord Dundonald, and subsequently by 
a militia council (Militia Act 1904), similar in constitution to the home 
Army Council. For details of the present military strength of 
Canada, see the article Canada. 

Austrian Army 

78. The Landsknecht infantry constituted the mainstay of the 
imperial armies in the 16th century. Maximilian I. and Charles 
V. are recorded to have marched and carried the " long pike " in 
their ranks. Maximilian also formed a corps of Kyrisser, who 
were the origin of the modern cuirassiers. It was not, however, 
until much later that the Austrian army came into existence as 
a permanent force. Rudolph II. formed a small standing force 
about 1600, but relied upon the " enlistment " system, like 
other sovereigns of the time, for the bulk of his armies. The 
Thirty Years' War produced the permanence of service which 
led in all the states of Europe to the rise of standing armies. 
In the Empire it was Wallenstein who first raised a distinctly 
imperial army of soldiers owing no duty but to the sovereign; 
and it was the suspicion that he intended to use this army, 
which was raised largely at his own expense, to further his own 
ends, that led to his assassination. From that time the regiments 
belonged no longer to their colonels, but to the emperor; and 
the oldest regiments in the present Austrian army date from the 
Thirty Years' War, at the close of which Austria had 19 infantry, 
6 cuirassier and 1 dragoon regiments. The almost continuous 
wars of Austria against France and the Turks (from 1495 to 
1S95 Austrian troops took part in 7000 actions of all sorts) led 
to a continuous increase in her establishments. The wars of the 
time of Montecucculi and of Eugene were followed by that of 
the Polish Succession, the two Turkish wars, and the three 
great struggles against Frederick the Great. Thus in 1763 the 
army had been almost continuously on active service for more 
than 100 years, in the course of which its organization had been 
modified in accordance with the lessons of each war. This, in 
conjunction with the fact that Austria took part in other Turkish 
campaigns subsequently, rendered this army the most formidable 
opponent of the forces of the French Revolution (1792). But 
the superior leading, organization and numbers of the emperor's 
forces were totally inadequate to the magnitude of the task of 
suppressing the Revolutionary forces, and though such victories 
as Neerwinden were sufficient proof of the efficiency and valour 
of the Austrians, they made no headway. In later campaigns, 
in which the enemy had acquired war experience, and the best 
of their officers had come to the front, the tide turned against 
the Imperialists even on the field of battle. The archduke 
Charles's victories of 1796 were more than counterbalanced by 
Bonaparte's Italian campaign, and the temporary success of 
1799 ended at Marengo and Hohenlinden. 

79. The Austrians, during the short peace which preceded 
the war of 1805, suffered, in consequence of all this, from a 
feeling of distrust, not merely in their leaders, but also in the 
whole system upon which the army was raised, organized and 
trained. This was substantially the same as that of the Seven 
Years' War time. Enlistment being voluntary and for long 
service, the numbers necessary to cope with the output of the 
French conscription could not be raised, and the inner history 
of the Austrian headquarters in the Ulm campaign shows that 
the dissensions and mutual distrust of the general officers had 
gone far towards the disintegration of an army which at that 
time had the most esprit de corps and the highest military 
qualities of any army in Europe. But the disasters of 1805 
swept away good and bad alike in the abolition of the old system. 
Already the archduke Charles had designed a " nation in arms " 
after the French model, and on this basis the reconstruction 



was begun. The conscription was put in force and the necessary 
numbers thus obtained; the administration was at the same 
time reformed and the organization and supply services brought 
into line with modern requirements. The war of 1809 surprised 
Austria in the midst of her reorganization, yet the new army 
fought with the greatest spirit. The invasion of Bavaria was by 
no means so leisurely as it had been in 1805, and the archduke 
Charles obtained one signal victory over Napoleon in person. 
Aspern and Wagram were most desperately contested, and 
though the archduke ceased to take part in the administration 
after 1809 the work went on steadily until, in 18 13, the Austrian 
armies worthily represented the combination of discipline with 
the " nation in arms " principle. Their intervention in the 
War of Liberation was decisive, and Austria, in spite of her 
territorial losses of the past years, put into the field well-drilled 
armies far exceeding in numbers those which had appeared in 
the wars of the Revolution. After the fall of Napoleon, Austria's 
hold on Italy necessitated the maintenance of a large army of 
occupation. This army, and in particular its cavalry, was 
admittedly the best in Europe, and, having to be ready to 
march at a few days' notice, it was saved from the deadening 
influence of undisturbed peace which affected every other 
service in Europe from 1815 to 1850. 

80. The Austrian system has conserved much of the peculiar 
tone of the army of 1848, of which English readers may obtain a 
good idea from George Meredith's Vittoria. It was, however, 
a natural result of this that the army lost to some considerable 
extent the spirit of the " nation in arms " of 1809 and 1813. 
It was employed in dynastic wars, and the conscription was of 
course modified by substitution; thus, when the war of 1859 
resulted unfavourably to the Austrians, the army began to lose 
confidence, precisely as had been the case in 1805. Once more, 
in 1866, an army animated by the purely professional spirit, 
which was itself weakened by distrust, met a " nation in arms," 
and in this case a nation well trained in peace and armed with a 
breechloader. Bad staff work, and tactics which can only be 
described as those of pique, precipitated the disaster, and in 
seven weeks the victorious Prussians were almost at the gates 
of Vienna. 

The result of the war, and of the constitutional changes about 
this time, was the re-adoption of the principles of 1806-1813, 
the abolition of conscription and long service in favour of 
universal service for a short term, and a thorough reform in the 
methods of command and staff work. It has been said of the 
Prussian army that " discipline is — the officers." This is more 
true of the " K.K." army 1 than of any other in Europe; the 
great bond of union between the heterogeneous levies of recruits 
of many races is the spirit of the corps of officers, which retains 
the personal and professional characteristics of the old army of 
Italy. 

French Army 

81. The French army (see for further details France: Law 
and Institutions) dates from the middle of the 15th century, at 
which time Charles VII. formed, from mercenaries who had 
served him in the Hundred Years' War, the compagnies d'ordon- 
nance, and thus laid the foundation of a national standing army. 
But the armies that followed the kings in their wars still consisted 
mainly of mercenaries, hired for the occasion; and the work of 
Charles and his successors was completely undone in the confusion 
of the religious wars. Louvois, was minister of Louis XIV., was 
the true creator of the French royal army. The organization of 
the first standing army is here given in some detail, as it served 
as a model for all armies for more than a century, and is also 
followed to some extent in our own times. Before the advent of 
Louvois, the forces were royal only in name. The army was a 
fortuitous concourse of regiments of horse and foot, each of which 
was the property of its colonel. The companies similarly 

1 The phrase " K. und K." {Kaiserlich und Koniglich) is applied 
to all services common to the Austrian and Hungarian armies. 
" K.-K." {Kaiserlich-Koniglich) refers strictly only to the troops 
of Austria, the Hungarian army being known as the " K.Uug." 
(Royal Hungarian) service. 



6i8 



ARMY 



[FRENCH 



belonged to their captains, and, the state being then in no condi- 
tion to buy out these vested interests, superior control was almost 
illusory. Indeed, all the well-known devices for eluding such 
control, for instance, showing imaginary men on the pay lists, 
can be traced to the French army of the 16th century. . A further 
difficulty lay in the existence of the offices called Colonel-General, 
Marshal-General and Grand Master of Artillery, between whom 
no common administration was possible. The grand master 
survived until 1743, but Louvois managed to suppress the other 
offices, and even to put one of his own subordinates into the office 
of grand master. Thus was assured direct royal control, exer- 
cised through the war minister. Louvois was unable indeed 
to overthrow the proprietary system, but he made stringent 
regulations against abuses, and confined it to the colonels 
(mcstre de camp in the cavalry) and the captains. Henceforward 
the colonel was a wealthy noble, with few duties beyond that of 
spending money freely and of exercising his court influence on 
behalf of his regiment. The real work of the service was done by 
the lieutenant-colonels and lieutenants, and the king and the 
minister recognized this on all occasions. Thus Vauban was 
given, as a reward for good service, a company in the " Picardie " 
regiment without purchase. Promotions from the ranks were 
very rare but not unknown, and all promotions were awarded 
according to merit except those to captain or colonel. One of the 
captains in a regiment was styled major, and acted as adjutant. 
This post was of course filled by selection and not by purchase. 
The grades of general officers were newly fixed by Louvois — the 
brigadier, -marichal de camp, lieutenant-general and marshal of 
France. The general principle was to give command, but not 
promotion, according to merit. The rank and file were recruited 
by voluntary enlistment for four years' service. The infantry 
company was maintained in peace at an effective of 60, except 
in the guards and the numerous foreign corps, in which the 
company was always at the war strength of 100 to 200 men. 
This arm was composed, in 1678, of the Gardes franc.aises, the 
Swiss guards, the old (vieux and pctits vieux) regiments of the line, 
of which the senior, " Picardie," claimed to be the oldest regiment 
in Europe, and the regiments raised under the new system. The 
regiment dn roi, which was deliberately made the model of all 
others and was commanded by the celebrated Martinet, was the 
senior of these latter. The whole infantry arm in 1678 numbered 
320,000 field and garrison troops. The cavalry consisted of the 
Maison du Roi (which Louvois converted from a " show " corps 
to one of the highest discipline and valour), divided into the 
Gardes du Corps and the M ousquetaircs , the Gendarmerie 
(descended from the old feudal cavalry and the ordmmance 
companies) and the line cavalry, the whole being about 55,000 
strong. There were also 10,000 dragoons. In addition to the 
regular army, the king could call out, in case of need, the ancient 
arriere-ban or levy, as was in fact done in 1674. On that occasion, 
however, it behaved badly, and it was not again employed. In 
16SS Louvois organized a militia raised by ballot. This numbered 
25,000 men and proved to be better, at any rate, than the arriere- 
ban. Many infantry regiments of the line were, as has been said, 
foreign, and in 1678 the foreigners nvimbered 30,000, the greater 
part of these being Swiss. 

82. The artillery had been an industrial concern rather than 
an arm of the service. In sieges a sum of money was paid for each 
piece put in battery, and the grand master was not subordinated 
to the war office. A nominee of Louvois, as has been said, filled 
the post at this time, and eventually Louvois formed companies 
of artillerymen, and finally the regiment of " Fusiliers " which 
Vauban described as the " finest regiment in the world." The 
engineer service, as organized by Vauban, was composed of 
engineers " inordinary," and of line officers especially employed 
in war. Louvois further introduced the system of magazines. 
To ensure the regular working of supply and transport, he 
instituted direct control by the central executive, and stored 
great quantities of food in the fortresses, thereby securing for 
the French armies a precision and certainty in military queries
which had hitherto been wanting. The higher administration 
of the army, under the minister of war, fell into two branches, 



that of the commissaries and that of the inspecting officers. The 
duties of the former resembled those of a modern " routine " 
staff — issue of equipment, checking of returns, &c. The latter 
exercised functions analogous to those of a general staff, super- 
vising the training and general efficiency of the troops. Louvois 
also created an excellent hospital service, mobile and stationary, 
founded the Hotel des Invalides in Paris for the maintenance of 
old soldiers, established cadet schools for the training of young 
officers, and stimulated bravery and good conduct by reviving 
and creating military orders of merit. 

8^. Thelasthalf of the 1 7th century is a brilliant period in the 
annals of the French armies. Thoroughly organized, animated 
by the presence of the king, and led by such generals as Conde, 
Turenne, Luxembourg, Catinat and Vendome, they made head 
against coalitions which embraced nearly all the powers of 
Europe, and made Fra*nce the first military nation of Europe. 
The reverses of the later part of Louis XIV.'s reign were not of 
course without result upon the tone of the French army, and the 
campaigns of Marlborough and Eugene for a time diminished the 
repute in which the troops of Louis were held by other powers. 
Nevertheless the War of the Spanish Succession closed with 
French victories, and generals of the calibre of Villars and Berwick 
were not to be found in the service of every prince. The war of 
the Polish Succession in Germany and Italy reflected no discredit 
upon the French arms; and the German general staff, in its 
history of the wars of Frederick the Great, states that " in 1740 
the French army was still regarded as the first in Europe." Since 
the death of Louvois very little had changed. The army was 
still governed as it had been by the great war minister, and some- 
thing had been done to reduce evils against which even he had 
been powerless. A royal regiment of artillery had come into 
existence, and the engineers were justly regarded as the most 
skilful in Europe. Certain alterations had been made in the 
organization of both the guard and the line, and the total strength 
of the French in peace was somewhat less than 200,000. 
Relatively to the numbers maintained in other states, it was thus 
as powerful as before. Indeed, only one feature of importance 
differentiated the French army from its contemporaries — the 
proportion of officers to men, which was one to eleven. In view 
of this, the spirit of the army was necessarily that of its officers, 
and these were by no means the equals of their predecessors of 
the time of Turenne or Luxembourg. Louvois' principle of 
employing professional soldiers for command and wealthy men 
for colonelcies and captaincies was not deliberately adopted, but 
inevitably grew out of the circumstances of the time. The system 
answered fairly whilst continual wars gave the professional 
soldiers opportunities for distinction and advancement. But in 
a long peace the captains of eighteen and colonels of twenty-three 
blocked all promotion, and there was no work save that of 
routine to be done. Under these conditions the best soldiers 
sought service in other countries, the remainder lived only for 
pleasure, whilst the titular chiefs of regiments and companies 
rarely appeared on parade. Madame de Genlis relates how, 
when young courtiers departed to join their regiments for a few 
weeks' duty, the ladies of the court decked them with favours, 
as if proceeding on a distant and perilous expedition. 

On the other hand, the fact that the French armies required 
large drafts of militia to bring up their regular forces to war 
strength gave them a vitality which was unusual in armies of 
the time. Even in the time of Louis XIV. the military spirit of 
the country had arisen at the threat of invasion, and the French 
armies of 1709 fought far more desperately, as the casualty lists 
of the allies at Malplaquet showed, than those of 1703 or 1704. 
In the time of the Revolution the national spirit of the French 
army formed a rallying-point for the forces of order, whereas 
Prussia, whose army was completely independent of the people, 
lost all power of defending herself after a defeat in the field. It 
is difficult to summarize the conduct of the royal armies in the 
wars of 1740-63. With a few exceptions the superior leaders 
proved themselves incompetent, and in three great battles, 
at least, the troops suffered ignominious defeat (Dettingen 
1743, Rossbach 1757, Minden 1759). On the other hand, 



FRENCH] 



ARMY 



619 



Marshal Saxe and others of the younger generals were excellent 
commanders, and Fontenoy was a victory of the first magnitude. 
The administration, however, was corrupt and inefficient, and 
the general reputation of the French armies fell so low that 
Frederick the Great once refused an important command to 
one of his generals on the ground that his experience had been 
gained only against French troops. 

Under Louis XVT. things improved somewhat; the American 
War and the successes of Lafayette and Rochambeau revived 
a more warlike spirit. Instruction was more carefully attended 
to, and a good system of drill and tactics was elaborated at the 
camp of St Omer. Attempts were made to reform the adminis- 
tration. Artillery and engineer schools had come into existence, 
and the intellectual activity of the best officers was remarkable 
(see Max Jahns, Cesch. der Kriegswissenschaften, vol. iii. passim). 
But the Revolution soon broke over France, and the history 
of the royal army was henceforward carried on by that revolu- 
tionary army, which, under a new flag, was destined to raise the 
military fame of France to its greatest height. 

84. If Louis was the creator of the royal army, Carnot was 
so of the revolutionary army. At the outbreak of the Revolution 
the royal army consisted of 224 infantry battalions, 7 regiments 
of artillery, and 62 regiments of cavalry, numbering about 
173,000 in all, but capable of augmentation on war strength to 
210.000. To this might be added about 60,000 militia (see 
Chuquet, Premiere invasion prussienne) . 

The first step of the Constituent Assembly was the abrogation 
of an edict of 1781 whereby men of non-noble birth had been 
denied commissioned rank (1790). Thus, when many of the 
officers emigrated along with their fellows of the noblesse, trained 
non-commissioned officers, who would already have been 
officers save for this edict, were available to fill their places. 
The general scheme of reform (see Conscription) was less satis- 
factory, but the formation of a National Guard, comprising in 
theory the whole military population, was a step of the highest 
importance. At this time the titles of regiments were abandoned 
in favour of numbers, and the costly and dangerous Maison du 
Roi abolished. But voluntary enlistment soon failed; the old 
corps, which kept up their discipline, were depleted, and the 
men went to the volunteers, where work was less exacting and 
promotion more rapid. " Aussi fut-on," says a French writer, 
" reduit bicnlot a forcer I' engagement volontaire ei a imposer le 
choix du corps." The '' first invasion " (July 1792) put an end 
to half-measures, and the country was declared " in danger." 
Even these measures, however, were purely designed to meet 
the emergency, and, after Valmy, enthusiasm waned to such a 
degree that, of a paper strength of 800,000 men (December 1792), 
only 112,000 of the line and 290,000 volunteers were actually 
present. The disasters of the following spring once more called 
for extreme energy, and 300,000 national guards were sent to 
the line, a step which was followed by a compulsory levee en 
masse; one million men were thus assembled to deal with the 
manifold dangers of civil and foreign war. France was saved 
by mere numbers and the driving energy of the Terrorists, not 
by discipline and organization. The latter was chaotic, and 
almost every element of success was wanting to the tumultuary 
levies of the year 1793 save a ferocious energy born of liberty 
and the guillotine. But under the Terrorist regime the army 
became the rallying-point of the nation, and when Lazare Carnot 
(q.v.) became minister of war a better organization and discipline 
began to appear. The amalgamation of the old army and the 
volunteers, which had been commenced but imperfectly carried 
out, was effected on a different and more thorough principle. 
The infantry was organized in demi-brigades of three battalions 
(usually one of the old army to two of volunteers). A permanent 
organization in divisions of all arms was introduced, and the 
ablest officers selected for the commands. Arsenals and manu- 
factories of warlike stores were created, schools of instruction 
were re-established; the republican forces were transformed 
from hordes to armies, well disciplined, organized and 
equipped. Later measures followed the same lines, and the 
artillery and engineers, which in 1790 were admittedly the best 



in Europe and which owing to the roturier element in their 
officer cadres had not been disorganized' by the emigration, 
steadily improved. The infantry, and in a less degree the 
cavalry, became good and trustworthy soldiers, and the glorious 
campaigns of 1794, 1795 and 1796, which were the direct result 
of Carnot's administration, bore witness to the potentialities 
of the essentially modern system. But, great as was the triumph 
of 1796-97, the exhaustion of years of continuous warfare 
had made itself felt: the armies were reduced to mere skeletons, 
and no sufficient means existed of replenishing them, till in 1798 
the conscription was introduced. From that time the whole 
male population of France was practically at her ruler's disposal ; 
and Napoleon had full scope for his genius in organizing these 
masses. His principal improvements were effected in the interval 
between the peace of Amiens and the war with the third coalition, 
while threatening the invasion of England. His armies were 
collected in large camps on the coasts of the Channel, and there 
received that organization which, with minor variations, they 
retained during all his campaigns, and which has since been 
copied by all European nations. The divisions had already given 
place to the army corps, and Napoleon completed the work of his 
predecessors. He withdrew the whole of the cavalry and a 
portion of the artillery from the divisions, and thus formed 
" corps troops " and cavalry and artillery reserves for the whole 
army. The grade of marshal of France was revived at Napoleon's 
coronation. At the same time, the operation of Jourdan's law, 
acquiesced in during times of national danger and even during 
peace, soon found opposition when the conscripts realized that 
long foreign wars were to be their lot. It was not the actual losses 
of the field armies, great as these undoubtedly were, which led 
Napoleon in the full tide of his career to adopt the fatal practice of 
" anticipating " the conscription, but the steady increase in the 
number of refractaires, men who refused to come up for service. 
To hunt these men down, no less than forty thousand picked 
soldiers were engaged within the borders of France, and the 
actual French element in the armies of Napoleon grew less and 
less with every extension of the empire. Thus, in the Grand 
Army of 1809, about one- third of the corps of all arms were 
purely German, and in 181 2 the army which invaded Russia, 
467,000 strong, included 280,000 foreigners. In other words, 
the million of men produced by the original conscription of 1793 
had dwindled to about half that number (counting the various 
subsidiary armies in Spain, &c), and one hundred thousand of 
the best and sturdiest Frenchmen were engaged in a sort of civil 
war in France itself. The conscription was " anticipated " 
even in 1806, the conscripts for 1807 being called up before their 
time. As the later wars of the Empire closed one by one the 
foreign sources of recruiting, the conscription became more 
terrible every year, with the result that more rifractaires and 
more trusted soldiers to hunt them down were kept in non- 
effective employment. Finally the capacity for resistance was 
exhausted, and the army, from the marshals downward, 
showed that it had had enough. 

85. One of the first acts of the Restoration was to abolish 
the. conscription, but it had again to be resorted to within three 
years. In 1818 the annual contingent was fixed at 40,000, and 
the period of service at six years; in 1824 the contingent was 
increased to 60,000, and in 1832 to 80,000. Of this, however, a 
part only, according to the requirements of the service, were 
enrolled; the remainder were sent home on leave or furlough. 
Up to 1855 certain exemptions were authorized, and substitution 
or exchange of lots amongst young men who had drawn was 
permitted, but the individual drawn was obliged either to serve 
personally or find a substitute. The long series of Algerian wars 
produced further changes, and in 1855 the law of " dotation " 
or exemption by payment was passed, and put an end to per- 
sonal substitution. The state now undertook to provide sub- 
stitutes for all who paid a fixed sum, and did so by high 
bounties to volunteers or to soldiers for re-engaging. Although 
the price of exemption was fixed as high as £92, on an aver- 
age 23,060 were claimed annually, and in 1859 as many as 
42,000 were granted. Thus gradually the conscription became 



620 



ARMY 



{GERMAN" 



rather subsidiary to voluntary enlistment, and in 1866, out 
of a total establishment of 400,000, only 120,000 were con- 
scripts. Changes had also taken place in the constitution of 
the army. On the Restoration its numbers were reduced to 
150,000, the old regiments broken up and recast, and a royal 
guard created in place of the old imperial one. When the revolu- 
tion of July 1830 had driven Charles X. from his throne, the 
royal guard, which had made itself peculiarly obnoxious, was 
dissolved; and during Louis Philippe's reign the army was 
augmented to about 240,000 with the colours. Under the 
Provisional Government of 1848 it was further increased, and in 
1854, when France allied herself with England against Russia, 
the army was raised to 500,000 men. The imperial guard was 
re-created, and every effort made to revive the old Napoleonic 
traditions in the army. In 1859 Napoleon III. took the field 
as the champion and ally of Italy, and the victories of Montebello, 
Magenta and Solferino raised the reputation of the army to the 
highest pitch, and for a time made France the arbiter of Europe. 
But the campaign of 1866 suddenly made the world aware that 
a rival military power had arisen, which was prepared to dispute 
that supremacy. 

Marshal Niel (q.v.), the then war minister, saw clearly that 
the organization which had with difficulty maintained 150,000 
men in Italy, was no match for that which had within a month 
thrown 250,000 into the very heart of Austria, while waging 
a successful war on the Main against Bavaria and her allies. 
In 1867, therefore, he brought forward a measure for the re- 
organization of the army. This was to have been a true 
" nation in arms " based on universal service, and Niel calculated 
upon producing a first-line army 800,000 strong — half with the 
colours, half in reserve — with a separate army of the second 
line. But many years must elapse before the full effect of this 
principle of recruiting can be produced, as the army is incom- 
plete in some degree until the oldest reservist is a man who has 
been through the line training. Niel himself died within a year, 
and 1870 witnessed the complete ruin of the French army. The 
law of 1868 remained therefore no more than an expression of 
principle. 

86. At the outbreak of the Franco-German War (q.v.) the 
French field troops consisted of 368 battalions, 252 squadrons, 
and 984 guns. The strength of the entire army on peace footing 
was 393,000 men; on war footing, 567,000. Disasters followed 
one another in rapid succession, and the bulk of this war-trained 
long-service army was captive in Germany within three months 
of the opening battle. But the spirit of the nation rose to the 
occasion as it had done in 1793. The next year's contingent 
of recruits was called out and hastily trained. Fourth battalions 
were formed from the depot cadres, and organized into regiments 
de marche. The gardes mobiles (Niel's creation) were mobilized, 
and by successive decrees and under various names nearly all 
the manhood of the country called to arms. 

The regular troops raised as rigiments de marche, &c, amounted 
to 213,000 infantry, 12,000 cavalry and 10,000 artillery. The 
garde mobile exceeded 300,000, and the mobilized national guard 
exceeded 1,100,000 — of whom about 180,000 were actually 
in the field and 250,000 in Paris; the remainder preparing 
themselves in camps or depots for active work. Altogether the 
new formations amounted to nearly 1,700,000. Though, in the 
face of the now war-experienced well-led and disciplined Germans, 
their efforts failed, this cannot detract from the admiration 
which must be felt by every soldier for the patriotism of the 
people and the creative energy of their leaders, of whom 
Gambetta and Freycinet were the chief. After the war every 
Frenchman set himself to solve the army problem not less 
seriously than had every Prussian after Jena, and the reformed 
French army (see France) was the product of the period 
of national reconstruction. The adoption of the " universal 
service " principle of active army, reserves and second-line 
troops, the essential feature of which is the line training of every 
man, was almost as a matter of course the basis of the re- 
organization, for the want of a trained reserve was the most 
obvious cause of the disasters of " the terrible year." 



German Army 

87. The German army, strictly speaking, dates only from 1871, 
or at earliest 1866. Before the unification of the German empire 
or confederation, the several states possessed distinct armies, 
federal armies when required being formed from the contingents 
which the members of the union, like those of an ordinary 
alliance, engaged to furnish. The armies of the Holy Roman 
Empire were similarly formed from " single," " double," or 
" treble " contingents under the supreme command of specially 
appointed field marshals of the Empire. In the troubles of 1848 
there was witnessed the curious spectacle of half of a victorious 
army being unable to pursue the enemy; this, being composed 
of " Prussian " as distinct from " federal contingent " troops, 
had to stop at the frontier of another state. The events of 1866 
and 1870 put an end to all this, and to a very great extent to the 
separate armies of the old confederation, all being now re- 
modelled on Prussian lines. The Prussian army therefore is 
at once the most important and historically the most interesting 
of the forces of the German empire. . Its debut (about 1630) 
was not satisfactory, and in the Thirty Years' War troops of 
Sweden, of the Emperor, of the League, &c, plundered Branden- 
burg unharmed. The elector, when appealed to for protection, 
could but answer, "Que faire? lis ont des canons." The 
humiliations of this time, were, however, avenged by the troops 
of the next ruler of Brandenburg, called the Great Elector. The 
supposed invincibility of the Swedes did not prevent him from 
inflicting upon them a severe defeat at Fehrbellin, and there- 
after the Prussian contingents which took part in the many 
European wars of the time acquitted themselves creditably. 
One of their generals was the famous Leopold of Anhalt-Dessau, 
and the reckless gallantry of this leader was conspicuous on 
many fields, from Blenheim to Malplaquet. But Leopold's 
greatest work was done in the years of peace (1715-40), during 
which Prussia was preparing the army with which Frederick 
the Great won his battles. He had introduced (about 1700) 
iron ramrods into the infantry service, and for over twenty 
years the Prussian infantry was drilled to a perfection which 
gave it a superiority of five to three over the best-drilled troops 
of the Austrian service, and still greater predominance over the 
French, which was then accounted the best in Europe. Frederick 
William I., king of Prussia, directed and supervised the creation 
of the new Prussian army, and Leopold was his principal assist- 
ant. In organization and methods of recruiting, as well as in 
tactical efficiency, the army of 1740 was equally pre-eminent. 
Then came the wars of Frederick the Great. It is not too much 
to say that the infantry won his earlier battles ; the cavalry 
had been neglected both by Frederick William and by Leopold, 
and Frederick wrote that " it was not worth the devil's while to 
fetch it away." But the predominance of the infantry was so 
far indisputable that Frederick was able to devote himself to the 
reorganization of the mounted arm, with results which appeared 
in the splendid victories of Hohenfriedberg, Rossbach, Leuthen 
and Zorndorf. But long before the close of the Seven Years' 
War the incomparable infantry of the old army had disappeared, 
to be replaced by foreigners, deserters and vagabonds of all 
kinds, not to mention the unwilling S#xon and other recruits 
forced into the king's service. The army of 200,000 men which 
Frederick bequeathed to his successor was indeed superb, and 
deserved to be the model of Europe. But with Frederick's 
death the genius which had animated it, and which alone gave 
value to such heterogeneous materials, was gone. The long 
peace had the customary effect of sapping the efficiency of 
the long-service troops. They still retained their imposing 
appearance and precision of movement, and overweening self- 
confidence. But in 1806, after two crushing defeats and a series 
of humiliating surrenders, Prussia found herself at the feet of the 
conqueror, shorn of half her territory, obliged to receive French 
troops in all her towns and fortresses, and only existing on 
sufferance. But in these very disasters were laid the seeds 
of her future greatness. By the treaty of Tilsit the Prussian 
army was limited to 43,060 men. This limitation suggested 



GERMAN: ITALIAN] 



ARMY 



621 



to Scharnhorst " universal service " on the Kriimper l system 
already described (see § 36 above). 

88. The bitter humiliation and suffering endured under the 
French yoke aroused a national spirit which was capable of any 
sacrifices. The civilian became eager to be trained to fight 
against the oppressor of his country; and when Prussia rose in 
1813, the armies she poured into the field were no longer pro- 
fessional, but national armies, imperfectly trained and organized, 
but animated by a spirit which more than compensated for 
these defects. At the close of the war her rulers, with far-seeing 
sagacity, at once devoted themselves to organize on a permanent 
footing the system which had sprung up under the necessities 
and enthusiasm of the moment. Universal compulsory service, 
and a three years' term in the ranks, with further periods in 
the reserve and Landwehr, were then introduced; and though 
variations have subsequently been made in the distribution of 
time, the principles were substantially the same as those now in 
force. By the law of 1814 the periods of service were fixed at 
three years in the army, two in the reserve and fourteen in the 
Landwehr, and the annual contingent at 40,000 men. As the 
population increased, it was felt that the service was unequally 
distributed, pressing unnecessarily heavily on some, while others 
escaped altogether. Further, the experiences of Bronnzell and 
Olmiitz in 1850, and of 1859, when Prussia armed in anticipation 
of a war with France, aroused great doubts as to the efficiency 
of the Landwehr, which then formed the bulk of Prussia's forces, 
and of whom many had been as long as ten years away from the 
colours. At this time the French remark that the Prussian 
army was " a sort of militia " wa£ by no means untrue. Accord- 
ingly, by the law of i860 the annual contingent was fixed at 
63,000, the period in the reserve was increased from two to four 
years, and that in the Landwehr reduced from fourteen to five, 
The total armed force thus remained nearly the same (12 con- 
tingents of 63,000, in place of 19 of 40,000), but the army and its 
reserves were more than doubled (increased from 5 X 40,000 to 
7 X 63,000) while the Landwehr was proportionately reduced. 

This change was not effected without great opposition, and led 
to a prolonged struggle between the king, guided by Bismarck, 
and the parliament. It required the victories of 1866 and 
1870, and the position thereby won for Prussia, to reconcile the 
nation to the new law. The military alliance (1866) of Prussia 
with the other German states gave place in 1871 to the union of 
all the armies into the German army as it is to-day. Some 
retained their old peculiarities of uniform, and even more than 
this was allowed to Bavaria and to Saxony, but the whole army, 
which has been increased year by year to its present strength, 
is modelled on the Prussian part of it. The Prussian army corps 
are the Guard, and the line numbered I. to XL, and XV. to 
XVIII. 

89. The Saxon Army formerly played a prominent part in all 
the wars of northern Europe, chiefly in connexion with Poland. 
In the War of the Austrian Succession the Saxon army played 
a prominent part, but in the end it suffered a heavy defeat 
in the battle of Kesselsdorf (1745). In the Seven Years' War 
Saxony was overrun by the Prussians almost without resistance, 
and the military forces of the country under Field Marshal 
Rutowski were forced to surrender en masse at Pirna (1756); 
the men were compelled by Frederick the Great to join the 
Prussian army, and fought, though most unwillingly, through 
the remainder of the war as Prussian soldiers. A few outlying 
regiments which had not been involved in the catastrophe 
served with the Austrians, and on one occasion at least, at Kolin, 
inflicted a severe blow on the Prussians. At the outbreak of the 
wars of the French Revolution the Saxon army was over 30,000 
strong. It took part in the campaign of Jena on the side of the 
Prussians, and during the Napoleonic domination in Germany 
Saxony furnished strong contingents to the armies of Napoleon, 
who in return recognized her elector as king, and largely in- 
creased his territories. The newly made king remained faithful 
to Napoleon even in his reverses; but the army was too German 

1 From Kriimperpferd", (cast horses attached to batteries, &c, for 
odd jobs), applied to the recruits in jest. 



in feeling to fight willingly under the French flag. Their defection 
at Leipzig contributed not a little to the results of that bloody 
day. After the peace the king was shorn of a great part of his 
dominions, and the army was reconstituted on a smaller scale. 
In 1866 Saxony sided with Austria, and her army shared in the 
disasters of the brief campaign and the crowning defeat at 
Koniggratz. Under the crown prince's leadership, however, 
the Saxons distinguished themselves by their courage and 
steadiness wherever they were engaged. After the war Saxony 
became part of the North German Confederation, and in 1870- 
187 1 her troops, under the command of the crown prince, 
formed the XII. corps of the great German army. They were 
assigned to the II. army of Prince Frederick Charles, and 
delivered the decisive attack on the French right at Gravelotte. 
Subsequently a IV. army was formed under the command of 
the crown prince, in which the XII. corps, now under Prince 
George of Saxony, served with unvarying credit in the campaign 
of Sedan and the siege of Paris. The Saxon army is now organized 
in every respect on Prussian lines, and forms two army corps 
(XII. at Dresden and XIX. at Leipzig) of the German army. 
The German emperor, in concert with the king of Saxony, names 
the officers for the higher commands. Saxony retains, however, 
her separate war ministry, budget, &c; and appointments and 
promotion to all but the highest commands are made by the king. 
The colours of the older Saxon forces, and especially the green 
of the tunics, are retained in many of the uniforms of the present 
day. 

90. The Bavarian Army has perhaps the most continuous record 
of good service in the field of any of the minor German armies. 
The oldest regiments date from the Thirty Years' War, in which 
the veteran army of the Catholic league, commanded by Count Tilly 
and formed on the nucleus of the Bavarian army, played a con- 
spicuous part. Later in the war the Bavarian general, Count Mercy, 
proved himself a worthy opponent of Turenne and Conde. Hence- 
forward the Bavarians were engaged in almost every war between 
France and Austria, taking part successively in the wars of the 
Grand Alliance, the Spanish Succession (in which they came into 
conflict with the English), and the Polish and Austrian Succession 
wars. In pursuance of the traditional anti-Austrian policy, the 
troops of Bavaria, led by a distinguished Bavarian, Marshal (Prince) 
Wrede, served in the campaigns of 1805 to 1813 side by side with 
the French, and Napoleon made the electorate into a kingdom. 
But in 1813 Bavaria joined the Alliance, and Wrede tried to inter- 
cept the French on their retreat from Leipzig. Napoleon, however, 
inflicted a severe defeat on his old general at Hanau, and opened 
his road to France. In 1866 the Bavarians took part against Prussia, 
but owing to their dilatoriness in taking the field, the Prussians 
were able to beat them in detail. In 1870, reorganized to some extent 
on Prussian lines, they joined their former enemy in the war against 
France, and bore their full share in the glories and losses of the 
campaign, the II. Bavarian corps having suffered more heavily 
than any but the III. Prussian corps. The I. Bavarian corps dis- 
tinguished itself very greatly at Sedan and on the Loire. Bavaria 
still retains her separate war office and special organization, and the 
troops have been less affected by the Prussian influence than those 
of the other states. The Bavarian corps are numbered separately 
(I. Bav., Munich; II. Bav., Wiirzburg; III. Bav., Nuremberg), and 
the old light blue uniforms and other distinctive peculiarities of 
detail are still maintained. 

91. Wurttemberj> furnishes one army corps (XIII.; headquarters, 
Stuttgart), organized, clothed and equipped in all respects like the 
Prussian army. Like the Bavarians, the Wurttembergers fought 
against the Prussians in 1866, but in 1870 made common cause with 
them against the French, and by the convention entered into the 
following year placed their army permanently under the command 
of the Prussian king as emperor. The emperor nominates to 
the highest commands, but the king of Wurttemberg retains the 
nomination and appointment of officers in the lower grades. 

92. The old Hanoverian Army disappeared, of course, with the 
annexation of Hanover to Prussia in 1866, but it is still represented 
officially by certain regiments of the X. army corps, and, in one case 
at least, battle honours won by the King's German Legion in the 
British service are borne on German colours of to-day. The Hessian 
Army is now represented by the XXV. (Grand-ducal Hessian) 
division, which forms part of the XVIII. army corps. 

Italian Army 

93. The old conscription law of. the kingdom of Sardinia is 
the basis of the military organization of Italy, as its constitu- 
tion is of that of the modern Italian kingdom. The Piedmontese 
have long borne a high reputation for their military qualities, a 



622 



ARMY 



[RUSSIAN: SPANISH 



reputation shared by the rulers of the house of Savoy (q.v.), 
many of whom showed special ability in preserving the inde- 
pendence of their small kingdom between two such powerful 
neighbours as France and Austria. During the wars of the 
French Revolution Piedmont was temporarily absorbed into 
the French republic and empire. The Italian troops who 
fought under Napoleon proved themselves, in many if not most 
cases, the best of the French allies, and Italy contributed large 
numbers of excellent general officers to the Grande Armee. 

After 1815 various causes combined to place Piedmont (Sardinia) 
at the head of the national movement which agitated Italy during 
the ensuing thirty years, and bring her in direct antagonism to 
Austria. Charles Albert, her then ruler, had paid great attention 
to the army, and when Italy rose against Austria in 1848 he took the 
field with an excellent force of nearly 70,000 men. At the outset 
fortune favoured the arms of Italy; but the genius and energy of 
Radetzky, the veteran Austrian commander, turned the tide, and 
in the summer of 1849 after many battles the Piedmontese army 
was decisively defeated at Novara, and her king compelled to sue 
for peace. Charles Albert abdicated in favour of his son Victor 
Emanuel, a prince who had already distinguished himself by his 
personal gallantry in the field. Under his care the army soon re- 
covered its efficiency, and the force which joined the allied armies in 
the Crimea attracted general admiration from the excellence of its 
organization, equipment and discipline. In 1859 Piedmont again 
took up arms against Austria for the liberation of Italy; but this 
time she had the powerful assistance of France, and played but a 
subordinate part herself. In this campaign the Sardinian army was 
composed of one cavalry and five infantry divisions, and numbered 
about 60,000 combatants. By the peace of Viliafranca, Italy, 
with the exception of Venetia, was freed from the Austrians, and 
Lombardy was added to Piedmont. The revolutionary campaign of 
Garibaldi in the following year united the whole peninsula under 
the rule of Victor Emanuel, and in 1866, when Italy for the third 
time took up arms against Austria — this time as the ally of Prussia — 
her forces had risen to nearly 450,000, of whom about 270,000 
actually took the field. But in quality these were far from being 
equal to the old Piedmontese army; and the northern army, under 
the personal command of the king, was decisively defeated at 
Custozza by the archduke Albert of Austria. 

The existing organization of the Italian army is determined by 
the laws of 1873, which made universal liability to service the basis 
of recruiting. The territorial system has not, however, been adopted 
at the same time, the materials of which the Italian army is com- 
posed varying so much that it was decided to blend the different 
types of soldiers so far as possible by causing them to serve together. 
The colonial wars in which Italian troops have taken part have been 
marked with great disasters, but relieved by the gallantry of the 
officers and the rank and file. 

Russian Army 
94. The history of the Russian army begins with the abolition 
of the Strelitz (g.v.) by Peter the Great in 1698, the nucleus of 
the new forces being four regiments of foot, two of which are 
well known to-day under their old titles of Preobrazhenski and 
Semenovski. Throughout the 18th century Russian military 
progress obeyed successive dynasties of western European 
models — first those of Prussia, then those of France. In the 
earlier part of the 19th century the army, used chiefly in wars 
against the revolutionary spirit, became, like others of that 
time, a dynastic force; subsequently the " nation in arms " 
principle reasserted itself, and on this basis has been carried out 
the reorganization of Russia's military power. The enormous 
development of this since 1874 is one of the most striking 
phenomena in recent military history. In 1892, in expectation 
of a general European war, whole armies were massed in the 
districts of Warsaw and Vilna, three-fifths of the entire forces 
being in position on the German and Austrian frontiers. 

The Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5 is generally held to have 
proved that the fighting power of the Russian has in no way 
diminished in intrinsic value from that of the days of Zorndorf, 
Borodino and Sevastopol. The proverbial stubbornness of the rank 
and file is the distinctive quality of the armies of the tsar, and in 
view of the general adoption of two-years' service in other countries 
it is a matter for grave consideration whether, against European 
forces and in defence of their own homes, the Russians would not 
prove more than formidable antagonists to the men of more highly 
individualized races who are their probable opponents. Equally 
remarkable is the new power of redistribution possessed by Russia. 
Formerly it was usual to count upon one campaign at least elapsing 
before Russia could intervene effectively in European wars; much, 
in fact the greater part, of her losses in the Crimean War was due 



to the enormous distances which had to be traversed on foot. Nowa^ 
days the original equal distribution of the army over the country 
has been modified in accordance with the political needs of each 
moment. In 1892 the centre of gravity was shifted to Poland and 
Kiev, in 1904 the performances of the trans-Siberian railway in 
transporting troops to the seat of war in Manchuria excited the 
admiration of military Europe. The attitude of the army in the 
troubles which followed upon the Japanese War belongs to the 
history of Russia, not to that of military organization, and it will be 
sufficient to say that the conduct of the " nation in arms " at times 
of political unrest may vary between the extremes of unquestioning 
obedience to authority and the most dangerous form of licence, 
examples of both being frequent in the history of nearly all national 
armies. A remarkable innovation in the modern history of this 
army is the conversion of the whole of the cavalry, except a few 
elite regiments, into dragoons of the old type. After the war of 
I904-5, however, this policy was reversed and the cavalry reformed 
on the usual model. The Cossacks still retain to a large extent the 
peculiarities of the light troops of the 18th century. 

Spanish Army 

95. The feudal sovereignties of medieval Spain differed but 
little, in their military organization, from other feudal states. 
As usual, mercenaries were the only forces on which reliance 
was placed for foreign wars. These troops called almugdvares 
( Arabic = scouts) won a great reputation on Italian and Greek 
battlefields of the 13th century, and with many transformations 
in name and character appeared from time to time up to the 
Peninsular War. Castile, however, had a military system very 
different from the rest. The forces of the kingdom were com- 
posed of local contingents similar to the English fyrd, pro- 
fessional soldiers who were paid followers of the great lords, 
and the heavy cavalry of the military orders. The groups of 
cities called Hermandades, while they existed, also had permanent 
forces in their pay. At the union of Castile and Aragon the 
Castilian methods received a more general application. The 
new Hermandad was partly a light cavalry, partly a police, and 
was organized in the ratio of one soldier to every hundred 
families. In the conquest of Grenada (1482-92) mesnadas 
or contingents were furnished by the crown, the nobles and the 
cities, and permanently kept in the field. The Hermandad 
served throughout the war as a matter of course. From the 
veterans of this war was drawn the army which in the Italian 
wars won its reputation as the first army in Europe. 

In 1596 the home defence of Spain was reorganized and the 
ordenanza, or militia, which was then formed of all men not 
belonging to the still extant feudal contingents, was generally 
analogous to the system of " assizes at arms " in England. 
This ordenanza served in the Peninsular War. 

96. With the Italian wars of the early 1 6th century came the 
development of the regular army ; a brief account of its place in the 
evolution of armies has been given above. Discipline, the feeling of 
comradeship and soldierly honour were the qualities which marked 
out the Spanish army as the model for others to follow, and for more 
than a century the Spanish army maintained its prestige as the 
first in Europe. The oldest regiments of the present Spanish army 
claiming descent from the tercios date from 1535. An officer whose 
regiment was reduced commonly took a pike in some other corps 
(e.g. Tilly), the senor soldado was counted as a gentleman, and his 
wife and family received state allowances. Nor was this army open 
only to Spaniards. Walloons, Italians, Burgundians and other 
nationalities ruled over by the Habsburgs all contributed their 
quotas. But the career of the old army came to an end at Rocroi 
(1643), and after this the forces of the monarchy began more and 
more to conform to the French model. 

97. The military history of Spain from 1650 to 1700 is full of 
incident, and in the long war of the Spanish Succession both the 
army and . the ordenanza found almost continuous employment. 
They were now organized, as were most other armies of Europe, 
on the lines of the French army, and in 1714 the old tercios, which 
had served in the Spanish Netherlands under Marlborough, were 
brought to Spain. The king's regiment " Zamora " of the present 
army descends from one of these which, as the tercio of Bovadilla, 
had been raised in 1580. The army underwent few changes of 
importance during the 18th century, and it is interesting to note 
that there were never less than three Irish regiments in the service. 
In 1808 the Irlanda, Ultonia ( = Ulster) and Hibernia regiments had 
come to consist (as had similar corps in the French service before 
the Revolution) largely of native soldiers. At that time the Spanish 
army consisted of 119 Spanish and foreign (Swiss, Walloon and 
Irish) battalions, with 24 cavalry regiments and about 8000 artillery 
and engineers. There were further 51 battalions of militia, and the 



TURKISH: AMERICAN] 



ARMY 



623 



total forces numbered actually 137,000. The part played by the 
- panish standing army in the Peninsular War was certainly wholly 
insignificant relatively to these figures. It must be borne in mind, 
however, that only continued wars can give real value to: long-service 
troops of the old style, and this advantage the Spanish regulars 
did not possess. Further, the general decadence of administration 
reacted in the usual way, the appointment of court favourites to 
high command was a flagrant evil, and all that can be urged. is that 
the best elements of the army behaved as well as did the Prussians 
of 1806, that the higher leading and the administration of the army 
in the field were both sufficiently weak to have ruined most armies, 
and that the men were drawn from the same country and the same 
classes which furnished the guerrilleros whom it became fashionable 
to exalt at the expense of the soldiers. In the later campaigns of 
Wellington, Spanish divisions did good service, and the corps of 
La Romafia (a picked contingent of troops which had been sent 
before the war to Denmark at Napoleon's instance), though often 
defeated, always retained some cohesion and discipline. But the result 
of this war, the second French invasion, and the continued civil 
wars of the 19th century was the destruction of the old army, and 
the present army of Spain still bears traces of the confusion out of 
which it arose. 

The most important changes were in 1870, when conscription was 
introduced, and in 1S72, when universal service was proposed in its 
place. The military virtues of the rank and -file and the devotion 
of the officers were conspicuously displayed in the Spanish-American 
War of 1898, and it cannot be claimed even for the Germans of 1870 
that they fired so coolly and accurately as did the defenders of 
S. Juan and El Caney. 

Turkish Army 

98. The writers who have left the most complete and trust- 
worthy contemporary accounts of the Turkish army in the 
14th and 15th centuries, when it reached the height of its most 
characteristic development, are Bertrandon de la Brocquiere, 
equerry to Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, and Francesco 
Filelfo of Tolentino. Bertrandon, a professional soldier, visited 
Palestine in 1432, and returned overland in 1433, traversing 
the Balkan Peninsula by the main trade-route from Con- 
stantinople to Belgrade. He wrote an account of his journey 
for Philip: see Early Travels in Palestine, translated and edited 
by T. Wright (London, 1848). Filelfo served as secretary to the 
Venetian baylo at Constantinople, and recorded his observations 
in a series of letters (see Filelfo). Both ascribe the military, 
superiority of the Turks over the nations of western Europe to 
two facts — firstly to their possession of a well-organized stand- 
ing army, an institution unknown elsewhere, and secondly to 
their far stricter discipline, itself a result of their military organ- 
ization and of the moral training afforded by Islam. 

The regular troops comprised the Janissaries (q.v.), a corps of 
infantry recruited from captured sons of Christians, and trained to 
form a privileged caste of scientific soldiers and religious fanatics; 
and the Spahis, a body of cavalry similarly recruited, and armed with 
scimitar, mace and bow. Celibacy was one of the rules of this 
standing army, which, in its semi-monastic ideals and constitution, 
resembled the knightly orders of the West in their prime. The 
Janissaries numbered about 12,000, the Spahis about 8000. A 
second army of some 40,000 men, mostly mounted and armed like 
the Spahis, was feudal in character, and consisted chiefly of the 
personal followers of the Moslem nobility ; more than half its numbers 
were recruited in Europe. This force of 60,000 trained soldiers was 
accompanied by a horde of irregulars, levied chiefly among the 
barbarous mountaineers of the Balkans and Asia Minor, and very 
ill-armed and ill-disciplined. Their numbers may be estimated at 
140,000, for Bertrandon gives 200,000 as the total of the Turkish 
forces. Many 15th and 16th century writers give a smaller total, 
but refer only to the standing and feudal armies. Others place 
the total higher. Laonicus Chalcocondylas in his Turcica Historia 
states that at the siege of Constantinople in 1453 the siiltan, com- 
manded 400,000 troops, but most other eye-witnesses of the siege 
give a total varying from 150,000 to 300,000. Many Christian 
soldiers of fortune enlisted with the Turks as artillerists or engineers, 
and supplied them at Constantinople with the most powerful cannon 
of the age. Other Christians were compelled to serve as engineers or 
in the ranks. As late as 1683 a corps of Wallachians was forced to 
join the Turkish army before Vienna, and entrusted with the task of 
bridging the Danube. But in the J 8th and early 19th centuries the 
introduction of Christians tended to weaken the moral of the army 
already sapped by defeat; it was found impossible to maintain the 
discipline of the Janissaries, whose privileges had become a source 
of danger; and the feudal nobility became more and more inde- 
pendent of the sultan's authority. These three causes contributed 
to make reorganization inevitable. 

The destruction of the Janissaries in 1826 marked the close of the 



history, of the : old Turkish army; already the re-creation of the 
service on the accepted models of western Europe had been com- 
menced. This was still incomplete when the new force was called 
upon to meet the Russians in 1828, and though the army displayed 
its accustomed bravery, its defective organization and other causes 
led to its defeat. Since then the army has been almost as constantly 
on active service as the British; the Crimean War, the Russo- 
Turkish War of 1877 and the Greco-Turkish War of 1897 witnessed 
the employment of a large proportion of the sultan's available 
forces, while innumerable local revolts in different parts of the 
empire called for great exertions, and often for fierce fighting on 
the part of the troops locally in garrison and those sent up from the 
nearest provinces. 

United States Army 
: 99. The regular army of the United States has always been 
small. From the first it has been a voluntary force, and until 
1898 its chief work in peace was to furnish numerous small posts 
on the frontier and amongst the Indians, and to act as a reserve 
to the civil power in the great cities. In war-time the regular 
army, if, as was usually the case, it was insufficient in numbers 
for the task of subduing the enemy, formed the nucleus of large 
armies raised " for the war." In 1790 the rank and file of the 
army, as fixed by act of Congress, amounted to 12 16 men; and 
in 1 814 an English expedition of only 3500 men was able to seize 
and burn Washington, the capital of a country which even then 
numbered eight millions of inhabitants. In 1861, at the begin- 
ning of the Civil War, the whole regular force amounted to about 
15,300 men. In April of that year the president called out 
75,000 volunteers for three months ; and in May a further 
call for 42,000 was made. In July a call for 500,000 men 
was authorized by Congress, and as even this vast force proved 
insufficient it "was found necessary to use a system of drafts 
In October 1863 a levy of 300,000 men was ordered, and in 
February 1864 a further call of 500,000 was made. Finally, in 
the beginning of 1865 two further levies, amounting in all to 
500,000 men, Were ordered, but were only partially carried out 
in consequence of the cessation of hostilities. The total number 
of men called under arms by the government of the United 
States, between April 1861 and April 1865, amounted to 
2,759,049, of whom 2,656,053 were actually embodied in the 
armies. If to these be added the 1,100,000 men embodied by 
the South during the same time, the total armed forces reach the 
enormous amount of nearly four millions, drawn from a population 
of only 32 millions — figures before which the celebrated uprising 
of the French nation in 1793, or the efforts of France and 
Germany in the Franco-German War, sink into insignificance. 
These 2,700,000 Federals were organized into volunteer regi- 
ments bearing state designations. The officers, except general 
and staff officers, were appointed by the governors of the re- 
spective states. The maximum authorized strength of the 
regular army never, during the war, exceeded 40,000 men; 
and the number in the field, especially towards the close of the 
war, Was very much less. The states, in order to obtain men 
to: fill their quotas, offered liberal bounties to induce men to 
enlist, and it therefore became very difficult to obtain recruits 
for the regular army, for which no bounties were given. The 
regular regiments accordingly dv/indled away to skeletons. 
The number of officers present was also much reduced, since 
many of them, while retaining their regular commissions, held 
higher rank in the volunteer army. After the close of the Civil 
Wat the volunteers were mustered out; and by the act of 
Congress of the 28th of July 1866 the line of the army was made 
to consist, of 10 regiments of cavalry of 12 troops each, 5 regL 
ments of artillery of 12 batteries each and 45 regiments oi 
infantry of 10 companies. The actual strength in August 1867 
was 53,962. The act of the 3rd of March 1869 reduced the 
number of infantry regiments to 25 and the enlisted strength 
of the army to 35,036. The numbers were further reduced, 
without change in organization, to 32,788 in 1870 and to 25,000 
in 1874. The latter number remained the maximum for 
twenty-four years. 

In March 1898, in view of hostilities with Spain, the 
artillery was increased by 2 regiments, and, in April, 2 com- 
panies were added to each infantry regiment, giving it 



624 



ARMY 



[MINOR ARMIES 



3 battalions of 4 companies each. The strength of batteries, 
troops and companies was increased, the maximum enlisted 
strength reached during 1898 being over 63,000. A volunteer 
army was also organized. Of this army, 3 regiments of engineer 
troops, 3 of cavalry and 10 of infantry were United States 
volunteers, all the officers being commissioned by the president. 
The other organizations came from the states, the officers being 
appointed by the respective governors. As fast as they were 
organized and filled up, they were mustered into the service 
of the United States. The total number furnished for the war 
with Spain was 10,017 officers and 213,218 enlisted men. All 
general and staff officers were appointed by the president. Three 
hundred and eighty-seven officers of the regular army received 
volunteer commissions. After the conclusion of hostilities with 
Spain, the mustering out of the volunteers was begun, and by 
June 1899 all the volunteers, except those in the Philippines, 
were out of the service. The latter, as well as those serving 
elsewhere, having enlisted only for the war, were brought home 
and mustered out as soon as practicable. 

The act of the 2nd of March 1899 added 2 batteries to each 
regiment of artillery. On the 2nd of February 1901 Congress 
passed an important bill providing for the reorganization and 
augmentation (max. 100,000) of the regular army, and other 
measures followed in the next years. (See United States.) 

Minor Armies 

100. Dutch and Belgian Armies. — The military power of the 
" United Provinces " dates its rise from the middle of the 1 6th 
century, when, after a long and sanguinary struggle, they succeeded 
in emancipating themselves from the yoke of Spain; and in the 
following century it received considerable development in conse- 
quence of the wars they had to maintain against Louis XIV. In 
1702 they had in their pay upwards of 100,000 men, including many 
English and Scottish regiments, besides 30,000 in the service of the 
Dutch East India Company. But the slaughter of Malplaquet 
deprived the republic of the flower of the army. Its part in the 
War of the Austrian Succession was far from being as creditable 
as its earlier deeds, a Prussian army overran Holland in 1787 almost 
without opposition, and at the beginning of the wars of the French 
Revolution the army had fallen to 36,000 men. In 1795 Holland 
was conquered by the French under Pichegru, and in the course of 
the changes which ensued the army was entirely reorganized, and 
under French direction bore its share in the great wars of the empire. 

With the fall of Napoleon and the reconstitution of the Nether- 
lands, the Dutch-Belgian army, formed of the troops of the now 
united countries, came into existence. The army fought at Waterloo, 
but was not destined to a long career, for the revolution of 1 830 
brought about the separation of Belgium. A Dutch garrison under 
Baron Chasse, a distinguished veteran of the Napoleonic wars, 
defended Antwerp against the French under Marshal Gerard, and 
the Netherlands have been engaged in many arduous colonial wars 
in the East Indies. The Belgian army similarly has contributed 
officers and non-commissioned officers to the service of the Congo 
Free State. 

101. Swiss Army. — The inhabitants of Switzerland were always 
a hardy and independent race, but their high military reputation 
dates from the middle of the 15th century, when the comparatively 
ill-armed and untrained mountaineers signally defeated Charles 
the Bold of Burgundy and the flower of the chivalry of Europe in 
the battles of Granson, Morat and Nancy. The Swabian war, 
towards the end of that century, and the Milanese war, at the begin- 
ning of the following one, added to the fame of the Swiss infantry, 
and made it the model on which that arm was formed all over 
Europe. The wealthier countries vied with each other in hiring 
them as mercenaries, and the poor but warlike Swiss found the 
profession of arms a lucrative one. 

A brief account of the Swiss mercenaries will be found earlier in 
this article. Their fall was due in the end to their own indiscipline 
in the first place, and the rise of the Spanish standing army and its 
musketeers in the second. Yet it does not seem that themilitary 
reputation of the Swiss was discredited, even by reverses such as 
Marignan. On the contrary, they continued all through the 17th 
and 1 8th centuries to furnish whole regiments for the service of other 
countries, notably of France, and individuals, like Jomini in a later 
age, followed the career of the soldier of fortune everywhere. The 
most notable incident in the later military history of the Swiss, the 
heroic faithfulness of Louis XVI. 's Swiss guard, is proverbial, and 
has been commemorated with just pride by their countrymen. 
The French Revolutionary armies overran Switzerland, as they did 
all the small neighbouring states, and during Napoleon's career she 
had to submit to his rule, and furnish her contingent to his armies. 
On the fall of Napoleon she regained her independence, and returned 
to her old trade of furnishing soldiers to the sovereigns and powers of 
Europe. Charles X. of France had at one time as many as 17,000 



Swiss in his pay ; Naples and Rome had each four regiments. The 
recruiting for these foreign services was openly acknowledged and 
encouraged by the government. The young Swiss engaged usually 
for a period of four or six years; they were formed in separate 
regiments, officered by countrymen of their own, and received a 
higher rate of pay than the national regiments; and at the close 
of their engagement returned with their earnings to settle down on 
their paternal holdings. A series of revolutions, however, expelled 
them from France and Italy, and recently the advance of liberal 
ideas, and the creation of great national armies based on the principle 
of personal service, has destroyed their occupation. Switzerland is 
now remarkable in a military sense as being the only country that 
maintains no standing army (see Militia). 

102. The Swedish Army can look back with pride to the days of 
Gustavus Adolphus and of Charles XII. The contributions made by 
it to the military science of the 17th century have been noticed above. 
The triumphs of the small and highly disciplined army of Charles 
were often such as to recall the similar victories of the Greeks under 
Alexander. The then nebulous armies of Russia and Poland re- 
sembled indeed the forces of Darius in the 4th century B.C., but Peter 
the Great succeeded at last in producing a true army, and the 
resistance of the Swedes collapsed under the weight of the vastly 
superior numbers then brought against them. 

The Danish Army has a long and meritorious record of good service 
dating from the Thirty Years' War. 

103. The existing Army of Portugal dates from the Peninsular 
War, when a considerable force of Portuguese, at one time exceeding 
60,000 men, was organized under Marshal Beresford. Trained and 
partly officered by English officers, it proved itself not unworthy of 
its allies, and bore its full share in the series of campaigns and 
battles by which the French were ultimately expelled from Spain. 
At the peace the army numbered about 50,000 infantry and 5000 
cavalry, formed on the English model, and all in the highest state 
of efficiency. This force was reduced in 1821, under the new 
constitutional government, to about one-half. 

104. The Rumanian, Bulgarian and Servian armies are the 
youngest in Europe. The conduct of the Rumanians before Plevna 
in 1877 earned for them the respect of soldiers of all countries. 
Servia and Bulgaria came to war in 1885, and the Bulgarian soldiers, 
under the most adverse conditions, achieved splendid victories 
under the leadership of their own officers. In the crisis following 
the Austrian annexation of Bosnia-Herzegovina (1908-9), it seemed 
likely that the Servian forces might play an unexpectedly active 
part in war even wjth a strong power. 

Bibliography. — Below are the titles of some of the more im- 
portant Works on the subject of armies. See also under biographical 
headings and articles dealing with the several arms, &c. A large 
proportion of the works mentioned below are concerned mainly 
with the development of strategy and tactics. 

V. der Gpltz, Das Volk in Waffen (1883, new ed., 1898, English 
translation, P. A. Ashworth, Nation in Arms, London, 1887, new 
ed., 1907, French, Nation' armee, Paris, 1889); Jahns, Heeresver- 
fassung und Volkerleben (Berlin, 1885); Berndt, Die Zahl im Kriege 
(Vienna, 1895); F. N. Maude, Evolution of Modern Strategy (1903), 
Voluntary versus Compulsory Service (1897), and War and the World's 
Life (1907) ; Pierron, Methodes de guerre, vol. i. ; Jahns, Ceschichte 
der Krtegswissenschaften (an exhaustive bibliography, with critical 
notes) ; Troschke, Mil. Litteratur seit den Befreiungskriegen (Berlin, 
1870) ; T. A. Dodge, Great Captains {Alexander, Hannibal, Caesar, 
Gustavus, Napoleon) ; Bronsart v. Schellendorf (Eng. trans., War 
Office, 1905) Duties of the General Staff; Fave, Histoire et tactique 
des trois armes (Liege, 1850) ; Maynert, Gesch. des Kriegswesens u. 
der Heeresverfassungen in Europa (Vienna, 1869); Jahns, Handbuch 
fur eine Geschichte des Kriegswesens v. der Urzeit bis zur Renaissance 
(Leipzig, 1 880) ; de la Barre Duparcq, Histoire de I' art de la guerre 
avant V usage de poudre (Paris, i860) ; Riistow and Kochly, Ge- 
schichte des griechischen Kriegswesens (Aarau, 1852); Kochly and 
Riistow, Grtechische Kriegsschriftsteller (Leipzig, 1855); Forster, 
in Hermes, xii. (1877) ; D. G. Hogarth, Philip and Alexander 
(London, 1897); Macdougall, Campaigns of Hannibal (London, 
1858); Riistow, Heerwesen, &c, Julius Casars (Nordhausen, 1855); 
Organ der M. Wissensch. Verein of 1877 (Vienna); Polybius litera- 
ture of the 17th and 18th centuries; supplement to M.W.B., 1883; 
the works of Xenophon, Aelian, Arrian, Vegetius, Polybius, Caesar, 
&c. (see Kochly and Riistow: a collection was made in the 15th 
century, under the title Veteres de re militari scriptores, 1487) ; 
Oman, A History of the Art of War: Middle Ages (London, 1898); 
Delpech, La Tactique au XIII' siecle (Paris, 1886); Kohler, Die 
Eniwickelung des Kriegswesens v. 11. Jahrhdt. bis zu den Hussiten- 
kriegen (Breslau, 1886-1893); Ricotti, Storia delle Compagnie di 
Ventura (Turin, 1846); Steger, Gesch. Francesco Sforzas und d. Hal. 
Condottieri (Leipzig, 1865) ; J. A. Symonds, The Renaissance in 
Italy and The Age of the Despots ; A Brandenburg Mobilization of 1477 
(German General Staff Monograph, No. 3) ; Palacky, "Kriegskunst 
der Bohmen," Zeitschrift bohmisch. Museums (Prague, 1828); 
George, Battles of English History (London, 1895); Biottot, Les 
Grands inspirSs devant la science; Jeanne d'A re (Paris, 1907); 
V. Ellger, Kriegswesen, &fc, der Eidgenossen, 14., 15., 16. Jahrhdt. 
(.1873); de la Chauvelays, Les Armies de Charles le Temeraire 
(Paris, 1879) ; Guillaume, Hist, des bandes d'ordonnance dans les 



ARNAL— ARNAUD 



625 



Pays-Bos (Brussels, 1873); the works of Froissart, de Brantflme, 
Machiavelh, Lienhard Fronsperger (Kriegsbuch, 1570), de la Noue, 
du Bellay, &c; Villari, Life and Times of MachiaveUi (English 
version) ; " Die frommerv Landsknechte " {M. W. B., supplement, 
1880); Kriegsbilder aus der Zeit der Landsknechte (Stuttgart, 1883); 
C. H. Firth, Cromwell's Army (London, 1902) ; Heilmann, Das 
Kriegswesen der Kaiserlichen und Schweden (Leipzig, 1850) ; 
C. Walton, History of the British Standing Army, 1660-1700 (London, 
1894); E. A. Altnam in United Service Magazine, February 1907; 
Austrian official history of Prince Eugene's campaigns, &c. ; de la 
Barre Duparcq, Hist, milit. de la Prusse avant 1756 (Paris, 1857); 
Marsigli, L'Etat militaire de I'emp. ottoman (1732); Prussian Staff 
History of the Silesian wars; C. von B(inder)-K(rieglstein), Geist 
und Stoff im Kriege (Vienna, 1895) ; E. d'Hauterive, L'Armee sous la 
Revolution (Paris, 1894); C. Rousset, Les Volontaires de 1791-1794; 
Michelet, Les Soldats de la Revolution (Paris, 1878); publications of 
the French general staff on the Revolutionary and Napoleonic 
wars; H. Bonnal, Esprit de la guerre moderne (a series of studies in 
military history, 1 805-1 870); Paimblant du Rouil, La Division 
Durutte, les Refractaires, also supplement, M.W.B., 1890; "The 
French Conscription" (suppl. M.W.B., 1892); C. v. der Goltz, 
Von Rossbach bis Jena una Auerstddt (a new edition of the original 
Rossbach und Jena, Berlin, 1883) ; German General Staff Monograph, 
No. 10; M.W.B. supplements of 1845, 1846, 1847, 1854, 1855,1856, 
1857, 1858, 1862, 1865, 1866, 1867, 1887; v. Duncker, Preussen 
wahrend der franz. Okkupation (1872); Archives of Prussian war 
ministry, publications of 1892 and 1896; histories of the wars of 
1 866 and 1870; V. Chareton, Comme la Prusse a prepare sa revanche, 
1806-1813 ; Reports of Col. Baron Stoffel, French' attache at Berlin 
(translation into English, War Office, London) ; Haxthausen, Les 
Forces militaires de la Prusse (Paris, 1853); de la Barre Duparcq, 
Eludes historiques generates et militaires sur la Prusse (Paris, 1854) '< 
Paixhans, Constitution militaire de la France (Paris, 1849) ; Due 
d'Aumale, Les Institutions militaires de la France (Paris, 1867); 
C. v. Decker, liber die Persbnlichkeit des preussischen Soldaten 
(Berlin, 1842) ; War Office, Army Book of the British Empire (London, 
1893); M. Jahns, Das franzosische Heer von der grossen Revolution 
bis zur Gegenwart (Leipzig, 1873); Baron Kaulbars, The German 
Army (in Russian) [St Petersburg, 1890] ; Die Schweiz im 19. Jahr- 
hundert (Berne and Lausanne, 1899); Heimann, L'Afmte allemande 
(Paris, 1895) ; R. de l'Homme de Courbiere, Grundziige der deutschen 
Militarverwaltung (Berlin, 1882) ; G. F. R. Henderson, The Science 
of War (London, 1905) ; J. W. Fortescue, History of the British Army 

(London, 1899 ) ; R. de l'Homme de Courbiere, Gesch. der 

brandenburg-preussisch. Heeresverfassung (Berlin, 1852); Krippen- 
tagel and Kiistel, Die preuss. Armee von der dltesten Zeit bts zur 
Gegenwart (Berlin, 1883) ; Gansauge, Das brandenbg.-preuss. Kriegs- 
wesen,i440,i640,i74o(Berliv, 1839); A.v.Boguslawksi,i?ie Landwehr, 
1813-1893 (1893); A. R. v. Sichart, Gesch. d. k. hannover. Armee 
(Hanover, 1866); v. Reitzenstein, Die k. hannover. Kavallerie, 1631- 
1866 (1892); Schlee, Zur Gesch. des hessischen Kriegswesens(Ka.$se\, 
1 867) ; Leichtlen, Badens Kriegsverfassung (Carlsruhe, 18 15) ; v. Stad- 
linger, Gesch. des wiirttembergischen Kriegswesens (Stuttgart, 1858); 
Munich, Entviickelung der bayerischen Armee (Munich, 1864); 
official Gesch. d. k. bayer. Armee (Munich, 1901 onward); Wiirdinger, 
Kriegsgesckichte v. Bayern (Munich, 1868); H. Meynert, Gesch. 
des osterr. Kriegswesens (Vienna, 1852), Kriegswesen Ungarns 
(Vienna, 1876); Anger, Gesch. der K.-K. Armee (Vienna, -1886) j 
Beitrdge zur Gesch. des osterr. Heerwesens, 1754-1814 (Vienna, 1872) ; 
R. v. Ottenfeld and Teuber, Die osterr. Armee, 1700-1867 (Vienna, 
1895); v. Wrede, Gesch. d. K. u. K. Wehrmacht (Vienna, 1902); 
May de Rainmoter, Histoire militaire de la Suisse (Lausanne, 1788) ; 
Cusachs y Barado, La Vida Militar en Espaila (Barcelona, 1888) ; 
Guillaume, Hist, de I'infanterie wallonne sous la maison d'Espagne 
(Brussels, 1876); A. Vitu, Histoire civile de Varmee (Paris, 1868); 
A. Pascal, Hist, de Varmee (Paris, 1847); L. Jablonski, L'Armee 
frangaise & travers les ages; C. Romagny, Hist, ginirale de Varmee 
nationale (Paris, 1893); E. Simond, Hist. mil. de la France; Susane, 
Hist, de I'infanterie, cavalerie, artillerie franQaises (Paris, 1874); 
Pere Daniel, Hist, des milices frangaises (1721) ; the official Historique 

des corps de troupe (Paris, 1900 ); Cahu, Le Soldat francais 

(Paris, 1876) ; J. Molard, Cent ans de Varmte francaise, 1789-1889 
(Paris, 1890) ; v. Stein, Lehre vom Heerwesen (Stuttgart, 1872) ; 
du Verger de S. Thomas, V Italic et son armee, 1865 (Paris, 1866) ; 
" C. Martel." Military Italy (London, 1884); Sir R. Biddulph, Lord 
Card-well at theWar Office (London, 1904) ; Willoughby Verner, Military 
Life of the Duke of Cambridge (London, 1905) ; W. H. Daniel, The 
Military Forces of the Crown (London, 1902); War Office, Annual 
Report of the British Army; Broome, Rise and Progress of the Bengal 
Army (Calcutta, 1850); W. J. Wilson, Hist, of the Madras Army 
(London, 1882-1885); C. M. Clode, Military Forces of the Crown; 
Blume, Die Grundlage unserer Wehrkraft (Berlin, 1899); Spenser 
Wilkinson, The Brain of an Army (London, 1890 and 1895); v. 
Olberg, Die franzosische Armee im Exerzirplatz una im Felde (Berlin, 
1861); Die Heere und Flotte der Gegenwart, ed. Zepelin (Berlin, 
1896); Molard, Puissances militaires de VEurope (Paris, 1895); 
works of Montecucculi, Puysegur, Vauban, Feuquieres, Guibert, 
Folard, Guichard, Joly de Maizeroy, Frederick the Great, Marshal 
Saxe, the prince de Ligne, Napoleon, Carnot, Scharnhorst, Clause- 
witz, Napoleon III., Moltke, Hamley, &c. 



The principal general military periodicals are:— English, Journal 
of the R. United Service Institution; United States, Journal of the 
Military Service Institution; French, Revue d' histoire and Revue 
des armies etrangeres (general staff) ; Rau and Lauth, L'Etat militaire 
des puissances (about every 4 years) ; Revue militaire generate, 
founded in 1907 by General Langlois; Aimanach du drapeau (a 
popular aide-memoire published annually) ; German, the Vierteljahrs- 
heft of the general staff: Militar-Wochenblatt (referred to above 
as M.W.B. — the supplements are of great value); von Lobell's 
Jahresberichte (annual detailed reports on the state, &c, of all armies 
—an English precis appears annually in the Journal of the R.U.S. 
Institution); Austrian, Streffleurs bst. Militar - Zeitschrift, with 
which was amalgamated (1907) the Organ d. militdrwissenschaft. 
Vereins. The British War Office issues from time to time handbooks 
dealing with foreign armies, and, quarterly since April 1907, a 
critical review and bibliography of recent military literature in 
the principal languages, under the name of Recent Publications of 
Military Interest. (C. F. A.) 

ARNAL, ETIENNE (1794-1872), French actor, was born at 
Meulan, Seine-et-Oise, on the 1st of February 1794. After 
serving in the army, and working in a button factory, he took 
to the stage. His first appearance (1815) was in tragedy, and for 
some time he was unsuccessful; it was not until 1827 that he 
showed his real ability in comedy parts, especially in plays by 
Felix August Duvert (1795-1876) and Augustin Theodore 
Lauzanne (1805-1877), whose Cabinets particuliers (1832), 
Le Mari de la- dame de chceurs (1837), Passe minuit, L'Homme 
blase" (1843), La Clef dans ledos (1848), &c, contained parts written 
for him. He was twenty years at the Vaudeville, and completed 
at the various. Parisian theatres a stage career of nearly half a 
century. Arnal was the author of Epitre a boujfe (1840), which 
is reprinted in his volume of poetry, Boutades en vers (1861). 

ARNALDUS DE VILLA NOVA, also called Arnaldus de 
Villanueva, Arnaldus Villanovanus or Arnaud de Ville- 
neuve (c. 1235-1313), alchemist, astrologer and physician, 
appears to have been of Spanish origin, and to have studied 
chemistry, medicine, physics, and also Arabian philosophy. After 
having lived at the court of Aragon, he went to Paris, where he 
gained a considerable reputation; but he incurred the enmity of 
the ecclesiastics and was forced to flee, finally finding an asylum 
in Sicily. About 13 13 he was summoned to Avignon by Pope 
Clement V., who was ill, but he died on the voyage. Many 
alchemical writings, including Thesaurus Thesaurorum or Rosarius 
Philosophorum, Novum Lumen, Flos Florum, and Speculum 
Alchimiae, are ascribed to him, but they are of very doubtful 
authenticity. Collected editions of them were published at 
Lyons in 1504 and 1532 (with a biography by Symphorianus 
Campegius) , at Basel in 1585, at Frankfort in 1603, and at Lyons 
in 1686. He is also the reputed author of various medical works, 
including Breviarium Practicae. 

See J. B. Haureau in the Histoire litteraire de la France (1881), 
vol. 28; E. Lalande, Arnaud de Villeneuve, sa vie et ses ceuvres 
(Paris, 1896). A list of writings is given by J. Ferguson in his 
Bibliotheca Chemica (1906). See also U. Chevalier, Repertoire des 
sources hist., &c, Bio-bibliographie (Paris, 1903). 

ARNAUD, HENRI (1641-1721), pastor and general of the 
Vaudois or Waldensians of Piedmont, was born at Embrun. 
About 1650 his family returned to their native valley of Luserna, 
where Arnaud was educated at La Tour (the chief village), later 
visiting the college at Basel (1662 and 1668) and the Academy 
at Geneva (1666). He then returned home, and seems to have 
been pastor in several of the Vaudois valleys before attaining 
that position at La Tour (1685). He was thus the natural leader 
of his co-religionists after Victor Amadeus expelled them (1686) 
from their valleys, and most probably visited Holland, the ruler 
of which, William of Orange, certainly gave him help and money. 
Arnaud occupied himself with organizing his 3000 countrymen 
who had taken refuge in Switzerland, and who twice (1687-1688) 
attempted to regain their homes. The English revolution of 
1688, and the election of William to the throne, encouraged the 
Vaudois to make yet another attempt. Furnished with detailed 
instructions from the veteran Josue Janavel (prevented by age 
from taking part in the expedition) Arnaud, with about 1000 
followers, started (August 17, 1689) from near Nyon on 
the Lake of Geneva for the glorieuse rentrte. On the 27 th of 
August, the valiant band, after many hardships and dangers, 



6 2 6 



ARNAUCD ,.; 



reached the Valley of St Martin, having passed by Sallanches and 
crossed the Col de Very (6506 ft.), the Enclave de la Fenetre 
(7425 ft.), the Col du Bonhomme (8147 ft), the Col du Mont 
Iseran (0085 ft.), the Grand Mont Cenis (6893 ft.), the Petit 
Mont Cenis (7166 ft.), the Col de Clapier (8173 ft.), the Col de 
Coteplane (7589 ft.), and the Col du Piz (8550 ft.). They soon 
took refuge in the lofty and secure rocky citadel of the Balsille, 
where they were besieged (October 24, 1689 to May 14, 1690) 
by the troops (about 4000 in number) of the king of France 
and the duke of Savoy. They maintained this natural fortress 
against many fierce attacks and during the whole of a winter. 
In particular, on the 2nd of May, one assault was defeated without 
the loss of a single man of Arnaud's small band. But another 
attack (May 14) was not so successful, so that Arnaud with- 
drew his force, under cover of a thick mist, and led them 
over the hills to the valley of Angrogna, above La Tour. A 
month later the Vaudois were received into favour by the duke 
of Savoy, who had then abandoned his alliance with France 
for one with Great Britain and Holland. Hence for the next 
six years the Vaudois helped Savoy against France, though 
suffering much from the repeated attacks of the French troops. 
But by a clause in the treaty of peace of 1696, made public in 
1698, Victor Amadeus again became hostile to the Vaudois, 
about 3000 of whom, with Arnaud, found a shelter in Protestant 
countries, mainly in Wiirttemberg, where Arnaud became the 
pastor of Dtirrmenz-Schonenberg, N.W. of Stuttgart (1699). 
Once again (1704-1706) the Vaudois aided the duke against 
France. Arnaud, however, took no part in the military opera- 
tions, though he visited England (1707) to obtain pecuniary aid 
from Queen Anne. He died at SchSnenberg (which was the! 
church hamlet of the parish of Diirrmenz) in 1 7 2 1 . It was during 
his retirement that he compiled from various documents by other 
hands his Histoire de la glorieuse rentrSe des Vaudois dans leurs 
vallees, which was published (probably at CasSel) in 17 10, with 
a dedication to Queen Anne. It was translated into English 
(1827) by H. Dyke Acland, and has also appeared in German 
and Dutch versions. A part of the original MS. is preserved 
in the Royal Library in Berlin. 

See K. H. Klaiber, Henri Arnaud, ein Lebensbild (Stuttgart, 
1880); A. de Rochas d'Aiglun, Les Vallees vaudoises (Paris, 1881); 
various chapters in the Bulletin du bicentenaire de la glorieuse 
reniree (Turin, 1889). (W. A. B. C.) 

ARNAULD, the surname of a family of prominent French 
lawyers, chiefly remembered in connexion with the Jansenist 
troubles of the 17 th century. At their head was Antoine 
Arnauld (1560-1619), a leader of the Paris bar; in this capacity 
he delivered a famous philippic against the Jesuits in 1594, 
accusing them of gross disloyalty to the newly converted 
Henry IV. This speech was afterwards known as the original 
sin of the Arnaulds. 

Of his twenty children several grew up to fight the Jesuits 
on more important matters. Five gave themselves up wholly 
to the church. Henri Arnauld (1597-1692), the seconct son, 
became bishop of Angers in 1649, and represented Jansenism 
on the episcopal Bench for as long as forty-three years. The 
youngest son, Antoine (1612-1694), was the most famous of 
Jansenist theologians (see below). The second daughter, 
Angelique (1591-1661), was abbess and reformer of Port Royal; 
here she was presently joined by her sister Agnes (1 593-1 671) 
and two younger sisters, both of whom died early. 

Only two of Antoine's children married — Robert Arnauld 
d'Andilly ( 1 588-1674), the eldest son, and Catherine Le- 
maistre (1590-1651), the eldest daughter. But both of these 
ended their lives under the shadow of the abbey. Andilly's 
five daughters all took the veil there; the second, Angelique 
de St Jean Arnauld d'Andilly (1624-1684) rose to be abbess, 
was a writer of no mean repute, and one of the most remarkable 
figures of the second generation of Jansenism. One of Andilly's 
sons became a hermit at Port Royal; the eldest, Antoine 
(161 5-1699), was first a soldier, afterwards a priest. As the 
Abbe Arnauld, he survives as author of some interesting Memoirs 
of his time. The second son, Simon Arnauld de Pomponne 



(1616-1699), early entered public life. After holding various 
embassies, he rose to be foreign secretary to Louis XIV., and 
was created marquis de Pomponne. Lastly Madame Lemaistre 
and two of her sons became identified with Port Royal. On 
her husband's death she took the veil there. Her eldest son, 
Antoine Lemaistre (1608-1658), became the first of the soli- 
taires, or hermits of Port Royal. There he was joined by his 
younger brother, Isaac Lemaistre de Saci (1613-1684), who 
presently took holy orders, and became confessor to the hermits. 

The Arnaulds' connexion with Port Royal (q.v.) — a convent 
of Cistercian nuns in the neighbourhood of Versailles — dated 
back to 1599, when the original Antoine secured the abbess's 
chair for his daughter Angelique, then a child of eight. About 
1608 she started to reform her convent in the direction of its 
original Rule; but about 1623 she made the acquaintance of 
du Vergier (q.v.) and thenceforward began to move in a Jan- 
senist direction. Her later history is entirely bound up with 
the fortunes of that revival. Angelique's strength lay chiefly 
in her character. Her sister and collaborator, Agnes, was also 
a graceful writer; and her Letters, edited by Prosper Feugere 
(a, vols., Paris, 1858), throw most valuable light on the inner 
aims and aspirations of the Jansenist movement. The first 
relative to join their projects of reform was their nephew, 
Antoine Lemaistre, who threw up brilliant prospects at the bar 
to settle down at the Abbey gates (1638). Here he was presently 
joined by his brother, de Saci, and other hermits, who led an 
austere semi-monastic existence, though without taking any 
formal vow. In 1646 they were joined by their uncle, Arnauld 
d'Andilly, Wtherto a personage of seme importance at court and 
in the world; he was a special favourite of the queen regent, 
Anne of Austria, and had held various offices of dignity in the 
government. Uncle and nephews passed their time partly in 
ascetic exercises — though Andilly never pretended to vie in 
austerity with the younger men — partly in managing the convent 
estates, and partly in translating religious classics. Andilly 
put Josephus, St Augustine's Confessions, and many other 
works, into singularly delicate French. Lemaistre attacked 
the lives of the saints; in 1654 Saci set to work on a translation 
of the Bible. His labours were interrupted by the outbreak 
of persecution. In 1661 he was forced to go into hiding; in 
1666 he was arrested, thrown into the Bastille, and kept there 
more than two years. Meanwhile his friends printed his trans- 
lation of the New Testament — really in Holland, nominally at 
Mons in the Spanish Netherlands (1667). Hence it is usually 
known as. the Nouveau Testament de Mons. It found enthusi- 
astic friends and violent detractors. Bossuet approved its 
orthodoxy, but not its over-elaborate style; and it was de- 
structively criticized by Richard Simon, the founder of Biblical 
criticism in France. On the other hand it undoubtedly did 
much to popularize the Bible, and was bitterly attacked by the 
Jesuits on that ground. 

By far the most distinguished of the family, however, was 
Antoine— le grand Arnauld, as contemporaries called him — 
the twentieth and youngest child of the original 
Antoine. Born in 1612, he was originally intended Ataauid. 
for the bar; but decided instead to study theology 
at the Sorbonne. Here he was brilliantly successful, and was 
on the high-road to preferment, when he came under the influence 
of du Vergier, and was drawn in the direction of Jansenism. 
His book, De la frSquente Communion (1643), did more than 
anything else to make the aims and ideals of this movement 
intelligible to the general public. Its appearance raised a violent 
storm, and Arnauld eventually withdrew into hiding; for more 
than twenty years he dared not make a public appearance in 
Paris. During all this time his pen was busy with innumerable 
Jansenist pamphlets. In 1655 two very outspoken Lettres a 
un due et pair on Jesuit methods in the confessional brought 
on a motion to expel him from the Sorbonne. This motion 
was the immediate cause of Pascal's Provincial Letters. Pascal, 
however, failed to save his friend; in February 1656 Arnauld 
was solemnly degraded. Twelve years later the tide of fortune 
turned. The so-called peace of Clement IX. put an end to 



A RN AULT— ARNDT 



627 



persecution. Arnauld emerged from his retirement, was most 
graciously received by Louis XIV., and treated almost as a 
popular hero. He now set to work with Nicole (q.v.) on a great 
work against the Calvinists: La Perpituiti de la foi catholiquc 
louchant Peucharistie. Ten years later, however, another storm 
of persecution burst. Arnauld was compelled to fly from France, 
and take refuge in the Netherlands, finally settling down at 
Brussels. Here the last sixteen years of his life were spent in 
incessant controversy with Jesuits, Calvinists and misbelievers 
of all kinds; here he died on the 8th of August 1694. His in- 
exhaustible energy is best expressed by his famous reply to 
Nicole, who complained of feeling tired. "Tired!" echoed 
Arnauld, "when you have all eternity to rest in?" Nor was 
this energy by any means absorbed by purely theological 
questions. He was one of the first to adopt the philosophy of 
Descartes, though with certain orthodox reservations; and 
between 1683 and 1685 he had a long battle with Malebranche 
on the relation of theology to metaphysics. Dn the whole, 
public opinion leant to Arnauld's side. When Malebranche 
complained that his adversary had misunderstood him, Boileau 
silenced him with the question: " My dear sir, whom do you 
expect to understand you, if M. Arnauld does not?" And 
popular regard for Arnauld's penetration was much increased 
by his Art de peiiser, commonly known as the Port-Royal Logic, 
which has kept its place as an elementary text-book until quite 
modern times. Lastly a considerable place has quite lately 
been claimed for Arnauld among the mathematicians of his 
age; a recent critic even describes him as the Euclid of the 
17th century. In general, however, since his death his reputa- 
tion has been steadily on the wane. Contemporaries admired 
him chiefly as a master of close and serried reasoning; herein 
Bossuet, the greatest theologian of the age, was quite at one 
with d'Aguesseau, the greatest lawyer. But a purely contro- 
versial writer is seldom attractive to posterity. Anxiety to 
drive home every possible point, and cut his adversary off from 
every possible line of retreat, makes him seem intolerably 
prolix. " In spite of myself," Arnauld once said regretfully, 
" my books are seldom very short." And even lucidity may 
prove a snare to those who trust to it alone, and scornfully 
refuse to appeal to the imagination or the feelings. It is to be 
feared that, but for his connexion with Pascal, Arnauld's name 
would be almost forgotten — or, at most, live only in the famous 
epitaph Boileau consecrated to his memory — 

" Au pied de ret autel de structure grossiere 
Git sans pompe, enferm6 dans une vile biere 
Le plus savant mortel qui jamais ait ecrit." 

Full details as to the lives and writings of the Arnaulds will be 
found in the various books mentioned at the close of the article on 
Port Royal. The most interesting account of Angelique will be 
found in Memoires pour servir a t'histoire de Port-Royal (3 vols., 
Utrecht : 1 742). Three volumes of her correspondence were also pub- 
lished at the same time and place. There are excellent modern lives 
of her in English by Miss Frances Martin {Angelique Arnatdd, 1873) 
and by A. K. H. (A ngelique of Port Royal, 1905). Antoine Arnauld's 
complete works — thirty-seven volumes in forty-two parts — were 

Published in Paris, 1 775-1781. No modern biography of him exists; 
ut there is a study of his philosophy in Bouillier, Histoire de la 
i>hilosopkie cariesienne (Paris, 1868); and his mathematical achieve- 
ments are discussed by Dr Bopp in the 14th volume of the Abhand- 
lungen zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften (Leipzig, 
1902). The memoirs of Arnauld d'Andilly and of his son, the abbe 
Arnauld, are reprinted both in Petitot's and Poujoulat's collections 
of memoirs illustrative of the 17th century. (St. C.) 

ARNAULT, ANTOINE VINCENT (1 766-1 834), French drama- 
tist, was born in Paris in January 1766. His first play, Marius 
a Minturnes (179-1), immediately established his reputation. 
A year later he followed up his first success with a second 
republican tragedy, Lucrhce. He left France during the Terror 
and on his return was arrested by the revolutionary authorities, 
but was liberated through the intervention of Fabre d'Eglantine 
and others. He was commissioned by Bonaparte in 1797 with the 
reorganization of the Ionian Islands, and was nominated to the 
Institute and made secretary general of the university. He was 
faithful to his patron through his misfortunes, and after the 
Hundred Days remained in exile until 1819. In 1829 he was 



re-elected to the Academy and became perpetual secretary in 
1833. Others of his plays are Blanche et Montcassin, ou les 
Vinitiens (1798); and Germanicus (1816), the performance of 
which was the occasion of a disturbance in the parterre which 
threatened serious political complications. His tragedies are 
perhaps less known now than his Fables (1813, 1815 and 1826), 
which are written in very graceful verse. Arnault collaborated 
in a Vie politique et militaire de Napoleon (1822), and wrote some 
very interesting Souvenirs d'un. scxagenaire (1833), which contain 
much out-of-the-way information about the history of the years 
previous to 1804. Arnault died at Goderville on the 16th of 
September 1834. 

His eldest son, fimilien Lucien (1787-1863), wrote several 
tragedies, the leading r61es in which were interpreted by Talma. 

See Sainte-Beuve, Causeries du lundi, vol. 7. Arnault's CEuvres 
computes (4 vols.) were published at the Hague and Paris in 1818- 
1819, and again (8 vols.) at Paris in 1824. 

ARNDT, ERNST MORITZ (1769-1860), German poet and 
patriot, was born on the 26th of December 1 769 at Schoritz in the 
island of Riigen, which at that time belonged to Sweden. He 
was the son of a prosperous farmer, and emancipated serf of 
the lord of the district, Count Putbus; his fnother came of 
well-to-do German yeoman stock. In 1787 the family removed 
into the neighbourhood of Stralsund, where Arridt was enabled 
to attend the academy. After an interval of private study he 
went in 1791 to the university of Greifswald as a student of 
theology and history, and in ; 1793 removed to Jena, where he fell 
under the influence of Fichte. On the completion of his university 
course he returned home, was for two years a private tutor in the 
family of Ludwig Kosegarten (1758-1818), pastor of Wittow and 
poet, and having qualified for the ministry as a " candidate of 
theology," assisted in the church services. At the age of twenty- 
eight he renounced the ministry, and for eighteen months he led 
a wandering life, visiting Austria, Hungary, Italy, France and 
Belgium. Returning homewards up the Rhine, he was moved 
by the sight of the ruined castles along its banks to intense 
bitterness against France. The impressions of this journey he 
later described in Reisendurch einen Theil Teutschlands, Ungarns, 
Italiensund Frankreichs inden Jahren 1798 und ijgg (1802-1804). 
In 1800 he settled in Greifswald as privat-docent in history, and the 
same year published tjber die Freiheit der alien Republiken. In 1 803 
appeared Germanien und Europa, "a fragmentary ebullition," 
as be himself called it, of his views on the French aggression. 
This was followed by one of the most remarkable of his books, 
Versuch einer Geschichte der Leibeigensckaft in Pommem und 
Riigen (Berlin, 1803), a history of serfdom in Pomerania and 
Riigen, which was so convincing an indictment that King 
Gustavus Adolphus IV. in 1806 abolished the evil. Arndt had 
meanwhile risen from privat-docent to extraordinary professor, 
and in 1806 was appointed to the chair of history at the univer- 
sity. In this year he published the first part of his Geist der Zeit, 
in which he flung down the gauntlet to Napoleon and called on 
his countrymen to rise and shake off the French yoke. So great 
was the excitement it produced that Arndt was compelled to 
take refuge in Sweden to escape the vengeance of Napoleon. 
Settling in Stockholm, he obtained government employment, 
but devoted himself to the great cause which was nearest his 
heart, and in pamphlets, poems and songs communicated his 
enthusiasm to his countrymen. Schill's heroic death at Stralsund 
impelled him to return to Germany and, under the disguise of 
" Almann, teacher of languages," he reached Berlin in December 
1809. In 1810 he returned to Greifswald, but only for a few 
months. He again set out on his adventurous travels, lived in 
close contact with the first men of his time, such as Blucher, 
Gneisenau and Stein, and in 18,12 was summoned by the last 
named to St Petersburg to assist in the organization of the final 
struggle against France. Meanwhile, pamphlet after pamphlet, 
full of bitter hatred of the French oppressor, came from his pen, 
and his stirring patriotic songs, such as Was ist das deutsche 
Vaterland? Der Gott, der Eisen wachsen liess , and Was blasen 
die Trompeten ? were on all lips. When, after the peace, the 
university of Bonn was founded in 1818, Arndt was appointed to 



628 



ARNDT— ARNE 



the chair of modern history. In this year appeared the fourth 
part of his Geisl der Zeit, in which he criticized the reactionary 
policy of the German powers. The boldness of his demands for 
reform offended the Prussian government, and in the summer 
of 1 819 he was arrested and his papers confiscated. Although 
speedily liberated, he was in the following year, at the instance 
of the Central Commission of Investigation at Mainz, established 
in accordance with the Carlsbad Decrees, arraigned before a 
specially constituted tribunal. Although not found guilty, he 
was forbidden to exercise the functions of his professorship, but 
was allowed to retain the stipend. The next twenty years he 
passed in retirement and literary activity. In 1840 he was 
reinstated in his professorship, and in 1841 was chosen rector of 
the university. The revolutionary outbreak of 1848 rekindled 
in the venerable patriot his old hopes and energies, and he took 
his seat as one of the deputies to the National Assembly at 
Frankfort. He formed one of the deputation that offered the 
imperial crown to Frederick William IV., and indignant at the 
king's refusal to accept it, he retired with the majority of von 
Gagern's adherents from public life. He continued to lecture 
and to write with freshness and vigour, and on his 90th birthday 
received from all parts of Germany good wishes and tokens of 
affection. He died at Bonn on the 29th of January i860. Arndt 
was twice married, first in 1800, his wife dying in the following 
year; a second time in 1817. 

Arndt's untiring labour for his country rightly won for him the 
title of " the most German of all Germans.' His lyric poems are 
not, however, all confined to politics. Many among the Gedichte 
(1803-1818; complete edition, i860) are religious pieces of great 
beauty. Among his other works are Reise durch Schweden (1797); 
Nebenstunden, eine Beschreibung und Geschichte der schottldndischen 
Inseln und der Orkaden (1820); Die Frage iiber die Niederlande 
(1831); Erinnerungen aus dem dusseren Leben (an autobiography, 
and the most valuable source of information for Arndt's life, 1840) ; 
Rhein- und Ahrwanderungen (1846), Wanderungen und Wandlungen 
mit dem Reichsfreiherrn von Stein (1858), and Pro populo Germanico 
(1854), which was originally intended to form the fifth part of the 
Geist der Zeit. Arndt's Werke have been edited by H. Rosch and 
H. Meisner in 8 vols, (not complete) (1892-1898). Biographies 
have been written by E. Langenberg (1869) and Wilhelm Baur 
(5th ed.. 1882); see also H. Meisner and R. Geerds, E. M. Arndt, 
ein Lebensbild in Briefen (1898), and R. Thiele, E. M. Arndt (1894). 
There are monuments to his memory at Schoritz, his birthplace, and 
at Bonn, where he is buried. 

ARNDT, JOHANN (1 555-1621), German Lutheran theologian, 
was born at Ballenstedt, in Anhalt, and studied in several 
universities. He was at Helmstadt in 1576; at Wittenberg in 
1577. At Wittenberg the crypto-Calvinist controversy was then 
at its height, and he took the side of Melanchthon and the 
crypto-Calvinists. He continued his studies in Strassburg, 
under the professor of Hebrew, Johannes Pappus (1540— 1610), 
a zealous Lutheran, the crown of whose life's work was the 
forcible suppression of Calvinistic preaching and worship in the 
city, and who had great influence over him. In Basel, again, 
he studied theology under Simon Sulzer (1508-1585), a broad- 
minded divine of Lutheran sympathies, whose aim was to 
reconcile the churches of the Helvetic and Wittenberg confessions. 
In 1 58 1 he went back to Ballenstedt, but was soon recalled to 
active life by his appointment to the pastorate at Badeborn in 
1583. After some time his Lutheran tendencies exposed him to 
the anger of the authorities, who were of the Reformed Church. 
Consequently, in 1590 he was deposed for refusing to remove the 
pictures from his church and discontinue the use of exorcism 
in baptism. He found an asylum in Quedlinburg (1590), and 
afterwards was transferred to St Martin's church at Brunswick 
(1599). Arndt's fame rests on his writings. These were mainly 
of a mystical and devotional kind, and were inspired by St 
Bernard, J. Tauler and Thomas a. Kempis. His principal 
work, Wahres Chrislentum (1606- 1609), which has been translated 
into most European languages, has served as the foundation 
of many books of devotion, both Roman Catholic and Protestant. 
Arndt here dwells upon the mystical union between the believer 
and Christ, and endeavours, by drawing attention to Christ's 
life in His people, to correct the purely forensic side of the 
Reformation theology, which paid almost exclusive attention 



to Christ's death for His people. Like Luther, Arndt was very 
fond of the little anonymous book, Deutsche Theologie. He 
published an edition of it and called attention to its merits 
in a special preface. After Wahres Chrislentum, his best-known 
work is Paradiesgdrtlein aller christlichen Tugenden, which was 
published in 161 2. Both these books have been translated into 
English; Paradiesgiirtlein with the title the Garden of Paradise. 
Several of his sermons are published in R. Nesselmann's Buck 
der Predigten (1858). Arndt has always been held in very 
high repute by the German Pietists. The founder of Pietism, 
Philipp Jacob Spener, repeatedly called attention to him and 
his writings, and even went so far as to compare him with Plato 
(cf. Karl Scheele, Plato und Johann Arndt, Ein Vortrag, &c, 
1857). 

A collected edition of his works was published in Leipzig and 
Gorlitz in 1734. A valuable account of Arndt is to be found in 
C. Aschmann's Essai sur la vie, &c., de J. Arndt. See further, 
Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie. 

ARNE, THOMAS AUGUSTINE (1710-1778), English musical 
composer, was born in London on the 12th of March 1710, his 
father being an upholsterer. Intended for the legal profession, 
he was educated at Eton, and afterwards apprenticed to an 
attorney for three years. His natural inclination for music, 
however, proved irresistible, and his father, finding from his 
performance at an amateur musical party that he was already 
a skilful violinist, furnished him with the means of educating 
himself in his favourite art. On the 7th of March 1733 he 
produced his first work at Lincoln's Inn Fields theatre, a setting 
of Addison's Rosamond, the heroine's part being performed by 
his sister, Susanna Maria, who afterwards became celebrated as 
Mrs Cibber. This proving a success was immediately followed 
by a burletta, entitled The Opera of Operas, based on Fielding's 
Tragedy of Tragedies. The part of Tom Thumb was played by 
Arne's young brother, and the opera was produced at the Hay- 
market theatre. On the 19th of December 1733 Arne produced at 
the same theatre the masque Dido and Aeneas, a subject of which 
the musical conception had been immortalized for Englishmen 
more than half a century earlier by Henry Purcell. Arne's 
individuality of style first distinctly asserted itself in the music 
to Dr Dalton's adaptation of Milton's Comus, which was per- 
formed at Drury Lane in 1738, and speedily established his 
reputation. In 1740 he wrote the music for Thomson and 
Mallet's Masque of Alfred, which is noteworthy as containing 
the most popular of all his airs — " Rule, Britannia!" In 1740 he 
also wrote his beautiful settings of the songs, " Under the green- 
wood tree," " Blow, blow, thou winter wind " and " When 
daisies pied," for a performance of Shakespeare's As You Like It. 
Four years before this, in 1736, he had married Cecilia, the 
eldest daughter of Charles Young, organist of All Hallows 
Barking. She was considered the finest English singer of the 
day and was frequently engaged by Handel in the performance 
of his music. In 1742 Arne went with his wife to Dublin, where 
he remained two years and produced his oratorio Abel, containing 
the beautiful melody known as the Hymn of Eve, the operas 
Britannia, Eliza and Comus, and where he also gave a number 
of successful concerts. On his return to London he was engaged 
as leader of the band at Drury Lane theatre (1744), and as 
composer at Vauxhall (1745). In this latter year he composed 
his successful pastoral dialogue, Colin and Phoebe, and in 1746 
the song, " Where the bee sucks. " In 1 7 59 he received the degree 
of doctor of music from Oxford. In 1760 he transferred 
his services to' Covent Garden theatre, where on the 28th of 
November he produced his Thomas and Sally. Here, too, on 
the 2nd of February 1762 he produced his Artaxerxes, an opera 
in the Italian style with recitative instead of spoken dialogue, 
the popularity of which is attested by the fact that it con- 
tinued to be performed at intervals for upwards of eighty years. 
The libretto, by Arne himself, was a very poor translation of 
Metastasio's Artaserse. In 1762 also was produced the ballad- 
opera Love in a Cottage. His oratorio Judith, of which the first 
performance was on the 27th of February 1761 at Drury Lane, 
was revived at the chapel of the Lock hospital, Pimlico, on the 



ARNETH— ARNHEM 



629 



29th of February 1764, in which year was also performed his 
setting of Metastasio's Olimpiade in the original language at the 
King's theatre in the Haymarket. At a later performance of 
Judith at Covent Garden theatre on the 26th. of February 1773 
Arne for the first time introduced female voices into oratorio 
choruses. In 1769 he wrote the musical parts for Garrick's ode 
for the Shakespeare jubilee at Stratford-on-Avon, and in 1770 
he gave a mutilated version of Purcell's King Arthur. One of 
his last dramatic works was the music to Mason's Caractacus, 
published in 1775. Though inferior to Purcell in intensity of 
feeling, Arne has not been surpassed as a composer of graceful 
and attractive melody. There is true genius in such airs as 
"Rule, Britannia!" and " Where the bee sucks," which still 
retain their original freshness and popularity. As a writer of 
glees he does not take such high rank, though he deserves 
notice as the leader in the revival of that peculiarly English 
form of composition. He was author as well as composer of 
The Guardian outwitted, The Rose, The Contest of Beauty and 
Virtue, and Phoebe at Court. Dr Arne died on the 5th of March 
1778, and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden. 

See also the article in Grove's Dictionary (new ed.) ; and two 
interesting papers in the Musical Times, November and December 
1901. 

ARNETH, ALFRED, Ritter von (1810-1897), Austrian 
historian, born at Vienna on the 10th of July 1819, was the 
son of Joseph Calasanza von Arneth (1 791-1863), a well-known 
historian and archaeologist, who wrote a history of the Austrian 
empire (Vienna, 1827) and several works on numismatics. Alfred 
Arneth studied law, and became an official of the Austrian state 
archives, of which in 1868 he was appointed keeper. He was a 
moderate liberal in politics and a supporter of the ideal of German 
unity. As such he was elected to the Frankfort parliament in 
1848. In 1 86 1 he became a member of the Lower Austrian diet 
and in 1869 was nominated to the Upper House of the Austrian 
Reichsrath. In 1879 he was appointed president of the Kaiserliche 
Akademie der Wissenschaften (Academy of Sciences) at Vienna, 
and in 1S96 succeeded von Sybel as chairman of the historical 
commission at Munich. He died on the 30th of July 1897. 

Arneth was an indefatigable worker, and, as director of the 
archives, his broad-minded willingness to listen to the advice 
of experts, as well as his own sound sense, did much to promote 
the more scientific treatment and use of public records in most 
of the archives of Europe. His scientific temper and the special 
facilities which he enjoyed for drawing from original sources 
give to his numerous historical works a very special value. 

Among his publications may be mentioned: Leben des Feld- 
marschalls Graf en Guido Starhemberg (Vienna, 1863); Prinz Eueen 
von Savoyen (3 vols., ib. 1864); Gesch. der Maria Theresa (10 vols., 
ib. 1863-1879); Maria Theresa u. Marie Antoinette, ihr Briefwechsel 
(ib. 1866); Marie Antoinette, Joseph II. und Leopold II., ihr Brief- 
wechsel ( 1 866) ; Maria Theresa und Joseph II. , ihre Korrespondenz 
satnt Briefen Josephs an seinen Bruder Leopold (3 vols., 1867) ; 
Beaumarchais und Sonnenfels (1868); Joseph II. und Katharina von 
Russland, ihr Briefwechsel (1869); Johann Christian Barthenstein 
und seine Zeit (1871); Joseph II. und Leopold von Toskana, ihr 
Briefwechsel (2 vols., 1872); Briefe der Kaiserin Maria Theresa an 
ihre Kinder und Freunde (4 vols., 1881); Marie Antoinette : Corre- 
spondance secrete entre Marie-Therese et le cotnte de Mercy- Argenleau 
(3 vols., Paris, 1875), in collaboration with Auguste Geffroy; Graf 
Philipp Cobenzl und seine Memoiren (1885); Correspondance secrete 
du comte de Mercy- Argenleau avec I'empereur Joseph II. et Kaunitz 
(2 vols., 1889-1891), in collaboration with Jules Flammermont; 
Anton Ritter von Schmerling. Episoden aus seinem Leben 1835, 
1848-1849 (1895); Johann Freiherr von Wessenberg, ein oster- 
reichischer Staatsmann des 19. Jahrh. (2 vols., 1898). Arneth also 
published in 1893 two volumes of early reminiscences under the title 
of Aus meinem Leben. 

ARNHEM, or Arnheim, the capital of the province of Gelder- 
land, Holland, on the right bank of the Rhine (here crossed by 
a pontoon bridge), and a junction station 35 m. by rail E.S.E. 
of Utrecht. Pop. (1900) 57,240. It is connected by tramway 
with Zutphen and Utrecht, and there is a regular service of 
steamers to Cologne, Amsterdam, Nijmwegen, Tiel, 's Herto- 
genbosch and Rotterdam. Arnhem is a gay and fashionable 
town prettily situated at the foot of the Veluwe hills, and enjoys 
a special reputation for beauty on account of its wooded and 



hilly surroundings, which have attracted many wealthy people 
to its neighbourhood. The Groote Kerk of St Eusebius, built 
in the third quarter of the 15th century, contains the marble 
monument to Charles (d. 1538), the last duke of Gelderland 
of the Egmont dynasty. High up against the wall is an effigy 
of the same duke in his armour. The fine lofty tower contains 
a chime of forty-five bells. The Roman Catholic church of St 
Walburgis is of earlier date, and a new Roman Catholic church 
dates from 1894. The town hall was built as a palace by Maarten 
van Rossum, Duke Charles's general, at the end of the 15th 
century, and was only converted to its present use in 1830. 
Its grotesque external ornamentation earned for it the name 
of Duivelshuis, or devil's house. The provincial government 
house occupies the site of the former palace of the dukes of 
Gelderland. Other buildings are the court-house, a public 
library containing many old works, a theatre, a large concert-hall, 
a museum of antiquities (as well as a separate coDection of Spanish 
antiquities), a gymnasium, a teachers' and art school, a building 
(1880) to contain the provincial archives, a hospital (1889) 
and barracks. On account of its proximity to the fertile Betuwe 
district and its situation near the confluence of the Rhine and 
Ysel, the markets and shipping of Arnhem are in a flourishing 
condition. A wharf for building and repairing iron steamers 
was constructed in 1889. The manufactures include woollen 
and cotton goods, paper, earthenware, soap, carriages, furniture 
and tobacco, which is cultivated in the neighbourhood. Wool- 
combing and dyeing are also carried on, and there are oil and 
timber mills. 

The environs of Arnhem are much admired. Following either 
the Zutphen or the Utrecht road, numerous pleasing views of 
the Rhine valley present themselves, and country houses and 
villas appear among the woods on every side. At Bronbeek, 
a short distance east of the town, is a hospital endowed by King 
William III. for soldiers of the colonial army. Beyond is the 
popular summer resort of Velp, with the castle of Biljoen built 
by Charles, duke of Gelderland, in 1530, and the beautiful park 
of the ancient castle of Rozendaal in the vicinity. The origin 
of the castle of Rozendaal is unknown. The first account of it 
is in connexion with a tournament given there by Reinald I., 
count of Gelderland, in the beginning of the 14th century, and 
it ever after remained the favourite residence of the counts and 
dukes of Gelderland. About the beginning of the 18th century 
fountains and lanes in the style of those at Versailles were laid 
out in the park, and soon after the castle itself, of which only 
the round tower remained (and is still standing), was rebuilt. 
The park is open to the public, and is famous for the beauty of 
the beech avenues and fir woods. Beyond this is De Steeg, 
another popular resort, whence stretches the famous Middachten 
Allee of beech trees to Dieren. On the Apeldoorn road is 
Sonsbeek, with a wooded park and small lakes, formerly a private 
seat and now belonging to the municipality. On the west of 
Arnhem is another pleasure ground, called the Reeberg, with a 
casino, and the woods of Heienoord. Close by is the ancient 
and well-preserved castle of Doornwerth with its own chapel. 
It was the seat of an independent lordship until 1402, after which 
time it was held in fief from the dukes of Gelderland. Beyond 
Doornwerth, at Renkum, is the royal country seat called Oranje- 
Nassau's Oord, which was bought by the crown in 1881. 

History. — Arnhem, called Arnoldi Villa in the middle ages, 
is, according to some, the Arenacum of the Romans, and is first 
mentioned in a document in 893. In 1233 Otto II., count of 
Gelderland, chose this spot as his residence, conferred municipal 
rights on the town, and fortified it. At a later period it entered 
the Hanseatic League. In 1473 it was captured by Charles 
the Bold of Burgundy. In 1505 it received the right of coining 
from Philip, son of the emperor Maximilian I. In 1514 Charles 
of Egmont, duke of Gelderland, took it from the Spaniards; 
but in 1543 it fell to the emperor Charles V., who made it the 
seat of the council of Gelderland. It joined the union of Utrecht 
in 1579, and came finally under the effective government of the 
states-general in 1585, all the later attacks of the Spaniards 
being repulsed. In 1 586 Sir Philip Sidney died in the town from 



630 



ARNICA— ARNIM 



the effects of his wound received before Zutphen. The French 
took the town in 1672, but left it dismantled in 1674. It was 
refortified by the celebrated Dutch general of engincers,Coehoorn, 
in the beginning of the 18th century. In 1795 it was again 
stormed by the French, and in 1813 it was taken from them 
by the Prussians under Biilow. Gardens and promenades have 
now taken the place of the old ramparts, the last of which was 
levelled in 1853. 

ARNICA, a genus of plants belonging to the natural order 
Compositae, and containing 18 species, mostly north-west 
American. The most important species is Arnica .montana 
(mountain tobacco), a perennial herb found in upland meadows 
in northern and central Europe (but not extending to Britain), 
and on the mountains of western and central Europe. A closely 
allied species (A.- angustifolia) , with very narrow leaves, is met 
with in Arctic Asia and America. The heads of flowers are 
large, 2 to 25 in. across, orange-yellow in colour, and borne on 
the summit of the stem or branches; the outer ray-flowers are 
an inch in length. The achenes (fruits) are brown and hairy, 
and are crowned by a tuft of stiffish hairs (pappus). The root- 
stock of A. montana is tough, slender, of a dark brown colour 
and an inch or two in length. It gives off numerous simple 
roots from its under side, and shows on its upper side the remains 
of rosettes of leaves. It yields an essential oil in small quantity, 
and a resinous matter called arnicin, C12H22O2, a yellow crystal- 
line substance with an acrid taste. The tincture prepared from' 
it is an old remedy which has a popular reputation in the treat- 
ment of bruises and sprains. The plant was introduced into 
English gardens about the middle of the 18th century, but is 
not often grown; it is a handsome plant for a rockery. 

ARNIM, ELISABETH (BETTINA) VON (1785-1859), German 
authoress, sister of Klemens Brentano, was born at Frankfort- 
on-Main on the 4th of April 1785. After being educated at a 
convent school in Fritzlar, sho lived for a while with her grand- 
mother, the novelist, Sophie Laroche (1731-1807), at Offenbach, 
and from 1803 to 1806 with her brother-in-law, Friedrich von 
Savigny, the famous jurist, at Marburg.. In 1807 she made at 
Weimar the acquaintance of Goethe, for whom she entertained 
a violent passion, which the poet, although entering into corre- 
spondence with her, did not requite, but only regarded as a harm- 
less fancy. Their friendship came to an abrupt end in 181 1, 
owing to " Bettina's " insolent behaviour to Goethe's wife. In 
this year she married Ludwig Achim von Arnim (q.v.), by whom 
she had seven children. After her husband's death in 1831, 
her passion for Goethe revived, and in 1835 she published her 
remarkable book, Goethes Briefwechsel mit einem Kinde, which 
purported to be a correspondence between herself and the poet. 
Regarded at first as genuine, it was afterwards for many years 
looked upon as wholly fictitious, until the publication in 1879 
of G. von Loeper's Brief e Goethes an Sophie Laroche una" 
Bettina Brentano, nebst dichterischen. Beilagen, which proved it 
to be based on authentic material, though treated with the 
greatest poetical licence. Equally fantastic is her correspond- 
ence Die Giinderode (1840), with her unhappy friend, the poet, 
Karoline von Giinderode (1780-1806), who committed suicide, 
and that with her brother Klemens Brentano, under the title 
Klemens Brentanos Friihlingskranz (1844). She also published 
Dies Buck gehort dem Konig (1843), in which she advocated the 
emancipation of the Jews, and the abolition of capital punish- 
ment. Among her other works may be mentioned Ilius Pam- 
philius und die A mbrosia (1848), also a supposititious correspond- 
ence. In all her writings she showed real poetical genius, com- 
bined with evidence of an unbalanced mind and a mannerism 
which becomes tiresome. She died at Berlin on the 20th of 
January 1859. Part of a design by her for a colossal statue of 
Goethe, executed in marble by the sculptor Karl Steinhauser 
(1813-1878), is in the museum at Weimar. 

Her collected works (Sdmtliche Schriften) were published in Berlin 
in 11 vols., 1853. Goethe's Briefwechsel mit einem Kinde has been 
edited by H. Grimm (4th ed., Berlin, 1890). See also C. Alberti, 
B. von Arnim (Leipzig, 1885); Moritz Carriere, Bettina von Arnim 
(Breslau, 1887), and the literature cited under Ludwig von Arnim. 



ARNIM, HARRY KARL KURT EDUARD VON, Count (1824- 
1881), German diplomatist, was a member of one of the most 
numerous and most widely spread families of the Prussian 
nobility. He was born in Pomerania on the 3rd of October 
1824, and brought up by his uncle Heinrich von Arnim, who 
was Prussian ambassador at Paris and foreign minister from 
March to June 1848, while Count Arnim-Boytzenburg, whose 
daughter Harry von Arnim afterwards married, was minister- 
president. It is noticeable that the uncle was brought before 
a court of justice and fined for publishing a pamphlet directed 
against the ministry of Manteuffel. After holding other posts 
in the diplomatic service Arnim was in 1864 appointed Prussian 
envoy (and in 1867 envoy of the North German Confederation)at 
the papal court. In 1 869 he proposed that the governments should 
appoint representatives to be present at the Vatican council, a 
suggestion which was rejected by Bismarck, and foretold that the 
promulgation of papal infallibility would bring serious political 
difficulties. After the recall of the French troops from Rome he 
attempted unsuccessfully to mediate between the pope and the 
Italian government. He was appointed in 187 1 German com- 
missioner to arrange the final treaty with France, a task which 
he carried out with such success that in 1871 he was appointed 
German envoy at Paris, and in 1872 received his definite appoint- 
ment as ambassador, a post of the greatest difficulty and 
responsibility. Differences soon arose between him and Bismarck; 
he wished to support the monarchical party which was trying 
to overthrow Thiers, while Bismarck ordered him to stand aloof 
from all French parties; he did not give that implicit obedience 
to his instructions which Bismarck required. Bismarck, how- 
ever, was unable to recall him because of the great influence 
which he enjoyed at court and the confidence which the emperor 
placed in him. He was looked upon by the Conservative party, 
who were trying to overthrow Bismarck, as his successor, and 
it is said that he was closely connected with the court intrigues 
against the chancellor. In the beginning of 1874 he was recalled 
and appointed to the embassy at Constantinople, but this 
appointment was immediately revoked. A Vienna newspaper 
published some correspondence on the Vatican council, including 
confidential despatches of Arnim's, with the object of showing 
that he had shown greater foresight than Bismarck. It was 
then found that a considerable number of papers were missing 
from the Paris embassy, and on the 4th of October Arnim was 
arrested on the charge of embezzling state papers. This recourse 
to the criminal law against a man of his rank, who had held one 
of the most important diplomatic posts, caused great astonish- 
ment. His defence was that the papers were not official, and he 
was acquitted on the charge of embezzlement, but convicted of 
undue delay in restoring official papers and condemned to three 
months' imprisonment. On appeal the sentence was increased 
to nine months. Arnim avoided imprisonment by leaving the 
country, and in 1875 published anonymously at Zurich a 
pamphlet entitled " Pro nihilo," in which he attempted to show 
that the attack on him was caused by Bismarck's personal 
jealousy. For this he was accused of treason, insult to the 
emperor, and libelling Bismarck, and in his absence condemned - 
to five years' penal servitude. From his exile in Austria he 
published two more pamphlets on the ecclesiastical policy of 
Prussia, " Der Nunzius kommt! " (Vienna, 1878), and "Quid 
faciamus nos?" (ib. 1879). He made repeated attempts, which 
were supported by his family, to be allowed to return to Germany 
in order to take his trial afresh on the charge of treason; his 
request had just been granted when he died on the 19th of May 
1881. 

In 1876 Bismarck carried an amendment to the criminal code 
making it an offence punishable with imprisonment or a fine 
up to £250 for an official of the foreign office to communicate 
to others official documents, or for an envoy to act contrary to 
his instructions. These clauses are commonly spoken of in 
Germany as the "Arnim paragraphs." (J. W. He.) 

ARNIM, LUDWIG ACHIM (JOACHIM) VON (1781-1831), 
German poet and novelist, was born at Berlin on the 26th 
of January 1781. He studied natural science at Halle and 



ARNIM-BOYTZENBURG— ARNO 



631 



Gottingen, and published one or two essays on scientific subjects; 
but his bent was from the first towards literature. From the 
earlier writings of Goethe and Herder he learned to appreciate 
the beauties of German traditional legends and folk-songs; 
and, forming a collection of these, published the result (1806- 
180S), in collaboration with Klemens Brentano (q.v.) under the 
title Des Knaben Wunderhorn. From 1810 onward he lived 
with his wife Bettina, Brentano's sister, alternately at Berlin 
and on Lis estate at Wiepersdorf, near Dahme in Brandenburg, 
where he died on the 21st of January 183 1. Arnim was a prolific 
and versatile writer, gifted with a sense of humour and a refined 
imagination — qualities shown in the best-known of his works, 
Des Knaben Wunderhorn, deficient as this is in the philological 
accuracy and faithfulness to original sources which would now 
be expected of such a compilation. In general, however, his 
writings, full as they are of the exaggerated sentiment and 
affectations of the romantic school, make but little appeal to 
modern taste. There are possible exceptions, such as the short 
stories Fiirst Ganzgott und Sanger Halbgott and Der tolle Invalide 
auf dent Fort Ratonneau and the unfinished romance Die Kronen- 
wachter (1817), which promised to develop into one of the finest 
historical romances of the 19th century. Among Arnim's other 
works may be mentioned Hollins Liebesleben (1802), Der Winter- 
garten (1809), a collection of tales; Armut, Reichtum Sckuld, 
und Busse der Crcifin Dolores (r8io), a novel; Halle und Jerusalem 
(181 1), a dramatic romance; and one or two smaller novels, 
such as Isabella von Agypten (1812). 

Arnim's Samtliclie Werke were edited by his widow and published 
in Berlin in 18 39-1840; second edition in 22 vols., 1853-1856. 
Selections have been edited by J. Dohmke (1892); M. Koch, Arnim, 
Klemens und Bettina Brentano, Gbrres (1893). Des Knaben Wunder- 
horn has been frequently republished, the best edition being that 
of A. Birlinger and W. Crecelius (2 vols., 1872-1876). See R. Steig, 
Achim von Arnim und Klemens Brentano (1894). 

ARNIM-BOYTZENBURG, HANS GEORG VON (1581-1641), 
German general and diplomatist, was born in 158 1 at Boytzen- 
burg in Brandenburg. From 1613 to 1617 he served in the 
Swedish army under Gustavus Adolphus, took part in the 
Russian War, and afterwards fought against the Turks in the 
service of the king of Poland. In 1626, though a Protestant, 
he was induced by Wallenstein to join the new imperial army, 
in which he quickly rose to the rank of field marshal, and won 
the esteem of his soldiers as well as that of his commander, 
whose close friend and faithful ally he became. This attach- 
ment to Wallenstein, and a spirit of religious toleration, were 
the leading motives of a strange career of military and political 
inconstancy. Thus the dismissal of Wallenstein and the perilous 
condition of German Protestantism after the edict of Restitution 
combined to induce Arnim to quit the imperial service for that of 
the elector of Saxony. He had served under Gustavus many 
years before, and later he had defeated him in the field, when 
in command of a Polish army; the fortune of war now placed 
Arnim at the head of the Saxon army which fought by the side 
of the Swedes at Breitenfeld (1631), and indeed the alliance of 
these two Protestant powers in the cause of their common religion 
was largely his work. The reappearances of Wallenstein, how- 
ever, caused him to hesitate and open negotiations, though he 
did not attempt to conceal his proceedings from the elector and 
Gustavus. During the Liitzen campaign, Arnim was operat- 
ing with success at the head of an allied army in Silesia. In 
the following year he was under the hard necessity of opposing 
his old friend in the field, but little was done by either; the 
complicated political situation which followed the death of 
Gustavus at Liitzen led him into a renewal of the private nego- 
tiations of the previous year, though he did nothing actually 
treasonable in his relations with Wallenstein. In 1634 Wallen- 
stein was assassinated, and Arnim began at once more active 
queries. He won an important victory at Liegnitz in May
1634, but from this time he became more and more estranged 
from the Swedes. The peace of Prague followed, in which 
Arnim's part, though considerable, was not all-important (163s). 
Soon after this event he refused an offer of high command in 
the French army and retired from active life. From 1637 to 



1638 he was imprisoned in Stockholm, having been seized at 
Boytzenburg by the Swedes on suspicion of being concerned 
in various intrigues. He made his escape ultimately, and 
returned to Saxony. Arnim died suddenly at Dresden in 1641, 
whilst engaged in raising an army to free German soil from 
foreign armies of all kinds. (See Thirty Years' War.) 

See K. G. Helbig, " Wallenstein und Arnim " (1850) and " Der 
Prager Friede,''in Raumer's Historisches Taschenbuch (1858); also 
E. D. M. Kirchner, Das Schloss Boytzenburg, &c. (i860) and A rchiv 
fur die sachsische Geschichte, vol. viii. (1870). 

ARNO, Arn or Aquila (c. 750-821), bishop and afterwards 
archbishop of Salzburg, entered the church at an early age, and 
after passing some time at Freising became abbot of Elnon, 
or St Amand as it was afterwards called, where he made the 
acquaintance of Alcuin. In 785 he was made bishop of Salzburg 
and in 787 was employed by Tassilo III., duke of the Bavarians, 
as an envoy to Charlemagne at Rome. He appears to have 
attracted the notice of the Frankish king, through whose influence 
in 798 Salzburg was made the seat of an archbishopric; and 
Arno, as the first holder of this office, became metropolitan of 
Bavaria and received the pallium from Pope Leo III. The area 
of his authority was extended to the east by the conquests of 
Charlemagne over the Avars, and he began to take a prominent 
part in the government of Bavaria. He acted as one of the 
missi dominici, and spent some time at the court of Charlemagne, 
where he was known by the assembled scholars as Aquila, and his 
name appears as one of the signatories to the emperor's will. 
He established a library at Salzburg, furthered in other ways 
the interests of learning, and presided over several synods called 
to improve the condition of the church in Bavaria. Soon after 
the death of Charlemagne in 814, Arno appears to have withdrawn 
from active life, although he retained his archbishopric until 
his death on the 24th of January 821. Aided by a deacon named 
Benedict, Arno drew up about 788 a catalogue of lands and 
proprietary rights belonging to the church in Bavaria, under 
the title of Indiculus or Congestum Arnonis. An edition of this 
work, which is of considerable value to historical students, was 
published at Munich in 1869 with notes by F. Keinz. Many other 
works were produced under the protection of Arno, among them 
a Salzburg consuetudinary, an edition of which appears in Quellen 
und Erorterungen zur bayrischen und deulschen Geschichte, Band 
vii., edited by L. Rbckinger (Munich, 1856). It has been sug- 
gested by W. von Giesebrecht that Arno was the author of an 
early section of Annates Laurissenses majores, which deals with 
the history of the Frankish kings from 741 to 829, and of which 
an edition appears in Monumenta Germaniae historica. Scriptores, 
Band i. pp. 128-131, edited by G. H. Pertz (Hanover, 1826). If 
this supposition be correct, Arno was the first extant writer to 
apply the name Deutsch (theodisca) to the German language. 

ARNO (anc. Arnus), a river of Italy which rises from the 
Monte Falterona, about 25 m. E.N.E. of Florence, 4265 ft. 
above the sea. It first runs S.S.E. through a beautiful valley, 
the Casentino; near Arezzo it turns W., and at Montevarchi 
N.N.W.; 16 m. below it forces its way through the limestone 
rock at Incisa and 10 m. farther on, at Pontassieve, it is joined 
by the Sieve. Thence it runs westward to Florence and through 
the gorge of Golfolina onwards to Empoli and Pisa, receiving 
various tributaries in its course, and falls into the sea 7 J m. west 
of Pisa, after a total course of 155 m. In prehistoric times the 
river ran straight on along the valley of the Chiana and joined 
the Tiber near Orvieto; and there was a great lake, the north 
end of which was at Incisa and the south at the lake of Chiusi. 
The distance from Pisa to the mouth in the time of Strabo was 
only 2§ m. The Serchio (anc. Auser), which joined the Arno at 
Pisa in ancient times, now flows into the sea independently. 
The Arno is navigable for barges as far as Florence; but it is 
liable to sudden floods, and brings down with it large quantities 
of earth and stones, so that it requires careful regulation. The 
most remarkable inundations were those of 1537 and 1740; in 
the former year the water rose to 8 ft. in the streets of Florence. 
The valley between Incisa and Arezzo contains accumulations 
of fossil bones of the deer, elephant, rhinoceros, mastodon, 
hippopotamus, bear, tiger, &c. 



632 



ARNOBIUS— ARNOLD 



ARNOBIUS (called Afer, and sometimes " the Elder "), early 
Christian writer, was a teache'r of rhetoric at Sicca Venerea in 
proconsular Africa during the reign of Diocletian. His conversion 
to Christianity is said by Jerome to have been occasioned by a 
dream; and the same writer adds that the bishop to whom 
Arnobius applied distrusted his professions, and asked some 
proof of them, and that the treatise Adversus Gentes was com- 
posed for this purpose. But this story seems rather improbable; 
for Arnobius speaks contemptuously of dreams, and besides, his 
work bears no traces of having been written in a short time, or 
of having been revised by a Christian bishop. From internal 
evidence (bk. iv. 36) the time of composition may be fixed at 
about a.d. 303. Nothing further is known of the life of Arnobius. 
He is said to have been the author of a work on rhetoric, which, 
however, has not been preserved. His great treatise, in seven 
books, Adversus Gentes (or Nationes), on account of which he takes 
rank as a Christian apologist, appears to have been occasioned 
by a desire to answer the complaint then brought against the 
Christians, that the prevalent calamities and disasters were due 
to their impiety and had come upon men since the establishment 
of their religion. In the first book Arnobius carefully discusses 
this complaint; he shows that the allegation of greater calam- 
ities having come upon men since the Christian era is false; 
and that, even if it were true, it could by no means be attributed 
to the Christians. He skilfully contends that Christians who 
worship the self-existent God cannot justly be called less religious 
than those who worship subordinate deities, and concludes 
by vindicating the Godhead of Christ. In the second bpok 
Arnobius digresses into a long discussion on the soul, which he 
does not think is of divine origin, and which he scarcely believes 
to be immortal. He even says that a belief in the soul's immor- 
tality would tend to remove moral restraint, and have a pre- 
judicial effect on human life. In the concluding chapters he 
answers the objections drawn from the recent origin of Christi- 
anity. Books iii., iv. and v. contain a violent attack on the 
heathen mythology, in which he narrates with powerful sarcasm 
the scandalous chronicles of the gods, and contrasts with their 
grossness and immorality the pure and holy worship of the 
Christian. These books are valuable as a repertory of mytho- 
logical stories. Books vi. and vii. ably handle the questions of 
sacrifices and worship of images. The confusion of the final 
chapter points to some interruption. The work of Arnobius 
appears to have been written when he was a recent convert, for 
he does not possess a very extensive knowledge of Scripture. 
He knows nothing of the Old Testament, and only the life of 
Christ in the New, while he does not quote directly from the 
Gospels. He is also at fault in regard to the Jewish sects. He 
was much influenced by Lucretius and had read Plato. His 
statements concerning Greek and Roman mythology are based 
respectively on the Protrepticus of Clement of Alexandria, and 
on Antistius Labeo, who belonged to the preceding generation 
and attempted to restore Neoplatonism. There are some 
pleasing passages in Arnobius, but on the whole he is a tumid 
and a tedious author. 

Editions. — Migne, Patr. Lai. iv. 349; A. Reifferscheich in the 
Vienna Corpus Script. Eccles. Lot. (1875). 

Translations. — A. H. Bryce and H. Campbell in Ante-Nicene 



Literature. — H. C. G. Moule in Diet. Chr. Biog.i.; Herzog- 
Hauck, Realencyklopadie; and G. Kruger, Early Chr. Lit. p. 304 
(where full bibliographies are given). 

ARNOBIUS (" the younger "), Christian priest or bishop in 
Gaul, flourished about 460. He is the author of a mystical 
and allegorical commentary on the Psalms, first published by 
Erasmus in 1522, and by him attributed to the elder Arnobius. 
It has been frequently reprinted, and in the- edition of De la 
Barre, 1580, is accompanied by some notes on the Gospels by 
the same author. To him has sometimes been, ascribed the 
anonymous treatise, Arnobii catholici et Serapionis conflictus de 
Deo trino et uno . . . de gratiae liberi arbtirii concordia, which 
was probably written by a follower of Augustine. The opinions 
of Arnobius, as appears from the commentary, are semi- 
Pelagian. 



ARNOLD, known as "Arnold of Brescia" (d. 1155), om> 
of the most ardent adversaries of the temporal power of the 
popes. He belonged to a family of importance, if not noble, 
and was born probably at Brescia, in Italy, towards the end 
of the nth century. He distinguished himself in his monastic 
studies, and went to France about 1115. He studied theology 
in Paris, but there is no proof that he was a pupil of Abelard. 
Returning to Italy he became a canon regular. His life was 
rigidly austere, St Bernard calling him " homo neque manducans 
neque bibens." He at once directed his efforts against the 
corruption of the clergy, and especially against the temporal 
ambitions of the high dignitaries of the church. During the 
schism of Anacletus (1131-1137) the town of Brescia was torn 
by the struggles between the partisans of Pope Innocent II. 
and the adherents of the anti-pope, and Arnold gave effect 
to his abhorrence of the political episcopate by inciting the 
people to rise against their bishop, and, exiled by Innocent II., 
went to France. St Bernard accused him of sharing the doctrines 
of Abelard (see Ep. 189, 195), and procured his condemnation 
by the council of Sens (-1140) at the same time as that of the 
great scholastic. This was perhaps no more than the outcome 
of the fierce polemical spirit of the abbot of Clairvaux, which 
led him to include all his adversaries under a single anathema. 
It seems certain that Arnold professed moral theology in Paris, 
and several times reprimanded St Bernard, whom he accused 
of pride and jealousy. St Bernard, as a last resort, begged 
King Louis VII. to take severe measures against Arnold, who 
had to leave France and take refuge at Zurich. There he soon 
became popular, especially with the lay nobility; but, denounced 
anew by St Bernard to the ecclesiastical authorities, he returned 
to Italy, and turned his steps towards Rome (1145). It was 
two years since, in 1143; the Romans had rejected the temporal 
power of the pope. The urban nobles had set up a republic, 
which, under forms ostensibly modelled on antiquity (e.g. 
patriciate, senatus populusque romanus, &c), concealed but 
clumsily a purely oligarchical government. Pope Eugenius III. 
and his adherents had been forced after a feeble resistance to 
resign themselves to exile at Viterbo. Arnold, after returning 
to Rome, immediately began a campaign of virulent denunciation 
against the Roman clergy, and, in particular, against the Curia, 
which he stigmatized as a " house of merchandise and den of 
thieves." His enemies have attributed to him certain doctrinal 
heresies, but their accusations do not bear examination. Accord- 
ing to Otto of Freising (Lib. de gestis Friderici, bk. ii. chap, xx.) 
the whole of his teaching, outside the preaching of penitence, 
was summed up in these maxims: — " Clerks who have estates, 
bishops who hold fiefs, monks who possess property, cannot be 
saved." His eloquence gained him a hearing and a numerous 
following, including many laymen, but consisting principally 
of poor ecclesiastics, who formed around him a party character- 
ized by a rigid morality and not unlike the Lombard Patarenes 
of the nth century. But his purely political action was very 
restricted, and not to be compared with that of a Rienzi or a 
Savonarola. The Roman revolution availed itself of Arnold's 
popularity, and of his theories, but was carried out without his 
aid. His name was associated with this political reform solely 
because his was the only vigorous personality which stood 
out from the mass of rebels, and because he was the principal 
victim of the repression that ensued. On the 15th of July 1148 
Eugenius III. anathematized Arnold and his adherents; but 
when, a short time afterwards, the pope, through the support 
of the king of Naples and the king of France, succeeded in' 
entering Rome, Arnold remained in the town unmolested, under 
the protection of the senate. But in 1152 the German king 
Conrad III., whom the papal party and the Roman republic 
had in vain begged to intervene, was succeeded by Frederick I. 
Barbarossa. Frederick, whose authoritative temper was at once 
offended by the independent tone of the Arnoldist party, con- 
cluded with the pope a treaty of alliance (October 16, 1152) of 
such a nature that the Arnoldists were at once put in a minority 
in the Roman government; and when the second successor 
of Eugenius III., the energetic and austere Adrian IV. (the 



ARNOLD, BENEDICT 



633 



Englishman, Nicholas Breakspear), placed Rome under an inter- 
dict, the senate, already rudely shaken, submitted, and Arnold 
was forced to fly into Campania (1155). At the request of the 
pope he was seized by order of the emperor Frederick, then in 
Italy, and delivered to the prefect of Rome, by whom he was 
condemned to death. In June 1155 Arnold was hanged, his 
body burnt, and the ashes were thrown into the Tiber. His 
death produced but a feeble sensation in Rome, which was 
already pacified, and passed almost unnoticed in Italy. The 
adherents of Arnold do not appear actually to have formed, 
either before or after his death, a heretical sect. It is probable 
that his adherents became merged in the communities of the 
Lombard Waldenses, who shared their ideas on the corruption 
of the clergy. Legend, poetry, drama and politics have from 
time to time been much occupied with the personality of Arnold 
of Brescia, and not seldom have distorted it, through the desire 
to see in him a hero of Italian independence and a modern 
democrat. He was before everything an ascetic, who denied 
to the church the right of holding property, and who occupied 
himself only as an accessory with the political and social con- 
sequences of his religious principles. 

The bibliography of Arnold of Brescia is very vast and of very 
unequal value. The following works will be found useful: W. von 
Giesebrecht, Arnold von Brescia (Munich, 1873); G. Gaggia, Arnaldo 
da Brescia (Brescia, 1882); and notices by Vacandard in the Revue 
des questions hisloriques (Paris, 1884), pp. 52-114, by R. Breyer in 
the Histor. Taschenbuch (Leipzig, 1889), vol. viii. pp. 123-178, and 
by A. Hausrath in Neue Heidelberg. Jahrb. (1891), Band i. pp. 
72-144. (P. A.) 

ARNOLD, BENEDICT (1741-1801), American soldier, born 
in Norwich, Connecticut, on the 14th of January 1741. He 
was the great-grandson of Benedict Arnold (1615-1678), thrice 
colonial governor of Rhode Island between 1663 and 1678; and 
was the fourth in direct descent to bear the name. He received 
a fair education but was not studious, and his youth was marked 
by the same waywardness which characterized his whole career. 
At fifteen he ran away from home and took part in an expedition 
against the French, but, restless under restraint, he soon deserted 
and returned home. In 1762 he settled in New Haven, where 
he became the proprietor of a drug and book shop; and he 
subsequently engaged successfully in trade with the West Indies. 
Immediately after the battle of Lexington Arnold led the local 
militia company, of which he was captain, and additional 
volunteers to Cambridge, and on the 29th of April 1775 he 
proposed to the Massachusetts Committee of Safety an ex- 
pedition against Crown Point and Ticonderoga. After a delay 
of four days the offer was accepted, and as a colonel of Massa- 
chusetts militia he was directed to enlist in the west part of 
Massachusetts and in the neighbouring colonies the men neces- 
sary for the undertaking. He was forestalled, however, by 
Ethan Allen (q.v.), acting on behalf of some members of the 
Connecticut Assembly. Under him, reluctantly waiving his 
own claim to command, Arnold served as a volunteer; and 
soon afterwards, Massachusetts having yielded to Connecticut, 
and having angered Arnold by sending a committee to make an 
inquiry into his conduct, he resigned and returned to Cambridge. 
He was then ordered to co-operate with General Richard Mont- 
gomery in the invasion of Canada, which he had been one of the 
first to suggest to the Continental Congress. Starting with 
1 1 00 men from Cambridge on the 17th of September 1775, he 
reached Gardiner, Maine, on the 20th, advanced through the 
Maine woods, and after suffering terrible privations and hard- 
ships, his little force, depleted by death and desertion,, reached 
Quebec on the 13th of November. The garrison had been 
forewarned, and Arnold was compelled to await the coming of 
Montgomery from Montreal. The combined attack on the 31st 
of December 1775 failed; Montgomery was killed, and Arnold 
was severely wounded. Arnold, who had been commissioned a 
brigadier-general in January 1776, remained in Canada until 
the following June, being after April in command at Montreal. 

Some time after the retreat from Canada, charges of mis- 
conduct and dishonesty, growing chiefly out of his seizure from 
merchants in Montreal of goods for the use of his troops, were 



brought against him; these charges were tardily investigated 
by the Board of War, which in a report made on the 23rd of 
May 1777, and confirmed by Congress, declared that his " char- 
acter and conduct " had been " cruelly and groundlessly 
aspersed." Having constructed a flotilla on Lake Champlain, 
Arnold engaged a greatly superior British fleet near Valcour 
Island (October 11, 1776), and after inflicting severe loss on 
the enemy, made his escape under cover of night. Two days 
later he was overtaken by the British fleet, which however he, 
with only one war- vessel, and that crippled, delayed long enough 
to enable his other vessels to make good their escape, fighting 
with desperate valour and finally running his own ship aground 
and escaping to Crown Point. The engagement of the nth 
was the first between British and American fleets. Arnold's 
brilliant exploits had drawn attention to him as one of the most 
promising of the Continental officers, and had won for him the 
friendship of Washington. Nevertheless, when in February 
1777 Congress created five new major-generals, Arnold, although 
the ranking brigadier, was passed over, partly at least for 
sectional reasons— Connecticut had already two major-generals 
— in favour of his juniors. At this time it was only Washington's 
urgent persuasion that prevented Arnold from leaving the 
service. Two months later while he was at New Haven, Governor 
Tryon's descent on Danbury took place; and Arnold, who took 
command of the militia after the death of General Wooster, 
attacked the British with such vigour at Ridgefield (April 27, 
1777) that they escaped to their ships with difficulty. 

In recognition of this service Arnold was now commissioned 
major-general (his commission dating from 17 th February) but 
without his former relative rank. After serving in New Jersey 
with Washington, he joined General Philip Schuyler in the 
Northern Department, and in August 1777 proceeded up the 
Mohawk Valley against Colonel St Leger, and raised the siege 
of Fort Stanwix (or Schuyler). Subsequently, after Gates 
had superseded Schuyler (August 19), Arnold commanded the 
American left wing in the first battle of Saratoga (September 19, 
1777). His ill-treatment at the hands of General Gates, whose 
jealousy had been aroused, led to a quarrel which terminated 
in Arnold being relieved of command. He remained with the 
army, however, at the urgent request of his brother officers, and 
although nominally without command served brilliantly in the 
second battle of Saratoga (October 7, 1777), during which he 
was seriously wounded. For his services he was thanked by 
Congress, and received a new commission giving him at last his 
proper relative rank. 

In June 1778 Washington placed him in command of Phil- 
adelphia. Here he soon came into conflict with the state 
authorities, jealous of any outside control. In the social life 
of Philadelphia, largely dominated by families of Loyalist sym- 
pathies, Arnold was the most conspicuous figure; he lived 
extravagantly, entertained lavishly, and in April 1779 took for 
his second wife, Margaret Shippen (1760-1804), the daughter of 
Edward Shippen (1720-1806), a moderate Loyalist, who event- 
ually became reconciled to the new order and was in 1799-1805 
chief-justice of the state. Early in February 1779 the executive 
council of Pennsylvania, presided over by Joseph Reed, one of 
his most persistent enemies, presented to Congress eight charges 
of misconduct against Arnold, none of which was of any great 
importance. Arnold at once demanded an investigation, and 
in March a committee of Congress made a report exonerating 
him; but Reed obtained a reconsideration, and in April 1779 
Congress, though throwing out four charges, referred the other 
four to a court-martial. Despite Arnold's demand for a speedy 
trial, it was December before the court was convened. It was 
probably during this period of vexatious delay that Arnold, 
always sensitive and now incited by a keen sense of injustice, 
entered into a secret correspondence with Sir Henry Clinton 
with a view to joining the British service. On the 26th of 
January 1780 the court, before which Arnold had ably argued 
his own case, rendered its verdict, practically acquitting him of 
all intentional wrong, but, apparently in deference to the Penn- 
sylvania authorities, directing Washington to reprimand him 



^34 



ARNOLD, SIR E.— ARNOLD, GOTTFRIED 



for two trivial and very venial offences. Arnold, who had 
confidently expected absolute acquittal, was inflamed with a 
burning anger that even Washington's kindly reprimand, couched 
almost in words of praise, could not subdue. 

It was now apparently that he first conceived the plan of be- 
traying some important post to the British. With this in view he 
sought and obtained from Washington (August 1780) command 
of West Point, the key to the Hudson River Valley. Arnold's 
offers now became more explicit, and, in order to perfect the 
details of the plot, Clinton's adjutant-general, Major John 
Andre, met him near Stony Point on the night of the 21st of 
September. On the 23rd, while returning by land, Andre with 
incriminating papers was captured, and the officer to whom he 
was entrusted unsuspectingly sent information of his capture to 
Arnold, who was thus enabled to escape to the British lines. 
Arnold, commissioned a. brigadier-general in the British army, 
received £6315 in compensation for his property losses, and was 
employed in leading an expedition into Virginia which burned 
Richmond, and in an attack upon New London (q.v) in Sep- 
tember 1781. In December 1781 he removed to London and 
was consulted on American affairs by the king and ministry, 
but could obtain no further employment in the active service. 
Disappointed at the failure of his plans and embittered by the 
neglect and scorn which he met in England, he spent the years 
1787-1791 at St John, New Brunswick, once more engaging in 
the West India trade, but in 1791 he returned to London, and 
after war had broken out between Great Britain and France, 
was active in fitting out privateers. Gradually sinking into 
melancholia, worn down by depression, and suffering from a 
nervous disease, he died at London on the 14th of June 180 1. , 

Arnold had three sons — Benedict, Richard and Henry — by 
his first wife, and four sons — Edward Shippen* James Robertson, 
George and William Fitch — by his second wife; five of them, 
and one grandson, served in the British army. Benedict (1768- 
1795) was an officer of the artillery and was mortally wounded 
in the West Indies. Edward Shippen (1 780-1813) became 
lieutenant of the Sixth Bengal Cavalry and later paymaster at 
Muttra, India. James Robertson (1 781-1854) entered the corps 
of Royal Engineers in 1798, served in the Napoleonic wars, in 
Egypt and in the West Indies, and rose to the rank of lieutenant- 
general, was an aide-de-camp to William IV., and was created 
a knight of the Hanoverian Guelphic order and a knight of the 
Crescent. George (1 787-1828) was a lieutenant-colonel in the 
Second Bengal Cavalry at the time of his death. William Fitch 
(1 794-1828) became a captain in the Nineteenth Royal Lancers; 
his son, William Trail (1826-1855) served in the Crimean War 
as captain of the Fourth Regiment of Foot and was killed during 
the siege of Sevastopol. 

Bibliography. — Jared Sparks' Life and Treason of. Benedict 
Arnold (Boston, 1835), in his " Library of American Biography," is 
biassed and unfair. The best general account is Isaac Newton 
Arnold's Life of Benedict Arnold (Chicago, 1880), which, while 
offering no apologies or defence of his treason, lays perhaps too great 
emphasis on his provocations. Charles Burr Todd's The Real 
Benedict Arnold (New York, 1903) is a curious attempt to make 
Arnold's wife wholly responsible for his defection. Frangois de 
Barb£-Marbois's Complot d' Arnold el de Sir II. Clinton contre les 
Atats-Unis (Paris, 1816) contains much interesting material, but is 
inaccurate. Two good accounts of the Canadian Expedition are 
Justin H. Smith's Arnold's March from Cambridge to Quebec (New 
York, 1903), which contains a reprint of Arnold's journal of the 
expedition; and John Codrhan's Arnold's Expedition to Quebec 
(New York, 1901). Arnold's Letters on the Expedition to Canada 
were printed in the Maine Historical Society's Collections 
for 1831 (repr. 1865). See also William Abbatt, The Crisis of the 
Revolution (New York, 1899); The Northern Invasion of 1780 
(Bradford Club Series, No. 6, New York, 1866); " The Treason of 
Benedict Arnold " (letters of Sir Henry Clinton to Lord George 
Germaine) in Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, 
vol. xxii. (Philadelphia, 1898); and Proceedings of a General Court 
Martial for tlie Trial of Major-General Arnold (Philadelphia, 1780; 
reprinted with introduction and notes, New York, 1865). 

ARNOLD, SIR EDWIN (1832-1904), British poet and jour- 
nalist, was born on the 10th of June 1832, and was educated at 
the King's school, Rochester; King's College, London; and 
University College, Oxford, where in 1852 he gained the Newdi- 



gate prize for a poem on Belshazzar's feast. On leaving Oxford 
he became a schoolmaster, and went to India as principal of the 
government Sanskrit College at Poona, a post which he held 
during the mutiny of 1857, when he was able to render services 
for which he was publicly thanked by Lord Elphinstone in the 
Bombay council. Returning to England in 1861 he worked as 
a journalist on the staff of the Daily Telegraph, a newspaper 
with which he continued to be associated for more than forty 
years. It was he who, on behalf of the proprietors of the Daily 
Telegraph in conjunction with the New York Herald, arranged 
for the journey of H. M. Stanley to Africa to discover the course 
of the Congo, and Stanley named after him a mountain to the 
north-east of Albert Edward Nyanza. Arnold must also be 
credited with the first idea of a great trunk line traversing the 
entire African continent, for in 1874 he first employed the phrase 
" a Cape to Cairo railway " subsequently popularized by Cecil 
Rhodes. It was, however, as a poet that he was best known 
to his contemporaries. The Light of Asia appeared in 1879 an d 
won an immediate success, going through numerous editions 
both in England and America. It is an Indian epic, dealing 
with the life and teaching of Buddha, which are expounded 
with much wealth of local colour and not a little felicity of 
versification. The poem contains many lines of unquestionable 
beauty; and its immediate popularity was rather increased 
than diminished by the twofold criticism to which ft was sub- 
jected. On the one hand it was held by Oriental scholars to give 
a false impression of Buddhist doctrine; while, on the other, 
the suggested analogy between Sakyamuni and Christ offended 
the taste of some devout Christians. The latter criticism prob- 
ably suggested to Arnold the idea of attempting a second narra- 
tive poem of which the central figure should be the founder of 
Christianity, as the founder of Buddhism had been that of the 
first. But though The Light of the World (1891), in which this 
idea took shape, had considerable poetic merit, it lacked the 
novelty of theme and setting which had given the earlier poem 
much of its attractiveness; and it failed to repeat the success 
attained by The Light of Asia. Arnold's other principal volumes 
of poetry were Indian Song of Songs (1875), Pearls of the Faith 
(1883), The Song Celestial (1885), With Sadi in the Garden (1888), 
Potiphar's Wife (1892) and Admma (1893). In his later years 
Arnold resided for some time in Japan, and his third, wife was 
a Japanese lady. In Seas and Lands (1891) and Japonica (1892) 
he gives an interesting study of Japanese life. He received the 
order of C.S.I, on the occasion of the proclamation of Queen 
Victoria as empress of India in 1877, and in 1888 was created 
K.C.I.E. He also possessed decorations conferred by the rulers 
of Japan, Persia, Turkey and Siam. Sir Edwin Arnold died 
on the 24th of March 1904. 

ARNOLD, GOTTFRIED (1666-1714), German Protestant 
divine, was born at Annaberg, in Saxony, where his father was 
a schoolmaster. In 1682 he went to the Gymnasium at Gera, 
and three years later to the university of Wittenberg. Here 
he made a special study of theology and history, and afterwards, 
through the influence of P. J. Spener, " the father of pietism," 
he became tutor in Quedlinburg. His first work, Die Erste Licbe 
zuChristo, to which in modern times attention was again directed 
by Leo Tolstoy, appeared in 1696. It went through five editions 
before 1728, and gained the author much reputation. In the 
year after its publication he was invited to Giessen as professor 
of church history. The life and work here, however, proved so 
distasteful to him that he resigned in 1698, and returned to 
Quedlinburg. In 1699 he began to publish his largest work, 
described by Tolstoy (The Kingdom of God is within You, 
chap, iii.) as" remarkable, although little known," Unparteiische 
Kirchen- und Ketzerhistorie, in which he has been thought by 
some to show more impartiality towards heresy than towards 
the Church (cp. Otto Pfleiderer, Development of Theology, p. 277). 
His next work, Geheimniss der gottlichen Sophia, published in 
1 700, seemed to indicate that he had developed a form of mysti- 
cism. Soon afterwards, however, his acceptance of a pastorate 
marked a change, and he produced a number of noteworthy 
works on practical theology. He was also known as the autho* 



ARNOLD, MATTHEW 



t>35 



of sacred poems. Gottfried Arnold has rightly been classed 
with the pietistic section of Protestant historians {Bibliotheca 
Sacra, 1850). 

See Calwer-Zeller, Theologisches Handwdrterbuch, and the account 
of him in Albert Knapp's new edition of Die erste Liebe zu Chrhto 
(1845). 

ARNOLD, MATTHEW (1822-1888), English poet, literary 
critic and inspector of schools, was bom at Laleham, near 
Staines, on the 24th of December 1822. When it is said that he 
was the son of the famous Dr Arnold of Rugby, and that Win- 
chester, Rugby and Balliol College, Oxford, contributed their 
best towards his education, it seems superfluous to add that, in 
estimating Matthew Arnold and his work, training no less than 
original endowment has to be considered. A full academic 
training has its disadvantages as well as its gains. In the in- 
dividual no less than in the species the history of man's develop- 
ment is the history of the struggle between the impulse to 
express original personal force and the impulse to make that 
force bow to the authority of custom. Where in any individual 
the first of these impulses is stronger than usual, a complete 
academic training is a gain; but where the second of these 
impulses is the dominant one, the effect of the academic habit 
upon the mind at its most sensitive and most plastic period is 
apt to be crippling. In regard to Matthew Arnold, it would be 
a bold critic of his life and his writings who should attempt to 
say what his work would have been if his training had been 
different. In his judgments on Goethe, Wordsworth, Byron, 
Shelley and Hugo, it may be seen how strong was his impulse 
to bow to authority. On the other hand, in Arnold's ingenious 
reasoning away the conception of Providence to "a stream of 
tendency not ourselves which makes for righteousness," we see 
how strong was his natural impulse for taking original views. 
The fact that the very air Arnold breathed during the whole of 
the impressionable period of his life w r as academic is therefore a 
very important fact to bear in mind. 

In one of his own most charming critical essays he contrasts the 
poetry of Homer, which consists of " natural thoughts in natural 
words," with the poetry of Tennyson, which consists of " distilled 
thoughts in distilled words." " Distilled " is one of the happiest 
words to be found in poetical criticism, and may be used with 
equal aptitude in the criticism of life. To most people the waters 
of life come with all their natural qualities — sweet or bitter— 
undistilled. Only the ordinary conditions of civilization, 
common to all, flavoured the waters of life to Shakespeare, to 
Cervantes, to Burns, to Scott, to Dumas, and those other great 
creators whose minds were mirrors — broad and clear — for 
reflecting the rich drama of life around them. To Arnold the 
waters of life came distilled so carefully that the wonder is that 
he had any originality left. A member of the upper stratum 
of that " middle class " which he despised, or pretended to 
despise — the eldest son of one of the most accomplished as well 
as one of the most noble-tempered men of his time — Arnold 
from the moment of his birth drank the finest distilled waters 
that can be drunk even in these days. Perhaps, on the whole, the 
surprising thing is how little he suffered thereby. Indeed those 
who had formed an idea of Arnold's personality from their 
knowledge of his " culture," and especially those who had been 
delighted by the fastidious and feminine delicacy of his prose 
style, used to be quite bewildered when for the first time they met 
him at a dinner-table or in a friend's smoking-room. His prose 
was so self-conscious that what people expected to find in the 
writer was the Arnold as he was conceived by certain " young 
lions " of journalism whom he satirized — a somewhat over- 
cultured petit-mailre — almost, indeed, a coxcomb of letters. On 
the other hand, those who had been captured by his poetry 
expected to find a man whose sensitive organism responded 
nervously to every uttered word as an aeolian harp answers to 
the faintest breeze. What they found was a broad-shouldered, 
manly — almost burly — Englishman with a fine countenance, 
bronzed by the open air of England, wrinkled apparently by the 
sun, wind-worn as an English skipper's, open and frank as a 
fox-hunting squire's — and yet a countenance whose finely 



chiselled features were as high-bred and as commanding as 
Wellington's or Sir Charles Napier's. The voice they heard was 
deep-toned, fearless, rich and frank, and yet modulated to express 
every nuance of thought, every movement of emotion and 
humour. In his prose essays the humour he showed was of a 
somewhat thin-lipped kind; in his more important poems he 
showed none at all. It was here, in this matter of humour, that 
Arnold's writings were specially misleading as to the personality 
of the man. Judged from his poems, it was not with a poet like 
the writer of " The Northern Farmer," or a poet like the writer 
of" NedBratts," that any student of poetry would have dreamed 
of classing him. Such a student would actually have been more 
likely to class him with two of his contemporaries between whom 
and himself there were but few points in common, the " humour- 
less " William Morris- and the " humourless " Rossetti. For, 
singularly enough, between him and them there was this one 
point of resemblance: while all three were richly endowed with 
humour, while all three were the very lights of the sets in which 
they moved, the moment they took pen in hand to write poetry 
they became sad. It would almost seem as if, like Rossetti, 
Arnold actually held that poetry was not the proper medium 
for humour. No wonder, then, if the absence of humour in his 
poetry did much to mislead the student of his work as to the 
real character of the man. 

After a year at Winchester, Matthew Arnold entered Rugby 
school in 1837. He early began to write and print verses. His 
first publication was a Rugby prize poem, Alaric at Rome, in 
1840. This was followed in 1843, after he had gone up to Oxford 
in 1840 as a scholar of Balliol, by his poem Cromwell, which won 
the Newdigate prize. In 1844 he graduated with second-iclass 
honours, and in 1,845 was elected a fellow of Oriel College, where 
among his colleagues was A. H. Clough, his friendship with 
whom is commemorated in that exquisite elegy Thyrsis. From 
1847 to 1851 he acted as private secretary to Lord Lansdowne; 
and in the latter year, after acting for a short time as assistant- 
master at Rugby, he was appointed to an inspectorship of schools, 
a post which lie retained until two years before his death. He 
married, in June 1851, the daughter of Mr Justice Wightman. 
Meanwhile, in 1849, appeared The Strayed Reveller, and other 
Poems, by A , a volume which gained a considerable esoteric 
reputation. In 1852 he published another volume under the 
same initial, Empedocles on Etna, and other. Poems. Empcdocles 
is as undramatic a poem perhaps as was ever written in dramatic 
form, but studded with lyrical beauties of a very high order. 
In 1853 Arnold published a volume of Poems under his own 
name. This consisted partially of poems selected from the two 
previous volumes. A second series of poems, which contained, 
however, only two new ones, was published in 1855. So great 
was the impression made by these in academic circles, that in 
1857 Arnold was elected professor of poetry at Oxford, and he 
held the chair for ten years. In 1858 he published his classical 
tragedy, Merope. Nine years afterwards his New Poems (1867) 
were published. While he held the Oxford professorship he 
published several series of lectures, which gave him a high place 
as a scholar and critic. The essays 1 On Translating Homer: 
Three Lectures given at Oxford, published in 186 1, supplemented 
in 1862 by On Translating Homer: Last Wards, a fourth lecture 
given. ill reply to F. W.. Newman's .ffowmc Translation in Theory 
and Practice (1861), and On the Study of Celtic Literature, pub- 
lished in 1867, were full of subtle and brilliant if not of profound 
criticism. So were the two series of Essays in Criticism, the 
first of which, consisting of articles reprinted from various 
reviews, appeared in 1865. The essay on " A Persian Passion 
Play " was added in the editions of 1875; and a second series, 
edited by Lord Coleridge, appeared in 1888. 

Arnold's poetic activity almost ceased after he left the chair 
of poetry at Oxford* He was several times sent by government 
to make inquiries into the state of education in France, Germany, 
Holland and other countries; and his reports, with their 
thorough-going and searching criticism of continental methods, 

1 These essays were edited.in 1905 with an introduction by W. H. D. 
Rouse. 



6 3 6 



ARNOLD, MATTHEW 



as contrasted with English methods, showed how conscientiously 
he had devoted some of his best energies to the work. His fame 
as a poet and a literary critic has somewhat overshadowed the 
fact that he was during thirty-five years of his life — from 1851 
to 1886— employed in the Education Department as one of 
H.M. inspectors of schools, while his literary work was achieved 
in such intervals of leisure as could be spared from the public 
service. At the time of his appointment the government, by 
arrangement with the religious bodies, entrusted the inspection 
of schools connected with the Church of England to clergymen, 
and agreed also to send Roman Catholic inspectors to schools 
managed by members of that communion. Other schools — 
those of the British and Foreign Society, the Wesleyans, and 
undenominational schools generally — were inspected by laymen, 
of whom Arnold was one. There were only three or four of these 
officers at first, and their districts were necessarily large. It is 
to the experience gained in intercourse with Nonconformist 
school managers that we may attribute the curiously intimate 
knowledge of religious sects which furnished the material for 
some of his keen though good-humoured sarcasms. The Edu- 
cation Act of 1870, which simplified the administrative system, 
abolished denominational inspection, and thus greatly reduced 
the area assigned to a single inspector. Arnold took charge of 
the district of Westminster, and remained in that office until 
his resignation, taking also an occasional share in the inspection 
of training colleges for teachers, and in conferences at the central 
office. His letters, passim, show that some of the routine which 
devolved upon him was distasteful, and that he was glad to 
entrust to a skilled assistant much of the duty of individual 
examination and the making up of schedules and returns. But 
the influence he exerted on schools, on the department, and on 
the primary education of the whole country, was indirectly far 
greater than is generally supposed. His annual reports, of 
which more than twenty were collected into a volume by his 
friend and official chief, Sir Francis (afterwards Lord) Sandford, 
attracted, by reason of their freshness of style and thought, 
much more of public attention than is usually accorded to blue- 
book literature; and his high aims, and his sympathetic 
appreciation of the efforts and difficulties of the teachers, had 
a remarkable effect in raising the tone of elementary education, 
and in indicating the way to improvement. In particular, he 
insisted on the formative elements of school education, on 
literature and the " humanities," as distinguished from the 
collection of scraps of information and " useful knowledge "; 
and he sought to impress all the young teachers with the. necessity 
of broader mental cultivation than was absolutely required to 
obtain the government certificate. In his reports also he dwelt 
often and forcibly on the place which the study of the Bible, 
not the distinctive formularies of the churches, ought to hold 
in English schools. He urged that besides the religious and 
moral purposes of Scriptural teaching, it had a literary value of 
its own, and was the best instrument in the hands even of the 
elementary teacher for uplifting the soul and refining and 
enlarging the thoughts of young children. 

On three occasions Arnold was asked to assist the government 
by making special inquiries into the state of education in foreign 
countries. These duties were especially welcome to him, serving 
as they did as a relief from the monotony of school inspection 
at home, and as opportunities for taking a wider survey of the 
whole subject of education, and for expressing his views on 
principles and national aims as well as administrative details. 
In 1859, as foreign assistant commissioner, he prepared for the 
duke of Newcastle's commission to inquire into the subject of 
elementary education a report (printed i860) which was after- 
wards reprinted (1 861) in a volume entitled The Popular Educa- 
tion of France, with Notices of that of Holland and Switzerland. 
In 1865 he was again employed as assistant-commissioner by 
the Schools Inquiry Commission under Lord Taunton; and his 
report on this subject, On Secondary Education in Foreign 
Countries (1866), was subsequently reprinted under the title 
Schools and Universities on the Continent (1868). Twenty years 
later he was sent by the Education Department to make special 



inquiries on certain specified points, e.g. free education, the 
status and training of teachers, and compulsory attendance 
at schools. The result of this investigation appeared as a 
parliamentary paper, Special Report on certain points connected 
with Elementary Education in Germany, Switzerland and France, 
in 1886. He also contributed the chapter on " Schools " (1837- 
1887) to the second volume of Mr Humphry Ward's Reign of 
Queen Victoria. Part of his official writings may be studied in 
Reports for Elementary Schools (1852-1882), edited by Sir F. 
Sandford in 1889. 

All these reports form substantial contributions to the history 
and literature of education in the Victorian age. They have 
been quoted often, and have exercised marked influence on subse- 
quent changes and controversies. One great purpose underlies 
them all. It is to bring home to the English people a conviction 
that education ought to be a national concern, that it should not 
be left entirely to local, or private, or irresponsible initiative, 
that the watchful jealousy so long shown by Liberals, and 
especially by Nonconformists, in regard to state action was a 
grave practical mistake, and that in an enlightened democracy, 
animated by a progressive spirit and noble and generous ideals, 
it was the part of wisdom to invoke the collective power of the 
state to give effect to those ideals. To this theme he constantly 
recurred in his essays, articles and official reports. " Porro 
unum est necessarium: One thing is needful; organize your 
secondary education." 

In 1883 a pension of £250 was conferred on Arnold in recog- 
nition of his literary merits. In the same year he went to the 
United States oh a lecturing tour, and again in 1886, his subjects 
being " Emerson " and the " Principles and Value of Numbers." 
The success of these lectures, though they were admirable in 
matter and form, was marred by the lecturer's lack of experience 
in delivery. It is sufficient, further, to say that Culture and 
Anarchy: an Essay in Political and Social Criticism, appeared 
in 1869; St Paul and Protestantism, with an Introduction on 
Puritanism and the Church of England (1870); Friendship's 
Garland: being the Conversations, Letters and Opinions of the 
late Arminius Baron von Thunder -ten-Tronckh (1871); Literature 
and Dogma: an Essay towards a Better Apprehension of the 
,Bible (1873); God and the Bible: a Review of Objections to 
Literature and Dogma (1875); Last Essays on Church and 
Religion (1877); Mixed Essays (1879); Irish Essays and Others 
(1882); Discourses in America (1885). Such essays as the first 
of these, embodying as they did Arnold's views of theological 
and polemical subjects, attracted much attention at the time 
of their publication, owing to the state of the intellectual atmo- 
sphere at the moment; but it is doubtful, perhaps, whether 
they will be greatly considered in the near future. Many 
severe things have been said, and will be said, concerning the 
inadequacy of poets like Coleridge and Wordsworth when 
confronting subjects of a theological or philosophical kind. 
Wordsworth's High Church Pantheism and Coleridge's dis- 
quisitions on the Logos seem farther removed from the specula- 
tions of to-day than do the dreams of Lucretius. But these two 
great writers lived before the days of modern science. Arnold, 
living only a few years later, came at a transition period when 
the winds of tyrannous knowledge had blown off the protecting 
roof that had covered the centuries before, but when time and 
much labour were needed to build another roof of new materials 
— a period when it was impossible for the poet to enjoy either 
the quietism of High Church Pantheism in which Wordsworth 
had basked, or the sheltering protection of German metaphysics 
under which Coleridge had preached — a period, nevertheless, 
when the wonderful revelations of science were still too raw, 
too cold and hard, to satisfy the yearnings of the poetic soul. 
Objectionable as Arnold's rationalizing criticism was to con- 
temporary orthodoxy, and questionable as was his equipment in 
point of theological learning, his spirituality of outlook and ethical 
purpose were not to be denied. Yet it is not Arnold's views 
that have become current coin so much as his literary phrases 
— his craving for " culture " and " sweetness and light," his con- 
tempt for " the dissidence of Dissent and the Protestantism 



ARNOLD, MATTHEW 



637 



of the Protestant religion," his " stream of tendency not our- 
selves making for righteousness," his classification of " Philistines 
and barbarians " — and so forth. His death at Liverpool, of heart 
failure on the 1 5 th of April 1 888, was sudden and quite unexpected. 

Arnold was a prominent figure in that great galaxy of Victorian 
poets who were working simultaneously — Tennyson, Browning, 
Rossetti, William Morris and Swinburne — poets between whom 
there was at least this connecting link, that the quest of all of them 
was the old-fashioned poetical quest of the beautiful. Beauty 
was their watchword, as it had been the watchword of their 
immediate predecessors — Wordsworth, Coleridge, Keats, Shelley 
and Byron. That this group of early 19th-century poets might 
be divided into two — those whose primary quest was physical 
beauty, and those whose primary quest was moral beauty — is 
no doubt true. Still, in so far as beauty was their quest they 
were all akin. And so with the Victorian group to which Arnold 
belonged. As to the position which he takes among them 
opinions must necessarily vary. On the whole, his place in the 
group will be below all the others. The question as to whether 
he was primarily a poet or a prosateur has been often asked. 
If we were to try to answer that question here, we should have 
to examine his poetry in detail — we should have to inquire 
whether his primary impulse of expression was to seize upon 
the innate suggestive power of words, or whether his primary 
impulse was to rely upon the logical power of the sentence. In 
nobility of temper, in clearness of statement, and especially in 
descriptive power, he is beyond praise. But intellect, judgment, 
culture and study of great poets may do much towards enabling 
a prose- writer to write what must needs be called good poetry. 
What they cannot enable him to do is to produce those magical 
effects which poets of the rarer kind can achieve by seizing that 
mysterious, suggestive power of words which is far beyond all 
mere statement. Notwithstanding the exquisite work that 
Arnold has left behind him, some critics have come to the con- 
clusion that his primary impulse in expression was that of the 
poetically-minded prosateur rather than that of the born poet. 
And this has been said by some who nevertheless deeply admire 
poems like " The Scholar Gypsy," "Thyrsis," " The Forsaken 
Merman, " " Dover Beach," " Heine's Grave," " Rugby Chapel," 
" The Grande Chartreuse," " Sohrab and Rustum," " The Sick 
King in Bokhara," " Tristram and Iseult," &c. It would seem 
that a man may show all the endowments of a poet save one, 
and that one the most essential — the instinctive mastery over 
metrical effects. 

In all literary expression there are two kinds of emphasis, 
the emphasis of sound and the emphasis of sense. Indeed the 
difference between those who have and those who have not the 
true rhythmic instinct is that, while the former have the innate 
faculty of making the emphasis of sound and the emphasis of 
sense meet and strengthen each other, the latter are without that 
faculty. But so imperfect is the human mind that it can rarely 
apprehend or grasp simultaneously these two kinds of emphasis. 
While to the born prosateur the emphasis of sense comes first, 
and refuses to be more than partially conditioned by the emphasis 
of sound, to the born poet the emphasis of sound comes first, 
and sometimes will, even as in the case of Shelley, revolt against 
the tyranny of the emphasis of sense. Perhaps the very origin 
of the old quantitative metres was the desire to make these two 
kinds of emphasis meet in the same syllable. In manipulating 
their quantitative metrical system the Greeks had facilities for 
bringing one kind of emphasis into harmony with the other 
such as are unknown to writers in accentuated metres. This 
accounts for the measureless superiority of Greek poetry in verbal 
melody as well as in general harmonic scheme to all the poetry of 
the modern world. In writers so diverse in many ways as Homer, 
jEschylus, Sophocles, Pindar, Sappho, the harmony between the 
emphasis of sound and the emphasis of sense is so complete that 
each of these kinds of emphasis seems always begetting, yet 
always born of the other. When in Europe the quantitative 
measures were superseded by the accentuated measures a 
reminiscence was naturally and inevitably left behind of the 
old system; and the result has been, in the English language at 



least, that no really great line can be written in which the em- 
phasis of accent, the emphasis of quantity and the emphasis of 
sense do not meet on the same syllable. Whenever this junction 
does not take place the weaker line, or lines, are always introduced, 
not for makeshift purposes, but for variety, as in the finest lines 
of Milton and Wordsworth. Wordsworth no doubt seems to 
have had a theory that the accent of certain words, such as 
"without," "within," &c, could be disturbed in an iambic 
line; but in his best work he does not act upon his theory, and 
endeavours most successfully to make the emphasis of accent, 
of quantity and of sense meet. It might not be well for a poem 
to contain an entire sequence of such perfect lines as 

" I thought of Chatterton, the marvellous boy," 
or 

"Thy soul was like a star and dwelt apart," 

for then the metricist's art would declare itself too loudly and 
weaken the imaginative strength of the picture. But such lines 
should no doubt form the basis of the poem, and weaker lines — 
lines in which there is no such combination of the three kinds of 
emphasis — should be sparingly used, and never used for make- 
shift purposes. Now, neither by instinct nor by critical study 
was Arnold ever able to apprehend this law of prosody. If he 
does write a line of the first order, metrically speaking, he seems 
to do so by accident. Such weak lines as these are constantly 
occurring— 

" The poet, to whose mighty heart 
Heaven doth a quicker pulse impart, 
Subdues that energy to scan 
Not his own course, but that of man." 

Much has been said about what is called the " Greek temper " 
of Matthew Arnold's muse. A good deal depends upon what 
it meant by the Hellenic spirit. But if the Greek temper ex- 
presses itself, as is generally supposed, in the sweet acceptance 
and melodious utterance of the beauty of the world as it is, 
accepting that beauty without inquiring as to what it means 
and as to whither it goes, it is difficult to see where in Arnold's 
poetry this temper declares itself. Surely it is not in Empedocles 
on Etna, and surely it is not in Merope. If there is a poem of his 
in which one would expect to find the joyous acceptance of life 
apart from questionings about the civilization in which the poet 
finds himself environed (its hopes,' its fears, its aspirations and 
its failures) — such questionings, in short, as were for ever 
Vexing Arnold's soul— it would be in " The Scholar Gypsy," 
a poem in which the poet tries to throw himself into the mood 
of a " Romany Rye." The great attraction of the gypsies to 
Englishmen of a certain temperament is that they alone seem to 
feel the joyous acceptance of life which is supposed to be specially 
Greek. Hence it would have been but reasonable to look, 
if anywhere, for the expression of Arnold's Greek temper in a 
poem which sets out to describe the feelings of the student who, 
according to Glanville's story, left Oxford to wander over 
England with the Romanies. But instead of this we got the old 
fretting about the unsatisfactoriness of modern civilization. 
Glanville's Oxford student, whose story is glanced at now and 
again in the poem, flits about in the scenery like a cloud- 
shadow on the grass; but the way in which Arnold contrives 
to avoid giving us the faintest idea either dramatic or pic- 
torial of the student about whom he talks so much, and the 
gypsies with whom the student lived, is one of the most singular 
feats in poetry. The reflections which come to a young Oxonian 
lying on the grass and longing to escape life's fitful fever without 
shuffling off this mortal coil, are, no doubt, beautiful reflections 
beautifully expressed, but the temper they show is the very 
opposite of the Greek. To say this is not in the least to disparage 
Arnold. " A man is more like the age in which he lives," says 
the Chinese aphorism, " than he is like his own father and mother," 
and Arnold's polemical writings alone are sufficient to show that 
the waters of life he drank were from fountains distilled, seven 
times distilled, at the topmost slope of 19th-century civilization. 
Mr George Meredith's " Old Chartist" exhibits far more of the 
temper of acceptance than does any poem by Matthew Arnold. 

His most famous critical dictum is that poetry is a " criticism 



6 3 8 



ARNOLD, SAMUEL^ARNOLD, THOMAS 



of life." What he seems to have meant is that poetry is the 
crowning fruit of a criticism of life; that just as the poet's 
metrical effects are and must be the result of a thousand semi- 
conscious generalizations upon the laws of cause and effect in 
metric art, so the beautiful things he says about life and the beauti- 
ful pictures he paints of life are the result of his generalizations 
upon life as he passes through it, and consequently that the value 
of his poetry consists in the beauty and the truth of his generaliza- 
tions. But this is saying no more than is said in the line — ■ 
" Rien n'est beau que le vrai; le vrai seul est aimable " — 
or in the still more famous lines — 

" ' Beauty is truth, truth beauty,' — that is all 
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know." 

To suppose that Arnold confounded the poet with the writer 
of pensees would be absurd. Yet having decided that poetry 
consists of generalizations on human life, in reading poetry he 
kept on the watch for those generalizations, and at last seemed 
to think that the less and not the more they are hidden behind 
the dramatic action, and the more unmistakably they are in- 
truded as generalizations, the better. For instance, in one of 
his essays he quotes those lines from the " Chanson de Roland " 
of Turoldus, where Roland, mortally wounded, lays himself 
down under a pine-tree with his face turned towards Spain and 
the enemy, and begins to "call many things to remembrance; 
all the lands which his valour conquered, and pleasant France, 
and the men of his lineage, and Charlemagne, his liege lord, who 
nourished him " — 

" De plusurs choses a remembrer li prist, 
De tantes teres cume li bers cunquist, 
De dulce France, des humes de sun ligu, 
De Carlemagne sun seignor ki l'nurrit." 

" That," says Arnold, " is primitive work v I repeat, with an: 
undeniable poetic quality of its own. It deserves such praise, 
and such praise is sufficient for it." Thenhe contrasts it with a 
famous passage in Homer— that same passage Which is quoted 
in the article Poetry, for the very opposite purpose to that of 
Arnold's, quoted indeed to show how the epic poet, leaving the 
dramatic action to act as chorus, weakens the kv6.ni oi the 
picture — the passage in the Iliad (iii. 243-244) where the poet, 
after Helen's pathetic mention of her brother's comments on 
the causes of their absence,' "criticizes life " and generalizes 
upon the impotence of human intelligence, the impotence even 
of human love, to pierce the darkness in which the web of human 
fate is woven. He appends Dr Hawtrey's translation:— 

"Qs <j>6lto' robs d' ?J5ij Khrixtv <t>vrri£oos ala 
kv A.(LKehaltiovi aWi, <jti\jj & Trarpi&i. yaij). 
" So said she; they long since in Earth's soft arms were reposing 
There, in their own dear land, their fatherland, Lacedaemon." 

" We are here," says Arnold, " in another world, another 
order of poetry altogether; here is rightly due such supreme 
praise as that which M. Vitel gives to the Chanson de Roland. 
If our words are to have any meaning, if our judgments are to 
have any solidity, we must not heap that supreme praise upon 
poetry of an order immeasurably inferior." He does not see 
that the two passages cannot properly be compared at all. . In 
the one case the poet gives us a dramatic picture; in the other; 
a comment on a dramatic picture. 

Perhaps, indeed, the place Arnold held and still holds as a 
critic is due more to his exquisite felicity in expressing his views 
than to the penetration of his criticism. Nothing can exceed 
the easy grace of his prose at the best. It is conversational and 
yet absolutely exact in the structure of the sentences; and in 
spite of every vagary, his distinguishing note is urbanity. Keen- 
edged as his satire could be, his writing for the most part is 
as urbane as Addison's own. His influence on contemporary 
criticism and contemporary ideals was considerable, and gener- 
ally wholesome. His insistence on the necessity of looking at 
" the thing in itself," and the need for acquainting oneself with 
" the best that has been thought and said in the. world," gave a 
new stimulus alike to originality and industry in criticism; 
and in his own selection of subjects — such as Joubert, or the de 
GuSrins — he opened a new world to a larger class of the better 



sort of readers, exercising in this respect an awakening influence 
in his own time akin to that of Walter Pater a few years after- 
wards. The comparison with Pater might indeed be pressed 
further, and yet too far. Both were essentially products of 
Oxford. But Arnold, whose description of that " home of lost 
causes, and forsaken beliefs, and unpopular names, and im- 
possible loyalties," is in itself almost a poem, had a classical 
austerity in his style that savoured more intimately of Oxford 
tradition, and an ethical earnestness even in his most flippant 
moments which kept him notably aloof from the more sensuous 
school of aesthetics. 

The first collected edition of Arnold's poems was published in 
1869 in, two volumes, the first consisting of Narrative and Elegiac 
Poems, and the second of Dramatic and Lyric Poems. Other editions 
appeared in 1877, 1881; a library edition (3 vols., 1885); a one- 
volume reprint of the poems printed in the library edition with one 
or two additions (1890). Publications by Matthew Arnold not 
mentioned in the foregoing article include : England and the Italian 
Question (1859), a pamphlet; A French Eton; or, Middle Class 
Education and the State (1864); Higher Schools and Universities in 
Germany (1874), a partial reprint from Schools and Universities on 
the Continent (1868); A Bible Reading for Schools; The Great 
Prophecy of Israel's Restoration, an arrangement of Isaiah, chs. 
xl.-lxvi. (1872), republished with additions and varying titles in 
1875 and 1883; an edition of the Six Chief Lives from Johnson's 
Lives of the Poets (1878) ; editions of the Poems of Wordsworth (1879), 
and the Poetry of Byron ( 1 881), for the Golden Treasury Series, with 
prefatory essays reprinted in the second series of Essays in Criticism; 
an edition of Letters, Speeches and Tracts on Irish Affairs by Edmund 
Burke (1881); and many contributions to periodical literature. 
The Letters of Matthew A mold ( 1 848-1 888) were collected and arranged 
by George W. E. Russell in 1895, reprinted 1901. Matthew Arnold's 
Note Bopks, with a Preface by the Hon. Mrs Wodeliouse, appeared in 
1902. A complete and uniform edition of The Works of Matthew 
Arnold (15 vols., 1904-1905) includes the letters as edited by Mr 
Russell. Vol. iii. contains a complete bibliography of his works, 
many of the early editions of which are very valuable, by Mr T. B. 
Smart, who published a separate bibliography in 1892. A valuable 
note on the rather complicated subject of ArnoldV bibliography is 
given by Mr H. Buxton Forman in Arnold's Poems, Narrative, 
Elegiac and Lyric (Temple Classics, 1900). 

It was Arnold's expressed desire that his biography should not be 
written, and before his letters were published they underwent 
considerable editing at the hands.of his family. There are, however, 
monographs on Matthew Arnold (1899) in Modern English Writers 
by Prof. Saintsbury, and by Mr H. VV. Paul (1902), in the English 
Men of Letters Series. These two works are supplemented by Mr 
G. W. E. Russell, who, as the editor of Arnold's letters, is in a 'sense 
the official biographer, in Matthew Arnold (1904, Literary Lives 
Series). There are also studies of Arnold in Mr J. M. Robertson's 
Modern Humanists (1891), and in W. H. Hudson's Studies in Interpre- 
tation (1896), in Sir J. G. Fitch's Tho-nas and Matthew Arnold (1897), 
and a review of some of the works above mentioned in the Quarterly 
for January 1905 by T. H. Warren. (T. W.-D.; J. G. F.) 

ARNOLD, SAMUEL (1740-1802), English composer, was born 
at London on the 10th of August 1740. He received a thorough 
musical education at the Chapel Royal, and when little more 
than twenty years of age was appointed composer at Covent 
Garden theatre. Here, in 1765, he produced his popular opera, 
The Maid of the Mill, many of the songs in which were selected 
from the works of Italian composers. In 1776 he transferred 
his services to the Haymarket theatre. In 1783 he was made 
composer to George III. Between 1765 and 1802 he wrote as 
many as forty-three operas, after-pieces and pantomimes, of 
which the best were The Maid of the Mill, Rosamond, Inkle and 
Yarico, The Battle of Hexham, The Mountaineers. His oratorios 
included The Cure of Saul (1767), Abimelech (1768), The Resur- 
rection (1773), The Prodigal Son (1777) and Elisha (1795). In 
1 783 he became organist to the Chapel Royal. In 1 786 he began 
an edition of Handel's works, which extended to 40 volumes, 
but was never completed. In 1793 he became organist of West- 
minster Abbey, where he was buried after his death on the 22nd 
of October 1802. Arnold is chiefly remembered now for the 
publication of his Cathedral Music, being a collection in score of 
the most valuable and useful compositions for that service by the 
several English masters of the last 200 years (1790). 

ARNOLD, THOMAS (1705-1842), English clergyman and 
headmaster of Rugby school, was born at West Cowes, in the 
Isle of Wight, on the 13th of June 1795. He was the son of 
William and Martha Arnold, the former of whom occupied the 



ARNOTT— ARNOULD-PLESSY 



639 



situation of collector of customs at Cowes. His father died 
suddenly of spasm in the heart in 1801, and his early education 
was confided by his mother to her sister, Miss Delafield. From 
her tuition he passed to that of Dr Griffiths, at Warminster, 
in Wiltshire, in 1803; and in 1807 he was removed to Winchester, 
where he remained until 1811, having entered as a commoner, 
and afterwards become a scholar of the college. In after life 
he retained a lively feeling of interest in Winchester school, 
and remembered with admiration and profit the regulative tact 
of Dr Goddard. and the preceptorial ability of Dr Gabell, who 
were successively head-masters during his stay there. 

From Winchester he removed to Oxford in 1811, where he 
becan.c a scholar at Corpus Christi College; in 1815 he was 
elected fellow of Oriel College; and there he continued to reside 
until 1819. This interval was diligently devoted to the pursuit 
of d. ssice.1 and historical studies, to preparing himself for 
ordination, and to searching investigations, under the stimulus 
of continual discussion with a band of talented and congenial 
associ ;te.s, of the profoundest questions in theology, ecclesiastics 1 
polity and social philosophy. The authors he most carefully 
studied at this period were Thucydides and Aristotle, and for 
their writings he formed an attachment v. hich remained to the 
close of his life, and exerted a powerful influence upon his mode 
of thought and opinions, as well as upon his literary occupations 
in subsequent years. Herodotus also came in for a considerable 
share of his regard, but more, apparently, for recreation than 
for work. Accustomed freely and fearlessly to investigate 
whatever came before him, and swayed by a scrupulous dread 
of insincerity, he was doomed to long and anxious hesitation 
concerning some of the fundamental points of theology before 
arrivinr; at a firm conviction of the truth of Christianity. Once 
satisfied, however, his faith remained clear and firm; and 
thenceforward his life became that of a supremely religious man. 

To the name of Christ he was prepared to " surrender his 
whole soul," and to render before it "obedience, reverence 
without measure, intense humility, most unreserved adoration " 
(Scrm ns. vol. iv. p. 210). He did not often talk about religion; 
he had net much of the accredited phraseology of piety even when 
he discoursed on spiritual topics; but more than most men he 
was directed by religious principle and feeling in all his conduct. 
He left Oxford in 18 19 and settled at Laleham, near Staines, 
where he took pupils for the university. His spare time was 
devoted to the prosecution of studies in philology and history, 
more particularly to the study of Thucydides, and of the new 
light which had been cast upon Roman history and upon histori- 
cal method in general by the researches of Niebuhr. He was 
also occasionally engaged in preaching, and it was whilst here 
that he published the first volume of his sermons. Shortly after 
he settled at Laleham, he married Mary, youngest daughter of 
the Rev. John Penrose, rector of Fledborough, Nottinghamshire. 
After nine years spent at Laleham he was induced to offer himself 
as a candid;. te for the vacant' head-mastership of Rugby; and 
though he entered somewhat late upon the contest, and though 
none of the electors was personally known to him, he was elected 
in December 1827. In June 1828 he received priest's orders; in 
April and November of the same year he took his degrees of 
B.D. and D.D., and in August entered on his new office. 

In one of the testimonials which accompanied his application 
to the trustees of Rugby, the writer stated it as his convic~ 
tion that " if Mr Arnold were elected, he would change the 
face cf education all through the public schools of England." 
This somewhat hazardous pledge was nobly redeemed. Under 
Arnold's superintendence the school became not merely a place 
where a certain amount of classical or general learning was to 
be obtained, but a sphere of intellectual, moral and religious 
discipline, where healthy characters were formed, and men were 
trained for the duties, and struggles and responsibilities of life. 
His energies were chiefly devoted to the business of the school; 
but he found time also for much literary work, as well as for an 
extensive correspondence. Five volumes of sermons, an edition 
of Thucydides, with English notes and dissertations, a History 
of Rome in three vols. £vo, beside numerous articles in reviews, 



journals, newspapers and encyclopaedias, are extant to attest 
the untiring activity of his mind, and his patient diligence during 
this period. His interest also in public matters vas incessant, 
especially ecclesiastical questions, and such as bore upon the 
social welfare and moral improvement of the masses. 

In 1841, after fourteen years at Rugby, Dr Arnold was 
appointed hy Lord Melbourne, then prime minister, to the chair 
of modern history at Oxford. On the 2nd of December 1841 
he delivered his inaugural lecture. Seven other lectures were 
delivered during the first three weeks of the Lent term of 1842. 
When the midsummer vacation arrived, he was preparing to 
set out with his family to Fox How in Westmoreland, where he 
had purchased some property and built a house^ But he was 
suddenly attacked by angina pectoris, and died on Sunday, 
the 12th of June 1842. His remains were interred on the follow- 
ing Friday in the chancel of Rugby chapel, immediately under 
the communion table. 

The great peculiarity and charm of Dr Arnold's nature seemed 
to lie in the supremacy of the moral and the spiritual element 
over his whole being. He was not a notable scholar, and he had 
not much of what is usually called tact in his dealings either 
with the juvenile or the adult mind. What gave him his power, 
and secured for him so deeply the respect and veneration of his 
pupils and acquaintances, was- the intensely religious:, character 
of his whole life. He seemed ever, to act from a severe and lofty 
estimate of duty. To be just, honest and truthful, he ever held 
to be the first aim of his being. 

His Life was written by Dean Stanley (1845). 

ARNOTT, NEIL (1788-1874), Scottish physician, was born at 
Arbroath on the 15th of May 1788. He studied medicine first 
at Aberdeen, and subsequently in London under Sir Evejard 
Home (i7s6'-i832), through whom he obtained, while yet in his 
nineteenth year, the appointment of full surgeon to an East 
Indiaman. After making two voyages to China he settled in 
181 1 to practise in London, and speedily acquired high reputation 
in his profession. Within a few years he was made physician 
to the French and Spanish embassies, and in 1837 he became 
a physician extraordinary to the queen. From his earliest youth 
Arnott had ah intense love of natural philosophy, and to this 
was added an inventiveness which served him in good stead in 
his profession and yielded the " Arnott water-bed," the " Arnott 
ventilator," the " Arnott stove," &c. He was the author of 
several works bearing on physical science or its applications, 
the most important being his Elements of Physics (1827), which 
went through six editions in his lifetime. In 1838 he published a 
treatise on Warming and Ventilating, and, in 1855, one on the 
Smokeless Fireplace. He was a strong advocate of scientific, 
as opposed to purely dassical, education; and he manifested 
his interest in natural philosophy by the gift of £2000 to each 
of the four universities of Scotland and to the , university of 
London, to promote its study in the experimental and practical 
form. He died in London on the and of March 1874. 

ARNOULD - PLESSY, JEANNE SYLVANIE (1810-1897), 
French actress, was born in Metz on the 7th of September 
1819, the daughter of a local actor named Plessy. She was 
a pupil of Samson at the Conservatoire in 1829, and made her 
debut as Emma at the Comedie Francaise in 1834 in Alexandre 
Duval's La Fille d'honneur. She had an immense success, and 
Mile Mars, to whom the public already compared her, took 
her up. Until 1845 she had prominent parts in all the plays, 
new and old, at the Theatre Francais, when suddenly at the , 
height of her success, she left Paris and went to London, marry- 
ing the dramatic author, J. F. Arnould (d. 1854), a man much 
older than herself. The Comedie Francaise, after having tried in 
vain to bring her back, brought a suit against her, and obtained 
heavy damages, In the meantime Madame Arnould-Plessy 
accepted an engagement at the French theatre at St Petersburg, 
where she played for nine years. In 1855 she returned, to Paris 
and was re-admitted to the Comedie Francaise, as pensionnaire 
with an engagement for eight years. This second part of her 
career was even more brilliant than the first. She revived some 
of her old roles, but began to abandon the jeunes premieres for. 



640 



ARNSBERG— AROIDEAE 



the " lead," in which she had a success unequalled since the 
retirement of Mile Mars. Her later triumphs were especially 
associated with new plays by fimile Augier, Le Fils de Giboyer 
and Maitre Guerin. Her last appearance was in Edouard Gadol's 
La Grand-maman; she retired in 1876, and died in 1897. 

ARNSBERG, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Westphalia, romantically situated on an eminence almost 
surrounded by the river Ruhr, 44 m. S.E. pf Minister and 58 m. 
E.N.E. of Diisseldorf by rail. Pop. (1900) 8490. It is the seat 
of the provincial authorities, and has three churches, a court of 
appeal, a Roman Catholic gymnasium, which was formerly 
the Benedictine abbey of Weddinghausen, a library, a normal 
school and a chamber of commerce. Weaving, brewing and 
distilling are carried on, and there are manufactories of white 
lead, shot and paper, works for the production of railway plant, 
and saw-mills. Near the town are the ruins of the castle of the 
counts of Arnsberg, the last of whom, Gottfried, sold his count- 
ship, in 1368, to the archbishop of Cologne. The countship was 
incorporated by the archbishops in their duchy of Westphalia, 
which in 1802 was assigned to Hesse-Darmstadt and in 181 5 to 
Prussia. The town, which had received its first charter in 1237 
and later joined the Hanseatic League, became the capital of the 
duchy. 

ARNSTADT, a town in the principality of Schwarzburg- 
Sondershausen, Germany, on the river Gera, 11 m. S. of Erfurt, 
with which it is connected by rail. Pop. (1900) 14,413. There 
are five churches, four Protestant and one Catholic. The 
Evangelical Liebfrauenkirche, a Romanesque building (mainly 
12th-century), has two octagonal towers and a 10th-century 
porch. The palace contains collections of pictures and porcelain, 
and attached to it is a magnificent tower, all that remains of 
the castle built in 1560. The town hall dates from 1561. The 
industries of Amstadt include iron and other metal founding, 
the manufacture of leather, cloth, tobacco, weighing-machines, 
paper, playing-cards, chairs, gloves, shoes, iron safes, and beer, 
and market-gardening and trade in grain and wood are carried 
on. There are copper-mines in the neighbourhood, as well as 
tepid saline springs, the waters of which are used for bathing, 
and are much frequented in summer. Amstadt dates back to 
the 8th century. It was bought in 1306 by the counts of 
Schwarzburg, who lived here till 1716. 

ARNSWALDE, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of Prussia, 
in a marshy district between four lakes, 20 m. S.W. of Stargard 
and on the main line between that place and Posen. Besides 
the Gothic church there are no noteworthy public buildings. Its 
industries include iron founding, machinery, and manufactures 
of cloth, matches and starch. Pop. (1900) 8665. 

ARNULF (c. 850-899), Roman emperor, illegitimate son of 
Carloman, king of Bavaria and Italy, was made margrave of 
Carinthia about 876, and on his father's death in 880 his dignity 
and possessions were confirmed by the new king of the east 
Franks, Louis III. The failure of legitimate male issue of the 
later Carolingians gave Arnulf a more important position than 
otherwise he would have occupied; but he did homage to the 
emperor Charles the Fat in 882, and spent the next few years in 
constant warfare with the Slavs and the Northmen. In 887, 
however, Arnulf identified himself with the disgust felt by the 
Bavarians and others at the incapacity of Charles the Fat. 
Gathering a large army, he marched to Tribur; Charles abdicated 
and the Germans recognized Arnulf as their king, a proceeding 
which L. von Ranke describes as " the first independent action 
of the German secular world." Arnulf's real authority did not 
extend far beyond the confines of Bavaria, and he contented 
himself with a nominal recognition of his supremacy by the kings 
who sprang up in various parts of the Empire. Having made 
peace with the Moravians, he gained a great and splendid 
victory over the Northmen near Louvain in October 891, and in 
spite of some opposition succeeded in establishing his illegitimate 
son, Zwentibold, as king of the district afterwards called Lorraine. 
Invited by Pope Formosus to deliver him from the power of 
Guido III., duke of Spoleto, who had been crowned emperor, 
Arnulf went to Italy in 894, but after storming Bergamo and 



receiving the homage of some of the nobles at Pavia, he was 
compelled by desertions from his army to return. The restoration 
of peace with the Moravians and the death of Guido prepared 
the way for a more successful expedition in 895 when Rome was 
stormed by his troops; and Arnulf was crowned emperor by 
Formosus in February 896. He then set out to establish his 
authority in Spoleto, but on the way was seized with paralysis. 
He returned to Bavaria, where he died on the 8th of December 
899, and was buried at Regensburg. He left, by his wife Ota, a 
son Louis surnamed the Child. Arnulf possessed the qualities of 
a soldier, and was a loyal supporter of the church. 

See " Annates Fuldenses " in the Monumenta Germaniae historica. 
Scriptores, Band i. (Hanover and Berlin, 1826); E. Dummler, 
Geschichte des ostfrdnkischen Reichs (Leipzig, 1887-1888) ; M. J. L. de 
Gagern, Arnulfi imperatoris vita (Bonn, 1837); E. Dummler, De 
Arnuljo Francorum rege (Berlin, 1852); W. B. Wenck, Die Erhebung 
Arnulf s und der Zerfall des karolingischen Reiches (Leipzig, 1852) ; 
O. Dietrich, Beitrdge zur Geschichte Arnolfs von Kdrnthen und Lud- 
wigs des Kindes (Berlin, 1890); E. Muhlbacher, Die Regesten des 
Kaiserreichs unte? den Karolingern (Innsbruck, 1881). 

AROIDEAE (Arum family) , a large and wide-spread botanical 
order of Monocotyledons containing about 1000 species in 105 
genera. It is generally distributed in temperate and tropical 
regions, but especially developed in warm countries. The 
common British representative of the order, Arum maculatum 




Arum maculatum, Cuckoo- pint. 

1. Leaves and inflorescence. succession (from below) female 

2. Underground root-stock. flowers, male flowers, and sterile 

3. Lower part of spathe cut open, flowers forming a ring of hairs 

4. Spike of fruits. Showing in borne on the spadix. 
(cuckoo-pint, lords and ladies, or wake robin), gives a meagre 
idea of its development. The plants are generally herbaceous, 
often, however, reaching a gigantic size, but are sometimes 
shrubby, as in Pothos, a genus of shrubby climbing plants, 
chiefly Malayan. Monstera is a tropical American genus of 
climbing shrubs, with large often much-perforated leaves; the 
fruiting spikes of a Mexican species, M . deliciosa, are eaten. 
The roots of the climbing species are of interest in their adaptation 



AROLSEN— ARQUEBUS 



641 



to the mode of life of the plant. For instance, some species of 
Philodendron have a growth like that of ivy, with feeding roots 
penetrating the soil and clasping roots which fix the plant to its 
support. In other species of the genus the seed germinates on a 
branch, and the seedling produces clasping roots, and roots which 
grow downwards hanging like stout cords, and ultimately reaching 
the ground. The leaves, which show great variety in size and 
form, are generally broad and net-veined, but in sweet-flag 
{Acorus Calamus) are long and narrow with parallel veins. In 
Arum the blade is simple, as also in the so-called arum-lily 
{Richardia), a South African species common in Britain as a 
greenhouse plant, and in Caladium, a tropical South American 
genus, and Alocasia (tropical Asia), species of which are favourite 
warm-greenhouse plants on account of their variegated leaves. 
In other genera the leaves are much divided and sometimes very 
large; those of Dracontium (tropical America) may be 15 ft. high, 
with a long stem-like stalk and a much-branched spreading 
blade. The East Indian genus Amor pho phallus has a similar 
habit. A good series of tropical aroids is to be seen in the aroid 
house at Kew. The so-called water cabbage (Pistia Stratiotes) 
is a floating plant widely distributed in the tropics, and consisting 
of rosettes of broadish leaves several inches across and a tuft of 
roots hanging in the water. 

The small flowers are densely crowded on thick fleshy spikes, 
which are associated with, and often more or less enveloped by, 
a large leaf (bract), the so-called spathe, which, as in cuckoo-pint, 
where it is green in colour, Richardia, where it is white, creamy 
or yellow, Anthurium, where it is a brilliant scarlet, is often the 
most striking feature of the plant. The details of the structure 
of the flower show a wide variation; the flowers are often 
extremely simple, sometimes as in Arum, reduced to a single 
stamen or pistil. The fruit is a berry — the scarlet berries of the 
cuckoo-pint are familiar objects in the hedges in late summer. 
The plants generally contain an acrid poisonous juice. The 
underground stems (rhizomes or tubers) are rich in starch; 
from that of Arum maculatum Portland arrowroot was formerly 
extensively prepared by pounding with water and then straining; 
the starch was deposited from the strained liquid. 

The order is represented in Britain by Arum maculatum, a low 
herbaceous plant common in woods and hedgerows in England, 
but probably not wild in Scotland. It grows from a whitish 
root-stock which sends up in the spring a few long-stalked, 
arrow-shaped leaves of a polished green, often marked with dark 
blotches. These are followed by the inflorescence, a fleshy spadix 
bearing in the lower part numerous closely crowded simple uni- 
sexual flowers and continued above into a purplish or yellowish 
appendage; the spadix is enveloped by a leafy spathe, con- 
stricted in the lower part to form a chamber, in which are the 
flowers. The mouth of this chamber is protected by a ring of 
hairs pointing downwards, which allow the entrance but prevent 
the escape of small flies; after fertilization of the pistils the hairs 
wither. The insects visit the plant in large numbers, attracted 
by the foetid smell, and act as carriers of the pollen from one 
spathe to another. As the fruit ripens the spathe withers, and 
the brilliant red berries are exposed. 

The sweet-flag Acorus Calamus (q.v.), which occurs apparently 
wild in England in ditches, ponds, &c, is supposed to have been 
introduced. 

AROLSEN, a town of Germany, capital of the principality of 
Waldeck, 25 m. N.W. of Cassel, with which it is connected by 
rail via Warburg. Pop. 3000. It lies in a pleasant undulating 
country at an elevation of 900 ft. above the sea. The Evangelical 
parish church contains some fine statues by Christian Rauch, 
and the palace (built 17 10-17 20), m addition to a valuable 
library of 30,000 vols., a collection of coins and pictures, among 
the latter several by Angel : ca Kauffmann. Arolseri is the 
birthplace of the sculptor C. Rauch and of the painters Wilhelm 
and Friedrich Kaulbach. 

ARONA, a town of Piedmont, Italy, in the province of Novara, 
on the W. bank of Lake Maggiore, 3 m. from its S. extremity, 
23 m. N. of Novara, and 42 m. N.W. of Milan by rail. Pop. 
(1001) 4700. It is a railway centre of some importance on the 



Simplon line, and is also the southern terminus of the steamers 
which ply on Lake Maggiore. The church of S. Maria contains 
a fine altar-piece by Gaudenzio Ferrari. On a bill to the north 
of the town stands a colossal bronze statue of S. Carlo Borromeo 
(born here in 1538), erected in 1697. The pedestal, of red granite, 
is 42 ft. high, and the statue 70 ft. high; the latter is hollow, and 
can be ascended from within. 

ARPEGGIO (from Ital. arpeggiare, to play upon the harp), in 
music, the notes of a chord, played in rapid succession as on a 
harp, and not together. 

ARPI (Gr. ' Apyoptinra.) , an ancient city of Apulia, 20 m. W. 
of the sea coast, and 5 m. N. of the modern Foggia. The 
legend attributes its foundation to Diomedes, and the figure of 
a horse, which appears on its coins, shows the importance of 
horse-breeding in early times in the district. Its territory 
extended to the sea, and Strabo says that from the extent of 
the city walls one could gather that it had once been one of the 
greatest cities of Italy. As a protection against the Samnites 
Arpi became an ally of Rome, and remained faithful until after 
the battle of Cannae, but Fabius captured it in 213 B.C., and it 
never recovered its former importance. It lay on a by-road 
from Luceria to Sipontum. No Roman inscriptions have, 
indeed, been found here, and remains of antiquity are scanty. 
Foggia is its medieval representative. (T. As.) 

ARPINO (anc. Arpinum), a town of Campania, Italy, in the 
province of Caserta, 1475 ft. above sea-level; 12 m. by rail 
N.W. of Roccasecca, a station on the railway from Naples to 
Rome. Pop. (1901) 10,607. Arpino occupies the lower part 
of the site of the ancient Volscian town of Arpinum, which was 
finally taken from the Samnites by the Romans in 305 B.C. 
It became a civitas sine suffragio, but received full privileges 
(civitas cum suffragio) in 188 B.C. with Formiae and Fundi; it 
was governed as a praefectura until the Social War, and then 
became a municipium. The ancient polygonal walls, which are 
still finely preserved, are among the best in Italy. They are 
built of blocks of pudding-stone, originally well jointed, but now 
much weathered. They stand free in places to a height of n ft., 
and are about 7 ft. wide at the top. A single line of wall, with 
medieval round towers at intervals, runs on the north side from 
the present town to Civitavecchia (2055 ft.), on the site of the 
ancient citadel. Here is the Porta dell' Arco, a gate of the old 
wall, with an aperture 15 ft. high, formed by the gradual inclina- 
tion of the two sides towards one another. Below Arpino, 
in the valley of the Liris, between the two arms of its tributary 
the Fibrenus, and J m. north of Isola del Liri, lies the church of 
S. Domenico, which marks the site of the villa in which Cicero 
was born and frequently resided. Near it is an ancient bridge, 
of a road which crossed the Liris to Cereatae (modern Casamari). 
The painter Giuseppe Cesari (1 560-1640), more often known as 
the Cavaliere d' Arpino, was also born here. 

See O. E. Schmidt, Arpinum, eine topographisch-historische Skizze 
(Meissen, 1900). (T. As.) 

ARQUA PETRARCA, a village of Venetia, Italy, in the pro- 
vince of Padua, 3 m. to the S.W. of Battaglia. Pop. (1901) 
1573. It is chiefly famous as the place where Petrarch lived 
his last few years and died in 1374. His house still exists, and 
his tomb, a sarcophagus supported by four short columns of red 
marble, stands in front of the church. Near Arqua., on the 
banks of the small Lago della Costa, is the site of a prehistoric lake 
village, excavations in which have produced interesting results. 

See A. Moschetti and F. Cordenone in BoUettino del Museo Civico di 
Padova, iv. (1901), 102 seq. 

ARQUEBUS (also called harquebus, hackbut, &c), a firearm 
of the 1 6th century, the immediate predecessor of the musket. 
The word itself is certainly to be derived from the German 
Hakenbiihse (mod. HakenbUchse, cf. Eng. hackbut and hackbush), 
" hook gun." The " hook " is often supposed to refer to 
the bent shape of the butt, which differentiated it from the 
straight-stocked hand gun, but it has also been suggested 
that the original arquebus had a metal hook near the muzzle, 
which was used to grip the wall (or other fixed object) so as to 
steady the aim and take up the force of recoil, that from this 

M 



642 



ARQUES-LA-BATAILLE— ARRAN 



the name Hakenbuhse spread till it became the generic name 
for small arms, and that the original form of the weapon then took 
the name of arquebus a croc. The French form arquebuse and 
Italian arcobugio, archibngio, often and wrongly supposed to 
indicate the hackbut's affinity with the crossbow (" hollow bow " 
or " mouthed bow "), are popular corruptions, the Italian being 
apparently the earlier of the two and supplanting the first and 
purest French form haquebut. Previous to the French wars in 
Italy, hand-gun men and even arbalisters seem to have been 
called arqucbusiers, but in the course of these wars the arquebus 
or hackbut came into prominence as a distinct type of weapon. 
The Spanish arquebusiers, who used it with the greatest effect 
in the Italian wars, notably at Bicocca (1522) and Pavia (1525), 
are the originators of modern infantry fire action. Filippo 
Strozzi made many improvements in the arquebus about 1530, 
and his weapons were effective up to four and five hundred paces. 
He also standardized the calibres of the arquebuses of the French 
army, and from this characteristic feature of the improved 
weapon arose the English term " caliver." In the latter part 
of the 16th century (c. 1570) the arquebus began to be displaced 
by the musket. .■':■.■;- 

ARQUES-LA-BATAILLE, a village of France, in the depart- 
ment of Seine-Inferieure, 4 m. S.E. of Dieppe by the Western 
railway. Pop. (1906) 1250. Arques is situated near the con- 
fluence of the rivers Varenne and Bethune ; the forest of Arques 
stretches to the north-east. The interest of the place centres in 
the castle dominating the town, which was built in the nth 
century by William of Arques; his nephew, William the Con- 
queror, regarding it as a menace to his own power, besieged and 
occupied it. After frequently changing hands, it came into the 
possession of the English, who were expelled in 1449 after an 
occupation of thirty years. In 1 589 its cannon decided the battle 
of Arques in favour of Henry IV. Since 1869 the castle has 
been state property. The first line of fortification was the work 
of Francis I.; the second line and the donjon date back to the 
nth century. The church of Arques, a building of the 16th 
century, preserves a fine stone rood screen, statuary, stained 
glass and other relics of the Renaissance period. 

ARRACK, Rack or Rak, a generic name applied to a variety 
of spirituous liquors distilled in the Far East. According to 
some authorities the word is derived from the Arabic arak 
(perspiration), but according to others (see Morewood's History 
0} Inebriating Liquors, 1834, p. 140) it is derived from the areca- 
nut, a material from which a variety of arrack was long manu- 
factured, and is of Indian origin. The liquor to which this or 
a similar name is applied is (or was, since the introduction c f 
European spirits and methods of manufacture is gradually 
causing the native spirit industries on the old lines to decay) 
manufactured in India, Ceylon, Siam, Java, Batavia, China, 
Corea, &c, and its manufacture still constitutes a considerable 
industry. The term arrack as designating a distilled liquor 
does not, however, appear to have been confined to the Far East, 
as, in Timkowski's Travels, it is stated that a spirit distilled from 
koumiss (</. v.) by the Tatars, Mongols and presumably the 
Caucasian races generally, is called arrack, araka or ariki. In 
Ceylon arrack is distilled chiefly from palm toddy, which is the 
fermented juice drawn from the unexpanded fiower-spathes of 
various palms, such as the Palmyra palm (Borassus flabelliformis) 
and the cocoa palm (Cocos nucifera). At the beginning of the 
19th century the arrack industry of Ceylon was of considerable 
dimensions, whole woods being set apart for no other purpose 
than that of procuring toddy, and the distillation of the spirit 
took place at every village round the coast. The land rents 
in 1831 included a sum of £35,573 on the cocoa-nut trees, and 
the duties on the manufacture and retail of the spirit amounted 
to over £30,000. On the Indian continent arrack is made from 
palm toddy, rice and the refuse of the sugar refineries, but mainly 
from the flowers of the muohwa or mahua tree (Bassia latijolia). 
The mahua flowers are very rich in sugar, and may, according to 
H. H. Mann, contain as much as 58 % of fermentable sugar, 
calculated on the total solids. . Even at the present day the 
process of manufacture is very primitive., the fermentation as a 



rule being carried on in so concentrated a liquid that complete 
fermentation rarely takes place. According to Mann, the total 
sugar in the liquor ready for fermentation may reach 20 %. 
The ferment employed (it is so impure that it can scarcely be 
called yeast) is obtained from a previous fermentation, and, 
as the latter is never vigorous, it is not surprising that the re- 
sulting spirit contains, compared with the more scientifically 
prepared European spirits, a very high proportion of by-products 
(acid, fusel oil, &c). The injurious nature of these native spirits 
has long been known and has been frequently set down to the 
admixture of drugs, such as hemp (ganga), but a recent investiga- 
tion of this question appears to show that this is not generally 
the case. The chemical constitution of these liquors alone 
affords sufficient proof of their inferior and probably injurious 
character. 

See H. H. Mann, The Analyst (1904). 

ARRAH, a town of British India, headquarters of Shahabad 
district, in the Patna division of Bengal, situated on a navigable 
canal connecting the river Sone with the Ganges. It is a station 
on the East Indian railway, 368 m. from Calcutta. In 1901 the 
population was 40,170. Arrah is famous for an incident in the 
Mutiny, when a dozen Englishmen, with 50 Sikhs, defended an 
ordinary house against 2000 Sepoys and a multitude of armed 
insurgents, perhaps four times that number. A British regiment, 
despatched to their assistance from Dinapur, was disastrously 
repulsed; but they were ultimately relieved, after eight days' 
continuous fighting, by a small force under Major (afterwards 
Sir Vincent) Eyre. 

ARRAIGNMENT (from Lat. ad, to, and rationare, to reason, 
call to account), a law term, properly denoting the calling of a 
person to answer in form of law upon an indictment. After a 
true bill has been found against a prisoner by the grand jury, 
he is called by name to the bar, the indictment is read over to 
him, and he is asked whether he be guilty or not of the offence 
charged. This is the arraignment. Formerly, it was usual to 
require the prisoner to hold up his hand, in order to identify 
him the more completely, but this practice is now obsolete, as 
well as that of asking him how he will be tried. His plea in 
answer to the charge is then entered, or a plea of not guilty is 
entered for him if he stands mute of malice and refuses to plead. 
If a person is mute by the visitation of God (i.e. deaf and dumb), 
it will be no bar to an arraignment if intelligence can be conveyed 
to him by signs or symbols. If he pleads guilty, sentence may be 
passed forthwith; if he pleads not guilty, he is then given in 
charge to a jury of twelve men to inquire into the truth of the 
indictment. He may also plead in abatement, or to the jurisdic- 
tion, or demur on a point of law. Several defendants, except 
those entitled to the privilege of peerage, charged on the same 
indictment, are arraigned together. 

In Scots law the term for arraignment is calling the diet. 

The Clerk of Arraigns is a subordinate officer attached to 
assize courts and to the Old Bailey. He is appointed by the clerk 
of assize (see Assize) and acts as his deputy. He assists at the 
arraignment of prisoners, and puts the formal questions to the 
jury when delivering their verdict. 

ARRAN, EARLS OF. The extinct Scottish title of the earls 
of Arran (not to be confused with the modern Irish cails of 
Arran — from the Arran or Aran Islands, Galway — a title cieated 
in 1 762) was borne by some famous characters in Scottish history. 
Except the first earl, Thomas Boyd (see Arran), and James 
Stewart, all the holders of this title were members of the Hamilton 
family. 

James Hamilton, 1st earl of Arran of the new creation 
(c. 1475-1529), son of James, 1st Lord Hamilton, and of Mary 
Stewart, daughter of James II. of Scotland, was born about 
1475, and succeeded in 1479 to his father's titles and estates. 
In 1489 he was made sheriff of Lanark, was appointed a privy 
councillor to James IV., and in 1503 negotiated in England the 
marriage between the king and Margaret Tudor. Hamilton ex- 
celled in the knightly exercises of the day, and the same year on 
the nth of August, after distinguishing himself in a famous 
tournament, he was created earl and iusticiary of Arran. In 



ARRAN 



643 



1504 as lieutenant-general of the realm he was employed in 
reducing the Hebrides, and about the same time in an expedition 
with 10,000 men in aid of John, king of Denmark. In 1507 he 
was sent ambassador to France, and on his return through Eng- 
land was seized and imprisoned by Henry VII. After the acces- 
sion of Henry VIII., Arran, in 1509, signed the treaty of peace 
between the two countries, and later, when hostilities began, 
was given command of a great fleet equipped for the aid of 
France in 15 13. The expedition proved a failure, Arran wasting 
time by a useless attack on Carrickfergus, lingering for months 
on the Scottish coast, and returning with a mere remnant of his 
fleet, the larger ships having probably been purchased by the 
French government. During his absence the battle of Flodden 
had been lost, and Arran found his rival Angus, who enjoyed 
Henry's support, married to the queen dowager and in control of 
the government. Arran naturally turned to the French party 
and supported the regency of the duke of Albany. Later, how- 
ever, becoming impatient of the latter's monopoly of power, he 
entered into various plots against him, and on Albany's departure 
in 1 51 7 he was chosen president of the council of regency and 
provost of Edinburgh. The same year he led an expedition to 
the border to punish the murderers of the French knight La 
Bastie. In September, however, after a temporary absence with 
the young king, the gates of Edinburgh were shut against him 
by the Douglases, and on the 30th of April 1520 the fierce fight 
of '' Cleanse the Causeway " took place in the streets between the 
two factions, in which the Hamiltons were worsted. The quarrel, 
however, between Angus and his wife, the queen-mother, with 
whom Arran now allied himself, gave the latter another oppor- 
tunity of regaining power, which he held from 1522, after 
Albany's return to France, till 1524, when he was forced to 
include Angus in the government. In 1526, on the refusal of the 
latter to give up his control of the king on the expiry of his term 
of office, Arran took up arms, but retreated before Angus's 
forces, and having made terms with him, supported him in his 
close custody of the king, in September defeating the earl of 
Lennox, who was marching to Edinburgh to liberate James. 
On the proscription of Angus and the Douglases, Arran joined 
the king at Stirling. He died in 1529. His eldest son James 
succeeded him. 

James Hamilton, 2nd earl of Arran and duke of Chatel- 
herault (c. 1515-1575), accompanied James V. in 1536 to France, 
and on the latter's death in 1542 was, in consequence of his 
position as next successor to the throne after the infant Mary, 
proclaimed protector of the realm and heir-presumptive of the 
crown, in 1543. He was a zealous supporter of the reformation, 
authorized the translation and reading of the Scriptures in the 
vulgar tongue, and at first supported the English policy in 
opposition to Cardinal Beaton, whom he arrested on the 27 th 
of January 1543, arranging the treaty with England and the 
marriage of Mary with Prince Edward in July, and being offered 
by Henry the hand of the princess Elizabeth for his son. But on 
the 3rd of September he suddenly joined the French party, met 
Beaton at Stirling, and abjured his religion for Roman Catholi- 
cism. On the 13th of January 1544, with Angus, Lennox and 
others, he signed a bond repudiating the English alliance. In 
1544 an attempt was made to transfer the regency from him to 
Mary of Lorraine, but Arran fortified Edinburgh and her forces 
retired; in March 1545 a truce was arranged by which each had 
a share in the government. Meanwhile, immediately on the 
repudiation of the treaty, war had broken out with England, 
and Arran was unable either to maintain order within the realm 
or defend it from outside aggression, the Scots being defeated 
at Pinkie on the 10th of September 1547. He reluctantly agreed 
in July 1 548 to the marriage of the dauphin with Mary, whom he 
had designed for his son, to the appeal for French aid, and to the 
removal of Mary for security to France, and on the 5th of 
February 1549 was created duke of Chatelherault in Poitou, his 
eldest son James being henceforth commonly styled earl of 
Arran. In June 1 548 he had also been made a knight of the order 
of St Michael in France. On the 12th of April 1554 he abdicated 
in favour of the queen-mother, whose government he supported 



till after the capture of Edinburgh in October 1559 by the lords 
of the congregation, when he declared himself on their side and 
took the Covenant. The same month he was one of the council 
of the Protestant lords, joined them in suspending Mary of 
Lorraine from the regency, and was made provisionally one of the 
governors of the kingdom. In order to discredit him with the 
English government a letter was forged by his enemies, in which 
Arran declared his allegiance to Francis II., but the plot was 
exposed. On the 27 th of February 1560 he agreed to the treaty 
of Berwick with Elizabeth, which placed Scotland under her pro- 
tection. The death the same year of Francis II. renewed his 
hopes of a union between his son and Mary, but disappointment 
drove him into an attitude of hostility to the court. In 1562 he 
was accused by his son, probably already insane, of plots against 
Mary's person, and he was obliged to give up Dumbarton Castle. 
Lennox claimed precedence over Arran in the succession to the 
throne, on the plea of the latter's supposed illegitimacy, and his 
restoration to favour in 1564, together with the project of Mary's 
marriage with Darnley, still further embittered Arran; he refused 
to appear at court, was declared a traitor, and fled to England, 
where on his consent to go into exile for five years he received a 
pardon from Mary. In 1566 he went to France, where he made 
vain attempts to regain his confiscated duchy. After the murder 
of Darnley in 1567 he was nominated by Mary on her abdication 
one of the regents, and he returned to Scotland in 1569 as a 
strong supporter of her cause. In March in an assembly of 
nobles called by Murray, he acknowledged James as king, but 
on the 5th of April he was arrested for not fulfilling the compact, 
and continued in confinement till April 1570. After Murray's 
assassination in January 1570, the regency in July was given to 
Lennox, and in June 1571 Arran assembled a parliament, when 
it was declared that Mary's abdication was obtained by fear, and 
the king's coronation was annulled. On the 28th of August he 
was declared a traitor and " forfeited," but he continued to 
support Mary's hopeless cause and to appeal for help to France 
and Spain, in spite of the pillage of his houses and estates, till 
February 1573, when he acknowledged James's authority and 
laid down his arms. He died on the 22nd of January 1575. He 
was by general consent a weak, fickle man, whose birth alone 
called him to high office. He married Margaret, daughter of 
James Douglas, 3rd earl of Morton, and had, besides several 
daughters, four sons: James, who succeeded him as 3rd earl of 
Arran, John, 1st marquess of Hamilton, David, and Claud, Lord 
Paisley, ancestor of the dukes of Abercorn. 

James Hamilton, 3rd earl (c. 1537-1609), was styled earl of 
Arran after the creation of his father as duke of Chatelherault in 
1549; the latter title did not descend to him, having been 
resumed by the French crown. His father's ambition destined 
him for the hand of Mary queen of Scots, and his union with the 
princess Elizabeth was proposed by Henry VIII. as the price of 
his father's adherence to the English interest. He was early 
involved in the political troubles in which Scotland was then 
immersed. In 1546 he was seized as a hostage at St Andrews by 
the murderers of Cardinal Beaton and released in 1547. In 1550 
he went to France, was given the command of the Scots guards, 
and in 1557 distinguished himself in the defence of St Quentin. 
He became a strong adherent of the reformed doctrine. His 
arrest was ordered by Henry II. in 1 559, Mary (probably in conse- 
quence of his projected union with Elizabeth which would have 
raised the Hamiltons higher than the Stuarts) declaring her wish 
that he should be " used as an arrant traitor." He, however, 
escaped to Geneva and then to England, and had an interview 
with Elizabeth in August. He returned to Scotland in September, 
where he supported his father's adherence to the lords of the 
Congregation against Mary of Lorraine, upheld the alliance with 
Elizabeth, and became one of the leaders of the Protestant party 
in the subsequent fighting, in particular organizing, together 
with Lord James Stuart (afterwards earl of Murray), in 1560, a 
stubborn resistance to the French at Dysart, and saving Fife. 
In November 1559 he had declined Bothwell's challenge to single 
combat. Subsequently he signed the treaty of Berwick, became 
one of the lords of the Congregation, and was appointed a visitor 



644 



ARRAN 



for the destruction of the religious houses. The same year 
proposals w.ere again made for his marriage with Elizabeth, 
which were rejected by the latter in 1561; and subsequently 
after the death of Francis II. (in December 1560), he became, 
with the strong support of the Protestants and Hamiltons, a 
suitor for Mary, also without success. He was chosen a member 
of her council on her arrival in Scotland in is6r, but took up 
a hostile attitude to the court in consequence of the practice of 
the Roman Catholic religion. He now showed marked signs of 
insanity, and was confined in Edinburgh Castle, where he re- 
mained till May 1566. He had then lost the power of speech, 
and from 1568 he lived in retirement with his mother at Craig- 
nethan Castle, while his estates were administered by his brother 
John, afterwards 1st marquess of Hamilton. In 1579, at the time 
of the fresh prosecution of the Hamiltons, when the helpless 
Arran was also included in the attainder of his brothers and his 
titles forfeited, the castle was besieged on the pretence of deliver- 
ing him from unlawful confinement, and Arran and his mother 
were brought to Linlithgow, while the charge of his estates was 
taken over by the government. In 1580 James Stewart (see 
below) was appointed his guardian, and in 1581 acquired the 
earldom; but his title and estates were restored after Stewart's 
disgrace in 1 586, when the forfeiture was repealed. Arran died 
unmarried in March 1609, the title devolving on his nephew 
James, 2nd marquess of Hamilton. 

James Stewart (d. 1595), the rival earl of Arran above 
referred to, was the son of Andrew Stewart, 2nd Lord Ochiltree. 
He served in his youth with the Dutch forces in Holland against 
the Spanish, and returned to Scotland in 1579. He immediately 
became a favourite of the young king, and in 1580 was made 
gentleman of the bedchamber and tutor of his cousin, the 3rd 
earl of Arran. The same year he was the principal accuser of the 
earl of Morton, and in 1581 was rewarded for having accom- 
plished the latter's destruction by being appointed a member of 
the privy council, and by the grant the same year, to the prejudice 
of his ward, of the earldom of Arran and the Hamilton estates, on 
the pretence that the children of his grandmother's father, the 
1st earl of Arran, by his third wife, from whom sprang the succeed- 
ing earls of Arran, were illegitimate. He claimed the position of 
second person in the kingdom as nearest to the king by descent. 
The same year he married Elizabeth, daughter of John Stewart, 
earl of Atholl, and wife of the earl of March, after both had been 
compelled to undergo the discipline of the kirk on account of 
previous illicit intercourse. He became the rival of Lennox for 
the chief power in the kingdom, but both were deprived of office 
by the raid of Ruthven on the 22nd of August 1382, and Arran 
was imprisoned till September under the charge of the earl of 
Gowrie. In 1583, however, he assembled a force of 12,000 men 
against the new government; the Protestant lords escaped over 
the border, and Arran, returning to power, was made governor 
of Stirling Castle and in 1584 lord chancellor. The same year 
Gowrie was captured through Arran's treachery and executed 
after the failure of the plot of the Protestant lords against 
the latter's government. He now obtained the governorship 
of Edinburgh Castle and was made provost of the city and 
lieutenant-general of the king's forces. Arran induced the 
English government to refrain from aiding the banished lords, 
and further secured his power by the forfeitures of his opponents. 
His tyranny and insolence, however, stirred up a multitude of 
enemies and caused his rapid fall from power. His agent in 
England, Patrick, Master of Gray, was secretly conspiring 
against him at Elizabeth's court. On account of the murder of 
Lord Russell on the border in July 1585, of which he was accused 
by Elizabeth, he was imprisoned at the castle of St Andrews, and 
subsequently the banished lords with Elizabeth's support entered 
Scotland, seized the government and proclaimed Arran a traitor. 
He fled in November, and from this time his movements are 
furtive and uncertain. In 1586 he was ordered to leave the 
country, but it is doubtful whether he ever quitted Scotland. 
He contrived secretly to maintain friendly communications with 
James, and in 1592 returned to Edinburgh, and endeavoured 
unsuccessfully to get reinstated in the court and kirk. Sub- 



sequently he is reported as making a voyage to Spain, probably 
in connexion with James's intrigues with that country. His 
unscrupulous and adventurous career was finally terminated 
towards the close of 1595 by his assassination near Symontown in 
Lanarkshire at the hands of Sir James Douglas (nephew of his 
victim the earl of Morton), who carried his head in triumph on 
the point of a spear through the country, while his body was left 
a prey to the dogs and swine. He had three sons, the eldest of 
whom became Lord Ochiltree. 

ARRAN, the largest island of the county of Bute, Scotland, at 
the mouth of the Firth of Clyde. Its greatest length, from the 
Cock of Arran to Bennan Head, is about 20 m., and the greatest 
breadth — from Drumadoon Point to King's Cross Point — is n m. 
Its area is 105,814 acres or 165 sq. m. In 1891 its population was 
4824, in 1901, 4819 (or 29 persons to the sq. m.). In 1901 there 
were 1900 persons who spoke English and Gaelic and nine Gaelic 
only. There is daily winter communication with Brodick and 
Lamlash by steamer from Ardrossan, and in summer by many 
steamers which call not only at these piers, but at Corrie, Whiting 
Bay and Loch Ranza. 

The chief mountains are in the north. The highest is Goatf ell 
(2866 ft., the name said to be a corruption of the Gaelic Goadh 
Bhein, " mountain of the winds "). Others are Caistel Abhail 
(2735 ft., " peaks of the castles "), Beinn Tarsuinn (2706 ft.), 
Cir Mhor (2618 ft.) and Beinn Nuis (2597 ft.). In the south 
Tighvein (1497 ft.) and Cnoc Dubh (1385 ft.) are the most 
important. Owing to the mountainous character of the island, 
glens are numerous. Glen Rosa and Glen Sannox are remarkable 
for their wild beauty, and among others are Iorsa, Catacol, 
Chalmadale, Cloy, Shant, Shurig, Tuie, Clachan, Monamore, 
Ashdale (with two cascades) and Scorrodale. Excepting Loch 
Tanna, the inland lakes are small. Loch Ranza, an arm of the 
sea, is one of the most beautiful in Scotland. The streams, or 
" waters " as they are called, are nearly all hill burns, affording 
good fishing. 

The oldest rocks, consisting of slate, mica-schists and grits, 
which have been correlated with the metamorphic series of the 
eastern Highlands, form an incomplete ring round the granite in 
the north of the island and occupy the whole of the west coast 
from Loch Ranza south to Dougrie. On the east side in North 
Glen Sannox Burn, they are associated with cherts, grits and dark 
schists with pillowy lavas, tuffs and agglomerates which, on 
lithological grounds, have been regarded as probably of the same 
age as the Arenig cherts and volcanic rocks in the south of 
Scotland. The Lower Old Red Sandstone strata are separated 
from the foregoing series by a fault and forma curving belt 
extending from Corloch on the east coast south by Brodick 
Castle to Dougrie on the west shore. Consisting of red sandstones, 
mudstones and conglomerates, they are inclined at high angles 
usually away from the granite massif and the encircling meta- 
morphic rocks. They are associated with a thin band of lava 
visible on the west side of the island near Auchencar and traceable 
inland to Garbh Thorr. The Upper Old Red Sandstone, com- 
posed of red sandstone and conglomerates, is only sparingly 
developed. The strata occur on the east shore between the 
Fallen Rocks and Corrie, and they appear along a narrow strip 
to the east and south of the lower division of the system, between 
Sannox Bay and Dougrie. On the north side of North Glen 
Sannox they rest unconformably on the Lower Old Red rocks. 
Contemporaneous lavas, highly decomposed, are intercalated 
with this division on the north side of North Glen Sannox where 
the band is highly faulted. The Carboniferous rocks of Arran 
include representatives of the Calciferous Sandstone, the three 
subdivisions of the Carboniferous Limestone series, and to a 
small extent the Coal Measures, and are confined to the north 
part of the island. They appear on the east coast between the 
Fallen Rocks and the Cock of Arran, where they form a strip 
about a quarter of a mile broad, bounded on the west by a fault. 
Here there is an ascending sequence from the Calciferous Sand- 
stone, through the Carboniferous Limestone with thin coals 
formerly worked, to the Coal Measures, the strata being inclined 
at high angles to the north. On the south side of a well-marked 



ARRANT— ARRAS 



&43 



anticline in the Upper Old Red Sandstone at North Sannox, the 
Carboniferous strata reappear on the coast with a south dip 
showing a similar ascending sequence for about half a mile. The 
lower limestones are well seen at Corrie, but the thin coals are not 
there represented. From Corrie they can be traced southwards 
and inland to near the head of Ben Lister Glen. The small 
development of Upper Carboniferous strata, visible on the shore 
south of Corrie and in Ben Lister Glen, consists of sandstones, 
red and mottled clays and purple shales, which yield plant- 
remains of Upper Carboniferous fades. These may represent 
partly the Millstone Grit and partly the Coal Measures. Con- 
temporaneous volcanic rocks, belonging to three stages of the 
Carboniferous formation, occur in Arran. The lowest group is 
on the horizon of the Calciferous Sandstone series, being visible 
at Corrie where it underlies the Corrie limestone, and is traceable 
southwards beyond Brodick. The second is represented by a 
thin lava, associated with the Upper Limestone group of the 
Carboniferous Limestone series, and the highest is found in Ben 
Lister Glen intercalated with the Upper Carboniferous strata, 
and may be the equivalent of the volcanic series which, in 
Ayrshire, occupies the position of the Millstone Grit. The 
Triassic rocks are arranged in two groups, a lower, composed of 
conglomerates and sandstones, and an upper one consisting of 
red and mottled shales and marls with thin sandstones and 
nodular limestones. In the extreme north at the Cock of Arran, 
there is a small development of these beds; they also occupy the 
whole of the east coast south of Corrie, and they spread over the 
south part of the island south of a line between Brodick Bay and 
Machrie Bay on the west. At Corrie and the Cock of Arran they 
rest on Upper Carboniferous strata; in Ben Lister Glen, on the 
lower limestone group of the Carboniferous Limestone series; 
and on the west coast they repose on the Old Red Sandstone. 
There is, therefore, a clear discordance between the Trias and all 
older strata in Arran. The former extension of Rhaetic, Liassic 
and Cretaceous formations in the island is indicated by the 
presence of fragments of these strata in a large volcanic vent on 
the plateau, on the south side of the road leading from Brodick 
to Shiskine. The fossils from the Rhaetic beds belong to the 
Aricula contorta zone, those from the Lias to the Ammonites 
angulatus zone, while the blocks of limestone with chert contain 
Inoceramiis. Cretaceous foraminifera and other organisms. The 
materials yielding these fossils are embedded in a course volcanic 
agglomerate which gives rise to crags and is pierced by acid and 
basic igneous rocks. One of the striking features in the geology 
of Arran is the remarkable series of intrusive igneous rocks of 
Tertiary age which occupy nearly one-half of the area and form 
the wildest and grandest scenery in the island. Of these the 
most important is the great oval mass of granite in the North, 
composed of two varieties; one, coarse-grained and older, forms 
the outside rim, while the fine-grained and newer type occurs in 
the interior. Another granite area appears on the south side of 
the road between Brodick and Shiskine, where it is associated with 
granophyre and quartz-diorite and traverses the volcanic vent of 
post-Cretaceous or Tertiary age already described. In the south 
of the island there are sills and dykes of felsite, quartz-porphyry, 
rhyolite, trachyte and pitchstone. The felsite sheets are well 
represented in Holy Island. It is worthy of note that the dykes 
and sheets of felsite are seldom pierced by the basalt dykes and 
are probably about the most recent of the intrusive rocks. The 
best example of the basic sills forms the Clauchland Hills and 
runs out to sea at Clauchland Point. Finally the basic dykes of 
dolcrite, basalt and augite-andesite are abundant and traverse 
the various sedimentary formations and the granite. 

The chief crops are oats and potatoes. Cattle and sheep are 
raised in considerable numbers. The game, which is abundant, 
consisting of blackcock and grouse, is strictly preserved. A few 
red deer still occur in the wilder hilly district. The fisheries are 
of some value. Loch Ranza being an important station. 

Standing stones, cairns and other memorials of a remote 
antiquity occur near Tormore, on Machrie Bay, Lamlash, and 
other places. The Norse raiders found a home in Arran for a 
long period until the defeat of Haakon V. at Largs (1263) com- 



pelled them to retire. The chief name in the island's history is 
that of Robert Bruce, who found shelter in the King's Caves on 
the western coast. One was reputed to be his kitchen, another 
his cellar, a third his stable, while the hill above was styled the 
King's Hill. From a point still known as King's Cross he crossed 
over to Carrick, in answer to the signal which warned him that 
the moment for the supreme effort for his country was come. 
In Glen Cloy the ruins of a fort bear the name of Bruce's Castle, 
in which his men lay concealed, and on the southern arm of Loch 
Ranza stands a picturesque ruined castle which is said to have 
been his hunting-seat. Kildonan Castle, near the south-eastern- 
most point, is a fine ruin of the 14th century, once a royal strong- 
hold. The island gave the title of earl to Thomas Boyd, who 
married the elder sister of James III., a step so unpopular with 
his peers that he had to fly the country, and the title soon after- 
wards passed to the Hamiltons. Brodick Castle, the ancestral 
seat of the dukes of Hamilton, is a splendid mansion on the 
northern shore of Brodick Bay. 

Brodick is the chief village in Arran, but most of the dwelling- 
houses have been built at Invercloy, close to the pier. Three 
m. south (by road) is Lamlash, on a fine bay so completely 
sheltered by Holy Island as to form an excellent harbour for 
ships of all sizes. Four m. to the north lies the village of 
Corrie which takes its name from a rugged hollow in the hill of 
Am Binnein (2172 ft.)which overshadows it. Daniel Macmillan 
(1813-1857), the founder of the publishing firm of Macmillan & 
Co., was a native of Corrie. 

About a mile and a half east of Lamlash village lies Holy 
Island, which forms a natural breakwater to the bay. It is 1 j m. 
long, nearly f m. wide, and its finely-marked basaltic cone rises 
to a height of 1030 ft. The island takes its name from the fact 
that St Molios, a disciple of St Columba, founded a church near 
the north-western point. Li the saint's cave on the shore may 
be seen the rocky shelf on which he made his bed, but his re- 
mains were interred in the hamlet of Clachan, some 2 m. from 
Blackwaterfoot. Off the south-eastern coast, f m. from Port 
Dearg, lies the pear-shaped isle of Pladda, which serves as the 
telegraph station from which the arrival of vessels in the Clyde 
is notified to Glasgow and Greenock. 

ARRANT (a variant of " errant," from Lat. err are, to wander), 
a word at first used in its original meaning of wandering, as in 
" knight-errant," thus an arrant or itinerant preacher, an arrant 
thief, one outlawed and wandering at large; the meaning easily 
passed to that of self-declared, notorious, and by the middle of 
the 1 6th century was confined, as an intensive adjective, to 
words of opprobrium and abuse, an arrant coward meaning thus 
a self-declared, downright coward. 

ARRAS, a city of northern France, chief town of the 
department of Pas-de-Calais, 38 m. N.N.E. of Amiens on the 
Northern railway between that city and Lille. Pop. (1906) 
20,738. Arras is situated in a fertile plain on the right and 
southern bank of the Scarpe, at its junction with the Crinchon 
which skirts the town on the south and east. Of the fortifica- 
tions erected by Vauban in the 17 th century, only a gateway 
and the partially dismantled citadel, nicknamed la Belle Inutile, 
are left. The most interesting quarter lies in the east of the town, 
where the lofty houses which border the spacious squares known 
as the Grande and the Petite Place are in the Flemish style. 
They are built with their upper storeys projecting over the foot- 
way and supported on columns so as to form arcades; beneath 
these are deep cellars extending under the squares themselves. 
The celebrated hotel de ville of the 16th century overlooks the 
Petite Place; its belfry, which contains a fine peal of bells, 
rises to a height of 240 ft. The decoration is in the richest 
Gothic style, and is especially admirable in the case Of the 
windows. Of the numerous ecclesiastical buildings the cathedral, 
a church of the 18th century possessing some good pictures, is 
the most important. It occupies the site of the church of the 
abbey of St Vaast, the buildings of which adjoin it and contain 
the bishop's palace, the ecclesiastical seminary, a museum of 
antiquities, paintings and sculptures, and a rich library. 

Arras is the seat of a prefect and of a bishop. It has tribunals 



6 4 6 



ARRAY— ARREST 



of first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce, a 
branch of the Bank of France, a communal college, training 
colleges, and a school of military engineering. Its industrial 
establishments include oil-works, dye-works and breweries, and 
manufactories of hosiery, railings and other iron-work, and of 
oil-cake. For the tapestry manufacture formerly flourishing 
at Arras see Tapestry. It has a very important market for 
cereals and oleaginous grains. The trade of the town is facilitated 
by the canalization of the Scarpe, the basin of which forms 
the port. 

Before the opening of the Christian era Arras was known as 
Nemetacum, or Nemetocenna, and was the chief town of the 
Atrebates, from which the word Arras is derived. Passing under 
the rule of the Romans, it became a place of some importance, 
and traces of the Roman occupation have been found. In 407 
it was destroyed by the Vandals, and having been partially 
rebuilt, came into the hands of the Franks. Christianity was 
introduced by St Vedast (Vaast), who founded a bishopric at 
Arras about 500. This was soon transferred to Cambrai, but 
brought back to its original seat about 1 100. As the chief town 
of the province of Artois, Arras passed to Baldwin I., count of 
Flanders, in 863, and about 880 was ravaged by the Normans. 
During this troubled period it retained some vestiges of its 
former trade, and the woollen manufacture was established here 
at an early date. Early in the 12th century a commune was 
established here, but the earliest known charter only dates from 
about 1 180; owing to the importance of Arras, this soon became 
a model for many neighbouring communes. At this time the 
city appears to have been divided into two parts, one dependent 
upon the bishop, and the other upon the count. When Philip 
Augustus, king of France, married Isabella, niece of Philip, 
count of Flanders, Arras came under the rule of the French king, 
who confirmed its privileges in 1194. As part of Artois it came 
in 1237 to Robert, son of Louis VIII., king of France, and in 
1384 to Philip the Bold, duke of Burgundy, who promised to 
respect its privileges. Anxious to recover the city for France, 
Louis XL placed a garrison therein after the death of Charles 
the Bold, duke of Burgundy, in 1477. This was driven out by 
the inhabitants, and Louis then stormed Arras, razed the walls, 
deported the citizens, whose places were taken by Frenchmen, 
and changed the name to Franchise. The successor of Louis, 
Charles VIII., restored the city to its former name and position, 
and as part of the inheritance of Mary, daughter and heiress of 
Charles the Bold, it was contended for by the French king, and 
his rival, the German king, Maximilian I. The peace of Senlis 
in 1493 gave Arras to Maximilian, and in spite of attacks by the 
French, it remained. under the rule of the Habsburgs until 1640. 
Taken in this year by the French, this capture was ratified by 
the peace of the Pyrenees in 1659, and henceforward it remained 
part of France. It suffered severely during the French Revo- 
lution, especially from Joseph Lebon, who, like the brothers 
Maximilien and Augustin Robespierre, was a native of the town. 
Owing to its position and importance, Arras has been the scene 
of various treaties. In 1414 the peace between the Armagnacs 
and the Burgundians was made here, and in 1435 a congress 
met here to make peace between the English and their Bur- 
gundian allies on the one side, and the French on the other, and 
after the English representatives had withdrawn, a treaty was 
signed on the 20th of September between France and Burgundy. 
In 1482 Louis XL made a treaty here with the estates and 
towns of Flanders about the inheritance of Mary of Burgundy, 
wife of the German king Maximilian I. 

See E. Lecesne, Histoire d'Arras jusqu'en 1789 (Arras, 1880); 
Arras sous la Revolution (Arras, 1882-1883). 

ARRAY (from the O. Fr. areyer, Med. Lat. arredare, to get 
ready), an orderly arrangement, particularly the drawing up of 
an army in position of battle. From the 13th century onwards 
in England " Commissions of Array " issued from the king for 
the levy of military forces (see Militia). In English law the 
term is used for the setting in order, name by name, of the panel 
of a jury, which may be challenged as a whole, " to the array," 
or individually, " to the polls." 



ARRENOTOKOUS, ARRENOTOKY (from Gr. &ppv, male, 
and tokos, from tIktuv, to beget), biological terms proposed by 
Leuckart and Eduard von Siebold to denote those parthenogenetic 
females which produce male young, while " thelytokous " and 
" thelytoky " would denote their producing female young. 

ARREST (Fr. arrester, arreter, to stop or stay), the restraint 
of a man's person, for the purpose of compelling him to be 
obedient to the law. It is defined to be the execution of the 
command of some court of record or officer of justice. 

Arrests in England are either in civil or in criminal cases. 
I. In Civil Cases. — The arrest must be by virtue of a precept 
or order out of some court, and must be effected by corporal 
seizing or touching the defendant's body, or as directed by the 
writ, capias et attachias, take and catch hold of. And if the 
defendant make his escape it is a rescous, or rescue, and attach- 
ment may be had against him, and the bailiff may then justify 
the breaking open of the house in which he is, to carry him away. 
Arrests on mesne process (see Process), before judgment 
obtained, were abolished by the Debtors Act 1869, s. 6; an 
exception, however, is made in cases in which the plaintiff proves, 
at any time before final judgment, by evidence on oath to the 
satisfaction of a judge of one of the superior courts, that he has 
a good cause of action to the amount of £50, that the defendant 
is about to quit the country, and that his absence will materially 
prejudice the plaintiff in prosecuting his action. In such cases 
an order for arrest may be obtained till security to the amount 
of the claim be found. 

Formerly a judgment creditor might arrest his debtor under a 
writ of capias ad satisfaciendum, but since 1869 imprisonment 
for debt has been abolished in England, except in certain cases, 
and in these the period of detention must not exceed one year. 

The following persons are privileged from arrest, viz., 1st, 
members of the royal family and the ordinary servants of the 
king or queen regnant, chaplains, lords of the bedchamber, &c. 
This privilege does not extend to servants of a consort queen or 
dowager. 2nd, peers of the realm, peeresses by birth, creation or 
marriage, Scottish and Irish peers and peeresses. 3rd, members 
of the House of Commons during the session of parliament, 
and for a convenient time (forty days) before and after it. 
Members of Convocation appear to have the same privilege. 
4th, foreign ambassadors and their "domestics and domestic 
servants." Temporary privilege from arrest in civil process is 
enjoyed by barristers travelling on circuit, by parties, witnesses 
or attorneys connected with a cause, and by clergymen whilst 
performing divine service. 

The arrest of any privileged person is irregular ab initio, and 
the party may be discharged on motion. The only exception 
is as to indictable crimes, such as treason, felony and breach of 
the peace. 

There are no longer any places where persons are privileged 
from arrest, such as the Mint, Savoy, Whitefriars, &c, on the 
ground of their being ancient palaces. 

Except in cases of treason, felony or breach of the peace, 
an arrest cannot be made on a Sunday, and if made it is void 
(Sunday Observance Act 1677) ; but it may be made in the night 
as well as in the day. 

II. In Criminal Cases. — All persons whatsoever are, without 
distinction, equally liable to this arrest, and any man may arrest 
without warrant or precept, and outer doors may be broken 
open for that purpose. The arrest may be made, — 1st, by 
warrant; 2nd, by an officer without warrant; 3rd, by a private 
person without warrant; or, 4th, by a hue and cry. 

1. Warrants are ordinarily granted by justices of the peace 
on information or complaint in writing and upon oath, and they 
must be indorsed when it is intended they should be executed 
in another county by a magistrate of that county (see Indictable 
Offences Act 1848). A warrant issued by a metropolitan police 
magistrate can be executed anywhere by a metropolitan police 
officer. Warrants are also granted in cases of treason or other 
offence affecting the government by the privy council, or one of 
the secretaries of state, and also by the chief or other justice 
of the court of king's bench {bench-warrant) in cases of felony, 



ARRESTMENT— ARRETIUM 



647 



misdemeanour or indictment found, or criminal information 
granted in that court. Every warrant ought to specify the offence 
charged, the authority under which the arrest is to be made, the 
person who is to execute it and the person who is to be arrested. 
A warrant remains in force till executed or discharged by order 
of a court. An officer may break open doors in order to execute 
a warrant in cases of treason, felony or indictable offences, 
provided that, on demand, admittance cannot otherwise be 
obtained. (See Warrant.) 

2. The officers who may arrest without warrant are, — justices 
of the peace, for felony or breach of the peace committed in their 
presence; the sheriff and the coroner in their county, for felony; 
constables, for treason, felony or breach of the peace committed 
in their view, — and within the metropolitan police district they 
have even larger powers (Metropolitan Police Acts 1829-1895). 

3. A private person is bound to arrest for a felony committed 
in his presence, under penalty of fine and imprisonment. By 
the Prevention of Offences Act 1851, a private person is allowed 
to arrest any one whom he finds committing an indictable offence 
by night, and under the Malicious Damage Act 1861, any person 
committing an offence against that act may be arrested without 
warrant by the owner of the property damaged, or his servants, 
or persons authorized by him. So, too, by the Coinage Offences 
Act 1 86 1. s. 31, any person may arrest any one whom he shall 
find committing any offence relating to the coin, or other offence 
against that act. 

A person arrested without warrant must not be detained in 
private custody but must be taken with all convenient speed 
to a police station or justice and there charged (Summary 
Jurisdiction Act 1879). 

4. The arrest by hue and cry is where officers and private 
persons are concerned in pursuing felons, or such as have danger- 
ously wounded others. By the Fugitive Offenders Act 188 1, 
provision was made for the arrest in the United Kingdom of 
persons committing treason, and felony in any of the British 
colonies and vice versa; as to the arrest of fugitives in foreign 
countries see Extradition. 

The remedy for a wrongful arrest is by an action for false 
imprisonment. 

In Scotland the law of arrest in criminal procedure has a 
general constitutional analogy with that of England, though the 
practice differs with the varying character of the judicatories. 
Colloquially the word arrest is used in compulsory procedure 
for the recovery of debt ; but the technical term applicable in 
that department is caption, and the law on the subject is generic- 
ally different from that of England. There never was a practice 
in Scottish law corresponding with the English arrest in mesne 
process; but by old custom a warrant for caption could be 
obtained where a creditor made oath that he had reason to 
believe his debtor meditated flight from the country, and the 
writ so issued is called a warrant against a person in meditalione 
fugae. Imprisonment of old followed on ecclesiastical cursing, 
and by fiction of law in later times it was not the creditor's 
remedy, but the punishment of a refractory person denounced 
rebel for disobedience to the injunctions of the law requiring 
fulfilment of his obligation. The system was reformed and 
stripped of its cumbrous fictions by an act of the year 1837. 
Although the proceedings against the person could only follow 
on completed process, yet, by a peculiarity of the Scottish law, 
documents executed with certain formalities, and by special 
statute bills and promissory notes, can be registered in the 
records of a court for execution against the person as if they 
were judgments of the court. 

The general principles as to the law of arrest in most European 
countries correspond more or less exactly to those prevailing in 
England. 

An arrest of a ship, which is the method of enforcing the 
admiralty process in rem, founded either on a maritime lien 
or on a claim against the ship, is dealt with under Admiralty 
Jurisdiction. 

See also article Attachment. 

Arrest of Judgment is the assigning just reason why judgment 



should not pass, notwithstanding verdict given, either in civil 
or in criminal cases, and from intrinsic causes arising on the 
face of the record. 

United States. — The law of arrest assimilates to that existing 
in England. Actual manual touching is not necessary {Pike v. 
Hanson, 9 N.H. 491; Hill v. Taylor, 50 Mich. 549); words of 
arrest by the officer, not protested against and no resistance 
offered, are sufficient {Emery v. Chesley, 18 N.H. 198; Goodell v. 
Tower, 1904, $8 Am. Rep. 790). Words of arrest, staying over 
night at prisoner's house, going with him before the magistrate 
next day constitute arrest {Courtery v. Dozier, 20 Ga. 369). 
Restraining a person in his own house is arrest. 

In civil cases in most of the states arrest for debt is abolished, 
except in cases of fraud or wilful injury to persons or property 
by constitutional provision or by statute. One arrested under 
process of a federal court cannot be arrested under that of a 
state court for the same cause. There is no provision in the 
United States constitution as to imprisonment for debt, but 
congress has enacted (in Rev. Stat., s. 990) that all the provisions 
of the law of any state applicable to such imprisonment shall 
apply to the process of federal courts in that state. A woman 
can be arrested in New York for wilful injury to person, character 
or property, and in certain other cases (Code, s. 553). The 
president, federal officials, governors of states, members of con- 
gress and of state legislatures (during the session), marines, 
soldiers and sailors on duty, voters while going to and from 
the polls, judges, court officials (1904, 100 N.W. 591), coroners 
and jurors while attending upon their public duties, lawyers, 
parties and witnesses while going to, attending or returning 
from court, and generally married women without separate 
property, are exempt from arrest. 

In criminal cases a bench-warrant in New York may be served 
in any county without being backed by a magistrate (Code 
Crim. Proc, s. 304). In Nebraska one found violating the law 
may be arrested and detained until a legal warrant can be issued 
(Crim. Code, s. 283). A bail may lawfully recapture his principal 
( 1 905) 121 Georgia Rep. 594. Foreign ambassadors and ministers 
and their servants are exempt from arrest. Exemption from 
arrest is a privilege, not of the court, as in England, but of the 
person, and can be waived {Petrie v. Fitzgerald, 1 Daly 401). 

ARRESTMENT, in Scots law, the process by which a creditor 
detains the goods or effects of his debtor in the hands of third 
parties till the debt due to him shall be paid. It is divided into 
two kinds: (1) Arrestment in security, used when proceedings 
are commencing, or in other circumstances where a claim may 
become, but is not yet, enforceable; and (2) Arrestment in 
execution, following on the decree of a court, or on a registered 
document, under a clause or statutory power of registration, 
according to the custom of Scotland. By the process of arrest- 
ment the property covered is merely retained in place; to realize 
it for the satisfaction of the creditor's claim a further proceeding 
called " furthcoming " is necessary. By old practice, alimentary 
funds, i.e. those necessary for subsistence, were not liable to 
arrestment. By the Wages Arrestment Limitation (Scotland) 
Act 1870, the wages of all labourers, farm-servants, manu- 
facturers, artificers and work-people are not arrestable except 
(1) in so far as they exceed 20s. per week; but the expense of the 
arrestment is not to be charged against the debtor unless the sum 
recovered exceed the amount of the said expense; or (2) under 
decrees for alimentary allowances and payments, or for rates 
and taxes imposed by law. 

ARRETIUM (mod. Arezzo), an ancient city of Etruria, in the 
upper valley of the Arno, situated on the Via Cassia, 50 m. S.E. 
of Florentia. The site of the original city is not quite certain; 
some writers place it on the isolated hill called Poggio di S. 
Cornelio, 25 m. to the S.E., where remains of a fortified enceinte 
still exist (cf. F. Noack in Romische Miiteilungen, 1897, p. 186); 
while others maintain, and probably rightly, that it occupied the 
hill at the summit of the modern town, where the medieval 
citadel {fortezza) was erected, and which was enclosed by an 
ancient wall. Numerous Etruscan tombs have been discovered 
within the lower portion of the area of the modern town, which 



6 4 8 



ARRHENIUS— ARRIAN 



appears to correspond in site with the Roman (C.I.L. xi. p. 
1082; G. Gamurrini in Notizie degli scan, 1883, 262; 1887, 
437). Vitruvius (ii. 8. 9) and Pliny (Nat. Hist. xxxv. 173) speak 
of the strength of its walls of bricks, but these have naturally 
disappeared. Many remains of Roman buildings have been 
discovered within the modern town, and the amphitheatre is 
still visible in the southern angle. Arretium appears as one of 
the cities which aided the Tarquins after their expulsion. It 
was an opponent of Rome at the end of the 4th and beginning of 
the 3rd century B.C., but soon sought for help against the attacks 
of the Gauls, against whom it was almost a frontier fortress. It 
was an important Roman base during the Hannibalic wars 
(though at one time it threatened defection — Livy xxvii. 21-24), 
and in 205 B.C. was able to furnish Scipio with a considerable 
quantity of arms and provisions (Livy xxviii. 45). In 187 B.C. 
the high road was extended as far as Bononia. Arretium took 
the part of Marius against Sulla, and the latter settled some of 
his veterans there as colonists. Caesar, or Octavian, added 
others, so that there are three classes, Arretini veteres, Fidentiores, 
and lulienses. A considerable contingent from Arretium joined 
Catiline and in 40 B.C. Caesar occupied it. C. Maecenas 1 was 
perhaps a native of Arretium. Its fertility was famous in ancient 
times, and still more the red pottery made of. the local clay, with 
its imitation of chased silver. The reliefs upon it are sometimes 
of considerable beauty, and large quantities of it, and the sites of 
several of the kilns, have been discovered in and near Arretium. 
It was also considerably exported. See Corp. Inscrip. Lai. xi. 
(Berlin, 1901) p. 1081, and Notizie degli scavi, passim (especially, 
1884, 369, for the discovery of a fine group of the moulds 
from which these vases were made). The museum contains a 
very fine collection of these and a good collection of medieval 
majolica. (T. As.) 

ARRHENIUS, SVANTE AUGUST (1859- ), Swedish 
physicist and chemist, was born on the 19th of February 1859, 
at Schloss Wijk, near Upsala. He studied at Upsala from 1876 
to 1881 and at Stockholm from 1881 to 1884, then returning to 
Upsala as privat-docent in physical chemistry. He spent two 
years from 1886 to 1888 in travelling, and visited Riga Poly- 
technic and the universities of Wurzburg, Graz, Amsterdam and 
Leipzig. In 1891 he was appointed lecturer in physics at 
Stockholm and four years later became full professor. Arrhenius 
is specially associated with the development of the theory of 
electrolytic dissociation, and his great paper on the subject, 
Recherches sur la conductibiliU galvanique des electrolytes — (1) 
conductibilite galvanique des solutions aqueuses extrimement 
diluees, (2) thSorie chimique des electrolytes, was presented to the 
Stockholm Academy of Sciences in 1883. He was subsequently 
continuously engaged in extending the applications of the 
doctrine of electrolytic conduction in relation not only to the 
problems of chemical action but also, on the supposition that 
in certain conditions the air conducts electrolytically, to the 
phenomena of atmospheric electricity. In 1900 he published a 
Larobok i teoretik elektrokemi, which was translated into German 
and English, and his Lehrbuch der kosmischen Physik appeared 
in 1903. In 1904 he delivered at the university of California a 
course of lectures, the object of which was to illustrate the 
application of the methods of physical chemistry to the study of 
the theory of toxins and antitoxins, and which were published 
in 1907 under the title Immunochemistry. In his Worlds in the 
Making (1908), an English translation of Das Werden der Welten 
(1907), he combated the generally accepted doctrine that the 
universe is tending to what Clausius termed Warmetod through 
exhaustion of all sources of heat and motion, and suggested that 
by virtue of a mechanism which maintains its available energy it 
is self-renovating, energy being " degraded " in bodies which are 
in the solar state, but " elevated " or raised to a higher level in 
bodies which are in the nebular state. He further put forward 
the conception that life is universally diffused, constantly 

1 The name Cilnius was apparently never borne by Maecenas 
himself, though he is so described, e.g. by Tacitus, Ann. vi. 11, cf. 
Macrob. ii. 4, 12. The Cilnii with whom Maecenas was connected 
were a noble Etruscan family. 



emitted from all habitable worlds in the form of spores which 
traverse space for years or ages, the majority being ultimately 
destroyed by the heat of some blazing star, but some few finding 
a resting-place on bodies which have reached the habitable stage. 

ARRIA, in Roman history, the heroic wife of Caecina Paetus. 
When her husband was implicated in the conspiracy of 
Scribonianus against the emperor Claudius (a.d. 42), and 
condemned to death, she resolved not to survive him. She 
accordingly stabbed herself with a dagger, which she then 
handed to him with the words, " Paetus, it does not hurt " 
(Paete, non dolet; see Pliny, Epp. iii. 16; Martial i. 14; Dio 
Cassius Ix. 16). Her daughter, also called Arria, was the wife of 
Thrasea Paetus. When he was condemned to death by Nero, 
she would have imitated her mother's example, but was dis- 
suaded by her husband, who entreated her to live for the sake 
of their children. She was sent into banishment (Tacitus, Annals, 
xvi. 34). 

ARRIAN (Flavitjs Arrianus), of Nicomedia in Bithynia, 
Greek historian and philosopher, was born about a.d. 96. and 
lived during the reigns of Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus 
Aurelius. In recognition of his abilities, he received the citizen- 
ship of both Athens and Rome. He was greatly esteemed by 
Hadrian, who appointed him governor, (legatus) of Cappadocia 
(131-137), in which capacity he distinguished himself in a cam- 
paign against the Alani. This is the only instance before the 3rd 
century in which a first-rate Roman military command was given 
to a Greek. Arrian spent a considerable portion of his time at 
Athens, where he was archon 147-148. With his retirement 
or recall from Cappadocia his official career came to an end. 
In his declining years, he retired to his native place, where 
he devoted himself to literary work. He died about 180. His 
biography, by Dio Cassius, is lost. 

When young, Arrian was the pupil and friend of Epictetus, 
who had probably withdrawn to Nicopolis, when Domitian 
expelled all philosophers from Rome. He took verbatim notes 
of his teacher's lectures, which he subsequently published under 
the title of The Dissertations (Aiarpij3cu), in eight books, of 
which the first four are extant and constitute the chief authority 
for Stoic ethics, and The Encheiridion {i.e. Manual) of Epictetus, 
a handbook of moral philosophy, for many years a favourite 
instruction book with both Christians and pagans. It was 
adapted for Christian use by St Nilus of Constantinople (5th 
century), and Simplicius (about 550) wrote a commentary on it 
which we still possess. 

The most important of Arrian's original works is his Anabasis of 
Alexander, in seven books, containing the history of Alexander 
the Great from his. accession to his death. Arrian's chief 
authorities were, as he tells us, Aristobulus of Cassandreia and 
Ptolemy, son of Lagus (afterwards king of Egypt), who both 
accompanied Alexander on his campaigns. In spite of a too 
indulgent view of his hero's defects, and some over-credulity, 
Arrian's is the most complete and trustworthy account of 
Alexander that we possess. 

Other extant works of Arrian are: Indica, a description of 
India in the Ionic dialect, including the voyage of Nearchus, 
intended as a supplement to the Anabasis; Acies Contra Alanos, 
a fragment of importance for the knowledge of Roman military 
affairs; Periplus of the Euxine, an official account written 
(131) for the emperor Hadrian; Taclica, attributed by some 
to Aelianus, who wrote in the reign of Trajan; Cynegeticus, 
a treatise on the chase, supplementing Xenophon's work on the 
same subject; the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, attributed to 
him, is by a later compiler. Amongst his lost works may be 
mentioned: Td fj.er' 'AXk^avSpov, a history of the period 
succeeding Alexander, of which an epitome is preserved in 
Photius; histories of Bithynia, the Alani and the Parthian 
wars under Trajan; the lives of Timoleon of Syracuse, Dion 
of Syracuse and a famous brigand named Timoleon. Arrian's 
style is simple, lucid and manly; but his language, though pure, 
presents some peculiarities. He was called " Xenophon the 
younger " from his imitation of that writer, and he even speaks 
of himself as Xenophon. 



ARRIS— ARROWROOT 



649 



Complete works ed. F. Diibner (1846) ; Anabasis, C. Abicht C 1 
with notes, C. VV. Kriiger (1835), C. Sintenis (1867), C. Abicht (1875) ; 
Scripta Minora, R. Hercher and A. Eberhard (1885); A. J. Roos, 
i., containing the Anabasis (Teubner series, 1907). English trans- 
lations: Anabasis, Rooke (1812); Anabasis and Indica, E. J. 
Chinnock (1893); Voyage of Nearchus with the spurious Periplus, 
W. Vincent (1807), J. \V. M'Crindle (Calcutta, 1879); Periplus of 
the Euxine, W. Falconer (1805); Cynegeticus [W. Dansey] (1831). 
See also E. Bolla, Arriano di Nicomedia (1890); E. Schwartz in 
Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie der classischen Altertumswissen- 
schafl (1896) ; H. F. Pelham, " Arrian as Legate of Cappadocia," in 
English Historical Review, October 1896; article Greece: History, 
ancient, " Authorities." 

ARRIS (Fr. areste, or arete), in architecture, the sharp edge 
or angle in which two sides or surfaces meet. 

ARRONDISSEMENT (from arrondir, to make round), an 
administrative subdivision of a department in France. Dating 
nominally from 1800, the arrondissement was really a re-creation 
of the " district " of 1790. It comprises within itself the canton 
and the commune. It differs from the department and from 
the commune in being merely an administrative division and 
not a complete legal personality with power to acquire and 
possess. The purposes for which it exists are, again, unlike 
those of the department and the commune, comparatively 
limited. It is the electoral district for the chamber of deputies, 
each arrondissement returning one member; if the population 
is in excess of 100,000 it is divided into two or more constituencies. 
It is also a judicial district having a court of first instance. It 
is under the control of a sub-prefect. There are 362 arrondisse- 
ments in the 8 7 departments. Each arrondissement has a council, 
with as many members as there are cantons, whose function is 
to subdivide among the communes their quota of the direct 
taxes charged to the arrondissement by the general council of 
the department. (See France.) Somewhat different from the 
arrondissements of the department are the arrondissements 
(20 in number) into which Paris is divided. They bear a certain 
resemblance to the sub-municipalities created in London by the 
London Government Act 1899, and each forms a local administra- 
tive unit (see Paris). 

France is also subdivided, for purposes of defence, into five 
maritime divisions, termed arrondissements. Institutedoriginally 
under the Consulate, they were suppressed in 1815, but re- 
established again in 1826. They are under the direction of 
maritime prefects, who, by a decree of 1875, must be vice-admirals 
in the navy. 

ARROWROOT. A large proportion of the edible starches 
obtained from the rhizomes or root-stocks of various plants are 
known in commerce under the name of arrowroot. Properly the 
name should be restricted to the starch yielded by two or three 
species of Maranta (nat. ord. Marantaceae) , the chief of which is 




Fie. 1. Fig. 2. 

Arrowroot Plant {Maranta arundinacea) . — Fig. 1, stem, leaves 
and flowers; fig. 2, tubers. 

M. arundinacea; and when genuine or West Indian arrowroot 
is spoken of, it is understood that this is the variety meant. 
Maranta arundinacea is probably a native of Guiana and western 
Brazil, but it has long been cultivated in the West Indian Islands, 



and has now spread to most tropical countries. The plant is a 
herbaceous perennial with a creeping root-stock which gives off 
fleshy cylindrical branches or tubers, covered with pale brown 
or white scales and afterwards ringed with their scars. It is at 
the period when these tubers are gorged with starch, immediately 
before the season of rest, that it is ripe for use. In addition to 
about 25% of starch, the tubers contain a proportion of woody 
tissue, vegetable albumen and various salts. The arrowroot 
may be separated on a small scale in the same manner as potato- 
starch is frequently prepared, that is, by peeling the root and 
grating it in water, when the starch falls to the bottom. The 
liquor is then drained off, and the starch purified by repeated 
washings till it is ready for drying. On a large scale the manu- 
facture of arrowroot is conducted with specially arranged 
machinery. The rhizomes when dug up are washed free of 
earthy impurities and afterwards skinned. Subsequently, 
according to Pereira's Materia Medica, " the carefully skinned 
tubers are washed, then ground in a mill, and the pulp washed 
in tinned-copper cylindrical washing-machines. The fecula 
(dim. of Lat. faex, dregs, or sediment) is subsequently dried in 
drying-houses. In order to obtain the fecula free from impurity, 
pure water must be used, and great care and attention paid in 
every step of the process. The skinning or peeling of the tubers 
must be performed with great nicety, as the cuticle contains a 
resinous matter which imparts colour and a disagreeable flavour 
to the starch. German-silver palettes are used for skinning the 
deposited fecula, and shovels of the same metal for packing the 
dried fecula. The drying is effected in pans, covered with white 
gauze to exclude dust and insects." 

Arrowroot is distinguished by the granules agglomerating 
into small balls, by slightly crepitating when rubbed between 
the fingers, and by yielding with boiling water a fine, transparent, 
inodorous and pleasant-tasting jelly. In microscopic structure 
the granules present an ovoid form, marked with concentric lines 
very similar to potato-starch, but readily distinguished by 
having a " hilum " marking at the thick extremity of the granule, 
while in potato-starch the same appearance occurs at the thin 
end (compare figs. 3 and 4 below). In addition to the West 
Indian supplies, arrowroot is found in the commerce of Brazil, 
the East Indies, Australia, Cape Colony and Natal. 

The name" arrowroot " is derived from the use by the Mexican 
Indians of the juice of the fresh root as an application to wounds 
produced by poisoned arrows. Sir Hans Sloane refers to it in 
his Catalogue of Jamaica 
Plants (1696), and it is said 
to have been introduced 
into England by William 
Houston about 1732. It is 
grown as a stove-plant in 
botanic gardens. The 
slender, much - branched 
stem is 5 or 6 ft. high, and 
bears numerous leaves with 
long, narrow sheaths and 
large spreading ovate blades, 
and a few short-stalked 
white flowers. 

Tous-les-mois, or Tulema 
arrowroot, also from the 
West Indies, is obtained 
from several species of 
Canna, a genus allied to Fig. 5. Tous-les- 
Maranta, and cultivated in mois. 

the same manner. The granules of tous-les-mois are readily 
distinguishable by their very large size (fig. 5). East Indian 
arrowroot is obtained from the root-stocks of several species 
of the genus Curcuma (nat. ord. Zingiberaceae), chiefly 
C. angustifolia, a native of central India. Brazilian arrow- 
root is the starch of the cassava plant, a species of Manihot 
(fig. 6) , which when agglutinated on hot plates forms the tapioca 
of commerce. The cassava is cultivated in the East Indian 
Archipelago as well as in South America. Tacca, or Otaheite 




Fig. 5. 



Fig. 6. 



Starch Granules magnified. 
Fig. 3. Potato. Fig. 4. Arrowroot. 
Fig. 6. Manihot. 



b5o 



ARROWSMITH— ARSENAL 



arrowroot, is the produce of Tacca pinnatifida, the pia plant of 
the South Sea Islands. Portland arrowroot was formerly pre- 
pared on the Isle of Portland from the tubers of the common 
cuckoo-pint, Arum maculatum. Various other species of arum 
yield valuable food-starches in hot countries. Under the name 
of British arrowroot the farina of potatoes is sometimes sold, 
and the French excel in the preparation of imitations of the more 
costly starches from this source. The chief use, however, of potato- 
farina as an edible starch is for adulterating other and more 
costly preparations. This falsification can readily be detected 
by microscopic examination, and the accompanying drawings 
exhibit the appearance under the microscope of the principal 
starches we have described. Although these starches agree in 
chemical composition, their value as articles of diet varies 
considerably, owing to different degrees of digestibility and 
pleasantness of taste. Arrowroot contains about 82 % of starch, 
and about 1 % of proteid and mineral matter. Farina, or 
British arrowroot, at about one-twelfth the price, is just as useful 
and pleasant a food. 

ARROWSMITH, the name of an English family of geographers. 
The first of them, Aaron Arrowsmith (1750-1823), migrated to 
London from Winston in Durham when about twenty years of 
age, and was employed by John Cary, the engraver. In 1 790 he 
made himself famous by his large chart of the world on Mercator's 
projection. Four years later he published another large map 
of the world on the globular projection, with a companion 
volume of explanation. The maps of North America (1796) 
and Scotland (1807) are the most celebrated of his many later 
productions. He left two sons, Aaron and Samuel, the elder of 
whom was the compiler of the Eton Comparative Atlas, of a 
Biblical atlas, and of various manuals of geography. They 
carried on the business in company with John Arrowsmith 
(1 790-1873), nephew of the elder Aaron. In 1834 John published 
his London Atlas, the best set of maps then in existence. He 
followed up the atlas with a long series of elaborate and carefully 
executed maps, those of Australia, America, Africa and India 
being especially valuable. In 1863 he received the gold medal 
of the Royal Geographical Society, of which body he was one of 
the founders. 

ARROYO (O. Sp. arrogio, Lat. arrogium, a rivulet or stream), 
the channel of a stream cut in loose earth, found often at the 
head of a gully, where the water flows only at certain seasons of 
the year. 

ARSACES, a Persian name, which occurs on a Persian seal, 
where it is written in cuneiform characters. The most famous 
Arsaces was the chief of the Parni, one of the nomadic Scythian 
or Dahan tribes in the desert east of the Caspian Sea. A later 
tradition, preserved by Arrian, derives Arsaces I. and Tiridates 
from the Achaemenian king Artaxerxes II. , but this has evidently 
no historical value. Arsaces, seeking refuge before the Bactrian 
king Diodotes, invaded Parthia, then a province of the Seleucid 
empire, about 250 B.C. (Strabo xi. p. 515, cf. Arrian p. 1, Miiller, 
in Photius, Cod. 38, and Syncellus p. 284). After two years 
(according to Arrian) he was killed, and his brother Tiridates, who 
succeeded him and maintained himself for a short time in Parthia, 
during the dissolution of the Seleucid empire by the attacks of 
Ptolemy III. (247 ff.), was defeated and expelled by Seleucus II. 
(about 238). But when this king was forced, by the rebellion of 
his brother, Antiochus Hierax, to return to the west, Tiridates 
came back and defeated the Macedonians (Strabo xi. pp. 513, 
515; Justin xli. 4; Appian, Syr. 65; Isidorus of Charax n). He 
was the real founder of the Parthian empire, which was of very 
limited extent until the final decay of the Seleucid empire, 
occasioned by the Roman intrigues after the death of Antiochus 
IV.Epiphanes (165 B.C.), enabled Mithradatesl. and his successors 
to conquer Media and B abylonia. Tiridates adopted the name of 
his brother Arsaces, and after him all the other Parthian kings 
(who by the historians are generally called by their proper 
names) , amounting to the number of about thirty, officially wear 
only the name Arsaces. With very few exceptions only the 
name AP2AKH2 (with various epithets) occurs on the coins of 
the Parthian kings, and the obverse generally shows the seated 



figure of the founder of the dynasty, holding in his hand a strung 
bow. The Arsacidian empire was overthrown in a.d. 226 by 
Ardashir (Artaxerxes), the founder of the Sassanid empire, whose 
conquests began about a.d. 212. The name Arsaces of Persia is 
also borne by some kings of Armenia, who were of Parthian 
origin. (See Persia and Partfia.) (Ed. M.) 

ARS-AN-DER-MOSEL, a town of Germany, in the imperial 
province Alsace-Lorraine, 5 m. S. of Metz on the railway to 
Noveant. It has a handsome Roman Catholic church and 
extensive foundries. In the vicinity are the remains of a Roman 
aqueduct, which formerly spanned the valley. Pop. 5000. 

ARSCHOT, PHILIPPE DE CROY, Duke of (1526-1595), 
governor-general of Flanders, was born at Valenciennes, and 
inherited the estates of the ancient and wealthy family of Croy. 
Becoming a soldier, he was made a knight of the order of the 
Golden Fleece by Philip II., king of Spain, and was afterwards 
employed in diplomatic work. He took part in the troubles in 
the Netherlands, and in 1 563 refused to join William the Silent 
and others in their efforts to remove Cardinal Granvella from his 
post. This attitude, together with Arschot's devotion to the 
Roman Catholic Church, which he expressed by showing his 
delight at the massacre of St Bartholomew, led Philip of Spain to 
regard him with still greater favour, which, however, was with- 
drawn in consequence of Arschot's ambiguous conduct when 
welcoming the new governor, Don John of Austria, to the 
Netherlands in 1576. In spite, however, of his being generally 
distrusted by the inhabitants of the Netherlands, he was ap- 
pointed governor of the citadel of Antwerp when the Spanish 
troops withdrew in 1577. After a period of vacillation he 
deserted Don John towards the end of that year. Jealous of the 
prince of Orange, he was then the head of the party which 
induced the archduke Matthias (afterwards emperor) to under- 
take the sovereignty of the Netherlands, and soon afterwards was 
appointed governor of Flanders by the state council. A strong 
party, including the burghers of Ghent, distrusted the new 
governor; and Arschot, who was taken prisoner during a riot at 
Ghent, was only released on promising to resign his office. He 
then sought to regain the favour of Philip of Spain, and having 
been pardoned by the king in 1580 again shared in the govern- 
ment of the Netherlands; but he refused to serve under the 
count of Fuentes when he became governor-general in 1594, and 
retired to Venice, where he died on the nth of December 1595. 
■ See J. L. Motley, The Rise of the Dutch Republic. 

ARSENAL, an establishment for the construction, repair, 
receipt, storage and issue of warlike stores; details as to materiel 
will be found under Ammunition, Ordnance, &c. The word 
" arsenal " appears in various forms in Romanic languages (from 
which it has been adopted into Teutonic), i.e. Italian arzanale, 
Spanish arsenal, &c; Italian also has arzana and darsena, and 
Spanish a longer form atarazanal. The word is of Arabic origin, 
being a corruption of daras-sina'ah, house of trade or manu- 
facture, dar, house, al, the, and sina'ah, trade, manufacture, 
sana'a, to make. Such guesses as arx navalis, naval citadel, arx 
senatus {i.e. of Venice, &c), are now entirely rejected. 

A first-class arsenal, which can renew the materiel and equip- 
ment of a large army, embraces a gun factory, carriage factory, 
laboratory and small-arms ammunition factory, small-arms 
factory, harness, saddlery and tent factories, and a powder 
factory; in addition it must possess great store-houses. In a 
second-class arsenal the factories would be replaced by workshops. 
The situation of an arsenal should be governed by strategical 
considerations. If of the first class, it should be situated at 
the base of queries and supply, secure from attack, not too
near a frontier, and placed so as to draw in readily the resources 
of the country. The importance of a large arsenal is such 
that its defences would be on the scale of those of a large 
fortress. The usual subdivision of branches in a great arsenal 
is into A, Storekeeping; B, Construction; C, Administration. 
Under A we should have the following departments and 
stores: — Departments of issue and receipt, pattern room, 
armoury department, ordnance or park, harness, saddlery 
and accoutrements, camp equipment, tools and instruments, 



ARSENIC 



651 



engineer store, magazines, raw material store, timber yard, 
breaking-up store, unserviceable store. Under B — Gun 
factory, carriage factory, laboratory, small-arms factory, 
harness and tent factory, powder factory, &c. In a second- 
class arsenal there would be workshops instead of these 
factories. C — Under the head of administration would be 
classed the chief director of the arsenal, officials military and 
civil, non-commissioned officers and military artificers, civilian 
foremen, workmen and labourers, with the clerks and writers 
necessary for the office work of the establishments. In the 
manufacturing branches are required skill, and efficient and 
economical work, both executive and administrative; in the 
storekeeping part, good arrangement, great care, thorough 
knowledge of all warlike stores, both in their active and passive 
state, and scrupulous exactness in the custody, issue and receipt 
of stores. For fuller details the reader is referred to papers by 
Sir E. Collen, R.A., in vol. viii., and Lieut. C. E. Grover, R.E., 
in vol. vi. Proceedings of R. Artillery Institution. In England 
the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, manufactures and stores the 
requirements of the army and navy (see Woolwich). 

ARSENIC (symbol As, atomic weight 75-0), a chemical element, 
known to the ancients in the form of its sulphides. Aristotle 
gave them the name aavoapaKT] , and Theophrastus mentions 
them under the name apcreviKov. The oxide known as white 
arsenic is mentioned by the Greek alchemist Olympiodorus, 
who obtained it by roasting arsenic sulphide. These substances 
were all known to the later alchemists, who used minerals con- 
taining arsenic in order to give a white colour to copper. Albertus 
Magnus was the first to state that arsenic contained a metal-like 
substance, although later writers considered it to be a bastard 
or semi-metal, and frequently called it arsenicum rex. In 1733 
G. Brandt showed that white arsenic was the calx of this element, 
and after the downfall of the phlogiston theory the views con- 
cerning the composition of white arsenic were identical with 
those which are now held, namely that it is an oxide of the 
element. 

Arsenic is found in the uncombined condition in various 
localities, but more generally in combination with other metals 
and sulphur, in the form of more or less complex sulphides. 
Native arsenic is usually found as granular or curvilaminar 
masses, with a reniform or botryoidal surface. These masses 
are cf a dull grey colour, owing to surface tarnish; only on fresh 
fractures is the colour tin-white with metallic lustre. The hard- 
ness is 3- 5 and the specific gravity 5-63-5-73. Crystals of arsenic 
belong to the rhombohedral system, and have a perfect cleavage 
parallel to the basal plane; natural crystals are, however, of 
rare occurrence, and are usually acicular in habit. Native 
arsenic occurs usually in metalliferous veins in association with 
ores of antimony, silver, &c. ; the silver mines of Freiberg in 
Saxony, St Andreasberg in the Harz, and Chaftarcillo in Chile 
being well-known localities. Attractive globular aggregates of 
well-developed radiating crystals have been found at Akatani, 
a village in the province Echizen, in Japan. » 

Arsenic is a constituent of the minerals arsenical iron, arsenical 
pyrites or mispickel, tin-white cobalt or smaltite, arsenical nickel, 
realgar, orpiment, pharmacolite and cobalt bloom, whilst it is 
also met with in small quantities in nearly all specimens of iron 
pyrites. The ordinary commercial arsenic is either the naturally 
occurring form, which is, however, more or Jess contaminated 
with other metals, or is the product obtained by heating arsenical 
pyrites, out of contact with air, in earthenware retorts which 
are fitted with a roll of sheet iron at the mouth, and an earthen- 
ware receiver. By this method of distillation the arsenic sub- 
limes into the receiver, leaving a residue of iron sulphide in the 
retort. For further purification, it may be sublimed, after having 
been previously mixed with a little powdered charcoal, or it may 
be mixed with a small quantity of iodine and heated. It can 
also be obtained by the reduction of white arsenic (arsenious 
oxide) with carbon. An electro-metallurgical process for the 
extraction of arsenic from its sulphides has also been proposed 
(German Patent, 67,073). These compounds are brought into 
solution by means of onlysulphides of the alkali metals and the 



resultant liquor run into the cathode compartment of a bath, 
which is divided by diaphragms into a series of anode and cathode 
chambers; the anode divisions being closed and gas-tight, and 
containing carbon or platinum electrodes. The arsenic solution 
is decomposed at the cathode, and the element precipitated 
there. 

Arsenic possesses a steel-grey colour, and a decided metallic 
lustre; it crystallizes on sublimation and slow condensation in 
rhombohedra, isomorphous with those of antimony and tellurium. 
It is very brittle. Its specific gravity is given variously from 
5-395 to 5-959; its specific heat is 0-083, an d its coefficient of 
linear expansion 0-00000559 (at 40 C). It is volatile at tempera- 
tures above ioo° C. and rapidly vaporizes at a dull red heat. It 
liquefies when heated under pressure, and its melting point lies 
between 446 C. and 45 7 C. The vapour of arsenic is of a golden 
yellow colour, and has a garlic odour. The vapour density is io-6 
(air=i) at 564° C, corresponding to a tetratomic molecule As 4 ; 
at a white heat the vapour density shows a considerable lowering 
in value, due to the dissociation of the complex molecule. 

By condensing arsenic vapour in a glass tube, in a current of an 
indifferent gas, such as hydrogen, amorphous arsenic is obtained, 
the deposit on the portion of the tube nearest to the source of 
heat being crystalline, that farther along (at a temperature of 
about 210 C.) being a black amorphous solid, while still farther 
along the tube a grey deposit is formed. These two latter forms 
possess a specific gravity of 4-710 (14 C.) [A. Bettendorff, 
Annalen, 1867, 144, p. no], and by heating at about 3 58°-36o° C. 
pass over into the crystalline variety. Arsenic burns on heating 
in a current of oxygen, with a pale lavender-coloured flame, 
forming the trioxide. It is easily oxidized by heating with 
concentrated nitric acid to arsenic acid, and with concentrated 
sulphuric acid to arsenic trioxide; dilute nitric acid only oxidizes 
it to arsenious acid. It burns in an atmosphere of chlorine 
forming the trichloride; it also combines directly with bromine 
and sulphur on heating, while on fusion with alkalis it forms 
arsenites. 

Arsenic and most of its soluble compounds are very poisonous, 
and consequently the methods used for the detection of arsenic 
are very important. For full accounts of methods used in de- 
tecting minute traces of arsenic in foods, &c, see " Report to 
Commission to Manchester Brewers' Central Association," the 
Analyst, 1900, 26, p. 8; " Report of Conjoint Committee of 
Society of Chemical Industry and Society of Public Analysts," 
the Analyst, 1902, 27, p. 48; T. E. Thorpe, Journal of the Chemical 
Society, 1903, 83, p. 774; O. Hehner and others, Journal of Society 
of Chemical Industry, 1902, 21, p. 94; also Adulteration. 

Arsenic and arsenical compounds generally can be detected by (a) 
Reinsch's test : A piece of clean copper is dipped in a solution of an 
arsenious compound which has been previously acidified with pure 
hydrochloric acid. A grey film is produced on the surface of the 
copper, probably due to the formation of a copper arsenide. The 
reaction proceeds better on heating the solution. On removing, 
washing and gently drying the metal and heating it in a glass tube, 
a white crystalline sublimate is formed on the cool part of the tube; 
under the same conditions antimony does not produce a crystalline 
sublimate. 

(b) Fleitmann's test and Marsh's test depend on the fact that arsenic 
and its compounds, when present in a solution in which hydrogen 
is being generated, are converted into arseniuretted hydrogen, 
which can be readily detected either by its action on silver nitrate 
solution or by its decomposition on heating. In Fleitmann's test, 
the solution containing the arsenious compound is mixed with pure 
potassium hydroxide solution and a piece of pure zinc or aluminium 
foil dropped in and the whole then heated. A piece of bibulous 
paper, moistened with silver nitrate, is held over the mouth of the 
tube, and if arsenic be present, a grey or black deposit is seen on 
the paper, due to the silver nitrate being reduced by the arseniuretted 
hydrogen. Antimony gives no reaction under these conditions, so 
that the method can be used to detect arsenic in the presence of 
antimony, but the test is not so delicate as either Reinsch's or 
Marsh's method. 

In the Marsh test the solution containing the arsenious compounds 
is mixed with pure hydrochloric acid and placed in an apparatus in 
which hydrogen is generated from pure zinc and pure sulphuric acid. 
The arseniuretted hydrogen produced is passed through a tube 
containing lead acetate paper and soda-lime, and finally through 
a narrow glass tube, constricted at various points, and heated by 
a very small flame. As the arseniuretted hydrogen passes over 



652 



ARSENIC 



the heated portion it is decomposed and a black deposit formed. 
Instead of heating the tube, the gas may be ignited at the mouth of 
the tube and a cold surface of porcelain or platinum placed in the 
flame, when a black deposit is formed on the surface. This may be 
distinguished from the similar antimony deposit by its ready solu- 
bility in a solution of sodium hypochlorite. A blank experiment 
should always be carried out in testing for small quantities of 
arsenic, to ensure that the materials used are quite free from traces 
of arsenic. It is to be noted that the presence of nitric acid interferes 
with the Marsh test ; and also that if the arsenic is present as an 
arsenic compound it must be reduced to the arsenious condition by 
the action of sulphurous acid. Arsenic compounds can be detected 
in the dry way by heating in a tube with a mixture of sodium car- 
bonate and charcoal when a deposit of black amorphous arsenic is 
produced on the cool part of the tube, or by conversion of the 
compound into the trioxide and heating with dry sodium acetate 
when the offensive odour of the extremely poisonous cacodyl oxide 
is produced. In the wet way, arsenious oxide and arsenites, acidified 
with hydrochloric acid, give a yellow precipitate of arsenic trisulphide 
on the addition of sulphuretted hydrogen; this precipitate is soluble 
in solutions of the alkaline hydroxides, ammonium carbonate and 
yellow ammonium sulphide. Under like conditions arsenates only 
give a precipitate on long-continued boiling. 

Arsenic is usually estimated either in the form of magnesium 
pyroarsenate or as arsenic sulphide. 'For the pyroarsenate method 
it is necessary that the arsenic should be in the arsenic condition, if 
necessary this can be effected by heating with nitric acid ; the acid 
solution is then mixed with " magnesia mixture " and made strongly 
alkaline by the addition of ammonia. It is then allowed to stand 
twenty-four hours, filtered, washed with dilute ammonia, dried, 
ignited to constant weight and weighed, the filter paper being 
incinerated separately after moistening with nitric acid. From the 
weight of magnesium pyroarsenate obtained the weight of arsenic 
can be calculated. 

In the sulphide method, the arsenic should be in the arsenious 
form. Sulphuretted hydrogen is passed through the liquid until 
it is thoroughly saturated, the excess of sulphuretted hydrogen is 
expelled from the solution by a brisk stream of carbon dioxide, and 
the precipitate is filtered on a Gooch crucible and washed with water 
containing a little sulphuretted hydrogen and dried at 100 ° C. ; 
it is then well washed with small quantities of pure carbon disulphide 
to remove any free sulphur, again dried and weighed. Arsenic can 
also be estimated by volumetric methods; for this purpose it must 
be in the arsenious condition, and the method of estimation consists 
in converting it into the arsenic condition by means of a standard 
solution of iodine, in the presence of a cold saturated solution of 
sodium bicarbonate. 

The atomic weight of arsenic has been determined by many 
different chemists. J. Berzelius, in 18 18, by heating arsenious 
oxide with excess of sulphur obtained the value 74-3; J. Pelouze 
(Comptes renins, 1845, 20, p. 1047) titrated arsenic chloride with 
silver -solution and obtained 75-0; and F. Kessler (Pogg. Ann. 
1861, 113, p. 134) by converting arsenic trisulphide in hydrochloric 
acid solution into arsenic pentasulphide also obtained 75-0. 

Compounds. — Arsenic forms two hydrides: — The dihydride, 
AS2H2, is a brown velvety powder formed when sodium or 
potassium arsenide is decomposed by water. It is a somewhat 
unstable substance, decomposing on being heated, with liberation 
of hydrogen. Arsenic trihydride (arsine or arseniuretted hydrogen), 
AsH 3 , is formed by decomposing zinc arsenide with dilute sulphuric 
acid ; by the action of nascent hydrogen on arsenious compounds, 
and by the electrolysis of solutions of arsenious and arsenic acids; 
it is also a product of the action of organic matter on many arsenic 
compounds. It is a colourless gas of unpleasant smell, excessively 
poisonous, very slightly soluble in water. It easily burns, forming 
arsenious oxide if the combustion proceeds in an excess of air, or 
arsenic if the supply of air is limited ; it is also decomposed into its 
constituent elements when heated. It liquefies at -40° C. and becomes 
solid at- 118-9° C. (K. Olszewski). Metals such as tin, potassium 
and sodium, when heated in the gas, form arsenides, with liberation 
of hydrogen; and solutions of gold and silver salts are reduced 
by the gas with precipitation of metallic gold and silver. Chlorine, 
bromine and iodine decompose arsine readily, the action being most 
violent in the case of chlorine. 

Arsenic tribromide, AsBr 3 , is formed by the direct union of arsenic 
and bromine, and subsequent distillation from the excess of arsenic; 
it forms colourless deliquescent prisms which melt at 20°-25° C, 
and boil at 220° C. Water decomposes it, a small quantity of water 
leading to the formation of the oxybromide, AsOBr, whilst a large 
excess of water gives arsenious oxide, As 4 06. 

Arsenic certainly forms two, or possibly three iodides. The di-iodide, 
As2l< or Asl2, which is prepared by heating one part of arsenic with 
two parts of iodine, in a sealed tube to 230 C, forms dark cherry- 
red prisms, which are easily oxidized, and are readily decomposed by 
water. The tri-iodide, Ash, prepared by subliming arsenic and iodine 
together in a retort, by leading arsine into an alcoholic iodine 
solution, or by boiling powdered arsenic and iodine with water, 
filtering and evaporating, forms brick-red hexagonal tables, of 
specific gravity 4-39, soluble in alcohol, ether and benzene, and in a 
large excess of water; in the presence of a small quantity of water, 



it is decomposed with formation of hydriodic acid and an insoluble 
basic salt of the composition 4AsOF3As 4 06-24H 2 0. It combines 
with alkaline iodides to form very unstable compounds. The penta- 
iodide, Asl 5> appears to be formed when a mixture of one part of 
arsenic and seven parts of iodine is heated to 190 C, but on dis- 
solving the resulting product in carbon bisulphide and crystallizing 
from this solvent, only the tri-iodide is obtained. 

Arsenic trichloride, AsCl 3 , is prepared by distilling white arsenic 
with concentrated sulphuric acid and common salt, or by the direct 
union of arsenic with chlorine, or from the action of phosphorus 
pentachloride on white arsenic. It is a colourless oily heavy liquid 
of specific gravity 2-205 (°° C.), which, when pure and free from 
chlorine, solidifies at — i8°C, and boilsat I32°C. It is very poisonous 
and decomposes in moist air with evolution of white fumes. With a 
little water it forms arsenic oxychloride, AsOCl, and with excess of 
water it is completely decomposed into hydrochloric acid and white 
arsenic. It combines directly with ammonia to form a solid com- 
pound variously givenasAsCl 3 -3NH 3 , or 2 AsCl 3 -7NH 3 ,orAsCl 3 -_4NH 3 . 

A rsenic trifluoride, AsF 3 , is prepared by distilling white arsenic with 
fluorspar and sulphuric acid, or by heating arsenic tribromide with 
ammonium fluoride; it is a colourless liquid of specific gravity 2-73, 
boiling at 63 ° C. ; it fumes in air, and in contact with the skin 
produces painful wounds. It is decomposed by water into arsenious 
and hydrofluoric acids, and absorbs ammonia forming the compound 
2AsF 3 -5NH 3 . By the action of gaseous ammonia on arsenious halides 
at — 30 C. to — 40 ° C, arsenamide, As(NH2) 3 , is formed. Water de- 
composes it into arsenious oxide and ammonia, and when heated 
to 6o° it loses ammonia and forms arsenimide, As 2 (NH) 3 (C. Hugot, 
Compt. rend. 1904, 139, p. 54). For AsF 5 , see Ber., 1906, 39, p. 67. 

Two oxides of arsenic are definitely known to exist, namely the 
trioxide (white arsenic), As 4 6 , and the pentoxide, AS2O5, while the 
existence of a suboxide, As 2 0(?), has also been mooted. Arsenic 
trioxide has been known from the earliest times, and was called 
Hiittenrauch (furnace-smoke) by Basil Valentine. It occurs naturally 
in the mineral claudetite, and can be artificially prepared by burning 
arsenic in air or oxygen: It is obtained commercially by roasting 
arsenical pyrites in either a Brunton's or Oxland's rotatory calciner, 
the crude product being collected in suitable condensing chambers, 
and afterwards refined by resublimation, usually in reverberatory 
furnaces, the foreign matter being deposited in a long flue leading to 
the condensing chambers. White arsenic exists in two crystalline 
forms (octahedral and prismatic) and one amorphous form; the 
octahedral form is produced by the rapid cooling of arsenic 
vapour, or by cooling a warm saturated solution in water, or by 
crystallization from hydrochloric acid, and also by the gradual 
transition of the amorphous variety, this last phenomenon being 
attended by the evolution of heat. Its specific gravity is 3-7; it is 
only slightly soluble in cold water, but is more soluble in hot water, 
the solution reacting faintly acid. The prismatic variety of the oxide 
can be obtained by crystallization from a saturated boiling solution 
in potassium hydroxide, or by the crystallization of a solution of silver 
arsenite in nitric acid. Its specific gravity is 4- 15. In the amorphous 
condition it can be obtained by condensing the vapour of the oxide 
at as high a temperature as possible, when a vitreous mass is pro- 
duced, which melts at 200 C, has a specific gravity of 3-68-3-798, 
and is more soluble in water than the crystalline variety. 

Arsenious oxide is very poisonous. It acts as a reducing agent ; it 
is not convertible into the pentoxide by the direct action of oxygen ; 
and its solution is reduced by many metals (e.g. zinc, tin and 
cadmium) with precipitation of arsenic and formation of arseniuretted 
hydrogen. The solution of arsenious oxide in water reacts acid 
towards litmus and contains tribasic arsenious acid, although on 
evaporation of the solution the trioxide is obtained and not the free 
acid. The salts of the acid are, however, very stable, and are known 
as arsenites. Of these salts several series are known, namely the 
ortho-arsenites,»which are derivatives of the acid H 3 As0 3 , the meta- 
arsenites, derivatives of HAs0 2 , and the pyro-arsenites, derivatives 
of H4AS2O5. The arsenites of the alkali metals are soluble in water, 
those of the other metals are insoluble in water, but are readily soluble 
in acids. A neutral solution of an arsenite gives a yellow precipitate 
of silver arsenite, Ag 3 As0 3 , with silver nitrate solution, and a 
yellowish-green precipitate (Scheele's green) of cupric hydrogen 
arsenite, CuHAs0 3 , with copper sulphate solution. By the action of 
oxidizing agents such as nitric acid, iodine solution, &c, arsenious 
acid is readily converted into arsenic acid, in the latter case the re- 
action proceeding according to the equation H 3 As0 3 + l2 + H20 = 
H 3 As0 4 +2HI. Arsenic pentoxide, As 2 5 , is most easily obtained 
by oxidation of a solution of arsenious acid with nitric acid ; the 
solution on concentration deposits the compound 2H 3 As0 4 -H 2 
(below 15° C), which on being heated to a dark red heat loses its 
water of crystallization and leaves a white vitreous mass of the 
pentoxide. This substance dissolves slowly in water, forming 
arsenic acid; by heating to redness it decomposes into arsenic and 
oxygen. It deliquesces in moist air, and is easily reduced to arsenic 
by heating with carbon. 

Arsenic acid, H 3 As0 4 , is prepared as shown above, the compound 
2H 3 As0 4 -H 2 on being heated to ioo° C. parting with its water of 
crystallization and leaving a residue of the acid, which crystallizes 
in needles. On heating to 180° C. it loses water and yields pyro- 
arsenic acid, H4AS2O7, which at 200° C. loses more water and leaves 



ARSENIC 



6 53 



9 crystalline mass of meta-arsenic acid, HAs03. These latter two 
acids are only stable in the solid state; they dissolve readily in 
water with evolution of heat and immediate transformation into 
the ortho-arsenic acid. The salts of arsenic acid, termed arsenates, 
are isomorphous with the phosphates, and in general character and 
reactions resemble the phosphates very closely; thus both series 
of salts give similar precipitates with "magnesia mixture" and 
with ammonium molybdate solution, but they can be distinguished 
by their behaviour with silver nitrate solution, arsenates giving a 
reddish-brown precipitate, whilstphosphates give a yellow precipitate. 

There are three known compounds of arsenic and sulphur, namely, 
realgar AS2S2, orpiment As 2 S 3 , and arsenic pentasulphide As 2 S_ 5 , 
Realgar occurs native in orange prisms of specific gravity 3-5; it 
is prepared artificially by fusing together arsenic and sulphur, but 
the resulting products vary somewhat in composition; it is readily 
fusible and sublimes unchanged, and burns on heating in a current 
of oxygen, forming arsenic trioxide and sulphur dioxide. 

Orpiment (auri pigmentum) occurs native in pale yellow rhombic 
prisms, and can be obtained in the amorphous form by passing a 
current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas through a solution of arsenious 
oxide or an arsenite, previously acidified with dilute hydrochloric 
acid. It melts_ easily and volatilizes. It burns on heating in air, 
and is soluble in solutions of alkaline hydroxides and carbonates, 
forming thioarsenites, As 2 S 3 +4KHO = K 2 HAs0 3 + K 2 HAsS 3 + H 2 0. 
On acidifying the solution so obtained with hydrochloric acid, the 
whole of the arsenic is reprecipitated as trisulphide, K 2 HAs0 3 + 
K 2 HAsS 3 +4HCl=4KCl+3H 2 0+As 2 S 3 . Arsenic pentasulphide, As 2 S 6 , 
can be prepared by fusing the trisulphide with the requisite amount 
of sulphur; it is a yellow easily-fusible solid, which in absence 
of air can be sublimed unchanged ; it is soluble in solutions of the 
caustic alkalis, forming thioarsenates, which can also be obtained 
by the action of alkali polysulphides on orpiment. The thioarsenites 
and thioarsenates of the alkali metals are easily soluble in water, 
and are readily decomposed by the action of mineral acids. Arsenic 
compounds containing selenium and sulphur are known, such as 
arsenic seleno-sulphide, AsSeS^ and arsenic thio-se!enide, AsSSe 2 . 
Arsenic phosphide, AsP, results when phosphine is passed into arsenic 
trichloride, being precipitated as a red-brown powder. 

Many organic arsenic compounds are known, analogous to those 
of nitrogen and phosphorus, but apparently the primary and 
secondary arsines, AsH 2 -CH 3 and AsH(CH 3 ) 2 , do not exist, although 
the corresponding chlorine derivatives, AsCl 2 -CH 3 , methyl arsine 
chloride, and AsCl(CH 3 ) 2 , dimethyl arsine chloride, are known. 
The tertiary arsines, such as As(CH 3 ) 3 , trimethyl arsine, and the 
quaternary arsonium iodides and hydroxides, (CH 3 ) 4 AsI and 
(CH 3 ) 4 As-OH, tetramethyl arsonium iodide and hydroxide, have 
been obtained. The arsines and arsine chlorides are liquids of over- 
powering smell, and in some cases exert an extremely irritating action 
on the mucous membrane. They do not possess basic properties; 
the halogen in the chlorine compounds is readily replaced by oxygen, 
and the oxides produced behave like basic oxides. The chlorides 
AsCfe-CHs and AsCl(CH 3 ) 2 as well as As(CH 3 ) 3 are capable of com- 
bining with two atoms of chlorine, the arsenic atom apparently 
changing from the tri- to the penta-valent condition, and the corre- 
sponding oxygen compounds can also be oxidized to compounds 
containing one oxygen atom or two hydroxyl groups more, forming 
acids or oxides. The compounds of the type AsX 5 , e.g. AsCU-CH 8 , 
AsCl 3 (CH 3 ) 2 , on heating break down, with separation of methyl 
chloride and formation of compounds of the type AsX 3 ; the break- 
ing down taking place more readily the fewer the number of methyl 
groups in the compound. The dimethyl arsine (or cacodyl) com- 
pounds have been most studied. On distillation of equal parts of 
dry potassium acetate and arsenious oxide, a colourless liquid of 
unbearable smell passes over, which is spontaneously inflammable 
and excessively poisonous. It is sometimes called Cadet's fuming 
liquid, and its composition was determined by R. Bunsen, who 
gave it the name cacodyl oxide (kiucuSjjs, stinking); its formation 
may be shown thus : 

_ As 4 q 6 +8CH 3 C0 2 K=2[(CH 3 ) 2 As] 2 0+4K 2 C0 3 +4C0 2 . 
The liquid is spontaneously inflammable owing to the presence of 
free cacodyl, Asj(CH]) 4 , which is also obtained by heating the oxide 
with zinc clippings in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide ; it is a liquid 
of overpowering odour, and boils at I70°C. Cacodyl oxide boils at 
150° C, and on exposure to air takes up oxygen and water and 
passes over into the crystalline cacodylic acid, thus : 

[(CH 3 ) 2 As] 2 0+H 2 0+0,=2(CH 3 ) 2 As-0-OH. 

Pharmacology. — Of arsenic and its compounds, arsenious acid 
(dose -jV-tV § r -) and its preparation liquor arsenicalis, Fowler's 
solution (dose 2-8 1U), are in very common use. The iodide of 
arsenic (dose -glj— £ gr.) is one of the ingredients of Donovan's 
solution (see Mercury); and iron arsenate (dose T V4- gr. in a 
piU), a mixture of ferrous and ferric arsenates with some iron 
oxide, is of great use in certain cases. Sodium arsenate (■^s—iV 
gr.) is somewhat less commonly prescribed, though all the com- 
pounds of this metal have great value in experienced hands. 

Externally, arsenious acid is a powerful caustic when applied 



to raw surfaces, though it has no action on the unbroken skin. 
Internally, unless the dose be extremely small, all preparations 
are severe gastro-intestinal irritants. This effect is the same 
however the drug be administered, as, even after subcutaneous 
injection, the arsenic is excreted into the stomach after absorp- 
tion, and thus sets up gastritis in its passage through themucous 
membrane. In minute doses it is a gastric stimulant, promoting 
the flow of gastric juice. It is quickly absorbed into the blood, 
where its presence can be demonstrated especially in the white 
blood corpuscles. In certain forms of anaemia it increases the 
number of the red corpuscles and also their haemoglobin content. 
None of these known effects of arsenic is sufficient to account for 
the profound change that a course of the drug will often produce 
in the condition of a patient. It has some power of affecting the 
general metabolism, but no wholly satisfactory explanation is 
forthcoming. According to Binz and Schultz its power is due 
to the fact that it is an oxygen-carrier, arsenious acid withdrawing 
oxygen from the protoplasm to form arsenic acid, which subse- 
quently yields up its oxygen again. It is thus vaguely called an 
alterative, since the patient recovers under its use. It is elimin- 
ated chiefly by the urine, and to a less extent by the alimentary 
canal, sweat, saliva, bile, milk, tears, hair, &c, but it is also 
stored up in the body mainly in the liver and kidneys. 

Therapeutics. — Externally arsenious acid has been much used 
by quack doctors to destroy morbid growths, &c, a paste or 
solution being applied, strong enough to kill the mass of tissue 
and make it slough out quickly. But many accidents have 
resulted from the arsenic being absorbed, and the patient thereby 
poisoned. Internally it is useful in certain forms of dyspepsia, 
but as some patients are quite unable to tolerate the drug, it must 
always be administered in very small doses at first, the quantity 
being slowly increased as tolerance is shown. Children as a rule 
bear it better than adults. It should never be given on an 
empty stomach, but always after a full meal. Certain cases of 
anaemia which do not yield to iron are often much improved by 
arsenic, though in other apparently similar ones it appears to be 
valueless. It is the routine treatment for pernicious anaemia 
and Hodgkin's disease, though here again the drug may be of 
no avail. For the neuralgia and anaemia following malaria, for 
rheumatoid arthritis, for chorea and also asthma and hay fever, 
it is constantly prescribed with excellent results. Certain skin 
diseases, as psoriasis, pemphigus and occasionally chronic 
eczema, are much benefited by its use, though occasionally a 
too prolonged course will produce the very lesion for which under 
other circumstances it is a cure. A recent method of using 
the drug is in the form of sodium cacodylate by subcutaneous 
injection, and this preparation is said to be free from the cumu- 
lative effects sometimes arising after the prolonged use of the 
other forms. Other organic derivatives employed are sodium 
metharsenite and sodium anilarsenate or atoxyl; hypodermic 
injections of the latter have been used in the treatment of 
sleeping sickness. Occasionally, as among the Styrians, indi- 
viduals acquire the habit of arsenic-eating, which is said to 
increase their Weight, strength and appetite, and clears their 
complexion. The probable explanation is that an antitoxin is 
developed within them. 

Toxicology and Forensic Medicine. — The commonest source of 
arsenical poisoning is the arsenious acid or white arsenic, which 
in one form is white and opaque, like flour, for which it has been 
mistaken with fatal results. Also, as it has little taste and no 
colour it is easily mixed with food for homicidal purposes. 
When combined with potash or soda it is used to saturate fly- 
papers, and strong solutions can be obtained by soaking these in 
water; this fact has also been used with criminal intent. Copper 
arsenite (or Scheele's green) used to be much employed as a 
pigment for wall-papers and fabrics, and toxic effects have 
resulted from their use. Metallic arsenic is probably not 
poisonous, but as it usually becomes oxidized in the alimentary 
canal, the usual symptoms of arsenical poisoning follow its use. 

In acute poisoning the interval between the reception of the 
poison and the onset of symptoms ranges from ten minutes, or 
even less, if a strong solution be taken on an empty stomach, to 



654 



ARSENIUS— ARSES 



twelve or more hours if the drug be taken in solid form and the 
stomach be full of food. The usual period, however, is from 
half an hour to an hour. In a typical case a sensation of heat 
developing into a burning pain is felt in the throat and stomach. 
This is soon followed by uncontrollable vomiting, and a little 
later by severe purging, the stools being first of all faecal but 
later assuming a rice water appearance and often containing 
blood. The patient suffers from intense thirst, which cannot be 
relieved, as drinking is immediately followed by rejection of the 
swallowed fluid. There is profound collapse, the features are 
sunken, the skin moist and cyanosed. The pulse is feeble and 
irregular, and respiration is difficult. The pain in the stomach 
is persistent, and cramps in the calves of the legs add to the 
torture. Death may be preceded by coma, but consciousness is 
often maintained to the end. The similarity of the symptoms 
to those of cholera is very marked, but if the suspicion arises it 
can soon be cleared up by examining any of the secretions for 
arsenic. More rarely the poison seems to centre itself on the nerve 
centres, and gastro-intestinal symptoms may be almost or quite 
absent. In such cases the acute collapse occurs in company with 
both superficial and deep anaesthesia of the limbs, and is soon 
followed by coma terminating in death. In criminal poisoning 
repeated doses are usually given, so that such cases may not be 
typical, but will present some of the aspects of acute and some of 
chronic arsenical poisoning. As regards treatment, the stomach 
must be washed out with warm water by means of a soft rubber 
tube, an emetic being also administered. Then, if available, 
freshly precipitated ferric hydrate must be given, which can be 
prepared by adding a solution of ammonia to one of iron pef- 
chloride. The precipitate is strained off, and the patient can 
swallow it suspended in water. While this is being obtained, 
magnesia, castor oil or olive oil can be given; or failing all these, 
copious draughts of water. The collapse must be treated with hot 
blankets and bottles, and subcutaneous injections of brandy, ether 
or strychnine. The pain can be lessened by injections of morphia. 

Arsenic may be gradually absorbed into the system in very 
small quantities over a prolonged period, the symptoms of 
chronic poisoning resulting. The commonest sources used to be 
wall-papers, fabrics, artificial flowers and toys: also certain 
trades, as in the manufacture of arsenical sheep-dipping. But 
at the present time cases arising from these causes occur very 
rarely. In 1900 an outbreak of " peripheral neuritis " with 
various skin affections occurred in Lancashire, which was traced 
to beer made from glucose and invert sugar, in the preparation of 
which sulphuric acid contaminated with arsenic was said to 
have been used. But the nature of the disease in this case was 
decidedly obscure. The symptoms so closely resembled those of 
beri-beri that it has also been suggested that the illness was the 
same, and was caused by the manufacture of the glucose from 
mouldy rice (see Beri-Beri) , though no proof of this was possible. 
The earliest symptoms are slight gastric disorders, loss of appetite 
and general malaise, followed later by colicky pains, irritation 
of eyelids and skin eruptions. But sooner or later peripheral 
neuritis develops, usually beginning with sensory disturbances, 
tingling, numbness, formication and occasionally cutaneous 
anaesthesia. Later the affected muscles become exquisitely 
tender, and then atrophy, while the knee-jerk or other reflex is 
lost. Pigmentation of the skin may occur in the later stages. 
Recovery is very slow, and in fatal cases death usually results 
from heart failure. 

After acute poisoning, the stomach at a post-mortem presents 
signs of intense inflammation, parts or the whole of its mucous 
membrane being of a colour varying from dark red to bright 
vermilion and often corrugated. Submucous haemorrhages are 
usually present, but perforation is rare. The rest of the ali- 
mentary canal exhibits inflammatory changes in a somewhat 
lesser degree. After chronic poisoning a widely spread fatty 
degeneration is present. Arsenic is found in almost every part of 
the body, but is retained in largest amount by the liver, secondly 
by the kidneys. After death from chronic poisoning it is found 
present even in the brain and spongy bone. The detection of 
arsenic in criminal cases is effected either by Reinsch's test or 



by Marsh's test, the urine being the secretion analysed when 
available. But Reinsch's test cannot be used satisfactorily for a 
quantitative determination, nor can it be used in the presence of 
chlorates or nitrates. And Marsh's test is very unmanageable 
with organic liquids on account of the uncontrollable frothing 
that takes place. But in such cases the organic matter can be 
first destroyed by one of the various methods, usually the moist 
method devised by Fresenius being chosen. 

ARSENIUS (c. 354-450), an anchorite, said to have been born 
of a noble Roman family, who achieved a high reputation for his 
knowledge of Greek and Roman literature. He was appointed 
by Theodosius the Great, tutor of the young princes Arcadius 
and Honorius, but at the age of forty he retired to Egypt, where 
for forty years he lived in monastic seclusion at Scetis in the 
Thebais, under the spiritual guidance of St John the Dwarf. 
He is said to have gained the admiration of his fellows by the 
extreme rigour of his asceticism. The remainder of his life he 
spent at Canopus, and Troe near Memphis, where he died at the 
age of ninety-fiye. Of his writings two collections of admonitory 
maxims are extant: the first, AtSacrKaKia koJ. irapaivtcns, con- 
taining instructions for monks, is published with a Latin version 
by Fr. Combefis in Auctarium biblioth. patr. novissim. (Paris, 
1672), pp. 301 f.; the second is a collection of forty-four wise 
sayings put together by his friends under the title of ' Airo<bdiy iiara 
(see Cotelerius, Eccl. graec. monum., 1677, i. pp. 353-372). In 
the Roman Catholic Church his festival is on the 19th of July, 
in the Orthodox Eastern Church on the 8th of May. His 
biography by Simeon Metaphrastes is largely fiction. 

ARSENIUS AUTORIANUS (13th century), patriarch of Con- 
stantinople, lived about the middle of the 13th century. He 
received his education in Nicaea at a monastery of which he 
later became the abbot, though not in orders. Subsequently he 
gave himself up to a life of solitary asceticism in a Bithynian 
monastery, and is said, probably wrongly, to have remained 
some time in a monastery on Mount Athos. From this seclusion 
he was in a.d. 1255 called by Theodore II. Lascaris to the 
position of patriarch at Nicaea, and four years later, on that 
emperor's death, became joint guardian of his son John. His 
fellow-guardian Georgios Mouzalon was immediately murdered 
by Michael Palaeologus, who assumed the position of tutor. 
Arsenius then took refuge in the monastery of Paschasius, 
retaining his office of patriarch but refusing to discharge its 
duties. Nicephorus of Ephesus was appointed in his stead. In 
1 261 Michael, having recovered Constantinople, induced Arsenius 
again to undertake the office of patriarch, but soon incurred his 
severe censure by ordering the young prince John to be blinded. 
Arsenius went so far as to excommunicate the emperor, who, 
having vainly sought for pardon, took refuge in false accusations 
against Arsenius and caused him to be banished to Proconnesus, 
where some years afterwards (according to Fabricius in 1264; 
others say in 1273) he died. Throughout these years he declined 
to remove the sentence of excommunication which he had passed 
upon Michael, and after his death, when the new patriarch 
Josephus gave absolution to the emperor, the quarrel was carried 
on between the " Arsenites " and the " Josephists." The 
" Arsenian schism" lasted till 1315, when reconciliation was 
effected by the patriarch Niphon (see Gibbon, Decline and Fall 
of the Roman Empire, ed. J. B. Bury, 1898, vol. vi. 467 foil.). 
Arsenius is said to have prepared from the decisions of the 
councils and the works of the Fathers a summary of divine laws 
under the title Synopsis Canonum. This was published (Greek 
original and Latin version) by G. Voel and H. Justel in Biblio- 
theca Jur. Canon. Vet. (Paris, 166 1), 749 foil. Some hold that 
the Synopsis was the work of another Arsenius, a monk of Athos 
(see L. Petit in Vacant's Diet, theol. cathol. i. col. 1994); the 
ascription depends on whether the patriarch Arsenius did or did 
not sojourn at Mount Athos. 

See Georgius Pachymeres ii. 15, in. passim, iv. 1-16; Nicephorus 
Gregoras iii. 1, iv. 1; lor the will of Arsenius see Cotelerius, 
Monumenta, ii. 168. 

ARSES, Persian king, youngest son of Artaxerxes III., was 
raised to the throne in 338 B.C. by Bagoas (q.v.), who had 



ARSINOE— ARSON 



655 



murdered his father and all his brothers. But when the young 
king tried to make himself independent^ Bagoas killed him too, 
with all his children, in the third year of his reign (336) (Diod. 
17.5; Strabo 15. 736; Trogus, Prol. x., Alexander's despatch 
to Darius III.; Arrian ii. 14. 5, and the chronographers). In 
Plutarch, De fort. Alex. ii. 3. 5, he is called Oarses; in Johannes 
Antioch. p. 38, Arsamos; in the canon of Ptolemy, Aroges 
(by Elias of Nisibis, Pirilz); in a chronological tablet from 
Babylon (Brit. Mus. Sp. ii. 71, Zeitschrift fur Assyriologie, viii. 
176, x. 64) he is abbreviated into Ar. See Persia: Ancient 
History. _ (Ed. M.) 

ARSINOE, the name of four Egyptian princesses of the 
Ptolemaic dynasty. The name was introduced into the Ptolemaic 
dynasty by the mother of Ptolemy I. This Arsinoe' was originally 
a mistress of Philip II. of Macedon, who presented her to a 
Macedonian soldier Loqus shortly before Ptolemy was born. It 
was, therefore, assumed by the Macedonians that the Ptolemaic 
house was really descended from Philip (see Ptolemies). 

1. Daughter of Lysimachus, king of Thrace, first wife of 
Ptolemy II. Philadelphus (285-247 B.C.). Accused of conspiring 
against her husband, who perhaps already contemplated marriage 
with his sister, also named Arsinoe, she was banished to Coptos, 
in Upper Egypt. Her son Ptolemy was afterwards king under 
the title of Euergetes. It is supposed by some (e.g. Niebuhr, 
Kleine Schriften ; cf . Ehrlichs, De Callimachi hymnis) that she is 
to be identified with the Arsinoe who became wife of Magas, 
king of Cyrene, and that she married him after her exile to 
Coptos. But this hypothesis is apparently without foundation. 
Magas before his death had betrothed his daughter Berenice to 
the son of his brother Ptolemy II. Philadelphus, but Arsinoe, 
disliking the projected alliance, induced Demetrius the Fair, 
son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, to accept the throne of Cyrene as 
husband of Berenice. She herself, however, fell in love with 
the young prince, and Berenice in revenge formed a con- 
spiracy, and, having slain Demetrius, married Ptolemy's son 
(see Berenice, 3). 

2. Daughter of Ptolemy I. Soter and Berenice. Born about 
316 B.C., she married Lysimachus, king of Thrace, who made 
over to her the territories of his divorced wife, Amastris. To 
secure the succession for her own children she brought about 
the murder of her stepson Agathocles. Lysandra, the wife of 
Agathocles, took refuge with Seleucus, king of Syria, who made 
war upon Lysimachus and defeated him (281). After her 
husband's death Arsinoe fled to Ephesus and afterwards to 
Cassandreia in Macedonia. Seleucus, who had seized Lysima- 
chus's kingdom, was murdered in 281 by Ptolemy Ceraunus 
(half-brother of Arsinoe), who thus became master of Thrace 
and Macedonia. To obtain possession of Cassandreia, he offered 
his hand in marriage to Arsinoe, and being admitted into the 
town, killed her two younger sons and banished her to Samo- 
thrace. Escaping to Egypt, she became the wife of her full 
brother Ptolemy II., the first instance of the practice (afterwards 
common) of the Greek kings of Egypt marrying their sisters. 
She was a woman of a masterful character and won great influence. 
Her husband, though she bore him no children, was devoted to 
her and paid her all possible honour after her death in 271. 
He gave her name to a number of cities, and also to a district 
(nome) of Egypt. 1 It is related that he ordered the architect 
Dinochares to build a temple in her honour in Alexandria; in 
order that her statue, made of iron, might appear to be suspended 
in the air, the roof was to consist of an arch of loadstones (Pliny, 
Hist. Nat. xxxiv. 42). Coins were also struck, showing her 
crowned and veiled on the obverse, with a double cornucopia on 
the reverse. She was worshipped as a goddess under the title of 
Gea <j>CkabtK4x>s, and she and her husband as Qtol &5e\<j)oi 
(Justin xxiv. 2, 3; Pausanias i. 7). 

See von Prott, Rhein. Mus. liii. (1898), pp. 460 f. 

3. Daughter of Ptolemy III. Euergetes, sister and wife of 
Ptolemy IV. Philopator. She seems to be erroneously called 

1 The appendix to pt. ii. of the Tebtunis series of papyri (Grenfell, 
Hunt and Goodspeed, 1907) contains a lengthy account ol the topo- 
graphy of the Arsinoite nome. 



Eurydice by Justin (xxx. 2), and Cleopatra by Livy (xxvii. 4). 
Her presence greatly encouraged the troops at the battle of 
Raphia (217), in which Antiochus the Great was defeated. Her 
husband put hei to death to please his mistress Agathocleia, 
a Samian dancer (between 210 and 205). She was worshipped 
as Geo. 4>lSowo.tu>p; she and her husband as Oeot </>iXo7raTopes 
(Polybius v. 83, 84, xv. 25-33). 

4. Youngest daughter of Ptolemy XIII. Auletes, and sister 
of the famous Cleopatra. During the siege of Alexandria by 
Julius Caesar (48) she was recognized as queen by the inhabitants, 
her brother, the young Ptolemy, being then held captive by 
Caesar. Caesar took her with him to Rome as a precaution. 
After Caesar's triumph she was allowed to return to Alexandria. 
After the battle of Philippi she was put to death at Miletus 
(or in the temple of Artemis at Ephesus) by order of Mark 
Antony, at the request of her sister Cleopatra (Dio Cassius 
xlii. 39; Caesar, Bell. civ. iii. 112; Appian, Bell. civ. v. 9). 

Authorities.— For general authorities see article Ptolemies. 
The article " Arsinoe " in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie contains 
a full list of those who bore the name, and also of the numerous towns 
which were called after the various princesses. 

ARSINOITHERIUM (so called from the Egyptian queen 
Arsinoe), a gigantic horned mammal from the Middle Eocene 
beds of the Fayum, Egypt, representing a sub-order of Ungulata, 
called Barypoda. The skull is remarkable for carrying a huge 
pair of horn-cores above the muzzle, which seem to be the en- 
larged nasal bones, and a rudimentary pair farther back; the 
front horn-cores, like the rest of the skull, consist of a mere shell 
of bone, and were probably clothed in life with horny sheaths. 
The teeth form a continuous even series, the small canines being 
crowded between the incisors and premolars; the crowns of the 
cheek-series are tall (hypsodont), with a distinctive pattern of 
their own. Although the brain is relatively larger, the bones of 
the limbs, especially the short, five-toed feet, approximate to 
those of the Amblypoda and Proboscidea; but in the articula- 
tion of the astragalus with both the navicular and cuboid 
Arsinoitherium is nearer the former than the latter group. 

It is probable, however, that these resemblances are mainly 
due to parallelism in development, and are in all three cases 
adaptations necessary to support the enormous weight of the 
body. On the other hand, the marked resemblance of the 
structure of the tarsus is probably indicative of descent from 
nearly allied condylarthrous ancestors (see Phenacodus). No 
importance can be attached to the presence of horns as an 
indication of affinity between Arsinoitherium and the Ambly- 
poda; and there are important differences in the structure of 
the skulls of the two, notably in the external auditory meatus, 
the occiput, the premaxillae, the palatal foramina and the lower 
jaw. 

From the Proboscidea Arsinoitherium differs broadly in skull 
structure, in the form of the cheek-teeth, and in the persistence 
of the complete dental series of forty-four without gaps or 
enlargement of particular teeth. Whether there is any relation- 
ship with the Hyracoidea cannot be determined until we are 
acquainted with the forerunners of Arsinoitherium, which is 
evidently a highly specialized type. 

It may be added that as the name Barypoda has been used 
at an earlier date for another group of animals, the alternative 
title Embrithopoda has been suggested in case the former should 
be considered barred. 

See C. W. Andrews, Descriptive Catalogue of the Tertiary Vertebrata 
of the Fayum, British Museum (1906). (R. L.*) 

ARSON (from Lat. ardere, to burn), a crime which has been 
described as the malicious and voluntary burning of the house of 
another (3 Co. Inst. 66). At common law in England it is an 
offence of the degree of felony. In the Roman civil law arson 
was punishable by death. It appears early in the history of 
English law, being known in ancient laws by the term of boernet. 
It is mentioned by Cnut as one of the bootless crimes, and under 
the Saxon laws was punishable by death. The sentence of death 
for arson was, says Stephen (Commentaries, iv. 89) , in the reign 
of Edward I. executed by a kind of lex talionis, for the incendiaries 
were burnt to death; a punishment which was inflicted also under 



6 5 6 



ARSONVAL— ARSUF 



the Gothic institutions. Death continued to be the penalty at 
least down to the reign of King John, according to a reported 
case (Gloucester Pleas, pi. 216), but in course of time the penalty 
became that of other common-law felonies, death by the gallows. 
It is one of the earliest crimes in which the mens rea, or criminal 
intent, was taken special notice of. Bracton deals at length with 
the mala conscienlia, which he says is necessary for this crime, 
and contrasts it with negligentia (f. 146 b), while in many early 
indictments malice aforethought (malilia praecogitatd) appears. 
Arson was deprived of " benefit of clergy " under the Tudors, 
while an act of 8 Henry VI. c. 6 (1429) made the wilful burning 
of houses, under particular circumstances, high treason, but acts 
of 1 Ed. VI. c. 12 (1547) and 1 Mary (1553) reduced it to an 
ordinary felony. The English law concerning arson was con- 
solidated by 7 & 8 Geo. IV. c. 30, which was repealed and re- 
enacted by the Malicious Damage Act 1861. 

The common-law offence of arson (which has been greatly en- 
larged by the act of 1861) required some part of the house to be 
actually burnt; neither a bare intention nor even an actual 
attempt by putting fire in or towards it will constitute the 
offence, if no part was actually burnt, but the burning of any 
part, however trifling, is sufficient, and the offence is complete 
even if the fire is put out or goes out of itself. The burning 
must be malicious and wilful, otherwise it is only a trespass. 
If a man by wilfully setting fire to his own house burn the house 
of his neighbour also, it will be a felony, even though the primary 
intention of the party was to burn his own house only. The 
word house, in the definition of the offence at common law, 
extends not only to dwelling-houses, " but to all out-houses 
which are parcel thereof, though not adjoining thereto." Barns 
with corn and hay in them, though distant from a house, are 
within the definition. 

The different varieties of the offence are specified in the 
Malicious Damage Act 1861. The following crimes are thereby 
made felonies: (1) setting fire to any church, chapel, meeting- 
house or other place of divine worship; (2) setting fire to a 
dwelling-house, any person being therein; (3) setting fire to a 
house, out-house, manufactory, farm-building, &c, with intent 
to impose and defraud any person; (4) setting fire to buildings 
appertaining to any railway, port, dock or harbour; or (5) 
setting fire to any public building. In these cases the act pro- 
vides that the person convicted shall be liable, at the discretion 
of the court, to be kept in penal servitude for life, or for any 
term not less than three years (altered to five years by the Penal 
Servitude Acts Amendment Act 1864), or to be imprisoned for 
any time not exceeding two years, with or without hard labour, 
and, if a male under sixteen years of age, with or without whip- 
ping. Setting fire to other buildings, and setting fire to goods 
in buildings under such circumstances that, if the building were 
thereby set fire to, the offence would amount to felony, are 
subject to the punishments last enumerated, with this exception 
that the period of penal servitude is limited to fourteen years. 
The attempt to set fire to any building, or any matter or thing 
not enumerated above, is punishable as a felony. Russell says 
{Crimes, p. 1781) that the term building is no doubt very in- 
definite, but it was used in 9 & 10 Vict. c. 25, s. 2; and it was 
thought much better to adopt this term and leave it to be inter- 
preted as each case might arise, than to attempt to define; as 
any such attempt would probably have failed in producing any 
expression more certain than the term " building " itself. In 
R. v. Manning, 1872 (L.R. 1 C.C.R. 338), it was held that an 
unfinished house was a building within the meaning of the act. 
The setting fire to crops of hay, grass, corn, &c, is punishable 
by penal servitude for any period not exceeding fourteen years, 
but setting fire to stacks of the same, or any cultivated vegetable 
produce, or to peat, coals, &c, is regarded as a more serious 
offence, and the penal servitude may be for life. For the 
attempt to commit the last two offences penal servitude is limited 
to seven years. Setting fire to mines of coal, anthracite or other 
mineral fuel is visited with the full measure of penalty, and in 
the case of an attempt the penal servitude is limited to fourteen 
years. By the Dockyards, &c, Protection Act 1772 it is a felony 



punishable by death wilfully and maliciously to set fire to any 
of His Majesty's ships or vessels of war, or any of His Majesty's 
arsenals, magazines, dockyards, rope-yards, victualling offices 
or buildings therein, or any timber, material, stores or ammuni- 
tion of war therein or in any part of His Majesty's dominions. 
If the person guilty of the offence is a person subject to naval 
discipline, he is triable by court-martial, and if found guilty, a 
sentence of capital punishment may be passed. The Malicious 
Damage Act 1861, s. 43, also includes as a felony the setting 
fire to any ship or vessel, with intent to prejudice any owner 
or part owner of the vessel, or of any goods on the same, or any 
person who has underwritten any policy of insurance on the vessel, 
or upon any goods on board the same. 

In Scotland the offence equivalent to arson in England is 
known by the more expressive name of fire-raising. The crime 
was punishable capitally by old consuetudinary law, but it is 
now no longer capital, and may be tried in the sheriff court 
(50 & 51 Vict. c. 35, s. 56). Formerly the public prosecutor had 
the privilege of declining to demand capital punishment, and he 
invariably did so. Wilful fire-raising, which is the most heinous 
form of the crime, requires the raising of fire, without any lawful 
object, but with the deliberate intention of destroying certain 
premises or things, whether directly by the application of fire 
thereto, or indirectly by its application to something contained 
in or forming part of or communicating with them; also the 
intention to destroy premises or things of a certain description 
(much as mentioned above); and such premises or things must 
be the property of another than the accused. Wicked, culpable 
and reckless fire-raising differs from wilful fire-raising in that the 
fire is raised without the deliberate intention of destroying premises 
or things, but while the accused was engaged in some unlawful 
act, or while he was in such a state of passion, excitement or 
recklessness as not to care what results might follow from his acts. 

United States. — The same general principles apply to this crime 
in American law. In some states by statute the intent to injure 
or defraud must be shown, e.g. when the property is insured. 
In New York one who wilfully burns property (including a 
vessel or its cargo) with intent to defraud or prejudice the 
insurer thereof, though the offence of arson is not committed, 
is punishable by imprisonment for not more than five years 
(N.Y. Pen. Code, ss. 575, 578). There must be an intent to 
destroy the building (ibid. s. 490; California Code, s. 447). An 
agreement to commit arson is conspiracy (ibid. s. 171). Killing a 
person in committing the crime of arson is murder in the first 
degree (ibid. s. 183) ; this is so in California, even where the crime 
is merely an attempt to commit arson (Cal. Pen. Code, s. 189). 
Explosion of a house by gunpowder or dynamite is arson (Texas 
Pen. Code, art. 761), but a charge of arson by " burning " will 
not be sustained by proof of exploding by dynamite, even 
though part of the building is burnt by the explosion (Landers v. 
State [Tex.], 47 S.W. 1008). 

Authorities. — W. S. Holdsworth, History of English Law, vol. 
iii. ; Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law ; Stephen, 
History of Criminal Law, vol. iii.; Stephen, Commentaries; Russell 
on Crimes. 

ARSONVAL, a village of France in the department of Aube, 
lies on the right bank of the Aube, about 30 m. east of Troyes. 
It has a church dating from the 12th century. Pop. 434. 

ARSOT, the name of a forest in France, in the immediate 
neighbourhood of Belfort. It has an area of about 1500 acres, 
is almost encircled by a small stream, the Eloie, and is about 
1400 ft. above the sea. On the east it is continued by the forest 
of Denney, which contains the fortress of Roppe, dominating the 
road from Colmar into France. 

ARSUF, a town on the coast of Palestine, 12 m. N.N.E. of 
Jaffa, famous as the scene of a victory of the crusaders under 
Richard I. of England over the army of Saladin. After the 
capture of Acre on the 12th of July 1191, the army of the 
crusaders, under Richard Cceur-de-Lion and the duke of 
Burgundy, opened their campaign for the recovery of Jerusalem 
by marching southward towards Jaffa, from which place it was 
intended to move direct upon the holy city. The march was 



ARSURE— ART 



657 



along the sea-shore, and, the forces of Saladin being in the 
vicinity, the army moved in such a formation as to be able to 
give battle at any moment. Richand thus moved slowly, but in 
such compact order as to arouse the admiration even of the 
enemy. The right column of baggage and supplies, guarded by 
infantry, was nearest the sea, the various corps of heavy cavalry, 
one behind the other, formed the central column, and on the 
exposed left flank was the infantry, well closed up, and " level 
and firm as a wall," according to the testimony of Saracen authors. 
The columns were united into a narrow rectangle by the advanced 
and rear guards. The whole march was a running fight between 
untiring horse-archers and steady infantry. Only once did the 
column open out, and the opportunity was swiftly seized by the 
Saracens, yet so rapid was the rally of the crusaders that little 
damage was done (August 25). The latter maintained for many 
days an absolutely passive defence, and could not be tempted to 
fight; Richard and his knights made occasional charges, but 
quickly withdrew, and on the 7th of September this irregular 
skirmishing, in which the crusaders had scarcely suffered at all, 
culminated in the battle of Arsuf. Saladin had by now decided 
that the only hope of success lay in compelling the rear of the 
Christians' column to halt — and thus opening a gap, should the 
van be still on the move. Richard, on the other hand, had 
prepared for action by closing up still more, and as the crusaders 
were now formed a simple left turn brought them into two lines 
of battle, infantry in first line, cavalry in second line. Near 
Arsuf the road entered a defile between the sea and a wooded 
range of hills; and from the latter the whole Moslem army 
suddenly burst forth. The weight of the attack fell upon the 
rear of Richard's column, as Saladin desired. The column 
slowly continued its march, suffering heavily in horses, but 
otherwise unharmed. The first assault thus made no impression, 
but a fierce hand-to-hand combat followed, in which the Hospit- 
allers, who formed the rear of the Christian army, were hard 
pressed. Their grand master, like many other subordinates in 
history, repeatedly begged to be allowed to charge, but Richard, 
who on this occasion showed the highest gift of generalship, that 
of feeling the pulse of the fight, waited for the favourable 
moment. Almost as he gave the signal for the whole line to 
charge, the sorely pressed Hospitallers rode out upon the enemy 
on their own initiative. At once the whole of the cavalry 
followed suit. The head (or right wing) and centre were not 
closely engaged, and their fleeter opponents had time to ride off, 
but the rear of the column carried all before it in its impetuous 
onset, and cut down the Saracens in great numbers. A second 
charge, followed by a third, dispersed the enemy in all directions. 
The total loss of the Saracens was more than tenfold that of 
the Christians, who lost but seven hundred men. The army 
arrived at Jaffa on the 10th of September. 
See Oman, Hist, of the Art of War, ii. 303-317. 

ARSURE, a village of France in the department of Jura, has 
some stone quarries and extensive layers of peat in its neighbour- 
hood. Its church has a choir dating from the nth century. 
Pop. 370. 

ARSURES, a village of France in the department of Jura, 
situated on a small stream, the Lurine. It is surrounded by 
vineyards, from which excellent wine is produced. Pop. 233. 

ART, a word in its most extended and most popular sense 
meaning everything which we distinguish from Nature. Art and 
Nature are the two most comprehensive genera of which the 
human mind has formed the conception. Under the genus 
Nature, or the genus Art, we include all the phenomena of the 
universe. But as our conception of Nature is indeterminate and 
variable, so in some degree is our conception of Art. Nor does 
such ambiguity arise only because some modes of thought refer a 
greater number of the phenomena of the universe to the genus 
Nature, and others a greater number to the genus Art. It arises 
also because we do not strictly limit the one genus by the other. 
The range of the phenomena to which we point, when we say Art, 
is never very exactly determined by the range of the other 
phenomena which at the same time we tacitly refer to the order of 
Nature. Everybody understands the general meaning of a phrase 



like Chaucer's " Nature ne Art ne koude him not amende," 01 
Pope's " Blest with each grace of nature and of art." In such 
phrases we intend to designate familiarly as Nature all which 
exists independently of our study, forethought and exertion — in 
other words, those phenomena in ourselves or the world which we 
do not originate but find; and we intend to designate familiarly 
as Art all which we do not find but originate — or, in other 
words, the phenomena, which we add by study, forethought 
and exertion to those existing independently of us. But we do 
not use these designations consistently. Sometimes we draw an 
arbitrary line in the action of individuals and societies, and say, 
Here Nature ends and Art begins — such a law, such a practice, 
such an industry even, is natural, and such another is artificial; 
calling those natural which happen spontaneously and without 
much reflection, and the others artificial. But this line different 
observers draw at different places. Sometimes we adopt views 
which waive the distinction altogether. One such view is that 
wherein all phenomena are regarded as equally natural, and the 
idea of Nature is extended so as to include " all the powers 
existing in either the outer or the inner world, and everything 
which exists by means of those powers." In this view Art 
becomes a part of Nature. It is illustrated in the familiar 
passage of Shakespeare, where Polixenes reminds Perdita that 
" Nature is made better by no mean, 

But nature makes that mean : so, over that art 

Which, you say, adds to nature, is an art 

That nature makes." . . . 

" This is an art 

Which does mend nature, change it rather, but 

The art itself is nature." 
A posthumous essay of John Stuart Mill contains a full philo- 
sophical exposition and defence of this mode of regarding the 
relations of Nature and Art. Defining Nature as above, and again 
as a " collective name for all facts, actual and possible," that 
writer proceeds to say that such a definition 

" is evidently inapplicable to some of the modes in which the word 
is familiarly employed. For example, it entirely conflicts with the 
common form of speech by which Nature is opposed to Art, and 
natural to artificial. For in the sense of the word Nature which has 
thus been defined, and which is the true scientific sense, Art is as 
much Nature as anything else ; and everything which is artificial is 
natural — Art has no independent powers of its own: Art is but 
the employment of the powers of Nature for an end. Phenomena 
produced by human agency,, no less than those which, as far as we 
are concerned, are spontaneous, depend on the properties of the 
elementary forces, or of the elementary substances and their com- 
pounds. The united powers of the whole human race could not 
create a new property of matter in general, or of any one of its species. 
We can only take advantage for our purposes of the properties we 
find. A ship floats by the same laws of specific gravity and equi- 
librium as a tree uprooted by the wind and blown into the water. 
The corn which men raise for food grows and produces its grain by 
the same laws of vegetation by which the wild rose and the mountain 
strawberry bring forth their flowers and fruit. A house stands and 
holds together by the natural properties, the weight and cohesion 
of the materials which compose it. A steam engine works by the 
natural expansive force of steam, exerting a pressure upon one 
part of a system of arrangements, which pressure, by the mechanical 
properties of the lever, is transferred from that to another part, 
where it raises the weight or removes the obstacle brought into con- 
nexion with it. In these and all other artificial queries the
office of man is, as has often been remarked, a very limited one; it 
consists of moving things into certain places. We move objects, 
and by doing this, bring some things into contact which were separate, 
or separate others which were in contact ; and by this simple change 
of place, natural forces previously dormant are called into action, 
and produce the desired effect. Even the volition which designs, 
the intelligence which contrives, and the muscular force which 
executes these movements, are themselves powers of Nature." 

Another mode of thought, in some sort complementary to 
the last, is based on the analogy which the queries of forces
external to a man bear to the queries of man himself. Study,
forethought and exertion are assigned to Nature, and her 
queries are called queries of Art. This view was familiar
to ancient systems of philosophy, and especially to that of 
the Stoics. According to the report of Cicero, Nature as con- 
ceived by Zeno was a fire, and at the same time a voluntary agent 
having the power or art of creating things with regularity and 
design (" naturam esse ignem artificiosum ad gignendum pro- 
gredientem via"). To this fire not merely creative force and 



6 5 8 



ART 



systematic action were ascribed, but actual personality. Nature 
was " non artificiosa solum, sed plane artifex." " That which 
in the works of human art is done by hands, is done with much 
greater art by Nature, that is, by a fire which exercises an art 
and is the teacher of other arts." This conception of Nature 
as an all-generating fire, and at the same time as a personal 
artist both teaching and including in her own activity all the 
human arts, on the one hand may be said, with Polixenes and 
J. S. Mill, to merge Art in Nature; but on the other hand it 
finds the essence of Nature in the resemblance of her queries
to those of Art. " It is the proprium of art," according to the 
same system, " to create and beget," and the reasoning proceeds 
—Nature creates and begets, therefore Nature is an artist or 
Demiurgus. A kindred view is set forth by Sir Thomas Browne 
in the Religio Medici, when he declares that " all things are 
artificial; for Nature is the Art of God." 

But these modes of thought, according to which, on the one 
hand, the processes of Art are included among processes of 
Nature, or on the other the processes of Nature among the pro- 
cesses of Art, are exceptional. In ordinary use the two concep- 
tions, each of them somewhat vague and inexact, are antithetical. 
Their antithesis was what Dr Johnson had chiefly in his mind 
when he defined Art as " the power of doing something which 
is not taught by Nature or by instinct." But this definition 
is insufficient, because the abstract word Art, whether used 
of all arts at once or of one at a time, is a name not only for the 
power of doing something, but for the exercise of the power; 
and not only for the exercise of the power, but for the rules 
according to which it is exercised; and not only for the ruies, 
but for the result. Painting, for instance, is an art, and the word 
connotes not only the power to paint, but the act of painting; 
and not only the act, but the laws for performing the act rightly; 
and not only all these, but the material consequences of the 
act or the thing painted. So of agriculture, navigation and 
the rest. Exception might also be taken to Dr Johnson's defini- 
tion on the ground that it excludes all actions of instinct from 
the genus Art, whereas usage has in more languages than one 
given the name of Art to several of those ingenuities in the lower 
animals which popular theory at the same time declares to be 
instinctive. Dante, for instance, speaks of boughs shaken by the 
wind, but not so violently as to make the birds forgo their Art — 
" Non pero dal lor esser dritto sparte 

Tanto, che gl' augelletti per le cime 

Lasciasser d' operar ogni lor arte." 

And Fontenelle, speaking in the language not of poetry but 
of science: — ■" Most animals — as, for instance, bees, spiders 
and beavers — have a kind of art peculiar to themselves; but 
each race of animals has no more than one art, and this one 
has had no first inventor among the race. Man, on the other 
hand, has an infinity of different arts which were not born with 
his race, and of which the glory is his own." Dr Johnson might 
reply that those properties of variety and of originality or in- 
dividual invention, which Fontenelle himself alleges in the 
ingenuities of man but not in those of the lower animals, are 
sufficient to make a generic difference, and to establish the 
impropriety of calling a honeycomb or a spider's web a work 
of Art. It is not our purpose to trespass on ground so debateable 
as that of the nature of consciousness in the lower animals. 
Enough that when we use the term Art of any action, it is because 
we are thinking of properties in the action from which we infer, 
whether justly or not, that the agent voluntarily and designedly 
puts forth skill for known ends and by regular and uniform 
methods. If, then, we were called upon to frame a general 
definition of Art, giving the word its widest and most compre- 
hensive meaning, it would run thus: — Every regulated operation 
or dexterity by which organized beings pursue ends which they know 
beforehand, together with the rules and the result of every such 
operation or dexterity. 

Here it will be well to consider very briefly the natural history 
of the name which has been given to this very comprehensive 
conception by the principal branches of civilized mankind. 
Our own word Art the English language has taken, as all the 



Romance languages of modern Europe have taken theirs, directly 
from the Latin. The Latin ars, according to the prevailing 
opinion of philologists, proceeds from a root AR, of which the 
primitive signification was to put or fit things together, and 
which is to be found in a large family of Greek words. The 
Greek rkx vr l, the name both for arts in the particular and art 
in the abstract, is by its root related both to tsk-tuv and 
ren-vov, and thus contains the allied ideas of making and beget- 
ting. The proprium of art in the logic of the Stoics, " to create 
and beget," was strictly in accordance with this etymology. 
The Teutonic Kunst is formed from konnen, and konnen is 
developed from a primitive Ich kann. In kann philology is 
inclined to recognize a preterite form of a lost verb, of which 
we find the traces in Kin-d, a child; and the form Ich kann 
thus meaning originally " I begot," contains the germ of the two 
several developments, — konnen, " to be master," " to be able," 
and kennen, " to know." We thus see that the chief Indo- 
European languages have with one consent extended a name for 
the most elementary exercise of a constructive or productive 
power, till that name has covered the whole range of the skilled 
and deliberate queries of sentient beings.

In proportion as men left out of sight the idea of creation, of 
constructing or producing, " artificiosum esse ad gignendum," 
which is the primitive half of this extended notion, and attended 
only to the idea of skill, of proceeding by regular and disciplined 
methods, " progredi via," which is the superadded half, the 
whole notion Art, and the name for it, might become subject to 
a process of thought which, if analysed, would be like this: — 
What is done by regular and disciplined methods is Art; facts 
are observed and classified, and a systematic view of the order 
of the universe obtained, by regular and disciplined methods; 
the observing and classifying of facts, and obtaining a systematic 
view of the order of the universe, is therefore Art. To a partial 
extent this did unconsciously take place. Science, of which the 
essence is only in knowledge and theory, came to be spoken of as 
Art, of which the essence is all in practice and production. 
Cicero, notwithstanding his citation of the Stoical dictum that 
practice and production were of the essence of Art, elsewhere 
divides Art into two kinds — one by which things are only 
contemplated in the mind, another by which something is pro- 
duced and done. (" Quumque artium aliud eiusmodi sit, ut 
tantummodo rem cernat; aliud, ut moliatur aliquid et faciat." 
— Acad. ii. 7.) Of the former kind his instance is geometry; of 
the latter the art of playing on the lyre. Now geometry, under- 
standing by geometry an acquisition of the mind, that is, a 
collected body of observations and deductions concerning the 
properties of space and magnitude, is a science and not an art; 
although there is an art of the geometer, which is the skill by 
which he solves any given problem in his science, and the rules 
of that skill, and his exertion in putting it forth. And so every 
science has its instrumental art or practical discipline; and in 
as far as the word Art is used only of the practical discipline or 
dexterity of the geometer, the astronomer, the logician, the 
grammarian, or other person whose business it is to collect and 
classify facts for contemplation, in so far the usage is just. The 
same justification may be extended to another usage, whereby 
in Latin, and some of its derivative languages, the name Art came 
to be transferred in a concrete sense to the body of rules, the 
written code or manual, which lays down the discipline and 
regulates the dexterity; as ars grammatica, ars logica, ars rhetorica 
and the rest. But when the word is stretched so as to mean the 
sciences, as theoretical acquisitions of the mind, that meaning is 
illegitimate. Whether or not Cicero, in the passage above quoted, 
had in his mind the science of geometry as a collected body of 
observations and deductions, it is certain that the Ciceronian 
phrase of the liberal arts, the ingenuous arts, both in Latin and 
its derivatives or translations in modern speech, has been used 
currently to denote the sciences themselves, and not merely 
the disciplines instrumental . to them. The trivium and the 
quadrivium ( grammar, logic and rhetoric — -geometry, astronomy, 
music and arithmetic) have been habitually called arts, when 
some of them have been named in that sense in which they mean 



ART 



6 59* 



not arts but sciences, " only contemplating things in the mind." 
Hence the nomenclature, history and practical organization, 
especially in Britain, of one great division of university studies: 
the division of " arts," with its " faculty," its examinations, and 
its degrees. 

In the German language the words for Art and Science have in 
general been loosely interchanged. The etymology of the word 
for Art secured a long continuance for this ambiguity. Kunst 
was employed indiscriminately in both the senses of the primitive 
Ich kann, to signify what I know, or Science, and what I can do, 
or Art. It was not till the end of the 1 7th century that a separate 
word for Science, the modern Wissenschaft, came into use. 
On the other hand, the Greek word rkxvn, with its distinct 
suggestion of the root signification to make or get, acted probably 
as a safeguard against this tendency. The distinction between 
rexvy, Art or practice, and entrriifiri, knowledge or Science, is 
observed, though not systematically, in Greek philosophy. But 
for our present purpose, that of making clear the true relation 
between the one conception and the other, further quotation is 
rendered superfluous by the discussion the subject has received 
at the hands of the modern writer already quoted. Between Art, 
of which we practise the rules, and Science, of which we entertain 
the doctrines, J. S. Mill establishes the difference in the simplest 
shape, by pointing out that one grammatical mood is proper for 
the conclusions of Science, and another for those of Art. Science 
enunciates her conclusions in the indicative mood, whereas 
" the imperative is the characteristic of Art, as distinguished 
from Science." And as Art utters her conclusions in her own 
form, so she supplies the substance of her own major premise. 

" Every art has one first principle, or general major premise, not 
borrowed from science, that which enunciates the object aimed at, 
and affirms it to be a desirable object. The builder's art assumes 
that it is desirable to have buildings; architecture (as one of the 
fine arts) that it is desirable to have them beautiful and imposing. 
The hygienic and medical arts assume, the one that the preservation 
of health, the other that the cure of disease, are fitting and desirable 
ends. These are not propositions of science. Propositions of science 
assert a matter of fact — an existence, a co-existence, a succession, 
or a resemblance. The propositions now spoken of do not assert 
that anything is, but enjoin or recommend that something should 
be. They are a class by themselves. A proposition of which the 
predicate is expressed by the words ought or should be is generically 
different from one which is expressed by is or will be." 

And the logical relation of Art and Science, in other words, 
the manner of framing the intermediate member between the 
general major premise of Art and its imperative conclusion, is 
thus defined: — 

" The Art [in any given case] proposes to itself an end to be 
attained, defines the end, and hands it over to the Science. The 
Science receives it, considers it as a phenomenon or effect to be 
studied, and having investigated its causes and conditions, sends 
it back to Art with a theorem of the causes and combinations by 
which it could be produced. Art then examines these combinations 
of circumstances, and according as any of them are or are not in 
human power, pronounces the end attainable or not. The only one 
of the premises, therefore, which Art supplies, is the original major 
premise, which asserts that the attainment of the given end is 
desirable. Science, then, lends to Art the proposition (obtained by 
a series of inductions or deductions) that the performance of certain 
actions will attain the end. From these premises Art concludes that 
the performance of these actions is desirable, and finding it also 
practicable, converts the theorem into a rule or precept. . . . The 
grounds, then, of every rule of Art are to be found in the theorems 
of Science. An Art, or a body of Art, consists of the rules, together 
with as much of the speculative propositions as comprises the justifi- 
cation of these rules. The complete Art of any matter includes a 
selection of such a portion from the Science as is necessary to show 
on what conditions the effects, which the Art aims at producing, 
depend. And Art in general consists of the truths of Science arranged 
in the most convenient order for practice, instead of the order which 
is most convenient for thought. Science groups and arranges its 
truths so as to enable us to take in at one view as much as possible 
of the general order of the universe. Art, though it must assume the 
same general laws, follows them only into such of their detailed 
consequences as have led to the formation of rules of conduct, and 
brings together from parts of the field of Science most remote from 
one another, the truths relating to the production of the different and 
heterogeneous causes necessary to each effect which the exigencies 
of practical life require to be produced." — (Mill's Logic, vol. ii. pp. 
542-549)- 



The whole discussion may be summed up thus. Science 
consists in knowing, Art consists in doing. What I must do in 
order to know, is Art subservient to Science : what I must know 
in order to do, is Science subservient to Art. 

Art, then, is defined by two broad distinctions: first, its 
popular distinction from Nature; and next, its practical and 
theoretic distinction from Science. Both of these distinctions 
are observed in the terms of our definition given above. Within 
the proper limits of this definition, the conception of Art, and 
the use of the word for it, have undergone sundry variations. 
These variations correspond to certain vicissitudes or develop- 
ments in the order of historical facts and in society. The 
requirements of society, stimulating the ingenuity of its individual 
members, have led to the invention of arts and groups of arts, 
constantly progressing, with the progress of civilization, in 
number, in complexity, and in resource. The religious imagina- 
tion of early societies, who find themselves in possession of such 
an art or group of arts, forgets the history of the invention, and 
assigns it to the inspiration or special grace of some god or hero. 
So the Greeks assigned the arts of agriculture to Triptolemus, 
those of spinning and navigation to Athena, and of music to 
Apollo. At one stage of civilization one art or group of arts is 
held in higher esteem, another at another. In societies, like most 
of those of the ancient world, where slaves were employed in 
domestic service, and upon the handicrafts supplying the 
immediate utilities of life — food, shelter and clothing-^— these 
constituted a group of servile arts. The arts of husbandry or 
agriculture, on the other hand, have alternately been regarded 
as servile and as honourable according as their exercise has been 
in the hands of a subject class, as under feudal institutions, or, 
as under the Roman republic, of free cultivators. Under feudal 
institutions, or in a society in a state of permanent war, the allied 
arts of war and of government have been held the only honourable 
class. In commercial states, like the republics of Italy, the arts 
of gain, or of production (other than agricultural) and distribution, 
have made good their title to equal estimation and greater power 
beside the art of captains. But among peaceful arts, industries 
or trades, some have always been held to be of higher and others 
of lower rank; the higher rank being assigned to those that 
required larger queries, higher training, or more thoughtful
conduct, and yielded ampler returns — the lower rank to those 
which called for simple manual exercise, especially if such 
exercise was of a disagreeable or degrading kind. In the cities 
of Italy, where both commerce and manufactures were for the 
first time organized on a considerable scale, the name arte, Art, 
was retained to designate the gilds or corporations by which the 
several industries were exercised; and, according to the nature 
of the industry, the art was classed as higher or lower {maggiore 
and minor e). "i 

The arts of which we have hitherto spoken have arisen from 
positive requirements, and supply what are strictly utilities, in 
societies; not excluding the art of war, at least so far as concerns 
one-half of war, the defensive half. But war continued to be 
an honourable pursuit, because it was a pursuit associated 
with birth, power and wealth, as well as with the virtue of 
courage, in cases where it had no longer the plea of utility, but 
was purely aggressive or predatory; and the arts of the chase 
have stood in this respect in an analogous position to those 
of war. 

There are other arts which have not had their origin in positive 
practical needs, but have been practised from the first for 
pleasure or amusement. The most primitive human beings of 
whom we have any knowledge, the cave-dwellers of the palaeo- 
lithic period, had not only the useful art of chipping stones into 
spear-heads, knife-heads and arrow-heads, and making shafts 
or handles of these implements out of bone; they had also the 
ornamental art of scratching upon the bone handle the outlines 
of the animals they saw — mammoth, rhinoceros or reindeer — or 
of carving such a handle into a rude resemblance of one of these 
animals. Here we have a skill exercised, in the first case, for pure 
fancy or pleasure, and in the second, for adding an element of 
fancy or pleasure to an element of utility. Here, therefore, is the 



66o 



ARTA— ARTABANUS 



germ of all those arts which produce imitations of natural objects 
for purposes of entertainment or delight, as painting, sculpture, 
and their subordinates; and of all those which fashion useful 
objects in one way rather than another because the one way gives 
pleasure and the other does not, as architecture and the subordi- 
nate decorative arts of furniture, pottery and the rest. Arts that 
work in a kindred way with different materials are those of 
dancing and music. Dancing works with the physical movements 
of human beings. Music works with sound. Between that 
imitative and plastic group, and the group of these which only 
produce motion or sound and pass away, there is the inter- 
mediate group of eloquence and the drama, which deal with the 
expression of human feeling in spoken words and acted gestures. 
There is also the comprehensive art of poetry, which works with 
the material of written words, and can ideally represent the 
whole material of human life and experience. Of all these arts 
the end is not use but pleasure, or pleasure before use, or at least 
pleasure and use conjointly. In modern language, there has 
grown up a usage which has put them into a class by themselves 
under the name of the Fine Arts, as distinguished from the 
Useful or Mechanical Arts. (See Aesthetics and Fine Arts.) 
Nay more, to them alone is often appropriated the use of the 
generic word Art, as if they and they only were the arts Kar't^oxV"- 
And further yet, custom has reduced the number which the 
class-word is meant to include. When Art and the works of Art 
are now currently spoken of in this sense, not even music or 
poetry is frequently denoted, but only architecture, sculpture 
and painting by themselves, or with their subordinate and 
decorative branches. In correspondence with this usage, 
another usage has removed from the class of arts, and put into a 
contrasted class cf manufactures, a large number of industries 
and their products, to which the generic term Art, according 
to our definition, properly applies. The definition covers the 
mechanical arts, which can be efficiently exercised by mere 
trained habit, rote or calculation, just as well as the fine arts, 
which have to be exercised by a higher order of powers. But 
the word Art, becoming appropriated to the fine arts, has been 
treated as if it necessarily carried along with it, and as if works 
to be called works of art must necessarily possess, the attributes 
of free individual skill and invention, expressing themselves in 
ever new combinations of pleasurable contrivance, and seeking 
perfection not as a means towards some ulterior practical end 
but as an ideal end in itself. (S. C.) 

ARTA (Narda, i.e. h> "ApSa, or Zarla, i.e. eis "Apra), a town of 
Greece, in the province of Arta, 59 m. N.N.W. of Mesolonghi. 
Pop. about 7000. It is built on the site of the ancient Ambracia 
(g.v.), its present designation being derived from a corruption 
of the name of the river Arachthus (Arta) on which it stands. 
This enters the Gulf of Arta some distance south of the town. 
The river forms the frontier between Greece and Turkey, and is 
crossed by a picturesque bridge, which is neutral ground. There 
are a few remains of old cyclopean walls. The town contains 
also a Byzantine castle, built on the lofty site of the ancient 
citadel; a palace belonging to the Greek metropolitan; a number 
of mosques, synagogues and churches, the most remarkable 
being the church of the Virgin of Consolation, founded in 819. 
The streets of the town were widened and improved in 1869. 
Manufacture of woollens, cottons, Russia leather and em- 
broidery is carried on, and there is trade in cattle, wine, tobacco, 
hemp, hides and grain. Much of the neighbouring plain is very 
fertile, and the town is surrounded with gardens and orchards, 
in which orange, lemon and citron come to great perfection. 
In 1083 Arta was taken by Bohemund of Tarentum; in 1449 
by the Turks; in 1688 by the Venetians. In 1797 it was held 
by the French, but in the following year, 1798, Ah Pasha of 
Iannina captured it. During the Greek War of Independence 
it suffered severely, and was the scene of several conflicts, in 
which the ultimate success was with the Turks. An insurrec- 
tion in 1854 was at once repressed. It was ceded to Greece 
in 1 88 1. In the Greco-Turkish War of 1897 the Greeks 
gained some temporary successes at Arta during April and 
May. 



ARTA, GULF OF (anc. Sinus Ambracius), an inlet of the 
Ionian Sea, 25 m. long and 10 broad, most of the northern shores 
of which belong to Turkey, the southern and eastern to Greece. 
Its only important affluent, besides the Arta, is the Luro (anc. 
Charadra), also from the north. The gulf abounds with mullets, 
soles and eels. Around its shores are numerous ruins of ancient 
cities: Actium at the entrance, where the famous battle was 
fought in 31 B.C.; Nicopolis, Argos, Limnaea and Olpae; 
and several flourishing towns, such as Preveza, Arta (anc. 
Ambracia), Karavasara or Karbasaras, and Vonitza. 

The river Arta (anc. Arachthus or Aratthus, in Livy xxxviii. 
3, Aretho) is the chief river of Epirus, and is said to have been 
navigable in ancient times as far as Ambracia. Below this town 
it flows through a marshy plain, consisting mainly of its own 
alluvium; its upper course is through the territory of the 
Molossians; its total length is about 80 m. 

ARTABANUS, the name of a number of Persian princes, 
soldiers and administrators. The most important are the 
following : — 

1. Brother of Darius I., and, according to Herodotus, the 
trusted adviser of his nephew Xerxes. Herodotus makes him a 
principal figure in epic dialogues: he warns Darius not to attack 
the Scythians (iv. 83; cf. also iv. 143), and predicts to Xerxes 
his defeat by the Greeks (vii. 10 ff., 46 ff.) ; Xerxes sent him home 
to govern the empire during the campaign (vii. 52, 53). 

2. Vizier of Xerxes (Ctesias, Pers. 20), whom he murdered 
in 465 B.C. According to Aristotle, Pol. v. 13 n b, he had previ- 
ously killed Xerxes' son Darius, and was afraid that the father 
would avenge him; according to Ctesias, Pers. 29, Justin iii. 1, 
Diod. xi. 69, he killed Xerxes first and then pretended that 
Darius had murdered him, and instigated his brother Artaxerxes 
to avenge the parricide. At all events, during the first months 
of the reign of Artaxerxes I., he was the ruling power in the state 
(therefore the chronographers wrongly reckon him as king, 
with a reign of seven months), until Artaxerxes, having learned 
the truth about the murder of his father and his brother, 
overwhelmed and killed Artabanus and his sons in open fight. 

3. A satrap of Bactria, who revolted against Artaxerxes I., 
but was defeated in two battles (Ctes. Pers. 31). 

The name was borne also by four Parthian kings. The Parthian 
king Arsaces, who was attacked by Antiochus III., in 209, has been 
called Artabanus by some modern authors without any reason. 

4. Artabanus I., successor of his nephew Phraates II. about 
127 B.C., perished in a battle against the Tochari, a Mongolian 
tribe, which had invaded the east of Iran (Justin xli. 2). He is 
perhaps identical with the Artabanus mentioned in Trogus, 
Prol. xlii. 

5. Artabanus II. c. a.d. 10-40, son of an Arsacid princess 
(Tac. Ann. vi. 48), lived in the East among the Dahan nomads. 
He was raised to the throne by those Parthian grandees who 
would not acknowledge Vonones I., whom Augustus had sent 
from Rome (where he lived as hostage) as successor of his father 
Phraates IV. The war between the two pretenders was long 
and doubtful; on a coin Vonones mentions a victory over 
Artabanus. At last Artabanus defeated his rival completely 
and occupied Ctesiphon; Vonones fled to Armenia, where he 
was acknowledged as king, under the protection of the Romans. 
But when Artabanus invaded Armenia, Vonones fled to Syria, 
and the emperor Tiberius thought it prudent to support him no 
longer. Germanicus, whom he sent to the East, concluded a 
treaty with Artabanus, in which he was recognized as king and 
friend of the Romans. Armenia was given (a.d. 18) to Zeno, 
the son of the king of Pontus (Tac. Ann. ii. 3 f., 58; Joseph. 
Ant. 18. 24). 

Artabanus II., like all Parthian princes, was much troubled 
by the opposition of the grandees. He is said to have been very 
cruel in consequence of his education among the Dahan bar- 
barians (Tac. Ann. vi. 41). To strengthen his power he killed all 
the Arsacid princes whom he could reach (Tac. Ann. vi. 31). 
Rebellions of the subject nations may have occurred also. We 
learn that he intervened in the Greek city Seleucia in favour of 
the oligarchs (Tac. Ann. vi. 48), and that two Jewish brigands 



ART AND PART— ARTAXERXES 



661 



maintained themselves for years in Neerda in the swamps of 
Babylonia, and were acknowledged as dynasts by Artabanus 
(Jos. Ant. 18. 9). In a.d. 35 he tried anew to conquer Armenia, 
and to establish his son Arsaces as king there. A war with Rome 
seemed inevitable. But that party among the Parthian magnates 
which was hostile to Artabanus applied to Tiberius for a king of 
the race of Phraates. Tiberius sent Phraates's grandson, Tiri- 
dates III., and ordered L. Vitellius (the father of the emperor) 
to restore the Roman authority in the East. By very dexterous 
military and diplomatic queries Vitellius succeeded com-
pletely. Artabanus was deserted by his followers and fled to 
the East. Tiridates, who was proclaimed king, could no longer 
maintain himself, because he appeared to be a vassal of the 
Romans; Artabanus returned from Hyrcania with a strong 
army of Scythian (Dahan) auxiliaries, and was again acknow- 
ledged by the Parthians. Tiridates left Seleucia and fled to 
Syria. But Artabanus was not strong enough for a war with 
Rome; he therefore concluded a treaty with Vitellius, in which 
he gave up all further pretensions (a.d. 37). A short time after- 
wards Artabanus was deposed again, and a certain Cinnamus 
was proclaimed king. Artabanus took refuge with his vassal, the 
king Izates of Adiabene; and Izates by negotiations and the 
promise of a complete pardon induced the Parthians to restore 
Artabanus once more to the throne (Jos. Ant. 20. 3). Shortly 
afterwards Artabanus died, and was succeeded by his son, 
Vardanes, whose reign was still more turbulent than that of his 
father. 

6. Artabanus III. reigned a short time in a.d. 80 (on a coin 
of this year he calls himself Arsaces Artabanus) and the following 
years, and supported a pretender who rose in Asia Minor under 
the name of Nero (Zonaras xi. 18), but could not maintain himself 
against Pacorus II. 

7. Artabanus IV., the last Parthian king, younger son of 
Vologaeses IV., who died a.d. 209. He rebelled against his 
brother Vologaeses V. (Dio Cass. vii. 12), and soon obtained the 
upper 'hand, although Vologaeses V. maintained himself in a 
part of Babylonia till about a.d. 222. The emperor Caracalla, 
wishing to make use of this civil war for a conquest of the 
East in imitation of his idol, Alexander the Great, attacked the 
Parthians in 216. He crossed the Tigris, destroyed the towns 
and spoiled the tombs of Arbela; but when Artabanus advanced 
at the head of an army, he retired to Carrhae. There he was 
murdered by Macrinus in April 217. Macrinus was defeated at 
Nisibis and concluded a peace with Artabanus, in which he gave 
up all the Roman conquests, restored the booty, and paid a 
heavy contribution to the Parthians (Dio Cass, lxxviii. 26 f.) . But 
at the same time, the Persian dynast Ardashir (q.v.) had already 
begun his conquests in Persia and Carmania. When Artabanus 
tried to subdue him his troops were defeated. The war lasted 
several years; at last Artabanus himself was vanquished and 
killed (a.d. 226), and the rule of the Arsacids came to an end. 

See further Persia : History, § ancient, and works there quoted. 

(Ed. M.) 

ART AND PART, a term used in Scots law to denote the 
aiding or abetting in ti/e perpetration of a crime, — -the being an 
accessory before or at the perpetration of the crime. There is no 
such offence recognized in Scotland as that of being an accessory 
after the fact. 

ARTAPHERNES, more correctly Artaphrenes, brother of 
Darius Hystaspis, and satrap of Sardis. It was he who received 
the embassy from Athens sent probably by Cleisthenes (q.v.) in 
507 B.C., and subsequently warned the Athenians to receive back 
the " tyrant " Hippias. Subsequently he took an important 
part in suppressing the Ionian revolt (see Ionia, Aristagoras, 
HiSTiAEirs),and after the war compelled the cities to make agree- 
ments by which all differences were to be settled by reference. He 
also measured out their territories in parasangs and assessed their 
tributes accordingly (Herod, vi. 42). In 492 he was superseded 
in his satrapy by Mardonius (Herodotus v. 25, 30-32, 35, &c; 
Diod. Sic. x. 25). His son, of the same name, was appointed 
(490), together with Datis, to take command of the expedition 
sent by Darius to punish Athens and Eretria for their share in the 



Ionian revolt. After the defeat of Marathon he returned to Asia. 
In the expedition of Xerxes, ten years later, he was in command 
of the Lydians and Mysians (Herod, vi. 94, 119; vii. ^4, 
Aesch. Persae, 21). 

Aeschylus in his list of Persian kings (Persae, 775 ff.), which is 
quite unhistorical, mentions two kings with the name Arta- 
phrenes, who may have been developed out of these two Persian 
commanders. (Ed. M.) 

ARTAXERXES, a name representing Pers. Artakhshatra, 
" he whose empire is well-fitted " or "perfected", Heb. Artakh- 
shasta, Bab. Artakshalsu, Susian Irtakshashsha (and variants), 
Gr. 'Apra^ep^ris, 'Aprofepijjjs, and in an inscription of Tralles 
(Dittenberger, Sylloge, 573) 'Apra^crtn/s; Herodotus (vi. 98) 
gives the translation fikyas apyios, and considers the name as 
a compound of Xerxes, showing thereby that he knew nothing 
of the Persian language; the later Persian form is Ardashir, 
which occurs in the form Artaxias (Artaxes) as the name of some 
kings of Armenia. It was borne by three kings of the Achae- 
menian dynasty of ancient Persia; though, so long as its 
meaning was understood, it can have been adopted by the kings 
only after their accession to the throne. 

1. Artaxerxes I., surnamed Macrocheir, Longimanus, "Long- 
hand," because his right hand was longer than his left (Plut. 
Artax.i.). He was the younger son of Xerxes, and was raised to 
the throne in 465 by the vizier Artabanus, the murderer of his 
father. After a few months he became aware of the crimes 
of the vizier, and slew him and his sons in a hand-to-hand fight in 
the palace. His reign was, on the whole, peaceful; the empire 
had reached a period of stagnation. Plutarch (Artax. i.) says 
that he was famous for his mild and magnanimous character, 
Nepos (de Reg. i.) that he was exceedingly beautiful and valiant. 
From the authentic report of his cup-bearer Nehemiah we see 
that he was a kind, good-natured, but rather weak monarch, 
and he was undoubtedly much under the baneful influence of 
his mother Amestris (for whose mischievous character cf. Herod, 
ix. 109 ff.) and his sister and wife Amytis. The peacefulness of 
his rule was interrupted by several insurrections. At the very 
beginning the satrap Artabanus raised a rebellion in Bactria, but 
was defeated in two battles. More dangerous was the rebellion of 
Egypt under Inarus (Inaros), which was put down by Megabyzus 
only after a long struggle against the Egyptians and the 
Athenians' (460-4 54). Out of it sprang the rebellion of Megabyzus, 
who was greatly exasperated because, though he had persuaded 
Inarus to surrender by promising that his life would be spared, 
Artaxerxes, yielding to the entreaties of his wife Amytis, who 
wanted to take revenge on Inarus for the death of her brother 
Achaemenes, the satrap of Egypt, had surrendered him to her for 
execution. 

In spite of his weakness, Artaxerxes I. was not unsuccessful in 
his polity. In 448 the war with Athens was terminated by the 
treaty concluded by Callias (but see Callias and Cimon), by 
which the Athenians left Cyprus and Egypt to the Persians, 
while Persia gave up nothing of her rights, but promised not to 
make use of them against the Greek cities on the Asiatic coast, 
which had gained their liberty (Ed. Meyer, Forschungen zur alt. 
Gesch. ii. 71 ff.). In the Samian and the Peloponnesian wars, 
Artaxerxes remained neutral, in spite of the attempts made by 
both Sparta and Athens to gain his alliance. 

During the reign of Artaxerxes I. the Jewish religion was 
definitely established and sanctioned by law in Jerusalem, on the 
basis of a firman granted by the king to the Babylonian priest 
Ezra in his seventh year, 458 B.C., and the appointment of his 
cup-bearer Nehemiah as governor of Judaea in his twentieth 
year, 445 B.C. The attempts which have been made to deny the 
authenticity of those parts of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah 
which contain an account of these two men, taken from their own 
memoirs, or to place them in the reign of Artaxerxes II., are not 
convincing (cf. Ed. Meyer, Die Entstehung des Judenlums, 1896; 
see further Jews, §§ 19, 21, 22; Ezra and Nehemiah). 

Artaxerxes I. died in December 425, or January 424 (Thuc. iv. 
50) . To his reign must belong the famous quadrilingual alabaster 
vases from Egypt (on which his name is written in Persian, 



66 2 



ARTAXERXES 



Susian and Babylonian cuneiform characters and in hiero- 
glyphics), for Artaxerxes II. and III. did not possess Egypt. A 
great many tablets, dated from his reign, have been found in 
Nippur (published by H. von Hilprecht and Clay, The Babylonian 
Expedition of the University of Pennsylvania, series A, vol. ix.), 
and a few others at other places in Babylonia. Inscriptions of the 
king himself are not extant; his grandson mentions his buildings 
in Susa. For the suggested identification of Artaxerxes I. with 
the Biblical Ahasuerus, see Ahasuerus. 

2. Artaxerxes II., surnamed Mnemon, the eldest son of 
Darius II., whom he succeeded in the spring of 404. According 
to Ctesias (Pers. 57; Plut. Artax. i.) he was formerly called 
Arsaces or Arsikas, whereas Dinon (Plut. Artax. i.) calls him 
Oarses. This is corroborated by a Babylonian tablet with 
observations of the moon (Brit. Mus. Sp. ii. 749; Zeitsch. f. 
Assyriologie, vii. 223), which is dated from the 26th year of 
" Arshu, who is Artakshatsu," i.e. 379 B.C. (cp. Ed. Meyer, 
Forschungen zur alien Geschichte, ii. 466 ff .) . When Artaxerxes II. 
mounted the throne, the power of Athens had been broken by 
Lysander, and the Greek towns in Asia were again subjects 
of the Persian empire. But his whole reign is a time of con- 
tinuous decay; the original force of the Persians had been 
exhausted in luxury and intrigues, and the king, though personally 
brave and good-natured, was quite dependent upon his favourites 
and his harem, and especially upon his mother Parysatis. In the 
beginning of his reign falls the rebellion of his brother Cyrus, who 
was secretly favoured by Parysatis and by Sparta. Although 
Cyrus was defeated at Cunaxa, this rebellion was disastrous 
inasmuch as it opened to the Greeks the way into the interior 
of the empire, and demonstrated that no oriental force was 
able to withstand a band of well-trained Greek soldiers. Sub- 
sequently Greek mercenaries became indispensable not only 
to the king but also to the satraps, who thereby gained the 
means for attempting successful rebellions, into which they were 
provoked by the weakness of the king, and by the continuous 
intrigues between the Persian magnates. The reign is, therefore, 
a continuous succession of rebellions. Egypt soon revolted 
anew and could not be subdued again. When in 399 war broke 
out between Sparta and Persia, the Persian troops in Asia Minor 
were quite unable to resist the Spartan armies. The active and 
energetic Persian general Pharnabazus succeeded in creating 
a fleet by the help of Evagoras, king of Salamis in Cyprus, and 
the Athenian commander Conon, and destroyed the Spartan 
fleet at Cnidus (August 394). This victory enabled the Greek 
allies of Persia (Thebes, Athens, Argos, Corinth) to carry on the 
Corinthian war against Sparta, and the Spartans had to give 
up the war in Asia Minor. But it soon became evident that the 
only gainers by the war were the Athenians, who in 389, under 
Thrasybulus, tried to found their old empire anew (see Delian 
League). At the same time Evagoras attempted to conquer 
the whole of Cyprus, and was soon in open rebellion. The 
consequence was that, when in 388 the Spartan admiral Antal- 
cidas (q.v.) came to Susa, the king was induced to conclude a 
peace with Sparta by which Asia fell to him and European 
Greece to Sparta. After the peace, Evagoras was attacked. 
He lost his conquests, but had to be recognized as independent 
king of Salamis (380 B.C.). Two expeditions against Egypt 
(383-383 and 374-372) ended in complete failure. At the same 
period there were continuous rebellions in Asia Minor; Pisidia, 
Paphlagonia, Bithynia and Lycia, threw off the Persian 
yoke and Hecatomnus, the satrap of Caria, obtained an almost 
independent position. Similar wars were going on against the 
mountain tribes of Armenia and Iran, especially against the 
Cadusians on the Caspian Sea. In this war Artaxerxes is said 
to have distinguished himself personally (380 B.C.), but got into 
such difficulties in the wild country that he was glad when 
Tiribazus succeeded in concluding a peace with the Cadusian 
chieftains. 

By the peace of Antalcidas the Persian supremacy was pro- 
claimed over Greece; and in the following wars all parties, 
Spartans, Athenians, Thebans, Argives continually applied 
to Persia for a decision in their favour. After the battle of 



Leuctra, when the power of Thebes was founded by Epaminondas, 
Pelopidas went to Susa (367) and restored the old alliance 
between Persia and Thebes. The Persian supremacy, however, 
was not based upon the power of the empire, but only on the 
discord of the Greeks. Shortly after the edict by which the 
king had proclaimed his alliance with Thebes, and the conditions 
of the general peace .which he was going to impose upon Greece, 
his weakness became evident, for since 366 all the satraps of Asia 
Minor (Datames, Ariobarzanes, Mausolus, Orontes, Artabazus) 
were in rebellion again, in close alliance with Athens, Sparta 
and Egypt. The king could do little against them; even 
Autophradates, satrap of Lydia, who had remained faithful, 
was forced for some time to unite himself with the rebels. But 
every one of the allies mistrusted all the others; and the sole 
object of every satrap was to improve his condition and his 
personal power, and to make a favourable peace with the king, 
for which his neighbours and former allies had to pay the costs. 
The rebellion was at last put down by a series of treacheries 
and perfidious negotiations. Some of the rebels retained their 
provinces; others were punished, as opportunity offered. 
Mithradates betrayed his own father Ariobarzanes, who was 
crucified, and murdered Datames, to whom he had introduced 
himself as a faithful ally. When the long reign of Artaxerxes II. 
came to its close in the autumn of 359 the authority of the 
empire had been restored almost everywhere. 

Artaxerxes himself had done very little to obtain this result. 
In fact, in the last years of his reign he had sunk into a perfect 
dotage. All his time was spent in the pleasures of his harem, 
the intrigues of which were further complicated by his falling in 
love with and marrying his own daughter Atossa (according to the 
Persian religion a marriage between the nearest relations is no 
incest). At the same time, his sons were quarrelling about the 
succession; one of them, Ochus, induced the father by a series 
of intrigues to condemn to death three of his older brothers, 
who stood in his way. Shortly afterwards, Artaxerxes II. died. 

In this reign an important innovation took place in the Persian 
religion. Berossus (in Clemens Alex. Protrept. i. 5. 65) tells 
us that the Persians knew of no images of the gods until 
Artaxerxes II. erected images of Anaitis in Babylon, Susa, 
Ecbatana, Persepolis, Bactra, Damascus, Sardis. This statement 
is proved correct by the inscriptions; all the former kings name 
only Auramazda ( Ahuramazda) , but Artaxerxes II. in his build- 
ing inscriptions from Susa and Ecbatana invokes Ahuramazda, 
Anahita and Mithra. These two gods belonged to the old popular 
religion of the Iranians, but had until then been neglected by 
the true Zoroastrians; now they were introduced into the 
official worship much in the way in which the cult of the saints 
came into the Christian religion. About the history of Artaxerxes 
II. we are comparatively well informed from Greek sources; 
for the earlier part of his reign from Ctesias and Xenophon 
(Anabasis), for the later times from Dinon of Ephesus, the 
historian of the Persians (from whom the account of Justin is 
derived) , from Ephorus (whose account is quoted by Diodorus) 
and others. Upon these sources is based the biography of the 
king by Plutarch. 

3. Artaxerxes III. is the title adopted by Ochus, the son 
of Artaxerxes II., when he succeeded his father in 359- The 
chronographers generally retain the name Ochus, and in the 
Babylonian inscriptions he is called " Umasu, who is called 
Artakshatsu." The same form of the name (probably pro- 
nounced Uvasu) occurs in the Syrian version of the canon of 
Ptolemy by Elias of Nisibis (Amos). 

Artaxerxes III. was a cruel but an energetic ruler. To secure 
his throne he put to death almost all his relatives, but he sup- 
pressed the rebellions also. In 356 he ordered all the satraps to 
dismiss their mercenaries. Most of them obeyed; Artabazus of 
Phrygia, who tried to resist and was supported by his brothers- 
in-law, Mentor and Memnon of Rhodes, was defeated and 
fled to Philip of Macedon. Athens, whose general Chares had 
supported Artabazus, was by the threatening messages of the 
king forced to conclude peace, and to acknowledge the independ- 
ence of its rebellious allies (355 B.C.). Then the king attempted 



ARTEDI— ARTEMIS 



663 



to subjugate Egypt, but two expeditions were unsuccessful, 
and, in consequence, Sidon and the other Phoenician towns, and 
the princes of Cyprus, rebelled against Persia and defeated the 
Persian generals. After great preparations the king came in 
person, but again the attack on Egypt was repelled by the Greek 
generals of Nectanebus (346) . One or two years later Artaxerxes, 
at the head of a great army, began the siege of Sidon. The 
Sidonian king Tennes considered resistance hopeless, and 
betrayed the town to the Persian king, assisted by Mentor, who 
had been sent with Greek troops from Egypt to defend the town. 
Artaxerxes repressed the rebellion with great cruelty and 
destroyed the town. The traitor Tennes was put to death, but 
Mentor rose high in the favour of the king, and entered into a 
close alliance with the eunuch Bagoas, the king's favourite and 
vizier. They succeeded in subjecting the other rebels, and, after 
a hard fight at Pelusium, and many intrigues, conquered Egypt 
(343); Nectanebus fled to Ethiopia. Artaxerxes used his 
victory with great cruelty; he plundered the Egyptian temples 
and is said to have killed the Apis. After his return to Susa, 
Bagoas ruled the court and the upper satrapies, while Mentor 
restored the authority of the empire everywhere in the west. 
He deposed or killed many Greek dynasts, among them the 
famous Hermias of Atarneus, the protector of Aristotle, who had 
friendly relations with Philip (342 B.C.). When Philip attacked 
Perinthus and Byzantium (340), Artaxerxes sent them support, 
by which they were enabled to withstand the Macedonians; 
Philip's antagonists in Greece, Demosthenes and his party, 
hoped to get subsidies from the king, but were disappointed. 

In 338 Artaxerxes III., with his older sons, was killed by 
Bagoas, who raised his youngest son Arses to the throne. 
Artaxerxes III. is said never to have entered the country of 
Persia proper, because, being a great miser, he would not pay the 
present of a gold piece for every Persian woman, which it was 
usual to give on such occasions (Plut. Alex. 69). But we have a 
building inscription from Persepolis, which contains his name 
and genealogy, and invocations of Ahuramazda and Mithra. 

For the relations of Artaxerxes I. — III. with the Jews see Jews, 
§ § 1 9-2 1 . For bibliographical references see Persia : A ncient History. 

The name Artaxerxes was adopted by Bessus when he proclaimed 
himself king after the assassination of Darius III. It was borne by 
several dynasts of Persis, when it formed an independent kingdom in 
the time of the Parthian empire (on their coins they call themselves 
Artakhshathr; one of them is mentioned by Lucian, Macrobii, 15), 
and by three kings of the Sassanid dynasty, who are better known 
under the modern form Ardashir (q.v.). (Ed. M.) 

ARTEDI, PETER (1705-1735), Swedish naturalist, was born 
in the province of Angermania, in Sweden, on the 22nd of 
February 1705. Intending to become a clergyman, he went, in 
1724, to study theology at Upsala, but he turned his attention to 
medicine and natural history, especially ichthyology, upon the 
study of which he exercised great influence (see Ichthyology). 
In 1728 his countryman Linnaeus arrived in Upsala, and a last- 
ing friendship was formed between the two. In 1732 both 
left Upsala, Artedi for England, and Linnaeus for Lapland; 
but before parting they reciprocally bequeathed to each other 
their manuscripts and books in the event of death. He 
was accidentally drowned on the 27th of September 1735 at 
Amsterdam, where he was engaged in cataloguing the collections 
of Albert Seba, a wealthy Dutchman, who had formed what was 
perhaps the richest museum of his time. According to agree- 
ment, his manuscripts came into the hands of Linnaeus, and his 
Bibliotheca Ichthyologica and Philosophia Ichthyologica, together 
with a life of the author, were published at Leiden in the year 
1738. 

ARTEGA, a tribe of African " Arabs," said to be descendants 
of a sheik of that name who came from Hadramut in pre- 
Islamic days, settling near Tokar. The name is said to be 
" patrician," and the Artega may be regarded as the most 
ancient stock in the Suakin district. They are now an inferior 
mixed race. They were all followers of the mahdi and khalifa in 
the Sudan wars (1883-1898). 

See A ngIo-EgyptianSudan,edited byCountGleichen(London, 1905) . 

ARTEL (Russ. for " gang "), the name for the co-operative 
associations in Russia. Originally, the artels were true examples 



of productive co-operation, bodies of working-men associating 
together for the purpose of jointly undertaking some piece of 
work, and dividing the profits. This original form of artel still 
survives among the fishermen of Archangel. Artels have come, 
however, to be little more than trade gilds, with mutual respon- 
sibility. (For details see Russia.) 

ARTEMIDORUS. (1) A geographer " of Ephesus " who flour- 
ished about 100 B.C. After studying at Alexandria, he travelled 
extensively and published the results of his investigations 
in a large work on general geography (Td yecoy pa<t>oiiij,eva) in 
eleven books, much used by Strabo and others. The original 
work is lost, but we possess many small fragments and larger 
fragments of an abridgment made by Marcianus of Heracleia 
(5th century), which contains the periplus of the Euxine and 
accounts of Bithynia and Paphlagonia. (See Muller, Geographi 
Graeci Minor es; Bunbury, History of Ancient Geography; 
Stiehle, " Der Geograph Artemidoros von Ephesos," in Philo- 
logus, xi., 1856). (2) A soothsayer and interpreter of dreams, 
who flourished in the 2nd century A.D., during the reigns of 
Hadrian and the Antonines. He called himself Daldianus from 
his mother's birthplace, Daldis in Lydia, in order to make its 
name known to the world. His 'OvupoKpiTina., or interpretation 
of dreams, was said to have been written by command of Apollo 
Daldianus, whose initiated votary he was. It is in four books, 
with an appendix containing a collection of prophetic dreams 
which had been realized. The first three books, addressed to 
Cassius Maximus, a Phoenician rhetorician (perhaps identical 
with Maximus of Tyre) , treat of dreams and divination generally ; 
the fourth — with a reply to his critics — and the appendix are 
dedicated to his son, also named Artemidorus and an interpreter 
of dreams. Artemidorus boasts of the trouble expended on his 
work; he had read all the authorities on dreams, travelled 
extensively, and conversed with all who had studied the subject. 
The work is valuable as affording an insight into ancient super- 
stitions. According to Suidas, Artemidorus also wrote on augurs 
and cheiromancy, but all trace of these works is lost. (Editions: 
Reiff, 1805, Hercher, 1864; translation and notes, Krauss, 1881; 
English translation by Wood, 1644, and later editions.) 

ARTEMIS, one of the principal goddesses in Greek my thology, 
the counterpart of the Roman Diana. The suggested ety- 
mologies of the name (see O. Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie, 
ii.p. 1267, note 2), as in the case of mostof the Olympian deities, 
are unsatisfactory, and throw no light upon her significance and 
characteristics. The Homeric and later conception of Artemis, 
though by no means the original one, may be noticed first. She 
is the daughter of Zeus and Leto, twin-sister and counterpart of 
Apollo. She is said to have been born a day before him (on the 
6th of the month) and tradition assigns them different birth- 
places — Delos to Apollo, Ortygia to Artemis. But Ortygia 
(" home of quails ") applies still to Delos, and may well have 
been a synonym for that island. In its original sense it does not 
apply either to the island of Ortygia at Syracuse, or to Ortygia 
near Ephesus, which also claimed the honour of having been the 
birthplace of the goddess. Artemis is the goddess of chastity, an 
aspect of her character which gradually assumed more and more 
importance — the protectress of young men and maidens, who 
defies and contemns the power of Aphrodite. Her resemblance 
to her brother is shown in many ways. Like him, armed with 
bow and arrows, she deals death to mortals, sometimes gently 
and suddenly, especially to women, but also as a punishment 
for offences against herself or morality. With him she takes 
part in the combat with Python and with Tityus, in the slaughter 
of the children of Niobe, while alone she executes vengeance on 
Orion. Although Apollo has nothing to do with the earlier cult 
of Artemis, nor Artemis with that of Delphi, their association 
was a comparatively early one, and probably originated in Delos. 
Here the connexion of Artemis with the Hyperborean legend 
(see Apollo) is shown in the names of the maidens (Opis, 
Hecaerge) who were supposed to have brought offerings from the 
north to Delos, where they were buried. Both Opis (or Oupis) 
and Hecaerge are names of Artemis, the latter being the feminine 
of Hecaergos, an epithet of Apollo. Like her brother, she is not 



66 4 



ARTEMIS 



only a goddess who deals death, but she is also a healing and a 
purifying divinity, ov\la ("the healer," cf. Apollo Oulios), Xmj, 
Auaia (" purifier,") and awrupa, " she who saves from all evils" 
(cf. Apollo d7rorpcnra:os). Her connexion with the prophetic art 
is doubtful, although mention is made of an Artemis Sibylla. 
To her association with Apollo are certainly to be referred the 
names Delphinia and Pythia, and the titles referring to state and 
family life — irpooTarTjpta, Trarpicoris, j3ouXcaa. It probably 
accounts for her appearance as a goddess of seafarers, the 
bestower of fair weather and prosperous voyages. At Phigalia 
in Arcadia, Eurynome, represented as half woman and half fish, 
was probably another form of Artemis. To the same association 
may be traced her slight connexion with music, song and dance. 

It is in the Arcadian and Athenian rites and legends, however, 
which are certainly earlier than Homer, that the original con- 
ception of the goddess is to be found. These tend to show that 
Artemis was first and foremost a nature goddess, whose cult 
shows numerous traces of totemism. As a goddess of fertilizing 
moisture, lakes, rivers, springs, and marshy lowlands are brought 
into close connexion with her. Thus she is \t,p.va.ia, bkoiroiva 
Xip.vqs (" lady of the lake "),iXela(" of marshes "),Torap.la( u of 
rivers," especially of the Cladaus and Alpheus, whence her name 
'A\<f>tia.La). Her influence is very active in promoting the 
increase of the fruits of the field, hence she is specially a goddess 
of agriculture. She drives away the mice (cf. Apollo Smintheus) 
and slays the Aloidae, the corn spirits; she is the friend of the 
reapers, and requires her share of the first fruits. Her character 
as a harvest goddess is clearly shown in the legend of the Caly- 
donian boar, sent by her to ravage the fields out of resentment 
at not having received a harvest offering from Oeneus (see 
Meleager). As ext/iuXtos and eiuK Ai/3dwos ("presiding over 
the mill and the oven ") she extends her protection over the 
further development of the grain for the use of man. 

Artemis was naturally also a goddess of trees and vegetation. 
Near Orchomenus her wooden image stood in a large cedar-tree 
— an indication that her worship was originally that of the tree 
itself (ice5peaTis, " the cedar goddess"); at Caryae there was 
an image of Artemis KapvarLS (" the nut-tree goddess "). Two 
curious epithets in this connexion deserve notice: XvyoSicrfxa 
( "bound with withies "), derived from the legend that the 
image of Artemis Orthia was found in a thicket of withies, 
which twined round it and kept it upright (Xfryos is the agnus 
caslus, and points to Artemis in her relation to women); and 
cbra/yxopiyij ("the suspended"), probably a reference to the 
custom of hanging the mask or image of a vegetation-divinity 
on a tree to obtain fertility (Farnell, Cults of the Greek States, ii. 
p. 429; cf. the "swing" festival (alwpa) of the Greeks, and the 
oscilla of the Romans). 

The functions of the goddess extended from the vegetable to 
the animal world, to the inhabitants of the woods and mountains. 
This is clearly expressed in the cult of Artemis Laphria (possibly 
connected with Xa<pvpa, " spoils"), at whose festivals all kinds of 
animals, both wild and tame, as well as fruits, were thrown 
together on a huge wood fire. Her general name in this con- 
nexion was ayporepa (" roaming the wilds," not necessarily 
" goddess of the chase," an aspect less familiar in the older 
religion), to whom five hundred goats were offered every year 
by the Athenians as a thanksgiving in commemoration of the 
victory at Marathon. Numerous animals were sacred to her, 
and at Syracuse all kinds of wild beasts, including a lioness, 
were carried in procession in her honour. It has been observjed 
that she is rather the patroness of the wild beasts of the field 
than of the more agricultural or domestic animals (Farnell, 
Cults, ii. p. 431), although the epithet rifiepaoia ("the tamer," 
according to others, the "gentle" goddess of healing) seems to 
refer to her connexion with the latter. The bear was especially 
associated with her in Arcadia, and in her worship as Artemis 
Brauronia at Brauron in Attica. According to the legend, 
Callisto, an Arcadian nymph, became by Zeus the mother of 
Areas, the eponymous hero of the Arcadians. Zeus, to conceal 
the amour, changed Callisto into a she-bear; Hera, however, 
discovered it, and persuaded Artemis to slay Callisto, who was 



placed amongst the stars as ap/cros (" the bear "). There is ro 
doubt that Callisto is identical with Artemis; her name is an 
obvious variation of KaXXtorq, a frequent epithet of the goddess, 
to whom a temple was erected on the hill where Callisto was 
supposed to be buried. It is suggested by M. Kraus in Classical 
Review, February 1908, that Aphaea, the cult-name of Artemis 
at Aegina, is of Semitic origin and means " beautiful. " Closely 
connected with this legend is the worship of Artemis Brauronia. 
The accounts of its institution, which differ in detail, agree that 
it was intended to appease the wrath of the goddess at the killing 
of a bear. A number of young girls, between five and ten years 
of age, wearing a bear-skin (afterwards a saffron-coloured robe) 
danced a bear-dance, called apKrda, the girls themselves being 
called apKTOi. In one account, a maiden was ordered to be 
sacrificed to the bear Artemis, but a certain man who had a goat 
called it his daughter and offered it up in secret, just as at 
Munychium a fawn dressed up as a girl was sacrificed to the 
goddess. In place of the goat or fawn a bear might have been 
expected, but the choice may have been influenced by the animal 
totem of the tribe into whose hands the ritual fell. The whole is 
a reminiscence of earlier times, when the goddess herself was a 
bear, to whom human sacrifice was offered. Callisto was origin- 
ally a bear-goddess worshipped in Arcadia, identified with 
Artemis, when nothing remained of the original animal-worship 
but name and ritual. The worship of Callisto being merged in 
that of the greater divinity, she became the handmaid and 
companion of Artemis. A stone figure of a bear found on the 
Acropolis seems to point to the worship of Artemis Brauronia. 
Her death at the hands of the latter was explained by the wrath 
of the goddess — in her later aspect as goddess of chastity — at 
Callisto's amour with Zeus (see A. Lang, Myth, Ritual and 
Religion, ii.; Farnell, Cults, ii. p. 437). The custom of flogging 
youths at the altar of Artemis Orthia l at Limnaeum in Laconia, 
and the legend of Iphigeneia (q.v.), herself another form of 
Artemis, connected with Artemis Taurica of the TaUric Cher- 
sonese, are usually supposed to point to early human sacrifice 
(but see Farnell). Various explanations have been given of the 
epithet bpBla.: (1) that it refers to the primitive type of the 
" erect " wooden idol; (2) that it means " she who safely rears 
children after birth," or "heals the sick " (cf. opdios applied to 
Asclepius); (3) that it has a phallic significance (Schreiber in 
Roscher's Lexikon). Scholars differ as to whether Artemis 
Taurica is identical with Artemis Tauropolos, worshipped chiefly 
at Samos with a milder ritual, but it is more probable that 
TavpoiroXos simply means " protectress of bulls." 

The protecting influence of Artemis was extended, like that 
of Apollo, to the highest animal, man. She was especially con- 
cerned in the bringing up of the young. Boys were brought by 
their nurses to the temple of Artemis KopvdaXia ( = Kovporptupos) 
and there consecrated to her; at the Apaturia, on the day 
called Kovpeuns, boys cut off and dedicated their hair to her. 
Girls as well as boys were under her protection. Her function as 
a goddess of marriage is less certain, and the cult-titles adduced 
in support of it are hardly convincing; such are r)ye fibvij, 
interpreted as " she who leads home the bride," creXacr^opos, 
" bearer of light," that is, of torches at the marriage procession. 
On the other hand, her connexion with childbirth is clearly 
shown: in many places she is even called Eilithyia, who in the 
earlier poets was regarded as distinct from her. In one version 
of the story of her birth she is said to have been born a day before 
Apollo, in order to assist Leto at his birth; women in childbirth 
invoked her aid, and after delivery offered up their clothes or 
a lock of hair. As already noticed, in Homer Artemis appears 
as a goddess of death; closely akin to this is the conception 
of her as a goddess of war. As such she is vucri<p6pos (" bringer 
of victory ") ; the title koXcuvis is possibly connected with 

1 The site of the temple of Artemis Orthia was excavated by the 
British School of Archaeology at Athens (see Annual, 1906). The 
flogging (foanaoTlyoxjis) is explained by R. C. Bosanquet as a late 
institution of decadent Sparta, an exaggeration of an old ritual 
practice of whipping away boys who tried to steal cheeses from the 
altar (see The Year's Work in Classical Studies, ed. W. H. D. Rouse, 
1907). 



ARTEMISIA 



665 



Ko\tbs '"sword-sheath"); and \a<f>pia (see above) may refer to 
the spoils of war as well as the chase. 

The idea of Artemis as a virgin goddess, the " queen and 
huntress, chaste and fair," which obtained great prominence in 
early times, and seems inconsistent with her association with 
childbirth, is generally explained as due to her connexion with 
Apollo, but it is suggested by Farnell that irapdkvos originally 
meant " unmarried," and that " "Aprefiis irapdkvos may have been 
originally the goddess of a people who had not yet the advanced 
Hellenic institutions of settled marriage . . . and when society 
developed the later family system the goddess remained celibate, 
though not opposed to childbirth." 

Another view of the original character of Artemis, which has 
found much support in modern times, is that she was a moon- 
goddess. But there is no trace of Artemis as such in the epic 
period, and the Homeric hymn knows nothing of her identifica- 
tion with Selene. The attribute of the torch will apply equally 
well to the goddess of the chase, and epithets such as (jxixrcfropos, 
cre\aa(j>6pos, aidowla, although applicable, are by no means 
convincing. The idea dates from the 5th century, and was due 
to her connexion with Hecate and Apollo. When the latter 
came to be identified by philosophical speculation with the sun- 
god Helios, it was natural that his sister and counterpart should 
be identified with the moon-goddess Selene. But she is nowhere 
recognized in cult as such (see Gruppe, Griechische Mythologie, 
ii. p. 1297, note 2). 

It has been mentioned that Callisto, Iphigeneia, Eilithyia, are 
only Artemis under different names; to these may be added 
Adrasteia, Atalanta, Helen, Leto and others (see Wernicke in 
Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie) . 

Again, various non-Hellenic divinities were identified with 
Artemis, and their cult gradually amalgamated with hers. The 
most important of these was Artemis of Ephesus, whose seat 
was in the marshy valley of the Caystrus. Like the Greek 
Artemis, she was essentially a nature goddess, the great foster- 
mother of the vegetable and animal kingdom. A number of 
officials were engaged in the performance of her temple service. 
Her eunuch priests, /xeyaffv^oi (a name which points to a Persian 
origin), were under the control of a high priest called Essen 
(according to others, there was a body of priests called Essenes). 
There were also three classes of priestesses, Mellierae, Hierae, 
Parierae; there is no evidence that they were called Melissae 
(" bees "), although the bee is a frequent symbol on the coins of 
the city. Her chief festival, Ephesia or Artemisia, was held in 
the spring, at which games and various contests took place after 
the Greek fashion, although the ritual continued to be of a 
modified oriental, orgiastic type. This goddess is closely con- 
nected with the Amazons (?.».), who are said to have built her 
temple and set up her image in the trunk of a tree. The Greeks 
of Ephesus identified her with their own Artemis, and claimed 
that her birthplace Ortygia was near Ephesus, not in Delos. 
She has much in common with the oriental prototype of Aphro- 
dite, and the Cappadocian goddess Ma, another form of Cybele. 
The usual figure of the Ephesian Artemis, which was said in the 
first instance to have fallen from heaven, is in the form of a female 
with many breasts, the symbol of productivity or a token of her 
function as the all-nourishing mother. From the waist to the 
feet her image resembles a pillar, narrowing downwards and 
sculptured all round with rows of animals (lions, rams and bulls). 

Mention may also be made of the following non-Hellenic 
representatives of Artemis. Leucophryne (or Leucophrys), 
whose worship was brought by emigrants from Magnesia in 
Thessaly to Magnesia on the Maeander, was a nature god- 
dess, and her representation on coins exactly resembles that of 
the Ephesian Artemis. Her cult, however, from the little that 
is known of it appears to have been more Hellenic. There was an 
altar and temple of Artemis Pergaea at Perga in Pamphylia, 
where a yearly festival was held in her honour. As in the case of 
Cybele, mendicant priests were attached to her service. Similar 
figures were Artemis Cologne, worshipped at Lake Coloe near 
Sardis; Artemis Cordax, celebrated in wanton dances on Mount 
Sipylus; the Persian Artemis, identical with Anaitis Bendis, 



was a Thracian goddess of war and the chase, whose cult was 
introduced into Attica in the middle of the 5th century B.C. by 
Thracian metics. At her festival called Bendidea, held at the 
Peiraeus, there was a procession of Thracians who were settled in 
the district, and a torch-race on horseback. (For Britomartis 
see separate article.) 

Among the chief attributes of Artemis are: the hind, specially 
regarded as her sacred animal; the bear, the boar and the goat; 
the zebu (Artemis Leucophrys); the lion, one of her oldest 
animal symbols; bow and arrows, as goddess of the chase and 
death; a mural crown, as the protectress of cities; the torch, 
originally an attribute of the goddess of the chase or marriage, 
but, like the crescent (originally an attribute of the Asiatic 
nature goddesses), transferred to Artemis, when she came to be 
regarded as a moon-goddess. The Greek Artemis was usually 
represented as a huntress with bow and quiver, or torch in her 
hand, in face very like Apollo, her drapery flowing to her feet, or, 
more frequently, girt high for speed. She is accompanied often 
by a deer or a dog. Perhaps the finest existing statue of her is 
the Diana of Versailles from Hadrian's Villa (now in the Louvre), 
in which she wears a short tunic drawn in at the waist and sandals 
on her feet; her hair is bound up into a knot at the back of her 
head, with a band over the forehead. With her left hand she 
holds a stag, while drawing an arrow from the quiver on her 
shoulder with the right. Another famous statue is one from 
Gabii, in which she is finishing her toilet and fastening the 
chlamys over her tunic. In older times her figure is fuller and 
stronger, and the clothing more complete; certain statues 
discovered at Delos, imitated from wooden models (£6ara), are 
supposed to represent Artemis; they are described as stiff and 
rigid, the limbs as it were glued to the body without life or 
movement, garments closely fitting, the folds of which fall in 
symmetrical parallel lines. As a goddess of the moon she wears a 
long robe, carries a torch, and her head is surmounted by a 
crescent. On the coins of Arcadia, Aetolia, Crete and Sicily, are 
to be seen varied and beautiful representations of her head as 
conceived by the Greek artists in the best times. 

Authorities. — Articles in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie; 
Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie, and Daremberg and Saglio's 
Dictionnaire des antiquites (s.v. Diana, with well-arranged biblio- 
graphy) ; L. Preller, Griechische Mythologie (4th ed. by C. Robert) ; 
L. R. Farnell, The Cults of the Greek States, ii. (1896) ; O. Gruppe, 
Griechische Mythologie und Religions-Geschichte, ii. (1906) ; A. Claus, 
De Dianae antiquissima apud Graecos natura (Breslau, 1880). In 
the article Greek Art, fig. n (a gold ornament from Camirus) 
represents the Oriental goddess identified by the Greeks with 
Artemis. 

For the Roman goddess identified with Artemis see Diana. 

(J- H. F.) 

ARTEMISIA, daughter of Lygdamis, was queen of Hali- 
carnassus and Cos about 480 B.C. Being a dependent of Persia, 
she took part in person in the expedition of Xerxes against the 
Greeks, and fitted out five ships, with which she distinguished 
herself in the sea-fight near Salamis (480). When closely 
pursued by the Athenians she escaped by the stratagem of 
attacking one of the Persian vessels, whereupon the Athenians 
concluded that she was an ally, and gave up the pursuit (Herod, 
vii. 90, viii. 68). After the battle Xerxes declared that the 
men had fought like women, and the women like men. By her 
advice he did not risk another battle, but at once retired from 
Greece. She is said to have loved a young man named Dardanus, 
of Abydos, and, enraged at his neglect of her, to have put out his 
eyes while he was asleep. The gods, as a punishment for this, 
ordered her, by an oracle, to take ihe famous but rather mythical 
lover's leap from the Leucadian promontory (Photius, Cod. 153a). 

ARTEMISIA, the sister and wife of Mausolus (or Maussollus), 
king of Caria, was sole ruler from about 353 to 350 B.C. She has 
immortalized herself by the honours paid to the memory of her 
husband. She built for him, in Halicarnassus, a very magnificent 
tomb, called the Mausoleum, which was one of the seven wonders 
of the world, and from which the name mausoleum was afterwards 
given to all tombs remarkable for their grandeur. She appointed 
panegyrics to be composed in his honour, and offered valuable 
prizes for the best oratorical and tragic compositions. She also 



666 



ARTEMON— ARTERIES 



erected a monument, or trophy, in Rhodes, to commemorate her 
conquest of that island. When the Rhodians regained their 
freedom they built round this trophy so as to render it inacces- 
sible, whence it was known as the Abaton. There are statues 
of Mausolus and Artemisia in the British Museum. 

Vitruvius ii. 8; Diodorus Siculus xvi. 36; Cicero, Tusc. iii. 31; 
Val. Max. iv. 6. 

ARTEMON (fl. c. a.d. 230), a prominent Christian teacher 
at Rome, who held Adoptianist (see Adoptianism), or humani- 
tarian views, of the same type as his elder contemporaries the 
Theodotians, though perhaps asserting more definitely than they 
the superiority of Christ to the prophets in respect of His super- 
natural birth and sinlessness. He was excommunicated by 
Zephyrinus, despite his remarkable claim that all that bishop's 
predecessors in the see of Rome had held the humanitarian 
position. (See also Monarchianism.) 

ARTENA, a village of Italy, in the province of Rome, situated 
at the N.N.W. extremity of the Volscian Mountains; it is 36 m. 
S.E. by rail, and 24 m. direct from Rome. Pop. (1901) 5016. 
On the mountain above it (2073 ft.) are the fine remains of the 
fortifications of a city built in a very primitive style, in cyclopean 
blocks of local limestone; within the walls are traces of build- 
ings, and a massive terrace which supported some edifice of 
importance. The name of this city is quite uncertain; Ecetra 
is a possible suggestion. The modern village, which was called 
Monte Fortino until 1870, owes its present name to an un- 
warrantable identification of the site with the ancient Volscian 
Artena, destroyed in 404 B.C. Another Artena, which be- 
longed to the district of Caere, and lay between it and Veii, was 
destroyed in the period of the kings, and its site is quite unknown. 

See T. Ashby and G. J. Pfeiffer in Supplementary Papers of the 
American School in Rome, i. 87 seq. 

ARTERIES (Gr. dpnypta, probably from alpuv, to raise, 
but popularly connected by the ancients with ai/p, air), in 
anatomy, the elastic tubes w T hich carry the blood away from 
the heart to the tissues. As, after death, they are always found 
empty, the older anatomists believed that they contained air, 
and to this belief they owe the name, which was originally given 
to the windpipe (trachea). Two great trunks, the aorta and 
pulmonary artery, leave the heart and divide again and again 
until they become minute vessels to which the name of arterioles 
is given. The larger trunks are fairly constant in position and 
receive definite names, but as the smaller branches are reached 
there is an increasing inconstancy in their position, and anato- 
mists are still undecided as to the normal, i.e most frequent, 
arrangement of many of the smaller arteries. From a common- 
sense point of view it is probably of greater importance to 
realize how variable the distribution of small arteries is than 
to remember the names of twigs which are of neither surgical 
nor morphological importance. Arteries adapt themselves 
more quickly than most other structures to any mechanical 
obstruction, and many of the differences between the arterial 
systems of Man and other animals are due to the assumption 
of the erect position. Many arteries are tortuous, especially 
when they supply movable parts such as the face or scalp, but 
when one or two sharp bends are found they are generally due 
to the artery going out of its way to give off a constant and 
important branch. Small arteries unite or anastomose with 
others near them very freely, so that when even a large artery 
is obliterated a collateral circulation is carried on by the rapid 
increase in size of the communications between the branches 
coming off above and below the point of obstruction. Some 
branches, however, such as those going to the basal ganglia of 
the brain and to the spleen, are known as "end arteries," and 
these do not anastomose with their neighbours at all; thus, 
if one is blocked, arterial blood is cut off from its area of supply. 
As a rule, there is little arterial anastomosis across the middle 
line of the body near the surface, though the scalp, lips and 
thyroid body are exceptions. 

The distribution of the pulmonary artery is considered in con- 
nexion with the anatomy of the lungs (see Respiratory System). 
That of the aorta will now be briefly described. 

The Aorta lies in the cavities of the thorax and abdomen, and 



arises from the base of the left ventricle of the heart. It ascends 
forward, upward, and to the right as far as the level of . . 

the second right costal cartilage, then runs backward, and ° "' 

to the left to reach the left side of the body of the 4th thoracic 
vertebra, and then descends almost vertically. It thus forms the 
arch of the aorta, which arches over the root of the left lung, and 
which has attached to its concave surface a fibrous cord, known as 
the obliterated ductus arteriosus, which connects it with the left 
branch of the pulmonary artery. The aorta continues its course 
downward in close relation to the bodies of the thoracic vertebrae, 
then passes through an opening in the diaphragm (q.v.), enters the 
abdomen, and descends in front of the bodies of the lumbar vertebrae 
as low as the 4th, where it usually divides into two terminal branches, 
the common iliac arteries. Above and behind the angle of bifurca- 
tion, however, a long slender artery, called the middle sacral, is 
prolonged downward in front of the sacrum to the end of the coccyx. 

It will be convenient to describe the distribution of the arteries 
under the following headings: — (1) Branches for the head, neck 
and upper limbs; (2) branches for the viscera of the thorax and 
abdomen; (3) branches for the walls of the thorax and abdomen; 
(4) branches for the pelvis and lower limbs. 

The branches for the head, neck and upper limbs arise as three 
large arteries from the transverse part of the aorta; they are named 
innominate,' left common carotid and left subclavian. The innominate 
artery is the largest and passes upward and to the right, to the root 
of the neck, where it divides into the right common carotid and the 
right subclavian. The carotid arteries supply the two sides of the 
head and neck ; the subclavian arteries the two upper extremities. 

The common carotid artery runs up the neck by the side of 
the windpipe, and on a level with the upper border of the _ ... 
thyroid cartilage divides into the internal and external i-arof/rf 
carotid arteries. system. 

The internal carotid artery ascends through the carotid canal in 
the temporal bone into the cranial cavity. It gives off an ophthalmic 
branch to the eyeball and other contents of the orbit, and then 
divides into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. The middle 
cerebral artery extends outward into the Sylvian fissure of the brain, 
and supplies the island of Reil, the orbital part, and the outer face of 
the frontal lobe, the parietal lobe, and the temporo-sphenoidal lobe; 
it also gives a choroid branch to the choroid plexus of the velum 
interpositum. The anterior cerebral artery supplies the inner face 
of the hemisphere from the anterior end of the frontal lobe as far 
back as the internal parieto-occipital fissure. At the base of the 
brain not only do the two internal carotids anastomose with each 
other through the anterior communicating artery, which passes 
between their anterior cerebral branches, but the internal carotid on 
each side anastomoses with the posterior cerebral branch of the 
basilar, by a posterior communicating artery. In this manner a 
vascular circle, the circle of Willis, is formed, which permits of 
freedom of the arterial circulation by the anastomoses between 
arteries not only on the same side, but on opposite sides of the 
mesial plane. The vertebral and internal carotid arteries, which 
are the arteries of supply for the brain, are distinguished by lying 
at some depth from the surface in their course to the organ, by having 
curves or twists in their course, and by the absence ol large collateral 
branches. 

_ The external carotid artery ascends through the upper part of the 
side of the neck, and behind the lower jaw into the parotid gland, 
where it divides into the internal maxillary and superficial temporal 
branches. This artery gives off the following branches : — (a) Superior 
thyroid to the larynx and thyroid body; (b) Lingual to the tongue 
and sublingual gland ; (c) Facial to the face, palate, tonsil and sub- 
maxillary gland ; (d) Occipital to the sterno-mastoid muscle and back 
of the scalp; (e) Posterior auricular to the back of. the ear and the 
adjacent part of the scalp; (/) Superficial temporal to the scalp in 
front of the ear. and by its transverse facial branch to the back part 
of the face; (g) Internal maxillary, giving muscular branches to the 
muscles of mastication, meningeal branches to the dura mater, 
dental branches to the teeth, and other branches to the nose, palate 
and tympanum; (h) Ascending pharyngeal, which gives branches to 
the pharynx, palate, tonsils and dura mater. 

The subclavian artery is the commencement of the great arterial 
trunk for the upper limb. It passes across the root of the neck and 
behind the clavicle, where it enters the armpit, and „ . 
becomes the axillary artery; by that name it extends ." . 
as far as the posterior fold of the axilla, where it enters c aV t ^" 
the upper arm, takes the name of brachial, and courses as ^ s m ' 
far as the bend of the elbow; here it bifurcates into the radial and 
ulnar arteries. From the subclavian part of the trunk the following 
branches arise : — (a) Vertebral, which enters the foramen at the root 
of the transverse process of the 6th cervical vertebra, ascends through 
the corresponding foramina in the vertebrae above, lies in a groove 
on the arch of the atlas, and enters the skull through the foramen 
magnum, where it joins its fellow to form the basilar artery; it 
gives off muscular branches to the deep muscles of the neck, spinal 
branches to the spinal cord, meningeal branches to the dura mater, 
and an inferior cerebellar branch to the under surface of the cere- 
bellum. The basilar artery, formed by the junction of the two 
vertebrals, extends from the lower to the upper border of the pons 
Varolii ; it gives off transverse branches to the pons, auditory branches 



ARTERIES 



667 



to the internal ear, inferior cerebellar branches to the under surface 
of the cerebellum, whilst it breaks up into four terminal branches, 
viz. two superior cerebellar to the upper surface of the cerebellum, 
and two posterior cerebral which supply the tentorial and mesial 
aspects of the temporo-sphenoidal lobes, the occipital lobes, and the 
posterior convolutions of the parietal lobes, (b) Thyroid axis, which 
immediately divides into the inferior thyroid, the supra-scapular, 
and the transverse cervical branches; the inferior thyroid supplies the 
thyroid body, and gives off an ascending cervical branch to the 
muscles of the neck ; the supra-scapular supplies the muscles on the 
dorsum scapulae; the transverse cervical supplies the trapezius and 
the muscles attached to the vertebral border of the scapula, (c) 
Internal mammary supplies the anterior surface of the walls of the 
chest and abdomen, and the upper surface of the diaphragm, (d) 
Superior intercostal supplies the first intercostal space, and by its 
deep cervical branch the deep muscles of the back of the neck. 

The axillary artery supplies thoracic branches to the wall of the 
chest, the pectoral muscles, and the fat and glands of the axilla; 
an acromio-thoracic to the parts about the acromion; anterior and 
posterior circumflex branches to the shoulder joint and deltoid 
muscle ; a subscapular branch to the muscles of the posterior fold 
of the axilla. 

The brachial artery supplies muscular branches to the muscles of 
the upper arm; a nutrient branch to the humerus; superior and 
inferior profunda branches and an anastomotic to the muscles of the 
upper arm and the region of the elbow joint. 

The ulnar artery extends down the ulnar side of the front of the 
fore-arm to the palm of the hand, where it curves outward toward 
the thumb, and anastomoses with the superficial volar or other 
branch of the radial artery to form the superficial palmar arch. In 
the fore-arm the ulnar gives off the interosseous arteries, which supply 
the muscles of the fore-arm and give nutrient branches to the bones; 
two recurrent branches to the region of the elbow; carpal branches 
to the wrist joint: in the hand it gives a deep branch to the deep 
muscles of the hand, and from the superficial arch arise digital 
branches to the sides of the little, ring, and middle fingers, and the 
ulnar border of the index finger. 

The radial artery extends down the radial side of the front of the 
fore-arm, turns round the outer side of the wrist to the back of the 
hand, passes between the 1st and 2nd metacarpal bones to the palm, 
where it joins the deep branch of the ulnar, and forms the deep 
palmar arch. In the fore-arm it gives off a recurrent branch to the 
elbow joint; carpal branches to the wrist joint; and muscular 
branches, one of which, named superficial volar, supplies the muscle 
of the thumb and joins the ulnar artery: in the hand it gives off a 
branch to the thumb, and one to the radial side of the index, in- 
terosseous branches to the interosseous muscles, perforating branches 
to the back of the hand, and recurrent branches to the wrist. 

The branches of the aorta which supply the viscera of the thorax 
are the coronary, the oesophageal, the bronchial and the pericardiac. 
The coronary arteries, two in number, are the first branches 
Visceral Q £ t ^ e aortaj an( j ar ; se opposite the anterior and left 
branches. p OS f. er j or segments of the semilunar valve, from the wall of 
the aorta, where it dilates into the sinuses of Valsalva. They supply 
the tissue of the heart. 

The oesophageal, bronchial and pericardiac branches are sufficiently 
described by their names. 

The branches of the aorta which supply the viscera of the abdomen 
arise either singly or in pairs. The single arteries are the coeliac 
axis, the superior mesenteric, and the inferior mesenteric, which 
arise from the front of the aorta ; the pairs are the capsular, the two 
renal, and the two spermatic or ovarian, which arise from its sides. 
The single arteries supply viscera which are either completely or 
almost completely invested by the peritoneum, and the veins corre- 
sponding to them are the roots of the vena portae. The pairs of 
arteries supply viscera developed behind the peritoneum, and the 
veins corresponding to them are rootlets of the inferior vena cava. 

The coeliac axis is a thick, short artery, which almost immediately 
divides into the gastric, hepatic and splenic branches. The gastric 
gives off oesophageal branches and then runs along the lesser 
curvature of the stomach. The hepatic artery ends in the substance 
of the liver; but gives off a cystic branch to the gall bladder, a 
pyloric branch to the stomach, a gastro-duodenal branch, which divides 
into a superior pancreatico-duodenal for the pancreas and duodenum, 
and a right gaslro-epiploic for the stomach and omentum. The splenic 
artery ends in the substance of the spleen; but gives off pancreatic 
branches to the pancreas, vasa brevia to the left end of the stomach, 
and a left gastro-epiploic to the stomach and omentum. 

The superior mesenteric artery gives off an inferior pancreatico- 
duodenal branch to the pancreas and duodenum; about twelve 
intestinal branches to the small intestines, which form in the sub- 
stance of the mesentery a series of arches before they end in the 
wall of the intestines; an ileocolic branch to the end of the ileum, 
the caecum, and beginning of the colon; a right colic branch to the 
ascending colon; and a middle colic branch to the transverse colon. 

The inferior mesenteric artery gives off a left colic branch to the 
descending colon, a sigmoid branch to the iliac and pelvic colon, 
and ends in the superior haemorrhoidal artery, which supplies the 
rectum. The arteries which supply the coats of the alimentary 
tube from the oesophagus to the rectum anastomose freely with 




IM, 



each other in the wall of the tube, or in its mesenteric attachment, 
and the anastomoses are usually by the formation of arches or loops 
between adjacent branches. 

The capsular arteries, small in size, run outward from the aorta to 
end in the supra-renal capsules. 

The renal arteries pass one to each kidney, in which they for the 
most part end, but in the substance of the organ they give off small 
perforating branches, which pierce the capsule of the kidney, and are 
distributed in the surrounding fat. Additional renal arteries are 
fairly common. 

The spermatic arteries are two long slender arteries, which descend, 
one in each spermatic cord, into the scrotum to supply the testicle. 
The corresponding ovarian arteries in the female do not leave the 
abdomen. 

The branches of the aorta which supply the walls of Parietal 
the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, are the intercostal, the branches 
lumbar, the phrenic, and the middle sacral. 

The intercostal arteries arise from the back of the thoracic 
aorta, and are usually nine pairs. They run round the sides 
of the vertebral bodies as far as the commencement of the inter- 
costal spaces, where each divides 
into a dorsal and a proper intercostal 
branch; the dorsal branch passes to 
the back of the thorax to supply the 
deep muscles of the spine ; the proper 
intercostal branch (AB.) runs outward 
in the intercostal space to supply 
its muscles, and the lower pairs of 
intercostals also give branches to 
the diaphragm and wall of the ab- 
domen. Below the last rib a subcostal 
artery runs. 

The lumbar arteries arise from the 
back of the abdominal aorta, and 
are usually four pairs. They run 
round the sides of the lumbar verte- 
brae, and divide into a dorsal branch 
which supplies the deep muscles ol 
the back of the loins, and an abdominal 
branch which runs outward to supply 
the wall of the abdomen. The dis- 
tribution of the lumbar and inter- 
costal arteries exhibits a trans- 
versely segmented arrangement of 
the vascular system, like the trans- 
versely segmented arrangement of 
the bones, muscles and nerves met 
with in these localities, but more especially in the thoracic region. 

The phrenic arteries, two in number, pass to supply the under 
surface of the diaphragm. 

The middle sacral artery, as it runs down the front of the sacrum, 
gives branches to the back of the pelvic wall. 

Injections made by Sir W. Turner have shown that, both in the 
thoracic and abdominal cavities, slender anastomosing communica- 
tions exist between the visceral and parietal branches. 

The arteries to the pelvis and hind limbs begin at the bifurcation 
of the aorta into the two common iliacs. 

The common iliac artery, after a short course, divides into the 
internal and external iliac arteries. The internal iliac enters the pelvis 
and divides into branches for the supply of the pelvic walls 
and viscera, including the organs of generation, and for the 
great muscles of the buttock. The external iliac descends system. 
behind Poupart's ligament into the thigh, where it takes the name of 
femoral artery. The femoral descends along the front and inner 
surface of the thigh, gives off a profunda or deep branch, which, by its 
circumflex and perforating branches, supplies the numerous muscles 
of the thigh ; most of these extend to the back of the limb to carry 
blood to the muscles situated there. The femoral artery then runs 
to the back of the limb in the ham, where it is called popliteal artery. 
The popliteal divides into two branches, of which one, called anterior 
tibial, passes between the bones to the front of the leg, and then 
downward to the upper surface of the foot; the other, posterior 
tibial, continues down the back of the leg to the sole of the foot, 
and divides into the internal and external plantar arteries; branches 
proceed from the external plantar artery to the sides of the toes, 
and constitute the digital arteries. From the large arterial trunks 
in the leg many branches proceed, to carry blood to the different 
structures in the limb. 

The wall of an artery consists of several coats (see fig. 2). The 
outermost is the tunica adventitia, composed of connective tissue; 
immediately internal to this is the yellow elastic coat; struct — 
within this again the muscular coat, formed of involuntary . " 
muscular tissue, the contractile fibre-cells of which are ar t e ries 
for the most part arranged transversely to the long axis 
of the artery; in the larger arteries the elastic coat is much thicker 
than the muscular, but in the smaller the muscular coat is relatively 
strong; the vaso-motor nerves terminate in the muscular coat. In 
the first part of the aorta, pulmonary artery and arteries of the retina 
there is no muscular coat. Internal to the muscular coat is 
the elastic fenestrated coat, formed of a smooth elastic membrane 



Fig. 1. — Diagram of a pair 
of intercostal arteries. 
Ao, The aorta transversely 
divided, giving off at 
each side an inter- 
costal artery. 
PB, The posterior or dorsal 

branch. 
AB, The anterior or proper 
intercostal branch. 
A transverse section 
through the internal 
mammary artery. 



668 



ARTERIES 



perforated by small apertures. Most internal of all is a layer of 
endothelial cells, which form the free surface over which the blood 
flows. The arteries are not nourished by the blood which flows 
through them, but by minute vessels, vasa vasorum, distributed in 
their external, elastic and muscular coats. 




Fig. 2. — Diagram of the structure of an artery. A, tunica adven- 
titia; E, elastic coat; M, muscular coat; F, fenestrated coat; En, 
endothelium continuous with the endothelial wall of C, the capillaries. 

Embryology 

The earliest appearance of the blood vessels is dealt with under 
Vascular System. Here will be briefly described the fate of the 
main vessel which carries the blood away from the truncus arteriosus 
of the developing heart (q.v.). This ventral aorta, if traced forward, 
soon divides into two lateral parts, the explanation being that there 
were originally two vessels, side by side, which fused to form the 

heart, but continued sepa- 
JH- , .. rate anteriorly. The two 

parts run for a little 
distance toward the head 
of the embryo, ventral 
to the alimentary canal, 
and then turn toward the 
dorsum, passing one on 
either side of that tube to 
form the first aortic arch. 
Having reached the dor- 
sum they turn backward 
toward the tail end and 
form the dorsal aortae; 
here, according to A. H. 
Young (Studies in Ana- 
tomy, Owens College, 1891 
and 1900) they again turn 
toward the ventral side 
and become, after a tran- 
sitional stage, the hypo- 
gastric, placental, allantoic 
or umbilical arteries. This 
authority does not believe 
middle 



R.S." 




3. — Diagram of the Embryonic 



A.Ao. 
D.Ar. 
In. 



Ductus Arteriosus. 
Innominate Arterv. 



Arterial" Arches: I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, point that th , e , mid 1 le , ? acral 
to the six arches. (The black parts are art f r y of . the adult f ^ 
obliterated in the adult human subject.) r ? al , continuation of the 
,, . ,, ^ . . ^ single median dorsal aorta 

V.Ao. Ventral Aorta. into which the two parallel 

Arch ot Aorta. dorsal vessels just men- 

tioned soon coalesce, 

d 1 r* 1 1 r- v u» a' 1 :u. 1 .. 1 though until recently it 
R.I.C.-L.I.C. Right and Left Internal has always been so re . 

™ D Carotid Artenes. ga rded. The anterior loop 

D-B- Duct of Botalli. between the ventral and 

R.S.-L.S. Right and Left Subclavian dorsal aortae already de , 

r> ,7 r „ n?1 e .?' j t fi w _^ l , scribed as the first aortic 
R.V.-L.V. Right and Left Vertebral 

Arteries. 
Posterior Auricular Artery. 
Ophthalmic Artery. 
Dorsal Aorta. 
Pulmonary trunk. 
R.P.A.-L.P.A. Right and Left Pul- 
monary Arteries. 
R.C.C.-L.C.C. Right and Left Common 
Carotid Arteries. 



P.A. 
Oph. 
D.Ao 
P.T. 



E.C. External Carotid Artery. 

Oc. Occipital Artery. 

I.M. Internal Maxillary Artery. 

dorsal aorta. Of these arches 
probably partly represented 



the 



arch is included in the 
maxillary or first visceral 
arch of the soft parts 
(see fig. 3, 1). Later, four 
other well-marked aortic 
arches grow behind this 
in the more caudal vis- 
ceral arches, so that there 
are altogether five arterial 
arches on each side of 
the pharynx, through 
which the blood can pass 
from the ventral to the 
first soon disappears, but 
adult by the internal 



the adult by the 
maxillary artery, one branch of which, the infraorbital, is enclosed 
in the upper jaw, while another, the inferior dental, is sur- 
rounded by the lower jaw. Possibly the ophthalmic artery also 
belongs to this arch. The second arch also disappears, but the 



posterior auricular and occipital arteries probably spring from 
it, and at an early period it passed through the stapes as the 
transitory stapedial artery. The third arch forms the beginning of 
the internal carotid. The fourth arch becomes the arch of the adult 
aorta, between the origins of the left carotid and left subclavian, 
on the left side, and the first part of the right subclavian artery on 
the right. The apparent fifth arch on the left side (fig. 3, 6) remains 
all through foetal life as the ductus arteriosus, and, as the lungs 
develop, the pulmonary arteries are derived from it. J. E. V. Boas 
and W. Zimmermann have shown that this arch is in reality the sixth, 
and that there is a very transitory true fifth arch in front of it (fig. 
3, 5). The part of the ventral aorta from which this last arch rises 
is a single median vessel due to the same fusion of the two primitive 
ventral aortae which precedes the formation of the heart, but a 
spiral septum has appeared in it which divides it in such a way that 
while the anterior or cephalic arches communicate with the left ven- 
tricle of the heart, the last one com- 
municates with the right (see Heart). 
The fate of the ventral and dorsal longi- 
tudinal vessels must now be followed. 
The fused part of the two ventral aortae, 
just in front of the heart, forms the 
ascending part of the adult aortic arch, 
and where this trunk divides between the 
fifth and fourth arches (strictly speaking, 
the sixth and fifth), the right one forms 
the innominate (fig. 3, In.) and the left 
One a very short part of the transverse 
arch of the aorta until the fourth arch 
comes off (see fig. 4) . From this point to 
the origin of the third arch is common 
carotid, and after that, to the head, 
external carotid on each side. The dorsal 
longitudinal arteries on the head side of 
the junction with the third arch form the 
internal carotids. Between the third and 
fourth arches they are obliterated, while 
on the caudal side of this, until the point 
of fusion is reached on the dorsal side of 
the heart, the left artery forms the upper 
part of the dorsal aorta while the right 
entirely disappears. Below this point the _ 
thoracic and abdominal aortae axe formed -- IG- 4 1 " 




by the two primitive dorsal aortae which £iuman 

* J *■ . l * . . .. . hro nr>hoc 



—Diagram of the 
Aorta and its 
have fused to form a single median vessel. ^ a " c jl es- T',! S u P er " 
As the limbs are developed, vessels bud ficial Temporal Artery. 
out in them. The subclavian for the arm comes from the fourth aortic 
arch on each side, while in the leg the main artery is a branch of 
the caudal arch which is curving ventralward to form the umbilical 
artery. From the convexity of this arch the internal iliac and 
sciatic at first carry the blood to the limb, as they do permanently 
in reptiles, but later the external iliac and femoral become developed, 
and, as they are on the concave side of the bend of the hip, while the 
sciatic is on the convex, they have a mechanical advantage and 
become the permanent main channel. 

. F01 further details see O. Hertwig, Handbuch der vergleichenden 
und experimentellen Entwickelungslehre der Wirbeltiere (Jena, 1905). 

Comparative Anatomy 

In the Acrania the lancelet (Amphioxus) shows certain arrange- 
ments of its arteries which are suggestive of the embryonic stages 
of the higher vertebrates and Man. There is a median ventral aorta 
below the pharynx, from which branchial arteries run up on each side 
between the branchial clefts, where the blood is aerated, to join two 
dorsal aortae which run back side by side until the hind end of the 
pharynx is reached; here they fuse to form a median vessel from 
which branches are distributed to the straight intestine. There is 
no heart, but the ventral aorta is contractile, and the blood is driven 
forward in it and backward in the dorsal aortae. The branchial 
arteries are very numerous, and cannot be homologized closely 
with the five (originally six) pairs of aortic arches in Man. 

In the fish the ventral aorta gives rise to five afferent branchial 
arteries carrying the blood to the gills, though these may not all 
come off as independent trunks from the aorta. From the gills 
the afferent branchials carry the blood to the median dorsal aorta. 
As pectoral and pelvic fins are now developed, subclavian and iliac 
arteries are found rising from the dorsal aorta, though the aorta 
itself is continued directly backward as the caudal artery into the 
tail. In the Dipnoi or mud fish, in which the swim bladder is con- 
verted into a functional lung, the hindmost afferent branchial artery, 
corresponding to the fifth (strictly speaking the sixth) aortic arch of 
the human embryo, gives off on each side a pulmonary artery to that 
structure. 

The arrangement of the branchial aortic arches in the tailed 
Amphibia (Urodela), and in the tadpole stage of the tailless forms 
(Anura), makes it probable that the generalized vertebrate has six 
(if not more) pairs of these instead of the five which are evident 
in the human embryo. Four pairs of arches are present, the first of 
which is the carotid and corresponds to the third of Man; the 
second is the true aortic arch on each side; the third undergoes 



ARTERN— ARTEVELDE 



669 



great reduction or disappears when the gills atrophy, and is very 
transitory in the Mammalia (fig. 3, 5), while the fourth is the one 
from which the pulmonary artery' is developed when the lungs 
appear, and corresponds to the nominal fifth, though really the 
sixth arch, of the higher forms (fig. 3, 6). The dorsal part of this 
sixth arch remains as a pervious vessel in the Urodela, joining the 
pulmonary arch to the dorsal aorta. In the central part of the carotid 
arch the vessel breaks up into a plexus, for a short distance forming 
the so-called carotid gland, which has an important effect upon the 
adult circulation of the Amphibia. In the Reptilia the great arteries 
are arranged on the same plan as in the adult Amphibia, but the 
carotid arch retains its dorsal communication with the systematic 
aortic arch on each side, and this communication is known as the 
duct of Botalli (fig. 3, D.B.). In this class, as in the Amphibia, 
one great artery, the coeliaco-mesenteric, usually supplies the liver, 
spleen, stomach and anterior part of the intestines; this is a point 
of some interest when it is noticed how very close together the coeliac 
axis and superior mesenteric arteries rise from the abdominal aorta 
in Man. 

In the Birds the right fourth arch alone remains as the aorta, 
the dorsal part of the left corresponding arch being obliterated. 
From the arch of the aorta rise two symmetrical innominates, each 
of which divides later into a carotid and subclavian. The blood 
path from the aorta to the hind limb in the Amphibia, Reptilia and 
Aves, is a dorsal one, and passes through the internal iliac and sciatic 
to the back of the thigh, and so to the popliteal space; the external 
iliac is, if it is developed at all, only a small branch to the pelvis. 

In the Mammalia the fourth left arch becomes the aorta, the 
corresponding right one being obliterated, but several cases have 
been recorded in Man in which both arches have persisted, as they 
do in the reptiles (H. Leboucq, Ann. Sci. Med. Gand, 1894, p. 7). 
Examples have also been found of a right aortic arch, as in birds, 
while a very common human abnormality is that in which the dorsal 
part of the fourth right arch persists, and from it the right subclavian 
artery arises (see fig. 3). 

The commonest arrangement of the great branches of the aortic 
arch in Mammals is that in which the innominate and left carotid 
arise by a single short trunk, while the left subclavian comes off 
later; this is also Man's commonest abnormality. Sometimes, 
especially among the Ungulata, all the branches may rise from one 
common trunk; at other times two innominate arteries may be 
present ; this is commonest in the Cheiroptera, Insectivora and 
Cetacea. It is extremely rare to find all four large arteries rising 
independently from the aorta, though it has been seen in the Koala 
(F. G. Parsons, " Mammalian Aortic Arch," Journ. of Anal. vol. 
xxxvi. p. 389). The human arrangement of the common iliacs is not 
constant among mammals, for in some the external and internal 
iliacs rise independently from the aorta, and this is probably the 
more primitive arrangement. The middle sacral artery has already 
been referred to. A. H. Young and A. Robinson believe, on embryo^ 
logical grounds, that this artery in mammals is not homologous 
with the caudal artery of the fish, and is not the direct continuation 
of the aorta ; it is an artery which usually gives off two or more 
collateral branches, and sometimes, as in the Ornithorynchus and 
some edentates, breaks up into a network of branches which reunite 
and so form what is known as a rete mirabile. These retia mirabilia 
are often found in other parts of the mammalian body, though their 
function is still not satisfactorily explained. The way in which the 
blood is carried to the foot in the pronograde mammals differs from 
that of Man; a large branch called the internal saphenous comes 
off the common femoral in the lower third of the thigh, and this runs 
down the inner side of the leg to the foot. This arrangement is 
quite convenient as long as the knee is flexed, but when it comes to 
be extended, as in the erect posture, the artery is greatly stretched, 
and it is much easier for the blood to pass to the foot through the 
anterior and posterior tibials. A vestige of this saphenous artery, 
however, remains in Man as the anastomotica magna. 

The literature of the Comparative Anatomy of the Arteries up to 
1902 will be found in R. Wiedersheim's Vergleichende Anatomie der 
Wirbeltiere (Jena, 1902). The morphology of the Iliac Arteries is 
described by G. Levi, Archivio Italiano di Anat. ed Embriol., vol. i. 
(1902). (F. G. P.) 

ARTERN, a town of Germany, in Prussian Saxony, on the 
Unstrut, at the influx of the Helme, at the junction of railways 
to Erfurt, Naumburg and Sangerhausen, 8 m. S. of the last 
named. Pop. 5000. It has an Evangelical church, an agricul- 
tural college and some manufactures of machinery, sugar and 
boots. Its brine springs, known as early as the 15th century, 
are still frequented. 

ARTESIAN WELLS, the name properly applied to water- 
springs rising above the surface of the ground by natural hydro- 
static pressure, on boring a small hole down through a series 
of strata to a water-carrying bed enclosed between two im- 
pervious layers ; the name is, however, sometimes loosely 
applied to any deep well, even when the water is obtained by 
pumping. In Europe this mode of well-boring was first practised 



in the French province of Artois, whence the name of Artesian 
is derived. At Aire, in that province, there is a well from which 
the water has continued steadily to flow to a height of 11 feet 
above the ground for more than a century; and there is, within 
the old Carthusian convent at Lillers, another which dates from 
the 1 2th century, and which still flows. But unmistakable 
traces of much more ancient bored springs appear in Lombardy, 
in Asia Minor, in Persia, in China, in Egypt, in Algeria, and even 
in the great desert of Sahara. (See Well.) 

ARTEVELDE, JACOB VAN (c. 1290-1345), Flemish statesman, 
was born at Ghent about 1290. He sprang from one of the 
wealthy commercial families of this great industrial city, his 
father's name being probably William van Artevelde. His 
brother John, a rich cloth merchant, took a leading part in public 
affairs during the first decades of the 14th century. Jacob, 
who according to tradition was a brewer by trade, spent three 
years in amassing quietly a large fortune. He was twice married, 
the second time to Catherine de Coster, whose family was of 
considerable influence in Ghent. Not till 1337, when the out- 
break of hostilities between France and England threatened 
to injure seriously the industrial welfare of his native town, 
did Jacob van Artevelde make his first appearance as a political 
leader. As the Flemish cities depended upon England for the 
supply of the wool for their staple industry of weaving, he boldly 
came forward, as a tribune of the people, and at a great meeting 
at the monastery of Biloke unfolded his scheme of an alliance 
of the Flemish towns, with those of Brabant, Holland and 
Hainaut, to maintain an armed neutrality in the dynastic struggle 
between Edward III. and Philip VI. of France. His efforts were 
successful. Bruges, Ypres and other towns formed a league 
with Ghent, in which town Artevelde, with the title of captain- 
general, henceforth until his death exercised almost dictatorial 
authority. His first step was to conclude a commercial treaty 
with England. The efforts of the count of Flanders to overthrow 
the power of Artevelde by force of arms completely failed, and 
he was compelled at Bruges to sign a treaty (June 21, 1338) 
sanctioning the federation of the three towns, Ghent, Bruges and 
Ypres, henceforth known as the " Three members of Flanders." 
This was the first of a series of treaties, made during the year 
1330-1340, which gradually brought into the federation all the 
towns and provinces of the Netherlands. The policy of neutrality, 
however, proved impracticable, and the Flemish towns, under the 
leadership of Artevelde, openly took the side of the English king, 
with whom a close alliance was concluded. Artevelde now 
reached the height of his power, concluding alliances with kings, 
and publicly associating with them on equal terms. Under his 
able administration trade flourished, and Ghent rose rapidly in 
wealth and importance. His well-nigh despotic rule awoke at last 
among his compatriots jealousy and resentment. The proposal 
of Artevelde to disown the sovereignty of Louis, count of Flanders, 
and to recognize in its place that of Edward, prince of Wales 
(the Black Prince), gave rise to violent dissatisfaction. A popular 
insurrection broke out in Ghent, and Artevelde fell into the 
hands of the crowd and was murdered on the 24th of July 1345. 

The great services that he rendered to Ghent and to his 
country have in later times been recognized. A statue was 
erected in his native town on the Marche du Vendredi, and was 
unveiled by Leopold I., king of the Belgians, on the 13th of 
September 1863. 

See J. Hutten, James and Philip van Artevelde (London, 1882); 
W. J. Ashley, James and Philip van Artevelde (London, 1883); P. 
Nameche, Les van Artevelde et leur epoque (Louvain, 1887) ; L. 
Vanderkindere, Le Steele des Arteveldes (Brussels, 1879). 

ARTEVELDE, PHILIP VAN (c. 1340-1382), youngest son of 
the above, and godson of Queen Philippa of England, who held 
him in her arms at his baptism, lived in retirement until 1381. 
The Ghenters had in that year risen in revolt against the oppres- 
sion of the count of Flanders, and Philip, now forty years of age, 
and without any military or political experience, was offered the 
supreme command. His name awakened general enthusiasm. 
At first his efforts were attended by considerable success. He 
defeated Louis de Male, count of Flanders, before Bruges, 
entered that city in triumph, and was soon master of all Flanders. 



670 



ART GALLERIES 



But France took up the cause of the Flemish count, and a 
splendid French army was led across the frontier by the young 
king Charles VI. in person. Artevelde advanced to meet the 
enemy at the head of a burgher army of some 50,000 Flemings. 
The armies met at Roosebeke near Courtrai, with the result that 
the Flemings were routed with terrible loss, Philip himself being 
among the slain. This happened on the 27th of November 1382. 
The brief but stirring career of this popular leader is admirably 
treated in Sir Henry Taylor's drama, Philip van Artevelde. 

ART GALLERIES. An art gallery (by which, as distinguished 
from more general Museums of Art, q.v., is here meant one 
specially for pictures) epitomizes so many phases of human 
thought and imagination that it connotes much more than a mere 
collection of paintings. In its technical and aesthetic aspect the 
gallery shows the treatment of colour, form and composition. 
In its historical aspect we find the true portraits of great men of 
the past; we can observe their habits of life, their manners, their 
dress, the architecture of their times, and the 
religious worship of the period in which they lived. 
Regarded collectively, the art of a country epito- 
mizes the whole development of the people that 
produced it. Most important of all is the emotional 
aspect of painting, which must enter less or more 
into every picture worthy of notice. To take 
examples from the British National Gallery: 
pathos in its most intense degree will be found 
in Francia's " Pieta. "; dignity in . Velasquez' 
portrait of Admiral Pareja; homeliness in Van 
Eyck's portrait of Jan Arnolfini and his wife; the 
interpretation of the varying moods of nature in 



According to this theory, though imperfectly realized owing to 
the paucity of examples, the philosophic influence of art galleries 
is becoming more widely extended; and in its further develop- 
ment will be found an ever-growing source of interest, instruction 
and scholarship to the community. The most suitable method 
of describing art gallertes is to classify them by their types and 
contents rather than by the various countries to which they 
belong. Thus the great representative galleries of the world 
which possess works of every school are grouped together, 
followed by state galleries which are not remarkable for more 
than one school of national art. Municipal galleries are divided 
into those which have general collections, and those which are 
notable for special collections. Churches which have good paint- 
ings, together with those which are now secularized, are treated 
separately; while the collections in the Vatican and private 
houses are described together. The remaining galleries, such as 
the Salon or the Royal Academy, are periodical or commercial 




b* 



fr 



• • • • 




• • • • ■•^•B 



Fig. 

North Vestibule, Early Italian Schools: 

I. Tuscan School (15th and 16th cen- 
turies). 
II. Sienese School, &c. 

III. Tuscan School. 

IV. Lombard School. 

V. Ferrarese and Bolognese Schools. 
VI. Umbrian School, &c. 
VII. Venetian and Brescian Schools. 



1. — Plan of the National Gallery, London. 

VIII. Paduan and Early Venetian Schools. 
IX. Later Venetian School. 
X. Flemish School. 

XL Early Dutch and Flemish Schools. 
XII. Dutch and Flemish Schools. 

XIII. Flemish School. 

XIV. Spanish School. 
XV. German Schools. 

XVI. French School. 



XVII. French School. 
XVIII. British School. 
XIX. Old British School. 
XX. British School. 
XXI. British School. 
XXII. Turner Collection. 
Octagonal Hall: Miscellaneous. 
East Vestibule: British School. 
West Vestibule: Italian School. 



the work of Turner or Hobbema ; nothing can be more devotional 
than the canvases of Bellini or his Umbrian contemporaries. So 
also the ruling sentiments of mankind — mysticism, drama and 
imagination — are the keynotes of other great conceptions of the 
artist. All this may be at the command of those who visit the 
art gallery; but without patience, care and study the higher 
meaning will be lost to the spectator. The picture which " tells 
its own story " is often the least didactic, for it has no inner or 
deeper lesson to reveal; it gives no stimulus or training to the 
eye, quick as that organ may be — segnius irritant animos — to 
translate sight into thought. In brief, the painter asks that his 
ffOos may be shared as much as possible by the man who looks 
at the painting — the art above all others in which it is most 
needful to share the master's spirit if his work is to be fully 
appreciated. So, too, the art gallery, recalling the gentler 
associations of the past amidst surroundings of harmonious 
beauty and its attendant sense of comfort, is essentially a place 
of rest for the mind and eye. In the more famous galleries where 
the wealth of paintings allows a grouping of pictures according 
to their respective schools, one may choose the country, the 
epoch, the style or even the emotion best suited to one's taste. 



in character, and are important in the development of modern 
art. 

The collections most worthy of attention are the state galleries 
representative of international schools. Among these the British 
National Gallery holds a high place. The collection ~ te< 
was founded in 1824 by the acquisition of the Anger- galleries of 
stein pictures. Its accessions are mainly governed inter- 
by the parliamentary grant of £5°°° to £10,000 a na ''°" a/ 
year, a sum which has occasionally been enlarged to 
permit special purchases. Thus, in 1871, the Peel collection of 
seventy-seven pictures was bought for £75,000, and in 1885 the 
Ansidei Madonna (Raphael) and Van Dyck's portrait of Charles I. 
were bought, the one for £70,000 and the other for £17.500. In 
1890 the government gave £25,000 to meet a gift of £30,000 made 
by three gentlemen toacquire three portraits by Moroni, Velazquez 
and Holbein. The most important private gifts were the Vernon 
gift in 1847, the Turner bequest in 1856 and the Wynne-Ellis 
legacy in 1876. Since 1005 the Art Collections Fund, a society 
of private subscribers, has also been responsible for important 
additions to the gallery, notably the Venus of Velazquez (1907). 
The gallery contains very few poor works and all schools are well 



ART GALLERIES 



671 



represented, with the sole exception of the French school. This, 
however, can be amply studied at Hertford House (Wallace 
Collection), which, besides Dutch, Spanish and British pictures of 
the highest value, contains twenty examples of Greuze, fifteen by 
Pater, nineteen by Boucher, eleven by Watteau and fifteen by 
Meissonier. The national gallery of pictures at Berlin (Kaiser 
Friedrich Museum) , like the British National Gallery, is remark- 
able for its variety of schools and painters, and for the select type 
of pictures shown. During the last twenty-five years of the 19th 
century, the development of this collection was even more strik- 
ing than that of the English gallery. Italian and Dutch examples 
are specially numerous, though every school but the British (here 



It avoids the undue multiplication of canvases, and the over- 
crowding so noticeable in many Italian galleries where first-rate 
pictures hang too high to be examined. Thus the Viennese 
gallery, besides the intrinsic value of its pictures (Albert Diirer's 
chief work is there), is admirably adapted for study. The best 
gallery in Russia (St Petersburg, Hermitage) was made entirely 
by royal efforts, having been founded by Peter the Great, and 
much enlarged by the empress Catherine. It contains the 
collections of Crozat, Briihl and Walpole. There are about 
1800 works, the schools of Flanders and Italy being of signal 
merit; and there are at least thirty-five genuine examples by 
Rembrandt. The French collection (Louvre Palace, Paris) is one 




II. 



mm V 

Drawings 

• s 
Fig. 2. — Plan of the first and second 

as elsewhere) is really well seen. The purchase grant is consider- 
able, and is well applied. Two other German capitals have collec- 
tions of international importance — Dresden and Munich. The 
former is famous for the Sistine Madonna by Raphael, a work of 
such supreme excellence that there is a tendency to overlook 
other Italian pictures of celebrity by Titian, Giorgione and 
Correggio. Munich (Old Pinakothek) has examples of all the best 
masters, the South German school being particularly noticeable. 
The arrangement is good, and the methods of exhibition make 
this one of the most pleasant galleries on the continent. Vienna 
has the Imperial Gallery, a collection which in point of number 
cannot be considered large, as there are not more than 1700 
pictures. This, however, is in itself a safeguard, like the wise 
provision in a statute of 1856 for enabling the English authorities 
to dispose of pictures " unfit for the collection, or not required." 




xliv y \/\ftmV 

Studies and 

floors of the Imperial Gallery, Vienna. 

of the most important of all. In 1880 it was undoubtedly the 
first gallery in Europe, but its supremacy has since been menaced 
by other establishments where acquisitions are made more 
frequently and with greater care, and where the system of 
classification is such that the value of the pictures is enhanced 
rather than diminished by their display. In 1900 it was partly 
rearranged with great effect. The feature of the Louvre is the 
Salon Carre, a room in which the supposed finest canvases in the 
collection are kept together, pictures of world-wide fame, repre- 
senting all schools. It is now generally accepted that this system 
of selection not only lowers the standard of individual schools 
elsewhere by withdrawing their best pictures, but does not add 
to the aesthetic or educational value of the masterpieces them- 
selves. In Florence the Tribuna room of the Uffizi gallery is a 
similar case in point. Probably the two most widely known 



672 



ART GALLERIES 



pictures in the Louvre are Watteau's second " Embarquement 
pour Cythere," and the " Monna Lisa," a portrait by Leonardo da 
Vinci, but each school has many unique examples. The original 
drawings should be noted, being of equal importance to the col- 
lection preserved at the British Museum. The last collection to 
be mentioned under this heading is that known as the Royal 
Galleries in Florence, housed in the Pitti and Uffizi palaces. In 
some ways this collection does not represent general painting 
sufficiently to justify its inclusion with the galleries of Berlin, 
Paris and London. On the other hand, the great number of 
Italian pictures of vital importance to the history of international 
art makes this one of the finest existing collections. The two 
great palaces, dating from the 15th and 16th centuries, are 
joined together and contain the Medici pictures. They form the 
largest gallery in the world, and though many of the rooms are 
small and badly lighted, and although many paintings have 
suffered from thoughtless restoration, they have a charm and 
attraction which certainly make them the most popular galleries 
in Europe. The Pitti has ten Raphaels and excellent examples of 
Andrea del Sarto, Giorgione and Perugino. The Uffizi is more 
representative of non-Italian schools, but is best known for its 
works by Botticelli, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo and 
Sodoma, the schools of Tuscany and Umbria forming the bulk of 
both collections. Admission to the galleries is by payment, and 
the small income derived from this source is devoted to main- 
taining and enlarging the collections. 

As to the ground plans of the National Gallery, London (fig. 1), 
and of the Imperial Gallery at Vienna (fig. 2), it will be observed 
that while the former has the advantage of uniform top-light, 
the galleries at Vienna possess the most ample facilities for 
minute classification, small rooms or " cabinets " opening from 
each large room. Special rooms are also provided for drawings 
and water-colours, while special ranges of rooms are used by 
copyists and those responsible for the repair and preservation of 
the pictures. 

Though not so comprehensive as the great collections just 
described, the state galleries showing national schools of painting 
state an d little else are of striking interest. In England 

galleries of the National Gallery of British Art (known as the 
national -pate Gallery) contains British pictures. The corre- 
*" °° *' sponding collection of modern French art is at Paris 
(Luxembourg Palace), Berlin, Rome, Dresden, Vienna and 
Madrid having analogous galleries. The Victoria and Albert 
Museum has also numerous British pictures, especially in water- 
colour, and the National Portrait Gallery, founded in 1856, and 
since 1896 housed in its permanent home, is instructive in 
this connexion, though many of its pictures are the work of 
foreign artists. The national collections at Dublin and Edin- 
burgh may be mentioned here, though most schools are repre- 
sented. Brussels and Antwerp are remarkable for fine examples 
of Flemish art— Matsys, Memlinc and Van Eyck of the primitive 
schools, Rubens and Van Dyck of the later period. The collec- 
tions at Amsterdam (Ryks Museum) and the Hague(Mauritshuis) 
are a revelation to those who have only studied Rembrandt, 
Franz Hals, Van der Heist, and other Dutch portrait painters 
outside Holland; and in the former gallery especially, the 
pictures are arranged in a manner showing them to the best 
advantage. The Museo del Prado is even more noteworthy, for 
the fifty examples of Velasquez (outrivalling the Italian pictures, 
important as they are) make a visit to Madrid imperative to 
those who wish to realize the achievements of Spanish art. 
Christiania, Stockholm and Copenhagen have large collections of 
Scandinavian art, and the cities of Budapest and Basel have 
galleries of some importance. In Italy the state maintains 
twelve collections, mainly devoted to pictorial art. Of these the 
best are situated at Bologna, Lucca, Parma, Venice, Modena, 
Turin and Milan. In each case the local school of painting is 
fully represented. In Rome the Corsini and Borghese Galleries, 
the latter being the most catholic in the city, contain superb 
examples, some of them accepted masterpieces of Italian art; 
there are also good foreign pictures, but their number is limited. 
The Accademia at Florence should also be noted as the most 



important state gallery of early Italian art. The central Italian 
Renaissance can be more adequately studied here than in the 
Pitti. The " Primavera " of Botticelli, and the " Last Judg- 
ment " by Fra Angelico are perhaps the best-known works. 
The large statue of David by Michelangelo is also in this gallery, 
which, on the whole, is one of the most remarkable in Italy. 
Speaking broadly, these national galleries scattered throughout 
the country are not well arranged or classified ; and though some 
are kept in fine old buildings, beautiful in themselves, the lighting 
is often indifferent, and it is with difficulty that the pictures can be 
seen. In nearly every case admission fees are charged every day, 
festivals and Sundays excepted; few pictures are bought, acquisi- 
tions being chiefly made by removing pictures from churches. 

Many towns own collections of well-merited repute. In Italy 
such galleries are common, and among them may be noted 
Siena, with Sodoma and his school; Venice with Municipal 
Tintoretto (Doge's Palace); Genoa, with the great galleries 
palaces Balbi and Rosso; Vicenza (Montagna and of special 
school), Ferrara (Dosso and school), Bergamo and 
Milan (north Italian schools). Other civic collections of Italian 
art are maintained at Verona, Pisa, Rome, Perugia and Padua. 
In Holland, Haarlem, Leiden, Rotterdam and the Hague have 
galleries supplemental to those of the state, and are remarkable 
in showing the brilliance of artists like Grebber, de Bray and 
Ravesteyn, who are usually ignored. Birmingham and Man- 
chester have good examples of modern British art. Moscow 
(Tretiakoff collection) has modern Russian pictures, and con- 
temporary German and French work will be found in all 
the galleries of these two countries included in the municipal 
group. Collections of French work are found at Amiens, Rouen, 
Nancy, Tours, Le Mans and Angers, but large as these civic 
collections are, sometimes containing six and eight hundred 
canvases, few of their pictures are really good, many being the 
enormous patriotic canvases marked " Don de l'Etat," which do 
not confer distinction on the galleries. Cologne has the central 
collection of the early Rhenish school; Nuremberg is remarkable 
for early German work (Wohlgemut, &c). Stuttgart, Cassel 
(Dutch) and Hamburg (with a considerable number of British 
pictures) are also noteworthy, together with Brunswick, Hanover, 
Augsburg, Darmstadt and Dusseldorf , where German and Dutch 
art preponderate. Seville is famous for twenty -five examples of 
Murillo, and there are old Spanish paintings at Valencia, Cordova 
and Cadiz. 

In Great Britain the best of the municipal galleries of general 
schools are at Liverpool (early Flemish and British), and at 
Glasgow (Scottish painters, Rembrandt, Van der Municipal 
Goes and Venetian schools). In France there are galleries 
very large galleries at Tours, Montpellier, Lyons ° f generai 
(Perugino, Rubens), Dijon and Grenoble (Italian), 
Valenciennes (Watteau and school), while Rennes, Lille and 
Marseilles have first-rate collections. Nantes, Orleans, Besancon, 
Cherbourg and Caen have also many paintings, French for 
the most part, but with occasional foreign pictures of real 
importance, presented by the state during the Napoleonic con- 
quests, and not returned on the declaration of peace as were 
the works of art amassed in Paris. Some of the American 
collections have in recent years made a great advance in their 
acquisition of good pictures. At Boston (Museum of Fine 
Arts) all schools are represented, so too at the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art in New York, which is strong in Italian and Dutch 
works. Modern French and Flemish art is a feature of the 
Academy at Philadelphia, at the Lenox Library (New York), 
and at Chicago, where there are good examples of Millet, Con- 
stable and Rembrandt. The Corcoran bequest at Washington 
is of minor importance. The best civic collection in Germany 
of this class is the Stadel Institute at Frankfort (Van Eyck, 
Christus, early Flemish and Italian). 

As the great bulk of religious painting was executed for 
church decoration, there are still numberless churches which 
may be considered picture galleries. Thus at Antwerp churches. 
cathedral the Rubens paintings are remarkable; at 
Ghent, Van Eyck; at Bruges (hospital of St John), Memlinc; 



ARTHRITIS— ARTHROPODA 



673 



at Pisa, the Campo Santo (early Tuscan schools); at Sant' 
Apollinare, Ravenna, primitive Italo-Byzantine mosaics; at 
Siena, Pinturichio. Examples could be multiplied indefinitely 
— in Italy alone there are 80,000 churches and chapels, in all of 
which pictorial art has been employed. In Italy, besides the 
church " galleries " still used for religious services, there are 
some which have been secularized and are now used as museums, 
e.g. Certosa at Pa via, and San Vitale at Ravenna (mosaics); at 
Florence, the Scalzo (Andrea del Sarto); San Marco (Fra 
Angelico) ; the Riccardi and Pazzi chapels (Gozzoli and Perugino) ; 
at Milan, in the Santa Maria delle Grazie, the " Last Supper," 
by Leonardo, and at Padua, the famous Arena chapel (Giotto). 

The Vatican galleries, though best known for their statuary, 
have fine examples of painting, chiefly of the Italian school; 
Private the most famous easel picture is Raphael's " Trans- 
andscmi- figuration," but the Stanze, apartments entirely 
prl n"ri decorated by painting, are even more famous. In 
' England three royal palaces are open to the public — 
Hampton Court (Mantegna), Windsor (Van Dyck, Zuccarelli), 
and Kensington (portraits). At Buckingham Palace the Dutch 
pictures are admirable, and Queen Victoria lent the cele- 
brated Raphael cartoons to the Victoria and Albert Museum. 
Semi-private collections belong to Dulwich College (Velasquez 
and Watteau), Oxford University (Italian drawings), the Soane 
Museum (Hogarth and English school), and the Royal Academy 
(Leonardo). Among private collections the most important are 
the Harrach, and Prince Liechtenstein (Vienna), J. Pierpont 
Morgan (including miniatures), Mrs J. Gardner of Boston 
(Italian), Prince Corsini (Florence). In Great Britain there are 
immense riches in private houses, though many collections have 
been dispersed. The most noteworthy (1909) belong to the 
dukes of Devonshire and Westminster, Lord Ellesmere, Captain 
Holford (including the masterpiece of Cuyp), Ludwig Mond, 
Lord Lansdowne, Miss Rothschild. The finest private col- 
lection is at Panshanger, formerly the seat of Lord Cowper, 
the gallery of Van Dyck's work being quite the best in the 
world. 

Many galleries are devoted to periodical exhibitions in London ; 
the Royal Academy is the leading agency of this character, 
having held exhibitions since 1769. Its loan exhibi- 
aadcom- ^ ons 0I Old Masters are most important. Similar 
merclal. enterprises are the New Gallery, opened in 1888, the 
Grafton Gallery, and others. There are also old- 
established societies of etchers, water-colourists, &c. A feature 
common to these exhibitions is that the public always pays for 
admission, though they differ from the commercial exhibitions, 
becoming more common every year, in which the work of a single 
school or painter is shown for profit. But the annual exhibitions 
at the Guildhall, under the auspices of the corporation, are free. 
The great periodical exhibition of French art is known as the 
Salon, and for some years it has had a rival in the Champ de 
Mars exhibition. These two societies are now respectively 
housed in the Grand Palais and Petit Palais, in the Champs 
Elysees, which were erected in connexion with the Paris Exhibi- 
tion of 1900, but with the ultimate object of being devoted to the 
service of the two Salons. Berlin, Rome, Vienna and other 
Continental towns have regular exhibitions of original work. 

The best history of art galleries is found in their official and other 
catalogues, see article Museums. See also L. Viardot, Les Musees 
d' Italic, &c._ (3 vols., Paris, 1842, 1843, 1844); Annual Reports, 
official, of Xational Portrait Gallery, National Galleries of England, 
Ireland and Scotland; Civil Service Estimates, class iv. official. 
See also the series edited by Lafenestre and E. Richtenberger : 
I.e Louvre, La Belgique, Le Hollande, Florence, Belgique; A. La vice. 
Revue des musees de France, . . . d'Allemagne, . . . d'Angleterre, 
. . . d'Espagnc, . . . d'ltalie, . . . de Belgique, de Hollande et de 
Russie (Paris, 1862- 1872); E. Michel, Les Musees d'Allemagne 
(Paris, .1886) ; Kate Thompson, Public Picture Galleries of Europe 
(1880); C. L. Eastlake, Notes on Foreign Picture Galleries; Lord 
Ronald Gower, Pocket Guide to Art Galleries (public and private) of 
Belgium and Holland (1875); and many works, albums, and so 
forth, issued mainly for the sake of the illustrations. (B.) 

ARTHRITIS (from Gr. apdpov, a joint), inflammation of the 
joints, in various forms of what are generally called gout and 
rheumatism (qq~v.). 



ARTHROPODA, a name, denoting the possession by certain 
animals of jointed limbs, now applied to one of the three sub-phyla 
into which one of the great phyla (or primary branches) of 
coelomocoelous animals — the Appendiculata — is divided; the 
other two being respectively the Chaetopoda and the Rotifeia. 
The word " Arthropoda " was first used in classification by 
Siebold and Stannius (Lehrbuch der vergleich. Anatomie, Berlin, 
1845) as that of a primary division of animals, the others recog- 
nized in that treatise being Protozoa, Zoophyta, Vermes, 
Mollusca and Vertebrata. The names Condylopoda and Gnatho- 
poda have been subsequently proposed for the same group. 
The word refers to the jointing of the chitinized exo-skeleton 
of the limbs or lateral appendages of the animals included, 
which are, roughly speaking, the Crustacea, Arachnida, Hexapoda 
(so-called "true insects"), Centipedes and Millipedes. This 
primary group was set up to indicate the residuum of Cuvier's 
Articulata when his class Annelides (the modern Chaetopoda) was 
removed from that embranchement. At the same time C. T. E. 
von Siebold and H. Stannius renovated the group Vermes 
of Linnaeus, and placed in it the Chaetopods and the parasitic 
worms of Cuvier, besides the Rotifers and Turbellarian worms. 1 

The result of the knowledge gained in the last quarter of the 
19th century has been to discredit altogether the group Vermes 
(see Worm), thus set up and so largely accepted by German 
writers even at the present day. We have, in fact, returned 
very nearly to Cuvier's conception of a great division or branch, 
which he called Articulata, including the Arthropoda and the 
Chaetopoda (Annelides of Lamarck, a name adopted by Cuvier), 
and differing from it only by the inclusion of the Rotifera. The 
name Articulata, introduced by Cuvier, has not been retained 
by subsequent writers. The same, or nearly the same, assemblage 
of animals has been called Entomozoaria by de Blainville 
(1822), Arthrozoa by Burmeister (1843), Entomozoa or 
Annellata by H. Milne-Edwards (1855), and Annulosa by 
Alexander M'Leay (1819), who was followed by Huxley (1856). 
The character pointed to by all these terms is that of a ring-like 
segmentation of the body. This, however, is not the character 
to which we now ascribe the chief weight as evidence of the 
genetic affinity and monophyletic (uni-ancestral) origin of the 
Chaetopods, Rotifers and Arthropods. It is the existence in 
each ring of the body of a pair of hollow lateral appendages or 
parapodia, moved by intrinsic muscles and penetrated by blood- 
spaces, which is the leading fact indicating the affinities of 
these great sub-phyla, and uniting them as blood-relations. The 

1 Thegroup Arthropoda itself, thusconstituted.wasprecisely identical 
in its area with the Insecta of Linnaeus, the Entoma of Aristotle. But 
the word " Insect " had become limited since the days of Linnaeus 
to the Hexapod Pterygote forms, to the exclusion of his Aptera. 
Lamarck's penetrating genius is chiefly responsible for the shrinkage 
of the word Insecta, since it was he who, forty years after Linnaeus's 
death, set up and named the two great classes Crustacea and Arach- 
nida (included by Linnaeus under Insecta as the order " Aptera "), 
assigning to them equal rank with the remaining Insecta of Linnaeus, 
for which he proposed the very appropriate class-name " Hexapoda." 
Lamarck, however, appears not to have insisted on this name Hexa- 
poda, and so the class of Pterygote Hexapods came to retain the 
group- name Insecta, which is, historically or etymologically, no more 
appropriate to them than it is to the classes Crustacea and Arachnida. 
The tendency to retain the original name of an old and comprehensive 
group for one of the fragments into which such group becomes divided 
by the advance of knowledge — instead of keeping the name for its 
logical use as"a comprehensive term, including the new divisions, each 
duly provided with a new name — is most curiously illustrated in the 
history of the word physiology. Cicero says, " Physiologia naturae 
ratio," and such was the meaning of the name Physiologus, given to 
a cyclopaedia of what was known and imagined about earth, sea, sky, 
birds, beasts and fishes, which for a thousand years was the authori- 
tative source of information on these matters, and was translated 
into every European tongue. With the revival of learning, however, 
first one and then another special study became recognized — 
anatomy, botany, zoology, mineralogy, until at last the great 
comprehensive term physiology was bereft of all its once-included 
subject-matter, excepting the study of vital processes pursued by 
the more learned members of the medical profession. Professional 
tradition and an astute perception on their part of the omniscience 
suggested by the terms, have left the medical men in English- 
speaking lands in undisturbed but illogical possession of the words 
physiology, physic and physician. 



674 



ARTHROPODA 



parapodia (fig. 8) of the marine branchiate worms are the same 
things genetically as the " legs " of Crustacea and Insects (figs. 
10 and u). Hence the term Appendiculata was introduced by 
Lankester (preface to the English edition of Gegenbaur's Com- 
parative Anatomy, 1878 ) to indicate the group. The relation- 
ships of the Arthropoda thus stated are shown in the subjoined 
table:— 



Phylum- 



( Sub-phylum 1. Rotifera. 
-Appendiculata . •] " 2. Chaetopoda. 

( " 3. Arthropoda. 



The Rotifera are characterized by the retention of what 
appears in Molluscs and Chaetopods as an embryonic organ, 
the velum or ciliated prae-oral girdle, as a locomotor and food- 
seizing apparatus, and by the reduction of the muscular parapodia 
to a rudimentary or non-existent condition in all present surviving 
forms except Pedalion. In many important respects they are 
degenerate — reduced both in size and elaboration of structure. 

The Chaetopoda are characterized by the possession of horny 
epidermic chaetae embedded in the integument and moved 
by muscles. Probably the chaetae preceded the development 
of parapodia, and by their concentration and that of the muscular 
bundles connected with them at the sides of each segment, led 
directly to the evolution of the parapodia. The parapodia of 
Chaetopoda are never coated with dense chitin, and are, therefore, 
never converted into jaws; the primitive " head-lobe " or 
prostomium persists, and frequently carries eyes and sensory 
tentacles. Further, in all members of the sub-phylum Chaeto- 
poda the relative position of the prostomium, mouth and peri- 
stomium or first ring of the body, retains its primitive character. 
We do not find in Chaetopoda that parapodia, belonging to 
primitively post-oral rings or body-segments (called " somites," 
as proposed by H. Milne-Edwards), pass in front of the mouth 
by adaptational shifting of the oral aperture. (See, however, 8.) 

The Arthropoda might be better called the " Gnathopoda," 
since their distinctive character is, that one or more pairs of 
appendages behind the mouth are densely chitinized and turned 
(fellow to fellow on opposite sides) towards one another so as 
to act as jaws. This is facilitated by an important general 
change in the position of the parapodia; their basal attachments 
are all more ventral in position than in the Chaetopoda, and tend 
to approach from the two sides towards the mid-ventral line. 
Very usually (but not in the Onychophora = Peripatus) all the 
parapodia are plated with chitin secreted by the epidermis, 
and divided into a series of joints — giving the " arthropodous " 
or hinged character. 

There are other remarkable and distinctive features of structure 
which hold the Arthropoda together, and render it impossible to 
conceive of them as having a polyphyletic origin, that is to say, 
as having originated separately by two or three distinct lines of 
descent from lower animals; and, on the contrary, establish the 
view that they have been developed from a single line of primitive 
Gnathopods which arose by modification of parapodiate annulate 
worms not very unlike some of the existing Chaetopods. These 
additional features are the following — (1) All existing Arthropoda 
have an ostiate heart and have undergone " phleboedesis," that 
is to say, the peripheral portions of the blood-vascular system 
are not fine tubes as they are in the Chaetopoda and as they were 
in the hypothetical ancestors of Arthropoda, but are swollen so 
as to obliterate to a large extent the coelom, whilst the separate 
veins entering the dorsal vessel or heart have coalesced, leaving 
valvate ostia (see fig. 1) by which the blood passes from a 
pericardial blood-sinus formed by the fused veins into the dorsal 
vessel or heart (see Lankester's Zoology, part ii., introductory 
chapter, 1900). The only exception to this is in the case of 
minute degenerate forms where the heart has disappeared 
altogether. The rigidity of the integument caused by the depo- 
sition of dense chitin upon it is intimately connected with the 
physiological activity and form of all the internal organs, and 
is undoubtedly correlated with the total disappearance of the 
circular muscular layer of the body-wall present in Chaetopods. 
(2) In all existing Arthropoda the region in front of the mouth is 
no longer formed by the primitive prostomium or head-lobe, but 



one or more segments, originally post-oral, with their appendages 
have passed in front of the mouth (prosthomeres). At the same 
time the prostomium and its appendages cease to be recognizable 
as distinct elements of the head. The brain no longer consists 
solely of the nerve-ganglion-mass proper to the prostomial lobe, 
as in Chaetopoda, but is a composite (syncerebrum) produced by 
the fusion of this and the nerve-ganglion-masses proper to the 
prosthomeres or segments which pass forwards, whilst their 
parapodia ( = appendages) become converted into eye-stalks, 
and antennae, or more rarely grasping organs. (3) As in Chaeto- 
poda, coelomic funnels (coelomoducts) may occur right and left 




y^lK^ 









After Lankester, Q. J . Mic. Sci. vol . xxxiv., 1893. 

Fig. i. — Diagram to show the gradual formation of the Arthropod 
pericardial blood-sinus and " ostiate " heart by the swelling up 
(phleboedesis) of the veins entering the dorsal vessel or heart of a 
Chaetopod-like ancestor. The figure on the left represents the con- 
dition in a Chaetopod , that on the right the condition in an Arthropod, 
the other two are hypothetical intermediate forms. 

as pairs in each ring-like segment or somite of the body, and 
some of these are in all cases retained as gonoducts and often as 
renal excretory organs (green glands, coxal glands of Arachnida, 
not crural glands, which are epidermal in origin) ; but true 
nephridia, genetically identical with the nephridia of earthworms, 
do not occur (on the subject of coelom, coelomoducts and 
nephridia, see the introductory chapter of part ii. of Lankester's 
Treatise on Zoology). 

Tabular Statement of the Grades, Classes and Sub-classes of the 
Arthropoda. — It will be convenient now to give in the clearest 
form a statement of the larger subdivisions of the Arthropoda 
which it seems necessary to recognize at the present day. The 
justification of the arrangement adopted will form the substance 
of the rest of the present article. The orders included in the 
various classes are not discussed here, but are treated of under the 
following titles: — Peripatus (Onychophora), Centipede and 
Millipede (Myriapoda), Hexapoda (Insecta), Arachnida and 
Crustacea. 

Sub-Phylum ARTHROPODA (of the Phylum Appendiculata). 
Grade A. Hyparthropoda (hypothetical forms connecting ancestors 

of Chaetopoda with those of Arthropoda). 
Grade B. Protarthropoda. 
Class Onychophora. 
Ex . — Peripatus. 
Grade C. Euarthropoda. 
Class 1. Diplopoda. 
Ex. — Julus. 
Class 2. Arachnida. 

Grade a. Anomomeristica. 

Ex. — Phacops. 
Grade b. Nomomeristica. 
(a) Pantopoda. 

Ex. — Pycnogonum. 
(b) Euarachnida. 

Ex. — Limulus, Scorpio, Mygale, Acarus. 
Class 3. Crustacea. 

Grade a. Entomostraca. 

Ex. — Apus, Branchipus, Cyclops, Balanus. 
Grade b. Malacostraca. 

Ex. — Nebalia, Astacus, Oniscus, Gammarus. 
Class 4. Chilopoda. 

Ex. — Scolopendra. 
Class 5. Hexapoda (syn. Insecta Pterygota). 

Ex. — Locusta, Phryganea, Papilio, Apis, Musca, Cimex, 
Lucanus, Machilis. 
Incertae sedis — Tardigrada, Pentastomidae (degenerate forms). 
The Segmentation of the Body of Arthropoda. — The body of the 
Arthropoda is more or less clearly divided into a series of rings, 



ARTHROPODA 



675 



segments, or somites" which can be shown to be repetitions one of 
another, possessing identical parts and organs which may be larger 
or smaller, modified in shape or altogether suppressed in one somite 
as compared with another. A similar constitution of the body is 
more clearly seen in the Chaetopod worms. In the Vertebrata also 
a repetition of units of structure (myotomes, vertebrae, &c.) — 
which is essentially of the same nature as the repetition in Arthropods 
and Chaetopods, but in many respects subject to peculiar develop- 
ments — is observed. The name "metamerism " has been given to 
this structural phenomenon because the " meres," or repeated units, 
follow one another in line. Each such " mere " is often called a 
" metamere." A satisfactory consideration of the structure of the 
Arthropods demands a knowledge of what may be called the laws of 
metamerism, and reference should be made to the article under that 
head. 

The Theory of the Arthropod Head. — The Arthropod head is a 
tagma or group of somites which differ in number and in their relative 
position in regard to the mouth, in different 
classes. In a simple Chaetopod (fig. 2) the 
head consists of the first somite only; that 
somite is perforated by the mouth, and is 
provided with a prostomium or prae-oral 
lobe. The prostomium is essentially a part 
or outgrowth of the first somite, and cannot 
be regarded as itself a somite. It gives rise 
to a nerve-ganglion mass, the prostomial 
ganglion. In the marine Chaetopods (the 
Polychaeta) (fig. 3), we find the same 
essential structure, but the prostomium may 
give rise to two or more tactile tentacles, 
and to the vesicular eyes. The somites have 
well-marked parapodia, and the second and 

2 Diagram third, as we '' as the first, may give rise to 

„^ „„a „a tentacles which are directed forward, and 

thus contribute to form " the head." But 

the mouth remains as an inpushing of the 

wall of the first somite. 

The Arthropoda are all distinguished from 




From Goo lrich, Q. J. Micr 
Set. vol. xi. p. 247. 

Fig. 

of the head and ad- 
jacent region of an Oli- 
gochaet Chaetopod. 
Pr, The prostomium. 
m, The mouth. 



I, 



The nrostomial tne Chaetopoda by the fact that the head 
ganglion-mass or cons ' sts OI one or more somites which lie in 
archi-cerebrum front of the mouth (now called prosthomeres) , 
II III coelom of as we " as °' one or more somites behind it 
the first second (opisthomeres). The first of the post -oral 
and third somites, somites invariably has ks parapodia modi- 
fied so as to torm a pair of hemignaths 
(mandibles). About 1870 the question arose for discussion 
whether the somites in front of the mouth are to be considered 
as derived from the prostomium of a Chaetopod-like ancestor. 
Milne-Edwards and Huxley had satisfied themselves with discussing 
and establishing, according to the data at their command, the 
number of somites in the Arthropod head, but had not considered 
the question of the nature of the prae-oral somites. Lankester (2) 
was the first to suggest that (as is actually the fact in the Nauplius 
larva of the Crustacea) the prae-oral somites or prosthomeres and 
their appendages were ancestrally post- 
oral, but have become prae-oral " by 
adaptational shifting of the oral aperture." 
This has proved to be a sound hypothesis 
and is now accepted as the basis upon 
which the Arthropod head must be inter- 
preted (see Korschelt and Heider (3)). 
Further, the morphologists of the 'fifties 
appear, with few exceptions, to have ac- 
cepted a preliminary scheme with regard 
to the Arthropod head and Arthropod 
segmentation generally, which was mis- 
leading and caused them to adopt forced 
conclusions and interpretations. It was 

p IG i ) . Diagram of conceived by Huxley, among others, that 

the head and adjacent the same number of cephalic somites 
region of a Polychaet would be found to be characteristic of all 
Chaetopod. Letters as the diverse classes of Arthropoda, and that 
in fig. 1, with the addi- the somites, not only of the head but of 
tion of'T, prostomial the various regions of the body, could 
tentacle; Pa, parapo- be closely compared in their numerical 
dium. (From Goodrich.) sequence in classes so distinct as the 
Hexapods, Crustaceans and Arachnids. 
The view which it now appears necessary to take is, on the con- 
trary, this — viz. that all the Arthropoda are to be traced to a 
common ancestor resembling a Chaetopod worm, but differing from 
it in having lost its chaetae and in having a prosthomere in front of 
the mouth (instead of prostomium only) and a pair of hemignaths 
(mandibles) on the parapodia of the buccal somite. From this 
ancestor Arthropods with heads of varying degrees of complexity 
have been developed characteristic of the different classes, whilst 
the parapodia and somites of the body have become variously 
modified and grouped in these different classes. The resemblances 
which the members of one class often present to the members of 
another class in regard to the form of the limb-branches (rami) of 
the parapodia. and the formation of tagmata (regions) are not 




Ctnt. 



hastily to be ascribed to common inheritance, but we must consider 
whether they are not due to homoplasy — that is, to the moulding of 
natural selection acting in the different classes upon fairly similar 
elements under like exigencies. 

The'structure of the head in Arthropods presents three profoundly 
separated grades of structure dependent upon the number of pros- 
thomeres which have been assimilated by the prae-oral region. The 
classes presenting these distinct plans of head-structure cannot be 
closely associated in any scheme 
of classification professing to be 
natural. Peripatus, the type-genus 
of the class Onychophora, stands at 
the base of the series with only a 
single prosthomere (fig. 4). In Peri- 
patus the prostomium of the Chae- 
topod-like ancestor is atrophied, but 
it is possible that two processes on 
the front of the head (FP) represent 
in the embryo the dwindled prosto- 
mial tentacles. The single prostho- 
mere carries the retractile tentacles 
as its " parapodia." The second 
somite is the buccal somite (II, 
fig. 4) ; its parapodia have horny 
jaws on their ends, like the claws Fig 4. — Diagram of the head 
on the following legs (fig. 9), and and adjacent region of Peri- 
act as hemignaths (mandibles). The patus. Monoprosthomerous. 




study of sections of the embryo m, 
establishes these facts beyond doubt. I, 
It also shows us that the neuro- 
meres, no less than the embryonic 
coelomic cavities, point to the exist- 
ence of one, and only one, prostho- II, 
mere in Peripatus, of which the 
" protocerebrum," P, is the neuro- 
whilst the deuterocerebrum, 



Mouth. 

Coelom of the first somite 
which carries the anten- 
nae and is in front of the 
mouth. 

Coelom of the second 
somite which carries the 
mandibles (hence deu- 
terognathous). 



D, is the neuromere of the second III and IV, Coelom of the third 



and fourth somites. 
Rudimentary frontal pro- 
cesses perhaps repre- 
senting the prostomial 
tentacles of Polychaeta. 



or buccal somite. A brief indication 
of these facts is given by saying FP, 
that the Onychophora are " deuter- 
ognathous " — that is to say, that 
the buccal somite carrying the man- 
dibular hemignaths is the second of Ant, Antenna or tactile ten- 
the whole series. tacle. 

What has become of the nerve- Md, Mandible, 
ganglion of the prostomial lobe of Op, Oral- papilla, 
the Chaetopod in Peripatus is not P, Protocerebrum or fore- 
clearly ascertained, nor is its fate most cerebral mass be- 

indicated by the study of the em- longing to the first 

bryonic head of other Arthropods so somite, 

far. Probably it is fused with the D, Deuterocerebrum, consist- 



ing of ganglion cells be- 
longing to the second or 
mandibular somite. 
(After Goodrich.) 



protocerebrum, and may also be 
concerned in the history of the very 
peculiar paired eyes of Peripatus, 
which are like those of Chaetopods in 
structure — viz. vesicles with an intra- 
vesicular lens, whereas the eyes of all 
other Arthropodshaveessentially an- 
other structure, being " cups " of the 
epidermis, in which a knob-like or 
rod-like thickening of the cuticle is 
fitted as refractive medium. 

In Diplopoda (Julus, &c.) the 
results of embryological study point 
to a composition of the front part 
of the head exactly similar to that 
which we find in Onychophora. 
They are deuterognathous. 

The Arachnida present the first 
stage of progress. Here embryology . 

shows that there are two prostho- head and adjacent region of an 
meres (fig. 5), and that the gnatho- Arachnid. Diprosthomerous 
bases of the chelae which act as the ln the adult condition, though 
first pair of hemignaths are carried embryologically the append- 
by the third somite. The Arachnida a S es ° f somite II and the 
are therefore tritognathous. The somite itselt are, as here 
two prosthomeres are indicated by drawn, not actually in front ol 
their coelomic cavities in the embryo th e mouth. 
(I and II, fig. 5), and by two neuro- &, 
meres, the protocerebrum and the *""■. 
deuterocerebrum. The appendages *J> 
of the first prosthomere are not 




Fig. 5. — Diagram of the 



Lateral eye. 

Chelicera. 

Mouth. 

Protocerebrum. 

Deuterocerebrum. 



present as tentacles, as in Peripatus ~> 

and Diplopods, but are possibly l > n nI > IV - *-oelom of the 



represented by the eyes or possibly 
altogether aborted. The appendages 
of the second prosthomere are the 
well-known chelicerae of the Arach- 
nids, rarely, if ever, antenniform, but modified as 
clasp-knife fangs in spiders- 



first, second, third 
fourth somites. 
(Atter Goodrich.) 



md 



retroverts " or 



676 



ARTHROPODA 



The Crustacea (fig. 6) and the Hexapoda (fig. 7) agree in having 
three somites in front of the mouth, and it is probable, though not 
ascertained, that the Chilopoda (Scolopendra, &c.) are in the same 
case. The three prosthomeres or prae-oral somites of Crustacea 
due to the sinking back of the mouth one somite farther than in 
Arachnida are not clearly indicated by coelomic cavities in the 
embryo, but their existence is clearly established by the development 
and position of the appendages and by the neuromeres. 

The eyes in some Crustacea are mounted on articulated stalks, 
and from the fact that they can after injury be replaced by antenna- 
like appendages it is inferred that they represent the parapodia of 
the most anterior prosthomere. The second prosthomere carries 
the first pair of antennae and the third the second pair of antennae. 
Sometimes the pair of appendages has not a merely tactile jointed 
ramus, but is converted into a claw or clasper. Three neuromeres — 
a proto-, deutero-, and trito-cerebrum — corresponding to those three 
prosthomeres are sharply marked in the embryo. The fourth somite 
is that in which the mouth now opens, and which accordingly has its 
appendages converted into hemignathous mandibles. The Crustacea 
are tetartognathous. 

The history of the development of the head has been carefully 
worked out in the Hexapod insects. As in Crustacea and Arachnida, 



am' 



& 



^. 



re 
v * 



«k 



Jl 



the two following somites associated with it by the adaptation of 
their appendages as jaws, and the ankylosis of their terga with that 
of the prosthomeres. But in higher Crustacea the cephalic " tagma " 
is extended, and more somites are added to the fusion, and their 
appendages adapted as jaws of a kind. 

The Hexapoda are not known to us in their earlier or more primi- 
tive manifestations; we only know them as possessed of a definite 
number of somites arranged in definite numbers in three great 
tagmata. The head shows two jaw-bearing somites besides the 
mandibular somite (V, VI, in fig. 7) — thus six in all (as in some 
Crustacea), including prosthomeres, all ankylosed by their terga to 
form a cephalic shield. There is, however, good embryological 
evidence in some Hexapods of the existence of a seventh somite, 
the supra-lingual, occurring between the somite of the mandibles 
and the somite of the first maxillae (4). This segment is indicated 
embryologically by its paired coelomic cavities. It is practically an 
excalated somite, having no existence in the adult. It is probably 
not a mere coincidence that the Hexapod, with its two rudimentary 
somites devoid of appendages, is thus found to possess twenty-one 
somites, including that which carries the anus, and that this is also 
the number present in the Malacostracous Crustacea. 

The Segmental Lateral Appendages or Limbs of Arthropoda. — It 
has taken some time to obtain any general acceptance of the view 
that the parapodia of the Chaetopoda and the limbs of Arthropoda 
are genetically identi- 



ARTHROPODA 



677 



rtK#* 




as, for instance, in the lobster's claw. Such chelate rami or limb- 
branchesare independently developed in Crustacea and inArachnida, 
and are carried by somites of the body which do not correspond in 

position in the two groups. The 
range of modification of which the 
rami or limb-branches of the limbs 
of Arthropoda are capable is very 
large, and in allied orders or even 
families or genera we often find 
what is certainly the palp of the 
same appendage (as determined by 
numerical position of the segments) 
— in one case antenniform, in another 
chelate, in another pediform, and in 
another reduced to a mere stump or 
absent altogether. Very probably 
the power which the appendage of 
a given segment has of assuming the 
perfected form and proportions 
previously attained by the append- 
age of another segment must be 
classed as an instance of " homoe- 
osis," not only where such a change 
is obviously due to abnormal develop- 
ment or injury, but also where it 
constitutes a difference permanently 
established between allied orders or 
smaller groups, or between the two 
sexes. 

The most extreme disguise as- 
sumed by the Arthropod parapodium 
or appendage is that of becoming 
a mere stalk supporting an eye — a 
fact which did not obtain general 
credence until the experiments of 
Herbst in 1895, who found, on cut- 
ting off the eye-stalk of Palaemon, 
that a jointed antenna-like append- 
age was regenerated in its place. 
Since the eye-stalks of Podophthal- 
mate Crustacea represent append- 
ages, we are forced to the conclusion 
that the sessile eyes of other 
Crustacea, and of other Arthropoda 
generally, indicate the position of 
appendages which have atrophied. 1 
From what has been said, it is 
apparent that we cannot, in attempt- 
ing to discover the affinities and 
divergences of the various forms of 
Arthropoda, attach a very high 
phylogenetic value to the coincidence 
or divergence in form of the ap- 
pendages belonging to the somites 
compared with one another. 
The principal forms assumed by the Arthropod parapodium and 
its rami may be thus enumerated : — 

(1) Axial corm well developed, unsegmented or with two to four 

segments ; lateral 
endites and exites 
(rami) numerous 
and of various 
lengths (certain 
limbs of lower 
Crustacea). 

(2) Corm, with 
short unseg- 
mented rami, 
forming a flat- 
tened foliaceous 
appendage, adap- 
ted to swim- 
ming and respira- 
tion (trunk-limbs 
of Phyllopods). 

(3) Corm alone 
developed ; with 
no endites or 
exites, but pro- 
vided with ter- 
minal chitinous 
claws (ordinary leg of Peripatus), with terminal jaw teeth (jaw of 
Peripatus), or with blunt extremity (oral papilla of same) (see fig. 9). 

1 H. Milne-Edwards, who was followed by Huxley, long ago formu- 
lated the conclusion that the eye-stalks of Crustacea are modified 
appendages, basing his argument on a specimen of Palinurus (figured 
in Bateson's book (1), in which the eye-stalk of one side is replaced 
by an antenniform palp. Hofer (6) in 1894 described a similar case 
in Astacus. 



Fig. 9. — Three somite-ap- 
pendages or parapodia of 
Peripatus. 

A, A walking leg; p 1 to p 4 , 
the characteristic " pads "; /, 
the foot; cl 1 , cP, the two 
claws. 

B, An oral papilla, one of 
the second pair of post-oral 
appendages. 

C, One of the first post-oral 
pair of appendages or man- 
dibles; cl 1 , cl', the greatly 
enlarged claws. (Compare A.) 

The appendages are repre- 
sented with the neural or 
ventral surface uppermost. 
Original. 




After Lankester, Q.J. Mic. Sci. vol. xxi., 1881. 

Fig. 10. — The second thoracic (fifth post-oral) 
appendage of the left side of Apus cancriformis, 
placed with its ventral or neural surface upper- 
most to compare with figs. 8 and 9. 

1, 2, The two segments of the axis. 

en 1 , The gnathobase. 

en- to en e , The five following " endites." 

fl, The flabellum or anterior exite. 

br, The bract or posterior exite. 



(4) Three of the rami of the primitive limb (endites 5 and 6, 
and exite 1) specially developed as endopodite, exopodite, and 
epipodite — the first two often as firm and strongly chitinized, 
segmented, leg-like structures ; the original axis or corm reduced to 
a basal piece, with or without a distinct gnathobase (endite 1) — 
typical tri-ramose limb of higher Crustacea. 

(5) One ramus (the endopodite) alone developed — the original 
axis or corm serving as its basal joint with or without gnathobase. 
This is the usual uni-ramose limb found in the various classes of 
Arthropoda. It varies as to the presence or absence of the jaw- 
process and as to the stoutness of the segments of the ramus, theii 
number (frequently six, plus the basal corm), and the modification 
of the free end. This may be filiform or brush-like or lamellate 
when it is an antenna or palp; a simple spike (walking leg of 
Crustacea, of other aquatic forms, and of Chilopods and Diplopods) ; 
the, terminal joint flattened (swimming leg of Crustacea and Giganto- 
straca) ; the terminal joint provided with two or with three recurved 
claws (walking leg of many terrestrial forms — e.g. Hexapoda and 
Arachnida); the penultimate joint with a process equal in length 
to the last joint, so as to form a nipping organ (chelae of Crustaceans 
and Arachnids) ; the last joint reflected and movable on the pen- 
ultimate, as the blade of a clasp-knife on its handle (the retrovert, 




After Lankester, Q. J. Mic. Sci. vol. 
xxi., 1881. 

Fig. 11.— The first thoracic 
(fourth post-oral) appendage of 
Apus cancriformis (right side). 
Ax 1 to Ax A , the four segments of 

the axis with muscular 

bands. 
En 1 , Gnathobase. 
En 1 to En h , The elongated jointed 

endites (rami). 
.Ere 6 , The rudimentary sixth en- 
dite (exopodite of higher 

Crustacea). 
The flabellum which becomes 

the epipodite of higher 

forms. 
The bract devoid of muscles 

and respiratory in function. 

toothed so as to act as a biting jaw in the Hexapod Mantis, the 
Crustacean Squilla and others) ; with the last joint produced into a 
needle-like stabbing process in spiders. 

(6) Two rami developed (usually, but perhaps not always, the 
equivalents of the endopodite and exopodite) supported on the 
somewhat elongated corm (basal segment). This is the typical 
" bi-ramose limb " often found in Crustacea. The rami may be 
flattened for swimming, when it is " a bi-ramose swimmeret," or 
both or only one may be filiform and finely annulate; this is the 
form often presented by the antennae of Crustacea, and rarely by 
prae-oral appendages in other Arthropods. 

(7) The endopoditic ramus is greatly enlarged and flattened, 
without or with only one jointing, the corm (basal segment) is 
evanescent; often the plate-like endopodites of a pair of such 
appendages unite in the middle line with one another or by the 
intermediary of a sternal up-growth and form a single broad plate. 
These are the plate-like swimmerets and opercula of Gigantostraca 
and Limulus among Arachnids and of Isopod Crustaceans. They 
may have rudimentary exopodites, and may or may not have 
branchial filaments or lamellae developed on their posterior faces. 
The simplest form to which they may be reduced is seen in the 
genital operculum of the scorpion. 

(8) The gnathobase becomes greatly enlarged and not sepa- 
rated by a joint from the corm ; it acts as a hemignath or half 
jaw_ working against its fellow of the opposite side. The endo- 
podite may be retained as a small segmented palp at the side of 
the gnathobase or disappear (mandible of Crustacea, Chilopoda 
and Hexapoda). 

_ (9) The corm becomes the seat of a development of a special 
visual_ organ, the Arthropod eye (as opposed to the Chaetopod eye). 
Its jointing (segmentation) may be retained, but its rami disappear 
(Podophthalmous Crustacea). Usually it becomes atrophied, leaving 
the eye as a sessile organ upon the prae-oral region of the body 



678 



ARTHROPODA 



(the eye-stalk and sessile lateral eyes of Arthropoda generally, 
exclusive of Peripatus). 

(10) The forms assumed by special modification of the elements 
of the parapodium in the maxillae, labium, &c, of Hexapods, 
Chilopods, Diplopods, and of various Crustacea, deserve special 
enumeration, but cannot be dealt with without ample space and 
illustration. 

It may be pointed out that the most radical difference presented 
in this list is that between appendages consisting of the corm alone 
without rami (Onychophora) and those with more or less developed 
rami (the rest of the Arthropoda). In the latter class we' should 
distinguish three phases: (a) those with numerous and compara- 
tively undeveloped rami; (6) those with three, or two highly 
developed rami, or with only one — the corm being reduced to the 
dimensions of a mere basal segment ; (c) those reduced to a secondary 
simplicity (degeneration) by overwhelming development of one 
segment (e.g. the isolated gnathobase often seen as " mandible " 
and the genital operculum). 

There is no reason to suppose that any of the forms of limb 
observed in Arthropoda may not have been independently developed 
in two or more separate diverging lines of descent. 

Branchiae. — In connexion with the discussion of the limbs of 
Arthropods, a few words should be devoted to the gill-processes. 
It seems probable that there are branchial plumes or filaments in 
some Arthropoda (some Crustacea) which can be identified with 
the distinct branchial organs of Chaetopoda, which lie dorsal of the 
parapodia and are not part of the parapodium. On the other hand, 
we cannot refuse to admit that any of the processes of an Arthro- 
pod parapodium may become modified as branchial organs, and 
that, as a rule, branchial out-growths are easily developed, de 
novo, in all the higher groups of animals. Therefore, it seems to be, 
with our present knowledge, a hopeless task to analyse the branchial 
organs of Arthropoda and to identify them genetically in groups. 

A brief notice must suffice of the structure and history of the Eyes, 
the Tracheae and the so-called Malpighian tubes of Arthropoda, 
though special importance attaches to each in regard to the deter- 
mination of the affinities of the various animals included in this great 
sub-phylum. 

The Eyes. — The Arthropod eye appears to be an organ of special 
character developed in the common ancestor of the Euarthropoda, 
and distinct from the Chaetopod eye, which is found only in the 
Onychophora where the true Arthropod eye is absent. The essential 
difference between these two kinds of eye appears to be that the 
Chaetopod eye (in its higher developments) is a vesicle enclosing the 
lens, whereas the Arthropod eye is a pit or series of pits into which 
the heavy chitinous cuticle dips and enlarges knobwise as a lens. 
Two distinct forms of the Arthropod eye are observed — the mono- 
meniscous (simple) and the polymeniscous (compound). The nerve- 
end-cells, which lie below the lens, are part of the general epidermis. 
They show in the monomeniscous eye (see article Arachnida, fig. 26) 
a tendency to group themselves into " retinulae," consisting of five 
to twelve cells united by vertical deposits of chitin (rhabdoms). 
In the case of the polymeniscous eye (fig. 23, article Arachnida) a 
single retinula or group of nerve-end-cells is grouped beneath each 
associated lens. A further complication occurs in each of these two 
classes of eye. The monomeniscous eye is rarely provided with a 
single layer of cells beneath its lens; when it is so, it is called mono- 
stichous (simple lateral eye of Scorpion, fig. 22, article Arachnida). 
More usually, by an infolding of the layer of cells in development, 
we get three layers under the lens; the front layer is the corneagen 
layer, and is separated by a membrane from the other two which, 
more or less, fuse and contain the nerve-end-cells (retinal layer). 
These eyes are called diplostichous, and occur in Arachnida and 
Hexapoda (fig. 24, article Arachnida). 

On the other hand, the polymeniscous eye undergoes special 
elaboration on its lines. The retinulae become elongated as deep 
and very narrow pits (fig. 12 and explanation), and develop addi- 
tional cells near the moiith of the narrow pit. Those nearest to the 
lens are the corneagen cells of this more elaborated eye, and those 
between the original retinula cells and the corneagen cells become 
firm and transparent. They are the crystalline cells or vitrella (see 
Watase, 7). Each such complex of cells underlying the lenticle of a 
compound eye is called an " ommatidium " ; the entire mass of cells 
underlying a monomeniscous eye is an " ommataeum." The 
ommataeum, as already stated, tends to segregate into retinulae 
which correspond potentially each to an ommatidium of the com- 
pound eye. The ommatidium is from the first segregate and consists 
of few cells. The compound eye of the king-crab (Limulus) is the 
only recognized instance of ommatidia in their simplest state. 
Each can be readily compared with the single-layered lateral eye of 
the scorpion. In Crustacea and Hexapoda of all grades we find 
compound eyes with the more complicated ommatidia described 
above. We do not find them in any Arachnida. 

It is difficult in the absence of more detailed knowledge as to the 
eyes of Chilopoda and Diplopoda to give full value to these facts 
in tracing the affinities of the various classes of Arthropods. But 
they seem to point to a community of origin of Hexapods and 
Crustacea in regard to the complicated ommatidia of the compound 
eye, and to a certain isolation of the Arachnida, which are, however, 
traceable, so far as the eyes are concerned, to a distant common 




origin with Crustacea and Hexapoda through the very simple 
compound eyes (monostichous, polymeniscous) of Limulus. 

The Tracheae. — In regard to tracheae the very natural tendency 
of zoologists has been until lately to consider them as having once 
developed and once only, and therefore to hold that a group 
" Tracheata " should be recognized, including all tracheate Arthro- 
pods. We are driven by the conclusions arrived at as to the deriva- 
tion of the Arachnida from branchiate ancestors, independently 
of the other tracheate Arthropods, to formulate the conclusion 
that tracheae have been independently developed in the Arachnidan 
class. We are also, by the isolation of Peripatus and the impossi- 
bility of tracing to it all other tracheate Arthropoda, or of regarding 
it as a degenerate offset from some one of the tracheate classes, 
forced to the conclusion that the tracheae of the Onychophora have 
been independently acquired. Having accepted these two con- 
clusions, we formulate the generalization that tracheae can be inde- 
pendently acquired by various branches of Arthropod descent in 
adaptation to a terrestrial as opposed to an aquatic mode of life. 
A great point of interest therefore exists in the knowledge of the 
structure and embryology of tracheae in the different groups. It 
must be confessed that we have not such full knowledge on this head 
as could be wished for. Tracheae are essentially tubes like blood- 
vessels — apparently formed from the same tissue elements as blood- 
vessels — which contain air in place of blood, and usually communi- 
cate by definite orifices, the tracheal stigmata, with the atmosphere. 
They are lined internally by a cuticular deposit of chitin. In Peri- 

Fig. 12. — Diagram to show the deri- 
vation of the unit or " ommatidium " 
of the compound eye of Crustacea and 
Hexapoda, C, from a simple mono- 
meniscous monostichous eye resem- 
bling the lateral eye of a scorpion, A, 
or the unit of the compound lateral 
eye of Limulus (see article Arachnida, 
figs. 22 and 23). B represents an inter- 
mediate hypothetical form in which 
the cells beneath the lens are begin- 
ning to be superimposed as corneagen, 
vitrella and retinula, instead of stand- 
ing side by side in horizontal series. 
The black represents the cuticular 
product of the epidermal cells of the 
ocular area, taking the form either of 
lens, cl, of crystalline body, cry, or of 
rhabdom, rhab; hy, hypodermis or epidermal cells; corn 1 , laterally- 
placed cells in the simpler stage, A, which like the nerve-end cells, 
vit 1 and ret 1 , are corneagens or lens- producing; corn, specialized 
corneagen or lens- producing cells; vit 1 , potential vitrella cells with 
cry 1 , potential crystalline body now indistinguishable from retinula 
cells and rhabdomeres; vit, vitrella cell with cry, its contained 
cuticular product, the crystalline cone or body; ret 1 , rhab 1 , retinula 
cells and rhabdom of scorpion undifferentiated from adjacent cells, 
vit 1 ; ret, retinula cell ; rhab, rhabdom ; nf, optic nerve-fibres. 
(Modified from Watase.) 

patus and the Diplopods they consist of bunches of fine tubes which 
do not branch but diverge from one another; the chitinous lining 
is smooth. In the Hexapods and Chilopods, and the Arachnids 
(usually), they form tree-like branching structures, and their finest 
branches are finer than any blood-capillary, actually in some cases 
penetrating a single cell and supplying it with gaseous oxygen. In 
these forms the chitinous lining of the tubes is thickened by a close- 
set spiral ridge similar to the spiral thickening of the cellulose wall 
of the spiral vessels of plants. It is a noteworthy fact that other 
tubes in these same terrestrial Arthropoda — namely, the ducts of 
glands — are similarly strengthened by a chitinous cuticle, and that 
a spiral or annular thickening of the cuticle is developed in them 
also. Chitin is not exclusively an ectodermal product, but occurs 
also in cartilaginous skeletal plates of mesoblastic origin (connective 
tissue). The immediate cavities or pits into which the tracheal 
stigmata open appear to be in many cases ectodermic in sinkings, 
but there seems to be no reason (based on embryological observation) 
for regarding the tracheae as an ingrowth of the ectoderm. They 
appear, in fact, to be an air-holding modification of the vasifactive 
connective tissue.. Tracheae are abundant just in proportion as 
blood-vessels become suppressed. They are reciprocally exclusive. 
It seems not improbable that they are two modifications of the 
same tissue-elements. In Peripatus the stigmatic pits at which the 
tracheae communicate with the atmosphere are scattered and not 
definite in their position. In other cases the stigmata are definitely 
paired and placed in a few segments or in several. It seems that we 
have to suppose that the vasifactive tissue of Arthropoda can readily 
take the form of air-holding instead of blood-holding tubes, and that 
this somewhat startling change in its character has taken place 
independently in several instances — viz. in the Onychophora, in 
more than one group of Arachnida, in Diplopoda, and again in the 
Hexapoda and Chilopoda. 

The Malpighian Tubes. — This name is applied to the numerous 
fine caecal tubes of noticeable length developed from the proctodaeal 



ARTHROPODA 



679 



invert of ectodermal origin in Hexapods. These tubes are shown 
to excrete nitrogenous waste products similar to uric acid. Tubes 
of renal excretory function in a like position occur in most terrestrial 
Arthropoda — viz. in Chilopoda, Diplopoda and Arachnida. They 
are also found in some of the semi-terrestrial and purely aquatic 
Amphipod Crustaceans. But the conclusion that all such tubes are 
identical in essential character seems to be without foundation. The 
Malpighian tubes of Hexapods are outgrowths of the proctodaeum, 
but those of Scorpion and the Amphipod Crustacea are part of the 
metenteron or endodermal gut, though originating near its junction 
with the proctodaeum. Hence the presence or absence of such tubes 
cannot be used as an argument as to affinity without some dis- 
crimination. The Scorpion's so-called Malpighian tubes are not the 
same organs as those so named in the other Tracheata. Such renal 
caecal tubes seem to be readily evolved from either metenteron or 
proctodaeum when the conditions of the out-wash of nitrogenous 
waste-products are changed by the transference from aquatic to 
terrestrial life. The absence of such renal caeca in Limulus and their 
presence in the terrestrial Arachnida is precisely on a parallel with 
their absence in aquatic Crustacea and their presence in the feebly 
branchiate Amphipoda. 

Group Characters. — We shall now pass the groups of the Arthro- 
poda in review, attempting to characterize them in such a way as 
will indicate their probable affinities and genetic history. 

Sub-Phylum ARTHROPODA.— The characters of the sub- 
phylum and those of the associated sub-phyla Chaetopoda and Roti- 
fera have been given above, as well as the general characters of 
the phylum Appendiculata which comprises these great sub-phyla. 

Grade A. — Hyparthropoda. 
Hypothetical forms. 

Grade B. — Protarthropoda. 

(a) The integument is covered by a delicate soft cuticle (not firm 
or plated) which allows the body and its appendages great range of 
extension and contraction. 

(6) The paired claws on the ends of the parapodia and the fang- 
like modifications of these on the first post-oral appendages (man- 
dibles) are the only hard chitinous portions of the integument. 

(c) The head is deuterognathous — that is to say, there is only one 
prosthomere, and accordingly the first and only pair of hemignaths 
is developed by adaptation of the appendages of the second somite. 

(d) The appendages of the third somite (second post-oral) are 
clawless oral papillae. 

(e) The rest of the somites carry equi-formal simple appendages, 
consisting of a corm or axis tipped with two chitinous claws and 
devoid of rami. 

(f) The segmentation of the body is anomomeristic, there being 
no fixed number of somites characterizing all the forms included. 

(g) The pair of eyes situated on the prosthomere are not of the 
Euarthropod type, but resemble those of Chaetopods (hence Nereid- 
ophthalmous). 

(/;) The muscles of the body-wall and gut do not consist of trans- 
versely-striped muscular fibre, but of the unstriped tissue observed 
also in Chaetopoda. 

(i) A pair of coelomoducts is developed in every somite including 
the prosthomere, in which alone it atrophies in later development. 

(j) The ventral nerve-cords are widely separated — in fact, lateral 
in position. 

(k) There are no masses of nerve-cells forming a ganglion (neuro 
mere) in each somite. (In this respect the Protarthropoda are at 
a lower stage than most of the existing Chaetopoda.) 

(/) The genital ducts are formed by the enlargement of the coelo- 
moducts of the penultimate somite. 

Class (Unica). — Onychophora. 

With the characters of the grade: add the presence within the 
body of fine unbranched tracheal tubes, devoid of spiral thickening, 
opening to the exterior by numerous irregularly scattered tracheal 
pits. 

Genera — Eoperipatus, Peripatopsis, Opisthopatus, &c. (See Peri- 

PATCS.) 

Grade C (of the Arthropoda). — Euarthropoda. 

(a) Integument heavily plated with firm chitinous cuticle, allow- 
ing no expansion and retraction of regions of the body nor change 
of dimensions, except, in some cases, a dorso-ventral bellows move- 
ment. The separation of the heavier plates of chitin by grooves of 
delicate cuticle results in the hinging or jointing of the body and 
its appendages, and the consequent flexing and extending of the 
jointed pieces. 

(6) Claws and fangs are developed on the branches or rami of the 
parapodia, not on the end of the axis or corm. 

(c) The head is either deuterognathous, tritognathous, or tetartog- 
nathous. 

(d) Rarely only one, and usually at least two, of the somites 
following the mandibular somite carry appendages modified as jaws 
(with exceptions of a secondary origin). 

(<•) The rest of the somites may all carry appendages, or only a 
limited number may carry appendages. In all cases the append- 
ages primarily develop rami or branches which form the limbs, the 



primitive axis or corm being reduced and of insignificant size. In 
the most primitive stock all the post-oral appendages had gnatho- 
basic outgrowths. 

(/) The segmentation of the body is anomomeristic in the more 
archaic members of each class, nomomeristic in the higher members. 

(g) The two eyes of Chaetopod structure have disappeared, and 
are replaced by the Euarthropod eyes. 

(h) The muscles in all parts of the body consist of striped muscular 
fibre, never of unstriped muscular tissue. 

(i) The coelomoducts are suppressed in most somites, and retained 
only as the single pair of genital ducts (very rarely more numerous) 
and in some also as the excretory glands (one or two pairs). 

(j) The ventral nerve-cords approach one another in the mid- 
ventral line behind the mouth. 

(k) The nerve-cells of the ventral nerve cords are segregated as 
paired ganglia in each somite, often united by meristic dislocation 
into composite ganglia. 

(/) The genital ducts may be the coelomoducts of the penultimate 
or antepenultimate or adjacent somite, or of a somite placed near 
the middle of the series, or of a somite far forward in the series. 
Class 1 (of the Euarthropoda). — Diplopoda. 

The head has but one prosthomere (monoprosthomerous), and is 
accordingly deuterognathous. This carries short-jointed antennae 
(in one case bi-ramose) and eyes, the structure and development of 
which require further elucidation. Only one somite following the 
first post-oral or mandibula'r segment has its appendages modified 
as jaws. 

The somites of the body, except in Pauropus, either fuse after 
early development and form double somites with two pairs of 
appendages (Julus, &c), or present legless and leg-bearing somites 
alternating. 

Somites, anomomeristic, from 12 to 150 in the post-cephalic series. 

The genital ducts open in the fourth, or between the fourth and 
fifth post-oral somite. 

Terrestrial forms with small-jointed legs formed by adaptation of 
a single ramus of the appendage. Tracheae are present. 

Note. — The Diplopoda include the Juliformia, the Symphyla 
(Scolopendrella), and Pauropoda (Pauropus). They were until 
recently classified with the Chilopoda (Centipedes), with which 
they have no close affinity, but only a superficial resemblance. 
(Compare the definition of the class Chilopoda.) 

The movement of the legs in Diplopoda is like that of those of 
Peripatus, of the Phyllopod Crustacea, and of the parapodia of 
Chaetopoda, symmetrical and identical on the two sides of the 
body. The legs of Chilopoda move in alternating groups on the 
two sides of the body. This implies a very much higher develop- 
ment of nerves and muscles in the latter. (See Millipede.) 
Class 2 (of the Euarthropoda). — Arachnida. 

Head tritognathous and diprosthomerous — that is to say, with 
two prosthomeres, the first bearing typical eyes, the second a pair 
of appendages reduced to a single ramus, which is in more primitive 
forms antenniform, in higher forms chelate or retrovert. The 
ancestral stock was pantognathobasic — i.e. had a gnathobase or 
jaw process on every parapodium. As many as six pairs of ap- 
pendages following the mouth may have an enlarged gnathobase 
actually functional as a jaw or hemignath, but a ramus is well 
developed on each of these appendages either as a simple walking 
leg, a palp or a chela. In the more primitive forms the appendage 
of every post-oral somite has a gnathobase and two rami ; in higher 
specialized forms the gnathobases may be atrophied in every append- 
age, even in the first post-oral. 

The more primitive forms are anomomeristic; the higher forms 
nomomeristic, showing typically three groups or tagmata of six 
somites each. 

The genital apertures are placed on the first somite of the second 
tagma or mesosoma. Their position is unknown in the more primi- 
tive forms. The more primitive forms have branchial respiratory 
processes developed on a ramus of each of the post-oral appendages. 
In higher specialized forms these branchial processes become first 
of all limited to five segments of the mesosoma, then sunk beneath 
the surface as pulmonary organs, and finally atrophied, their place 
being taken by a well-developed tracheal system. 

A character of great diagnostic value in the more primitive 
Arachnida is the tendency of the chitinous investment of the tergal 
surface of the telson to unite during growth with that of the free 
somites in front of it, so as to form a pygidial shield or posterior 
carapace, often comprising as many as fifteen somites (Trilobites, 
Limulus). 

A pair of central monomeniscous diplostichous eyes is often present 
on the head. Lateral eyes also are often present which are monosti- 
chous withaggregatedlenses(Z,im«/«s)or with isolated lenses(Scorpio), 
or are diplostichous with simple lens (Pedipalpi, Araneae, &c). 
Class 3 (of the Euarthropoda). — Crustacea. 

Head tetartognathous and triprosthomerous — that is to say, with 
three prosthomeres; the first bearing typical eyes, the second a 
pair of antenniform appendages (often bi-ramose), the third a pair 
of appendages usually antenniform, sometimes claw-like. The 
ancestral stock was (as in the Arachnida) pantognathobasic, that 



68o 



ARTHROPODA 



is to say, had a gnathobase or jaw-process on the base of every 
post-oral appendage. 

Besides the first post-oral or mandibular pair, at least two succeed- 
ing pairs of appendages are modified as jaws. These have small 
and insignificant rami, or none at all, a feature in which the Arach- 
nida differ from them. The appendages of four or more additional 
following somites may be turned upwards towards the mouth and 
assist in the taking of food. 

The more primitive forms (Entomostraca) are anomomeristic, 
presenting great variety as to number of somites, form of appendages, 
and tagmatic grouping; the higher forms (Malacostraca) are nomo- 
meristic, showing in front of the telson twenty somites, of which the 
six hinder carry swimmerets and the five next in front ambulatory 
limbs. The genital apertures are neither far forward nor far back- 
ward in the series of somites, e.g. on the fourteenth post-oral in 
Apus, on the ninth post-oral in female Astacus and in Cyclops. 

With rare exceptions, branchial plates are developed either by 
modification of a ramus of the limbs or as processes on a ramus, or 
upon the sides of the body. No tracheate Crustacea are known, 
but some terrestrial Isopoda develop pulmonary in-sinkings of the 
integument. A characteristic, comparable in value to that presented 
by the pygidial shield of Arachnida, is the frequent development 
of a pair of long appendages by the penultimate somite, which with 
the telson form a trifid, or, when that is small, a bifid termination 
to the body. 

The lateral eyes of Crustacea are polymeniscous, with highly 
specialized retinulae like those of Hexapoda, and unlike the simpler 
compound lateral eyes of lower Arachnida. Monomeniscous eyes are 
rarely present,and when present, single, minute.and central in position. 

Note. — The Crustacea exhibit a longer and more complete series 
of forms than any other class of Arthropoda, and may be regarded 
as preserving the most completely represented line of descent. 

Class 4. — Chilopoda. 

Head triprosthomerous l and tetartognathous. The two somites 
following the mandibular or first post-oral or buccal somite carry 
appendages modified as maxillae. The fourth post-oral somite has 
its appendages converted into very large and powerful hemignaths, 
which are provided with poison-glands. The remaining somites 
carry single-clawed walking legs, a single pair to each somite. The 
body is anomomeristic, showing in different genera from 17 (inclusive 
of the anal and genital) to 175 somites behind that which bears the 
poison jaws. No tagmata are developed. The genital ducts open 
on the penultimate somite. 

Tracheae are developed which are dendriform and with spiral 
thickening of their lining. Their trunks open at paired stigmata 
placed laterally in each somite of the trunk or in alternate somites. 
Usually the tracheae open by paired stigmata placed upon the sides 
of a greater or less number of the somites, but never quite regularly 
on alternating somites. At most they are present on all the pedi- 
gerous somites excepting the first and the last. In Scutigera there 
are seven unpaired dorsal stigmata, each leading into a sac whence 
a number of air-holding tubes project into the pericardial blood-sinus. 

Renal caecal tubes (Malpighian tubes) open into the proctodaeum. 
(See Centipede.) 

Class 5. — Hexapoda. 

Head shown by its early development to be triprosthomerous 
and consequently tetartognathous. The first prosthomere has its 
appendages represented by the compound eyes and a protocerebrum, 
the second has the antennae for its appendages and a deutocerebrai 
neuromere, the third has suffered suppression of its appendages 
(which corresponded to the second pair of antennae of Crustacea), 
but has a tritocerebrum and coelomic chamber. The mandibular 
somite bears a pair of gnathobasic hemignaths without rami or 
palps, and is followed by two jaw-bearing somites (maxillary and 
labial). This enumeration would give six somites in all to the head 
— three prosthomeres and three opisthomeres. Recent investigations 
(Folsom, 4) show the existence in the embryo of a prae-maxillary 
or supra-lingual somite which is suppressed during development. 
This gives seven somites to the Hexapod's head, the tergites of which 
are fused to form a cephalic carapace or box. The number is signifi- 
cant, since it agrees with that found in Edriophthalmous Crustacea, 
and assigns the labium of the Hexapod to the same somite numeri- 
cally as that which carries the labium-like maxillipedes of those 
Crustacea. 

The somites following the head are strictly nomomeristic and 
nomotagmic. The first three form the thorax, the appendages of 
which are the walking legs, tipped with paired claws or ungues 
(compare the homoplastic claws of Scorpio and Peripatus). Eleven 
somites follow these, forming the abdominal " tagma," giving thus 



1 Embryological evidence of this is still wanting. In the other 
classes of Arthropoda we have more or less complete embryological 
evidence on the subject. It appears from observation of the embryo 
that whilst the first prosthomere of Centipedes has its appendages 
reduced and represented only by eye-patches (as in Arachnida, 
Crustacea and Hexapoda), the second has a rudimentary antenna, 
which disappears, whilst the third carries the permanent antennae, 
which accordingly correspond to the second antennae of Crustacea, 
and are absent in Hexapoda. 



twenty-one somites in all (as in the higher Crustacea). The somites 
of the abdomen all may carry rudimentary appendages in the 
embryo, and some of the hinder somites may retain their appendages 
in a modified form in adult life. Terminal telescoping of the ab- 
dominal somites and excalation may occur in the adult, reducing 
the obvious abdominal somites to as few as eight. The genital 
apertures are median and placed far back in the series of somites, 
viz. the female on the seventh abdominal (seventeenth of the whole 
series) and the male on the ninth or ante-penultimate abdominal 
(nineteenth of the whole series). The appendages of the eighth and 
tenth abdominal somites are modified as gonapophyses. The 
eleventh abdominal segment is the telson, usually small and soft; 
it carries the anus. 

The Hexapoda are not only all confined to a very definite dis- 
position of the somites, appendages and apertures, as thus indicated, 
but in other characters also they present the specialization of a 
narrowly-limited highly-developed order of such a class as the 
Crustacea rather than a range from lower more generalized to higher 
more specialized forms such as that group and also the Arachnida 
present. It seems to be a legitimate conclusion that the most 
primitive Hexapoda were provided with wings; and that the term 
Pterygota might be used as a synonym of Hexapoda. Many Hexa- 
poda have lost either one pair or both pairs of wings; cases are 
common of wingless genera allied to ordinary Pterygote genera. 
Sdme Hexapods which are very primitive in other respects happen 
to be also Apterous, but this cannot be held to prove that the posses- 
sion of wings is not a primitive character of Hexapods (compare 
the case of the Struthious Birds). The wings of Hexapoda are lateral 
expansions of the terga of the second and third thoracic somites. 
They appear to be serial equivalents (homogenous meromes) of the 
tracheal gills, which develop in a like position on the abdominal 
segments of some aquatic Hexapods. 

The Hexapoda are all provided with a highly developed tracheal 
system, which presents considerable variation in regard to its 
stigmata or orifices of communication with the exterior. In some 
a serial arrangement of stigmata comparable to that observed in 
Chilopoda is found. In other cases (some larvae) stigmata are 
absent; in other cases again a single stigma is developed, as in 
the smaller Arachnida and Chilopoda, in the median dorsal line 
or other unexpected position. When the facile tendency of Arthro- 
poda to develop tracheal air-tubes is admitted, it becomes probable 
that the tracheae of Hexapods do not all belong to one original 
system, but may be accounted for by new developments within the 
group. Whether the primitive tracheal system of Hexapoda was 
a closed one or open by serial stigmata in every somite remains at 
present doubtful, but the intimate relation of the system to the 
wings and tracheal gills cannot be overlooked. 

The lateral eyes of Hexapoda, like those of Crustacea, belong to 
the most specialized type of " compound eye," found only in these 
two classes. Simple monomeniscous eyes are also present in many 
Hexapods. 

Renal excretory caeca (Malpighian tubes) are developed from the 
proctodaeum (not from mesenteron as in scorpion and Amphipoda). 
Concluding Remarks on the Relationships to one another of the Classes 
of the Arthropoda. — Our general conclusion from a survey of the 
Arthropoda amounts to this, that whilst Peripatus, the Diplopoda, 
and the Arachnida represent terrestrial offshoots from successive 
lower grades of primitive aquatic Arthropoda which are extinct, the 
Crustacea alone present a fairly full series of representatives leading 
upwards from unspecialized forms. The latter were not very far 
removed from the aquatic ancestors (Trilobites) of the Arachnida, 
but differed essentially from them by the higher specialization of 
the head. We can gather no indication of the forefathers of the 
Hexapoda or of the Chilopoda less specialized than they are, whilst 
possessing the essential characteristics of these classes. Neither 
embryology nor palaeontology assists us in this direction. On the 
other hand, the facts that the Hexapoda and the Chilopoda have 
triprosthomerous heads, that the Hexapoda have the same total 
number of somites as the nomomeristic Crustacea, and the same 
number of opisthomeres in the head as the more terrestrial Crustacea, 
together with the same adaptation of the form of important appen- 
dages in corresponding somites, and that the compound eyes of both 
Crustacea and Hexapoda are extremely specialized and elaborate in 
structure and identical in that structure, all lead to the suggestion 
that the Hexapoda, and with them, at no distant point, the Chilo- 
poda, have branched off from the Crustacean main stem as specialized 
terrestrial lines of descent. And it seems probable that in the case 
of the Hexapoda, at any rate, the point of departure was subsequent 
to the attainment of the nomomeristic character presented by the 
higher grade of Crustacea. It is on the whole desirable to recognize 
such affinities in our schemes of classification. 

We may tabulate the facts as to head-structure in Chaetopoda 
and Arthropoda as follows : — 

Grade * (below the Arthropoda). — Agnatha, Aprosthomera. 

Without parapodial jaws; without the addition of originally, 

post-oral somites to the prae-oral region, which is a simple prostomial 

lobe of the first somite; the first somite is perforated by the mouth 

and its parapodia are not modified as jaws. 

= Chaetopoda. 



ARTHUR 



681 



Gradei (of theArthropoda). —Monognatha,Monoprosthomera. 

With a single pair of parapodial jaws carried by the somite which 
is perforated by the mouth; this is not the first somite, but the 
second. The first somite has become a prosthomere, and carries a 
pair of extensile antennae. 

= Onychophora (Peripatus, &"c). 
Grade 2 (of theArthropoda). — Dignatha, Monoprosthomera. 
The third somite as well as the second develops a pair of para- 
podial jaws; the first somite is a prosthomere carrying jointed 
antennae. 

= Diplopoda. 

Grade 3 (of the Arthropoda). — Pantognatha, Diprosthomera. 

A gnathobase is developed (in the primitive stock) on every pair 
of post-oral appendages; two prosthomeres present, the second 
somite as well as the first having passed in front of the mouth, but 
only the second has appendages. 

= Arachnida. 

Grade 4 (of theArthropoda). — Pantognatha, Triprosthomera. 

The original stock, like that of the last grade, has a gnathobase 
on every post-oral appendage, but three prosthomeres are now 
present, in consequence of the movement of the oral aperture from 
the third to the fourth somite. The later eyes are polymeniscous, 
with specialized vitrellae and retinulae of a definite type peculiar to 
this grade. 

= Crustacea, Chilopoda, Hexapoda. 

According to older views the increase of the number of somites 
in front of the mouth would have been regarded as a case of inter- 
calation by new somite-budding of new prae-oral somites in the 
series. We are prohibited by a general consideration of metamerism 
in the Arthropoda from adopting the hypothesis of intercalation of 
somites. However strange it may seem, we have to suppose that 
one by one in the course of long historical evolution somites have 
passed forwards and the mouth has passed backwards. In fact, 
we have to suppose that the actual somite which in grades 1 and 2 
bore the mandibles lost those mandibles, developed their rami as 
tactile organs, and came to occupy a position in front of the mouth, 
whilst its previous jaw-bearing function was taken up by the next 
somite in order, into which the oral aperture had passed. A similar 
history must have been slowly brought about when this second mandi- 
bulate somite in its turn became agnathous and passed in front of 
the mouth. The mandibular parapodia may be supposed during 
the successive stages of this history to have had, from the first, 
well-developed rami (one or two) of a palp-like form, so that the 
change required when the mouth passed away from them would 
merely consist in the suppression of the gnathobase. The solid palp- 
less mandible such as we now see in some Arthropoda is, necessarily, 
a late specialization. Moreover, it appears probable that the first 
somite never had its parapodia modified as jaws, but became a 
prosthomere with tactile appendages before parapodial jaws were 
developed at all, or rather pari passu with their development on the 
second somite. It is worth while bearing in mind a second possibility 
as to the history of the prosthomeres, viz. that the buccal gnathobasic 
parapodia (the mandibles) were in each of the three grades of prostho- 
merism only developed after the recession of the mouth and the 
addition of one, of two, or of three post-oral somites to the prae-oral 
region had taken place. In fact, we may imagine that the char- 
acteristic adaptation of one or more pairs of post-oral parapodia to 
the purposes of the mouth as jaws did not occur until after ancestral 
forms with one, with two, and with three prosthomeres had come 
into existence. On the whole the facts seem to be against this 
supposition, though we need not suppose that the gnathobase was 
very large or the rami undeveloped in the buccal parapodia which 
were destined to lose their mandibular features and pass in front of 
the mouth. 

References. — 1. Bateson, Materials for the Study of Variation 
(Macmillan, 1894), p. 85; 2. Lankester, " Primitive Cell-layers of the 
Embryo." Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist. (1873), p. 336; 3. Korschelt 
and Heider, Entwickelungsgeschichte (Jena, 1892), cap. xv. p. 389; 
4. Folsom, " Development of the Mouth Parts of Anurida," Bulletin 
Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard College, vol. xxxvi. No. 5 (1900), pp. 142- 
146; 5. Lankester, " Observations and Reflections on the Append- 
ages and Nervous System of Apus Cancriformis," Quart. Journ. 
Micr. Sci. vol. xxi. (1881) ; 6. Hofer, " Ein Krebs mit einer Extremi- 
st statt eines Stielauges," Verhandl. d. deutschen zool. Gesellsch. 
(1894) ; 7. Watase, " On the Morphology of the Compound Eyes of 
Arthropods," Studies from the Biol. Lab. of the Johns Hopkins 
University, vol. iv. pp. 287-334; 8. Benham describes backward 
shifting of the oral aperture in certain Chaetopods, Proc. Zoolog. 
Soc. London (1900), f No. lxiv. p. 976. N. B. — -References to the early 
literature concerning the group Arthropoda will be found in Carus, 
Geschichte der Zoologie. The more important literature up to 1892 
is given in the admirable treatise on Embryology by Professors 
Korschelt and Heider. Detailed references will be found under 
the articles on the separate groups of Arthropoda. (E. R. L.) 



ARTHUR (Fr. Artus), the central hero of the cycle of romance 
known as the Matiere de Bretagne (see Arthurian Legend). 
Whether there was an historic Arthur has been much debated; 
undoubtedly for many centuries after the appearance of Geoffrey 
of Monmouth's Historia Britonwn (circ. 1136), the statements 
therein recorded of a mighty monarch, who ruled over Britain 
in the 5th-6th centuries, and carried his conquests far afield, 
even to the gates of Rome, obtained general, though not 
universal, credence. Even in the 12th century there were some 
who detected, and derided, the fictitious character of Geoffrey's 
" History." As was naturally to be expected, the pendulum 
swung to the other extreme, and in a more critical age the 
existence of Arthur was roundly denied. The truth probably 
lies midway between the two. The words of Wace, the Norman 
poet who translated the Historia into verse, are here admirably 
to the point. Speaking of the tales told of Arthur, he says: — 
" Ne tot mencunge, ne tot veir, 

Ne tot fable, ne tot saveir, 

Tant ont li conteor conte, 

Et li fableor tant fable 

Por lor contes embeleter 

Que tout ont fait fable sembler." 1 

The opinion now generally accepted by scholars is that the 
evidence of Nennius, whose Historia Britonum preceded that of 
Geoffrey by some 400 years, is in the main to be relied on. He 
tells us that Arthur was Dux bellorum, and led the armies of the 
British kings against the Saxon invaders, whom he defeated in 
twelve great battles. Tunc Arthur pugnabat cum regibus 
Britonum, sed ipse dux erat bellorum. 

The traditional site of these battles covers a very wide area, and 
it is supposed that Arthur held a post analogous to that of the 
general who, under the Roman occupation, was known as Comes 
Britanniae, and held a roving commission to defend the island 
wherever attacked, in contradistinction to the Dux Britanniarum, 
who had charge of the forces in the north, and the Comes Lift oris 
Saxonici, whose task it was to defend the south-east line. The 
Welsh texts never call Arthur gwledig (prince), but amheradawr 
(Latin imperator) or emperor, a title which would be bestowed on 
the highest official in the island. The truth thus appears to be 
that, while there was never a King Arthur, there was a noted 
chieftain and general of that name. If we say that he carried on 
a successful war against the Saxons, was probably betrayed by 
his wife and a near kinsman, and fell in battle, we have stated all 
which can be claimed as an historical nucleus for his legend. It 
is now generally admitted that the representation of Arthur as 
world conqueror, Welt-Kaiser, is due to the influence of the 
Charlemagne cycle. In the 12 th century the Matiere de France 
was waning, the Matiere de Bretagne waxing in popularity, and 
public opinion demanded that the central figure of the younger 
cycle (for whatever the date of the subject matter, as a literary 
cycle the Arthurian is the younger) should not be inferior in 
dignity and importance to that of the earlier. When we add to 
this the fact that the writers of the 12th century represented 
the personages and events of the 6th in the garb, and under the 
conditions, of their own time, we can understand the reason of 
the manifold difficulties which beset the study of the cycle. 

But into the figure of Arthur as we know him, other elements 
have entered ; he is not merely an historic personality, but at the 
same time a survival of pre-historic myth, a hero of romance, and 
a fairy king; and all these threads are woven together in one 
fascinating but bewildering web. It is only possible here to- 
summarize the leading features which may be claimed as charac- 
teristic of each phase. 

Mythic. — Certain elements of the story point to Arthur as a 
culture hero; as such his name has been identified with the 
Mercurius Artaius of the Gauls. In this role he slays monsters, 
the boar Twrch Trwyth, the giant of Mont St Michel and the 
Demon Cat of Losanne (Andre de Coutances tells us that Arthur 
was really vanquished and carried off by the Cat, but that one 
durst not tell that tale before Britons!). He never, it should be 

1 Nor all a lie, nor all true, nor all fable, nor all known, so much 
have the story-tellers told, and the fablers fabled, in order to em- 
bellish their tale9, that they have made all seem fable. 



682 



ARTHUR 



noted, rides on purely chivalric ventures, such as aiding distressed 
damsels, seeking the Grail, &c. His expeditions are all more or 
less warlike. The story of his youth belongs, as Alfred Nutt 
(Folk-lore, vol. iv.) has shown, to the group of tales classified as 
the Aryan Expulsion and Return formula, found in all Aryan 
lands. Numerous parallels exist between the Arthurian and 
early Irish heroic cycles, notably the Fenian or Ossianic. This 
Fenian cycle is very closely connected with the Tuatha de 
Danaan, the Celtic deities of vegetation and increase; recent 
research has shown that two notable features of the Arthurian 
story, the Round Table and the Grail, can be most reasonably 
accounted for as survivals of this Nature worship, and were 
probably parts of the legend from the first. 

Romantic. — The character of Arthur as a romantic hero is, in 
reality, very different from that which, mainly through the 
popularity of Tennyson's Idylls, English people are wont to 
suppose. In the earlier poems he is practically a lay figure, his 
court the point of departure and return for the knights whose 
adventures are related in detail, but he himself a passive spectator. 
In the prose romances he is a monarch, the splendour of whose 
court, whose riches and generosity, are the admiration of all; 
but morally he is no whit different from the knights who surround 
him; he takes advantage of his bonnes fortunes as do others. 
He has two sons, neither of them born in wedlock; one, Modred, 
is alike his son and his nephew. In certain romances, the 
Perlesvaus and Diu Crone, he is a veritable roi faineant, over- 
come by sloth and luxury. Certain traits of his story appear to 
show the influence of Northern romance. Such is the story of his 
begetting, where Uther takes upon him the form of Gorlois to 
deceive Yguerne,even as Siegfried changed shapes with Gunther 
to the undoing of Briinnhilde. The sword in the perron (stone 
pillar or block), the withdrawal of which proves his right to the 
kingdom, is the sword of the Branstock. Morgain carries him off, 
mortally wounded, to Avalon, even as the Valkyr bears the 
Northern hero to Valhal. Morgain herself has many traits in 
common with the Valkyrie; she is one of nine sisters, she can fly 
through the air as a bird (Swan maiden) ; she possesses a marvel- 
lous ointment (as does Hilde, the typical Valkyr). The idea of a 
slumbering hero who shall awake at the hour of his country's 
greatest need is world-wide, but the most famous instances 
are Northern, e.g. Olger Danske and Barbarossa, and depend 
ultimately on an identification with the gods of the Northern 
Pantheon, notably Thor. W. Larminie cited an instance of a 
rhyme current in the Orkneys as a charm against nightmare, 
which confuses Arthur with Siegfried and his winning of the 
Valkyr. 

Fairy. — We find that at Arthur's birth (according to Layamon, 
who here differs from Wace), three ladies appeared and prophe- 
sied his future greatness. This incident is also found in the first 
continuation to the Perceval, where the prediction is due to a 
lady met with beside a forest spring, clearly here a water fairy. 
In the late romance of La Bataille de Loquifer Avalon has become 
a purely fairy kingdom, where Arthur rules in conjunction with 
Morgain. In Huon de Bordeaux he is Oberon's heir and successor, 
while in the romance of Brun de la Montague, preserved in a 
unique MS. of the Bibliotheque Nationale, we have the curious 
statement that all fairy-haunted places, wherever found, belong 
to Arthur: — 

" Et touz ces lieux faes 
Sont Artus de Bretagne." 
This brief summary of the leading features of the Arthurian 
tradition will indicate with what confused and complex material 
we are here dealing. (See also Arthurian Legend, Grail, 
Merlin, Round Table; and Celt: Celtic literature^) 

Texts. Historic: — Nennius, Historia Britonum; H. Zimmer, 
Nennius Vindicatus (Berlin, 1893), an examination into the credi- 
bility of Nennius; Geoffrey of Monmouth, Historia Britonum 
(translations of both histories are in Bohn's Library) ; Wace, the 
Brut (ed. by Leroux de Lincey) ; Layamon (ed. by Sir Fred. Madden). 

Romantic: — Merlin — alike in the Ordinary, or Vulgate (ed. 
Sommer), the Suite or " Huth " Merlin, the 13th century Merlin 
(ed. by G. Paris and J. Ulrich), and the unpublished and unique 
version of Bibl. nat. fonds francais, 337 (cf. Freymond's analysis 
in Zeitschrift fur franz. Sprache, xxii.) — devotes considerable space 



to the elaboration of the material supplied by the chronicles, the 
beginning of Arthur's reign, his marriage and wars with the Saxons. 
The imitation of the Charlemagne romances is here evident ; the 
Saxons bear names of Saracen origin, and camels and elephants 
appear on the scene. The Morte Arthur, or Mart au roi Artus, a 
metrical romance, of which a unique English version exists in the 
Thornton collection (ed. for Early English Text Society), gives an 
expanded account of the passing of Arthur; in the French prose form 
it is now always found incorporated with the Lancelot, of which it 
forms the concluding section. The remains of the Welsh tradition 
are to be found in the Mabinogion (cf. Nutt's edition, where the 
stories are correctly classified), and in the Triads. Professor Rhys' 
Studies in the Arthurian Legend are largely based on Welsh material, 
and may be consulted for details, though the conclusions drawn 
are not in harmony with recent research. These are the only texts 
in which Arthur is the central figure; in the great bulk of the 
romances his is but a subordinate role. (J. L. W.) 

ARTHUR I. ( 1 1 87-1 203) , duke of Brittany, was the posthumous 
son of Geoffrey, the fourth son of Henry II. of England, and 
Constance, heiress of Conan IV., duke of Brittany. The Bretons 
hoped that their young prince would uphold their independence, 
which was threatened by the English. Henry II. tried to seize 
Brittany, and in 1187 forced Constance to marry one of his 
favourites, Randulph de Blundevill, earl of Chester (d. 1232). 
Henry, however, died soon afterwards (1180). The new king of 
England, Richard Cceur de Lion, claimed the guardianship of 
the young Arthur, but in 1100 Richard left for the Crusade. 
Constance profited by his absence by governing the duchy, and 
in 1 194 she had Arthur proclaimed duke of Brittany by an 
assembly of barons and bishops. Richard invaded Brittany in 
1 196, but was defeated in 1197 and became reconciled to Con- 
stance. On his death in 1189, the nobles of Anjou, Maine and 
Touraine refused to recognize John of England, and did homage 
to Arthur, who declared himself the vassal of Philip Augustus. 
In 1202 war was resumed between the king of England and the 
king of France. The king of France recognized Arthur's right 
to Brittany, Anjou, Maine and Poitou. While Philip Augustus 
was invading Normandy, Arthur tried to seize Poitou. But, 
surprised at Mirebeau, he fell into the hands of John, who sent 
him prisoner to Falaise. In the following year he was transferred 
to Rouen, and disappeared suddenly. It is thought that John 
killed him with his own hand. After this murder John was 
condemned by the court of peers of France, and stripped of the 
fiefs which he possessed in France. 

See Ralph of Coggeshall, " Chronicon Anglicanum," in the 
Monumenta Britanniae historica; Dom Lobineau, Histoire de 
Bretagne (1702); Dom Morice, Histoire de Bretagne (1742-1756); 
A. de la Borderie, Histoire de Bretagne, vol. iii. (1899) ; Bemont, 
" De la condamnation de Jean-sans-Terre par la Cour des Pairs de 
France," in the Revue historique (1886), vol. xxxii. 

ARTHUR III. (1393-1458), earl of Richmond, constable of 
France, and afterwards duke of Brittany, was the third son of 
John IV., duke of Brittany, and Joan of Navarre, afterwards the 
wife of Henry IV. of England. His brother, John V., gave him 
his earldom of Richmond in England. While still very young, 
he took part in the civil wars which desolated France during the 
reign of Charles VI. From 1410 to 1414 he served on the side 
of the Armagnacs, and afterwards entered the service of Louis the 
dauphin, whose intimate friend he became. He profited by his 
position at court to obtain the lieutenancy of the Bastille, the 
governorship of the duchy of Nemours, and the confiscated 
territories of Jean Larcheveque, seigneur of Parthenay. His 
efforts to reduce the latter were, however, interrupted by the 
necessity of marching against the English. At Agincourt he 
was wounded and captured, and remained a prisoner in England 
from 1415 to 1420. Released on parole, he gained the favour of 
King Henry V. by persuading his brother, the duke of Brittany, 
to conclude the treaty of Troyes, by which France was handed 
over to the English king. He was rewarded with the countship 
of Ivry. 

In 1423 Arthur married Margaret of Burgundy, widow of the 
dauphin Louis, and became thus the brother-in-law of Philip 
the Good of Burgundy, and of the regent, the duke of Bedford. 
Offended, however, by Bedford's refusal to give him a high 
command, he severed his connexion with the English, and in 
March 1425 accepted the constable's sword from King Charles VII. 



ARTHUR 



683 



He now threw himself with ardour into the French cause, and 
persuaded his brother, John V. of Brittany, to conclude with 
Charles VII. the treaty of Saumur (October 7, 1425). But 
though he saw clearly enough the measures necessary for success, 
he lacked the means to carry them out. In the field he met with 
a whole series of reverses; and at court, where his rough and 
overbearing manners made him disliked, his influence was over- 
shadowed by that of a series of incompetent favourites. The 
peace concluded between the duke of Brittany and the English 
in September 1427 led to his expulsion from the court, where 
Georges de la Tremoille, whom he himself had recommended to 
the king, remained supreme for six years, during which Richmond 
tried in vain to overthrow him. In the meantime, in June 1429, he 
joined Joan of Arc at Orleans, and fought in several battles under 
her banner, till the influence of La Tremoille forced his with- 
drawal from the army. On the 5th of March 1432 Charles VII. 
concluded with him and with Brittany the treaty of Rennes; 
but it was not until June of the following year that La Tremoille 
was overthrown. Arthur now resumed the war against the 
English, and at the same time took vigorous measures against 
the plundering bands of soldiers and peasants known as routiers 
or ecorchenrs. On the 20th of September 143 5, mainly as a result 
of his diplomacy, was signed the treaty of Arras between Charles 
VII. and the duke of Burgundy, to which France owed her 
salvation. 

On the 13th of April 1436, Arthur took Paris from the English; 
but he was ill seconded by the king, and hampered by the 
necessity for leading frequent expeditions against the ecorcheurs; 
it was not till May 1444 that the armistice of Tours gave him 
leisure to carry out the reorganization of the army which he had 
long projected. He now created the compagnies d'ordonnance, 
and endeavoured to organize the militia of the francs archers. 
This reform had its effect in the struggles that followed. In 
alliance with his nephew, the duke of Brittany, he reconquered, 
during September and October 1449, nearly all the Cotentin; 
on the 1 5th of April 1430 he gained over the English the battle of 
Formigny; and during the year he recovered for France the 
whole of Normandy, which for the next six or seven years it was 
his task to defend from English attacks. On the death of his 
nephew Peter II., on the 22nd of September 1457, he became 
duke of Brittany, and though retaining his office of constable of 
France, he refused, like his predecessors, to do homage to the 
French king for his duchy. He reigned little more than a year, 
dying on the 26th of December 1458, and was succeeded by his 
nephew Francis II., son of his brother Richard, count of 
Etampes. 

Arthur was three times married: (1) to Margaret of Burgundy, 
duchess of Guienne (d. 1442); (2) to Jeanne d'Albret, daughter 
of Charles II. of Albret (d. 1444) ; (3) to Catherine of Luxemburg, 
daughter of Peter of Luxemburg, count of St Pol, who survived 
him. He left no legitimate children. 

Authorities. — The main source for the life of Duke Arthur III. 
is the chronicle of Guillaume Gruel (c. 1410-1474-1482). Gruel 
entered the service of the earl of Richmond about 1425, shared in 
all his campaigns, and lived with him on intimate terms. The 
chronicle covers the whole period of the duke's life, but the earlier 
part, up to 1425, is much less full and important than the later, 
which is based on Gruel's personal knowledge and observation. In 
spite of a perhaps exaggerated admiration for his hero, Gruel dis- 
plays in his work so much good faith, insight and originality that 
he is accepted as a thoroughly trustworthy authority. It was first 
published at Paris in 1622. Of the numerous later editions, the best 
is that of Achille le Vavasseur, Chronique d' 'Arthur de Richemont 
(Paris, 1890). See also E. Cosneau, Le Connetable de Richemont 
(Paris, 1886); G. du Fresne de Beaucourt, Histoire de Charles VII. 
(Paris, 1881, seq.). 

ARTHUR, CHESTER ALAN (1830- 1886), twenty - first 
president of the United States, was born in Fairfield, Vermont, 
on the 5th of October 1830. His father, William Arthur (1796- 
1875), when eighteen years of age, emigrated from Co. Antrim, 
Ireland, and, after teaching in various places in Vermont and 
Lower Canada, became a Baptist minister. William Arthur 
had married Malvina Stone, an American girl who lived at the 
time of the marriage in Canada, and the numerous changes of the 
family residence afforded a basis for allegations in 1880 that the 



son Chester was born not in Vermont, but in Canada, and was 
therefore, ineligible for the presidency. Chester entered Union 
College as a sophomore, and graduated with honour in 1848. 
He then became a schoolmaster, at the same time studying law. 
In 1853 he entered a law office in New York city, and in the 
following year was admitted to the bar. His reputation as a 
lawyer began with his connexion with the famous " Lemmon 
slave case," in which, as one of the special counsel for the state, 
he secured a decision from the highest state courts that slaves 
brought into New York while in transit between two slave states 
were ipso facto free. In another noted case, in 1855, he obtained 
a decision that negroes were entitled to the same accommodations 
as whites on the street railways of New York city. In politics 
he was actively associated from the outset with the Republican 
party. When the Civil War began he held the position of 
engineer-in-chief on Governor Edwin D. Morgan's staff, and 
afterwards became successively acting quartermaster-general, 
inspector-general, and quartermaster-general of the state troops, 
in which capacities he showed much administrative efficiency. 
At the close of Governor Morgan's term, on the 31st of December 
1862, General Arthur resumed the practice of his profession, 
remaining active, however, in party politics in New York city. 
In November 187 1 he was appointed by President U. S. Grant 
collector of customs for the port of New York. The custom- 
house had long been conspicuous for the most flagrant abuses of 
the " spoils system "; and though General Arthur admitted that 
the evils existed and that they rendered efficient administration 
impossible, he made no extensive reforms. In 1877 President 
Rutherford B. Hayes began the reform of the civil service with 
the New York custom-house. A non-partisan commission, 
appointed by Secretary John Sherman, recommended sweeping 
changes. The president demanded the resignation of Arthur 
and his two principal subordinates, George H. Sharpe, the 
surveyor, and Alonzo B. Cornell, the naval officer, of the Port. 
General Arthur refused to resign on the ground that to retire 
" under fire " would be to acknowledge wrong-doing, and 
claimed that as the abuses were inherent in a widespread system 
he should not be made to bear the responsibility alone. His 
cause was espoused by Senator Roscoe Conkling, for a time 
successfully; but on the nth of July 1878, during a recess of 
the Senate, the collector was removed, and in January 1879, 
after another severe struggle, this action received the approval 
of the Senate. In 1880 General Arthur was a delegate at large 
from New York to the Republican national convention. In 
common with the rest of the "Stalwarts," he worked hard for 
the nomination of Gen. U. S. Grant for a third term. Upon the 
triumph of James A. Garfield, the necessity of conciliating the 
defeated faction led to the hasty acceptance of Arthur for the 
second place on the ticket. His nomination was coldly received 
by the public; and when, after his election and accession, he 
actively engaged on behalf of Conkling in the great conflict with 
Garfield over the New York patronage, the impression was 
widespread that he was unworthy of his position. Upon the 
death of President Garfield, on the 19th of September 1881, 
Arthur took the oath as his successor. Contrary to the general 
expectation, his appointments were as a rule unexceptionable, 
and he earnestly promoted the Pendleton law for the reform of 
the civil service. His use of the veto in 1882 in the cases of a 
Chinese Immigration Bill (prohibiting immigration of Chinese 
for twenty years) and a River and Harbour Bill (appropriating 
over $18,000,000, to be expended on many insignificant as well 
as important streams) confirmed the favourable impression 
which had been made. The most important events of his 
administration were the passage of the Tariff Act of 1883 and 
of the " Edmunds Law " prohibiting polygamy in the territories, 
and the completion of three great trans-continental railways — 
the Southern Pacific, the Northern Pacific, and the Atchison, 
Topeka & Santa Fe. His administration was lacking in political 
situations of a dramatic character, but on all questions that arose 
his policy was sane and dignified. In 1884 he allowed his name 
to be presented for renomination in the Republican convention, 
but he was easily defeated by the friends of James G. Blaine. 



684 ARTHURIAN LEGEND— ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 



At the expiration of his term he resumed his residence in New 
York city, where he died on the 18th of November 1886. 

For an account of his administration see United States: History. 

ARTHURIAN LEGEND. By the "Arthurian legend," or 
Matiere de Brelagne, we mean the subject-matter of that import- 
ant body of medieval literature known as the Arthurian cycle 
(see Arthur). The period covered by the texts in their present 
form represents, roughly speaking, the century n 50-1 250. The 
History of Nennius is, of course, considerably earlier, and that of 
Geoffrey of Monmouth somewhat antedates 11 50 (1136), but 
with these exceptions the dates above given will be found to 
cover the composition of all our extant texts. 

As to the origin of this Matiere de Bretagne, and the circum- 
stances under which it became a favourite theme for literary 
treatment, two diametrically opposite theories are held. One 
body of scholars, headed by Professor Wendelin Forster of Bonn, 
while admitting that, so far as any historic basis can be traced, 
the events recorded must have happened on insular ground, 
maintain that the knowledge of these events, and their romantic 
development, are due entirely to the Bretons of the continent. 
The British who fled before the Teutonic and Scandinavian 
invasions of the 6th and 8th centuries, had carried with them to 
Armorica, and fondly cherished, the remembrance of Arthur and 
his deeds, which in time had become interwoven with traditions 
of purely Breton origin. On the other side of the Channel, i.e. 
in Arthur's own land, these memories had died out, or at most 
survived only as the faint echo of historic tradition. Through 
the medium of French-speaking Bretons these tales came to the 
cognizance of Northern French poets, notably Chretien de Troyes, 
who wove them into romances. According to Professor Forster 
there were no Arthurian romances previous to Chretien, and 
equally, of course, no insular romantic tradition. This theory 
reposes mainly on the supposed absence of pre-Chretien poems, 
and on the writings of Professor H. Zimmer, who derives the 
Arthurian names largely from Breton roots. This represents 
the prevailing standpoint of German scholars, and may be called 
the " continental " theory. In opposition to this the school of 
which the late Gaston Paris was the leading, and most brilliant, 
representative, maintains that the Arthurian tradition, romantic 
equally with historic, was preserved in Wales through the 
medium of the bards, was by them communicated to their 
Norman conquerors, worked up into poems by the Anglo- 
Normans, and by them transmitted to the continental poets. 
This, the " insular " theory, in spite of its inherent probability, 
has hitherto been at a disadvantage through lack of positive 
evidence, but in a recently acquired MS. of the British Museum, 
Add. 36614, we find the first continuator of the Perceval, 
Wauchier de Denain, quoting as authority for stories of Gawain 
a certain Bleheris, whom he states to have been " born and bred 
in Wales." The identity of this Bleheris with the Bledhericus 
mentioned by Giraldus Cambrensis as Famosus ille tabulator, 
living at a bygone and unspecified date, and with the Breri 
quoted by Thomas as authority for the Tristan story, has been 
fully accepted by leading French scholars. Further, on the 
evidence of certain MSS. of the Perceval, notably the Paris MS. 
(Bibl. Nat. 1450), it is clear that Chretien was using, and using 
freely, the work of a predecessor, large fragments of which have 
been preserved by the copyists who completed his unfinished 
work. The evidence of recent discoveries is all in favour of the 
insular, or French, view. 

So far as the character, as distinguished from the provenance, 
of this subject-matter is concerned, it is largely of folk-lore 
origin, representing the working over of traditions, in some cases 
(as e.g. in the account of Arthur's birth and upbringing) common 
to all the Aryan peoples, in others specifically Celtic. Thus 
there are a number of parallels between the Arthurian and the 
Irish heroic cycles, the precise nature of which has yet to be 
determined. So far as Arthur himself is concerned these parallels 
are with the Fenian, or Ossianic, cycle, in the case of Gawain 
with the Ultonian. 

In its literary form the cycle falls into three groups: — pseudo- 
historic: the Histories of Nennius and Geoffrey, the Brut of 



Wace and Layamon (see Arthur); poetic: the works of 
Chretien de Troyes, Thomas, Raoul de Houdenc and others (see 
Gawain, Perceval, Tristan, and the writers named above); 
prose: the largest and most important group (see Grail, 
Lancelot, Merlin, Tristan). Of these three branches the 
prose romances offer the most insuperable problems; none can 
be dated with any certainty; all are of enormous length; and 
all have undergone several redactions. Of not one do we as yet 
possess a critical and comparative text, and in the absence of 
such texts the publication of any definite and detailed theory as 
to the evolution and relative position of the separate branches of 
the Arthurian cycle is to be deprecated. The material is so vast 
in extent, and in so chaotic a condition, that the construction 
of any such theory is only calculated to invite refutation and 
discredit. 

The best general study of the cycle is to be found in Gaston 
Paris' s manual La Litterature franQaise au moyen Age (new and revised 
edition, 1905). See also the introduction to vol. xxx. of Histoire 
litteraire de la France. For the theories as to origin, see the Intro- 
ductions to Professor Forster's editions of the poems of Chretien 
de Troyes, notably that to vol. iv., Der Karrenritter, which is a long 
and elaborate restating of his position. Also Professor H. Zimmer's 
articles in Gattingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 12 and 20. For the Insular 
view, Ferd. Lot's " fitudes sur la provenance du cycle arthurien," 
Romania, vols, xxiv.-xxviii., are very valuable. For a popular 
treatment of the subject, cf. Nos. i. and iv. of Popular Studies in 
Romance and Folk-lore (Nutt). Robert- Huntington Fletcher's 
"The Arthurian Matter in the Chronicles" (vol. x. of Harvard 
Studies and Notes in Philology and Literature), is a most useful 
summary. (J. L. W.) 

ARTICHOKE. The common artichoke, Cynara, scolymus, 
is a plant belonging to the natural order Compositae, having 
some resemblance to a large thistle. It has long been esteemed 
as a culinary vegetable ; the parts chiefly employed being the 
immature receptacle or floret disk, with the lower part of the 
surrounding leaf -scales, which are known as " artichoke bottoms." 
In Italy the receptacles, dried, are largely used in soups; those of 
the cultivated plant as Carciofo domestico, and of the wild variety 
as Carciofo spinoso. 

The Jerusalem artichoke, Helianthus tuberosus, is a distinct 
plant belonging to the same order, cultivated for its tubers. 
It closely resembles the sunflower, and its popular name is a 
corruption of the Italian Girasole Articiocco, the sunflower 
artichoke. It is a native of Canada and the north-eastern 
United States, and was cultivated by the aborigines. The 
tubers are rich in the carbohydrate inulin and in sugar. 

The name is derived from the northern Italian articiocco-, 
or arciciocco, modern carciofo; these words come, through the 
Spanish, from the Arabic al-kharshiif. False etymology has 
corrupted the word in many languages: it has been derived in 
English from " choke," and " heart," or the Latin hortus, a 
garden; and in French, the form artichaut has been connected 
with chaud, hot, and chou, a cabbage. 

ARTICLE (from Lat. articulus, a joint), a term primarily for 
that which connects two parts together, and so transferred to 
the parts thus joined; thus the word is used of the separate 
clauses or heads in contracts, treaties or statutes and the like; 
of a literary composition on some specific subject in a periodical; 
or of particular commodities, as in " articles of trade and com- 
merce." It appears also in the phrase " in the article of death " 
to translate in articulo mortis, at the moment of death. In 
grammar the term is used of the adjectives which state the ex- 
tension of a substantive, i.e. the number of individuals to which 
a name applies; the indefinite article denoting one or any of 
a particular class, the definite denoting a particular member of 
a class. 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION, in English company law, the 
regulations for the internal management of a joint stock company 
registered under the Companies Acts. They are, in fact, the 
terms of the partnership agreed upon by the shareholders among 
themselves. They regulate such matters as the transfer and 
forfeiture of shares, calls upon shares, the appointment and 
qualification of directors, their powers and proceedings, general 
meetings of the shareholders, votes, dividends, the keeping and 
audit of accounts, and other such matters. In regard to these 



ARTICULATA—ARTILLERY 



685 



internal regulations the legislature has left the company free 
to adopt whatever terms of association it chooses. It has 
furnished in the schedule to the Companies Act 1862 (Table A), 
a model or specimen set of regulations, but their adoption, 
wholly or in part, is optional; only if a company does not 
register articles of its own these statutory regulations are to 
apply. When, as is commonly the case, a company decides to 
have articles of its own framing, such articles must be expressed 
in separate paragraphs, numbered arithmetically, and signed 
by the subscribers of the memorandum of association. They 
must also be printed, stamped like a deed, and attested. When 
so perfected, they are to be delivered, with the memorandum 
of association, to the registrar of joint stock companies, who is 
to retain and register them. The articles of association thereupon 
become a public document, which any person may inspect on 
payment of a fee of one shilling. This has important con- 
sequences, because every person dealing with the company is 
presumed to be acquainted with its constitution, and to have 
read its articles. The articles, also, upon registration, bind the 
company and its members to the same extent as if each member 
had subscribed his name and affixed his seal to them. (See also 
Memorandum of Association; Company; Incorporation.) 

In the United States, articles of association are any instrument 
in writing which sets forth the purposes, the terms and conditions 
upon which a body of persons have united for the prosecu- 
tion of a joint enterprise. When this instrument is duly executed 
and filed, the law gives it the force and effects of a charter of 
incorporation. 

ARTICULATA, a zoological name now obsolete, applied by 
Cuvier to animals, such as insects and worms, in which the body 
displays a jointed structure. (See Arthropoda.) 

ARTICULATION (from Lat. articulare, to divide into joints), 
the act of joining together; in anatomy the junction of the 
bones (see Joints); in botany the point of attachment and 
separation of the deciduous parts of a plant, such as a leaf. 
The word is also used for division into distinct parts, as of human 
speech by words or syllables. 

ARTILLERY (the O. Fr. artiller, to equip with engines of 
war, probably comes from Late Lat. articulwm, dim. of ars, art, 
cf. " engine " from ingenium, or of artus, joint), a term originally 
applied to all engines for discharging missiles, and in this sense 
used in English in the early 17th century. In a more restricted 
sense, artillery has come to mean all firearms not carried and 
used by hand, and also the personnel and organization by which 
the power of such weapons is wielded. It is, however, not usual 
to class machine guns (q.v.) as artillery. The present article 
deals with the development and contemporary state of the 
artillery arm in land warfare, in respect of its organization, 
personnel and special or " formal " employment. For the 
materiel — the guns, their carriages and their ammunition — see 
Ordnance and Ammunition. For ballistics, see that heading, 
and for the work of artillery in combination with the other arms, 
see Tactics. 

Artillery, as distinct from ordnance, is usually classified in 
accordance with the functions it has to perform. The simplest 
division is that into mobile and immobile artillery, the former 
being concerned with the handling of all weapons so mounted 
as to be capable of more or less easy movement from place to 
place, the latter with that of weapons which are installed in 
fixed positions. Mobile artillery is subdivided, again chiefly in 
respect of its employment, into horse and field batteries, heavy 
field or position artillery, field howitzers, mountain artillery and 
siege trains, adapted to every kind of terrain in which field troops 
may be employed, and work they may have to do. Immobile 
artillery is used in fixed positions of all kinds, and above all in 
permanent fortifications; it cannot, therefore, be classified as 
above, inasmuch as the raison d'etre, and consequently the arma- 
ment of one fort or battery may be totally distinct from that 
of another. " Fortress," " Garrison " and " Foot " artillery are 
the usual names for this branch. The dividing line, indeed, in 
the case of the heavier weapons, varies with circumstances; 
guns of position may remain on their ground while elaborate 



fortifications grow up around them, or the deficiencies of a field 
army in artillery may be made good from the materiel, more 
frequently still from the personnel, of the fortress artillery. 
Thus it may happen that mobile artillery becomes immobile 
and vice versa. But under normal circumstances the principle of 
classification indicated is maintained in all organized military 
forces. 

Historical Sketch 

1. Early Artillery.-^- Mechanical appliances for throwing pro- 
jectiles were produced early in the history of organized warfare, 
and " engines invented by cunning men to shoot arrows and great 
stones " are mentioned in the Old Testament. These were con- 
tinually improved, and, under the various names of catapulta, 
balista, onager, tribuchet, &c, were employed throughout the 
ancient and medieval periods of warfare. The machines finally 
produced were very powerful, and, even when a propelling agent 
so strong as gunpowder was discovered and applied, the super- 
session of the older weapons was not effected suddenly nor 
without considerable opposition. The date of the first employ- 
ment of cannon cannot be established with any certainty, but 
there is good evidence to show that the Germans used guns at 
the siege of Cividale in Italy (1331). The terms of a commission 
given (1414) by Henry V. to his magister operationum, ingeniarum, 
et gunnarum ac aliarum ordinationum, one Nicholas Merbury, 
show that the organization of artillery establishments was grafted 
upon that which was already in existence for the service of the 
old-fashioned machines. Previously to this it is recorded that 
of some 340 men forming the ordnance establishment of Edward 
III. in 1344 only 12 were artillerymen and gunners. Two years 
later, at Crecy, it is said, the English brought guns into the open 
field for the first time. At the siege of Harfleur (141 5) the 
ordnance establishment included 25 " master gunners " and 50 
" servitour gunners." The " gunner " appears to have been 
the captain of the gun, with general charge of the guns and 
stores, and the special duty of laying and firing the piece in 
action. 

2. The Beginnings of Field Artillery. — It is clear, from such 
evidence as we possess, that the chief and almost the only use of 
guns at this time was to batter the walls of fortifications, and it 
is not until later in the 15th century that their employment in 
the field became general (see also Cavalry) . The introduction 
of field artillery may be attributed to John Zizka, and it was in 
his Hussite wars (1419-1424) that the Wagenburg, a term of 
more general application, but taken here as denoting a cart or 
vehicle armed with several small guns, came into prominence. 
This device allowed a relatively high manoeuvring power to be 
attained, and it is found occasionally in European wars two 
centuries later, as for instance at Wimpfen in 1622 and Cropredy 
Bridge in 1644. In an act of attainder passed by the Lancastrian 
party against the Yorkists (1459), it is stated that the latter 
were " traiterously ranged in bataill . . . their cartes with 
gonnes set before their batailles " (Rot. Pari. 38 Henry VI., 
v. 348). In the London fighting of 1460, small guns were used 
to clear the streets, heavy ordnance to batter the walls of the 
Tower. The battle of Lose Coat Field ( 1 469) was decided almost 
entirely by Edward IV.'s field guns, while at Blackheath (1497) 
" some cornets of horse, and bandes of foot, and good store of 
artillery wheeling about " were sent to " put themselves beyond " 
the rebel camp (Bacon, Henry VII.). The greatest example of 
artillery work in the 15th century was the siege of Constantinople 
in 1 4 S3, at which the Turks used a large force of artillery, and 
in particular some monster pieces, some of which survived to 
engage a British squadron in 1807, when a stone shot weighing 
some 700 lb cut the mainmast of Admiral (Sir) J. T. Duckworth's 
flagship in two, and another killed and wounded sixty men. 
For siege purposes the new weapon was indeed highly effective, 
and the castles of rebellious barons were easily knocked to 
pieces by the prince who owned, or succeeded in borrowing, a 
few pieces of ordnance (cf. Carlyle, Frederick the Great, book iii. 
chap. i.). ''- > 

3. The 16th Century. — In the Italian wars waged by Charles 



686 



ARTILLERY 



VIII., Louis XII. and Francis I. of France, artillery played a 
most conspicuous part, both in siege and field warfare. Indeed, 
cannon did excellent service in the field before hand firearms 
attained any considerable importance. At Ravenna (1512) and 
Marignan (1515) field artillery did great execution, and at the 
latter battle " the French artillery played a new and distinguished 
part, not only by protecting the centre of the army from the 
charges of the Swiss phalanxes, and causing them excessive loss, 
but also by rapidly taking up such positions from time to time 
... as enabled the guns to play upon the flanks of the attacking 
columns" (Chesney, Observations on Firearms, 1852). In this 
connexion it must, however, be observed that, when the arquebus 
and other small arms became really efficient (about 1525), less 
is heard of this small and handy field artillery, which had 
hitherto been the only means of breaking up the heavy masses 
of the hostile pikemen. We have seen that artillery was not 
ignored in England; but, in view of the splendid and unique 
efficiency of the archers, there was no great opportunity of 
developing the new arm. In the time of Henry VIII., the 
ordnance in use in the field consisted in the main of heavy 
culverins and other guns of position, and of lighter field pieces, 
termed sakers, falcons, &c. It is to be noticed that already the 
lightest pieces had disappeared, the smallest of the above being 
a 2-pounder. In the earlier days of field artillery, the artillery 
train was a miscellaneous congeries of pontoon, supply, baggage 
and tool wagons, heavy ordnance and light guns in carts. 
With the development of infantry fire the use of the last- 
named weapons died out, and it is largely due to this fact that 
" artillery " came to imply cumbrous and immobile guns of 
position. Little is, therefore, heard of smart manoeuvring, such 
as that at Marignan, during the latter part of the 16th century. 
The guns now usually come into action in advance of the troops, 
but, from their want of mobility, could neither accompany a 
farther advance nor protect a retreat, and they were generally 
captured and recaptured with every changing phase of the fight. 
Great progress was in the meanwhile made in the adaptation of 
ordnance to the attack and defence of fortresses and, in particular, 
vertical fire came into vogue. A great Turkish gun, carrying a 
600-lb stone shot, was used in the siege of Constantinople, 
apparently in this way, since Gibbon records that at the range 
of a mile the shot buried itself a fathom deep in earth, a 
fact which implies that a high angle of elevation was given. 
In the celebrated siege of Malta in 1565 artillery played a 
conspicuous part. 

4. The Thirty Years' War. — Such, in its broadest outlines, is 
the history of artillery work during the first three centuries of its 
existence. Whilst the material had undergone a very consider- 
able improvement, the organization remained almost unchanged, 
and the tactical employment of guns had become restricted, 
owing to their slowness and difficulty of movement on the 
march and immobility in action. In wars of the type of the 
War of Dutch Independence and the earlier part of the Thirty 
Years' War, this heavy artillery naturally remained useful 
enough, and the Wagenburg had given place to the musketry 
initiated by the Spaniards at Bicocca and Pavia, which since 
1525 had steadily improved and developed. It is not, therefore, 
until the appearance of a captain whose secret of success was 
vigour and mobility that the first serious attempt was made to 
produce field artillery in the proper sense of the word, that is, a 
gun of good power, and at the same time so mounted as to be 
capable of rapid movement. The " carte with gonnes " had been, 
as is the modern machine gun, a mechanical concentration of 
musketry rather than a piece of artillery. Maurice of Nassau, 
indeed, helped to develop the field gun, and the French had in- 
vented the limber, but Gustavus Adolphus was the first to give 
artillery its true position on the battlefield. At the first battle 
of Breitenfeld (1631) Gustavus had twelve heavy and forty-two 
light guns engaged, as against Tilly's heavy 24-pounders, which 
were naturally far too cumbrous for field work. At the Lech 
(1632) Gustavus seems to have obtained a local superiority 
over his opponent owing to the handiness of his field artillery 
even more than by its fire-power. At Lutzen (1632) he had sixty 



guns to Wallenstein's twenty-one. His field pieces were not the 
celebrated " leather " guns (which were indeed a mere make- 
shift used in Gustavus' Polish wars) but iron 4-pounders. These 
were distributed amongst the infantry units, and thus began the 
system of " battalion guns " which survived in the armies of 
Europe long after the conditions requiring it had vanished. 
The object of thus dispersing the guns was doubtless to ensure 
in the first place more certain co-operation between the two arms, 
and in the second to exercise a military supervision over the 
lighter and more useful field pieces which it was as yet impossible 
to exercise over the personnel of the heavy artillery. 

5. Personnel and Classification. — More than 300 years after 
the first employment of ordnance, the men working the guns and 
the transport drivers were still civilians. The actual commander 
of the artillery was indeed, both in Germany and in England, 
usually a soldier, and Lennart Torstensson, the commander of 
Gustavus' artillery, became a brilliant and successful general. 
But the transport and the drivers were still hired, and even the 
gunners were chiefly concerned for . the safety of their pieces, 
the latter being often the property, not of the king waging war, 
but of some " master gunner " whose services he had secured, 
and the latter's apprentices were usually in entire charge of the 
material. These civilian " artists," as they were termed, owed 
no more duty to the prince than any other employes, and even 
Gustavus, it would appear, made no great improvement in the 
matter of the reorganization of artillery trains. Soldiers as 
drivers do not appear until 1 50 years later, and in the meanwhile 
companies of " firelocks " and " fusiliers " (q.v.) came into 
existence, as much to prevent the gunners and drivers from 
running away as to protect them from the enemy. A further 
cause of difficulties, in England at any rate, was the age of the 
" gunners." In the reign of Elizabeth, some of the Tower 
gunners were over ninety years of age. Complaints as to the 
inefficiency of these men are frequent in the years preceding the 
English Civil War. Gustavus, however, has the merit of being 
the first to make the broad classification of artillery, as mobile 
or non-mobile, which has since been almost universally in force. 
In his time the 1 2-pounder was the heaviest gun classed as mobile, 
and the " feildpeece " par excellence was the o-pounder or demi- 
culverin. After the death of Gustavus at Lutzen (1632), his 
principles came universally into practice, and amongst them 
were those of the employment of field artillery. 

6. The English Civil War. — Even in the English Civil War 
(Great Rebellion), in which artillery was hampered by the previous 
neglect of a century, its field work was not often contemptible, 
and on occasion the arm did excellent service. But in the cam- 
paigns of this war, fought out by men whose most ardent desire 
was to decide the quarrel swiftly, the marching and manoeuvring 
were unusually rapid. The consequence of this was that the 
guns were sometimes either late in arriving, as at Edgehill, or 
absent altogether, as at Preston. The role of guns was further 
reduced by the fact that there were few fortresses to be reduced, 
and country houses, however strong, rarely required to be 
battered by a siege train. The New Model army usually sent for 
siege guns only when they were needed for particular service. 
On such occasions, indeed, the heavy ordnance did its work so 
quickly and effectually that the assault often took place one or 
two days after the guns had opened fire. Cromwell in his sieges 
made great use of shells, 1 2-inch and even larger mortars being 
employed. The castle of Devizes, which had successfully re- 
sisted the Parliamentary battering guns, succumbed at once 
to vertical fire. It does not, however, appear certain that there 
was any separation of field from siege ordnance, although the 
Swedish system was followed in almost all military matters. 

7. Artillery Progress, 1660-1J40. — Cromwell's practice of 
relegating heavy guns to the rear, except when a serious siege 
operation was in view, and in very rapid movements leaving even 
the field pieces far behind, was followed to some extent in the 
campaigns of the age of Louis XIV. The number of ammunition 
wagons, and above all of horses, required for each gun was four 
or five times as great as that required even for a modern quick- 
firer. In the days of Turenne heavy guns were much employed. 



ARTILLERY 



687 



as the campaigns of the French were directed as a rule to the 
methodical conquest of territory and fortified towns. Similarly, 
Marlborough, working amidst the fortresses of the Netherlands 
in 1706, had over 100 pieces of artillery (of which 60 were mortars) 
to a force of some 1 1 ,000 men, or about 9 pieces per 1000 men. 
On the other hand, in his celebrated march to the Danube in 
1704, he had but few guns, and the allied armies at Blenheim 
brought into the field only 1 piece per 1000 men. ,At Oudenarde 
" from the rapidity of the march . . . the battle was fought with 
little aid from artillery on either side " (Coxe, Marlborough). 
There was less need now than ever before for rapid manoeuvres 
of mobile artillery, since the pike finally disappeared from the 
scene about 1700, and infantry fire-power had become the 
decisive factor in battles. In the meantime, artillery was gradu- 
ally ceasing to be the province of the skilled workman, and 
assuming its position as an arm of the military service. In the 
17th century, when armies were as a rule raised only " for the 
war." and disbanded at the conclusion of hostilities, there had 
been no very pressing need for the maintenance in peace of an 
expensive personnel and material. Gunners therefore remained, 
as civilians, outside the regular administration of the forces, 
until the general adoption of the " standing army " principle in 
the last years of the century (see Army). From this time steps 
were taken, in all countries, to organize the artillery as a military 
force. After various attempts had been made, the " Royal 
Regiment of Artillery " came into existence in England in 17 16. 
It is, however, stated that the English artillery did not " begin 
to assume a military appearance until the Flanders campaigns " 
of the War of the Austrian Succession. Even in the War of 
American Independence a dispute arose as to whether a general 
officer, whose regimental service had been in the Royal Artillery, 
was entitled to command troops of all arms, and the artillery 
drivers were not actually soldiers until 1793 at the earliest. 
French artillery officers received military rank only in 1732. 

8. Artillery in the Wars of Frederick the Great. — By the time 
of Frederick the Great's first wars, artillery had thus been 
divided into (a) those guns moving with an army in the field, 
and (b) those which were either wholly stationary or were called 
upon only when a siege was expected. The personnel was gradu- 
ally becoming more efficient and more amenable to discipline; 
the transport arrangements, however, remained in a backward 
state. Siege and fortress artillery was now organized and 
employed in accordance with the system of the " formal attack " 
as finally developed by Vauban. For details of this, as involving 
the tactical procedure of artillery in the attack and defence of 
fortresses, the reader is referred to Fortification and Siege- 
craft. We are concerned here more especially with the progress 
of field artillery. The part played by this arm began now to 
vary according to the circumstances of each action, and the 
" moral " support of guns was calculated as a factor in the dis- 
positions. In the early Silesian wars, heavy or reserve guns 
protected the deployment of the army and endeavoured to 
prepare for the subsequent advance by firing upon the hostile 
troops; the battalion guns remained close to the infantry, 
accompanied its movements and assisted in the fire fight. Their 
support was not without value, and the. heavy guns often pro- 
voked the enemy into a premature advance, as at Mollwitz. 
But the infantry or the cavalry forced the decision. It has been 
mentioned that with the final disappearance of the pike, about 
1700, infantry fire-power ruled the battlefield. Throughout the 
18th century, it will be found, when the infantry is equal to its 
work the guns have only a subordinate part in the fighting of 
pitched battles. At Kunersdorf (1759) the first dashing charge 
of the Prussian grenadiers captured 72 guns from the Russian 
army. Later the total of captured ordnance reached 180, yet 
the Russians, then almost wholly in flight, were not cut to pieces, 
for only a few light guns of the Prussian army could get to the 
front; their heavy pieces, though twelve horses were harnessed 
to each, never came into action. This example will serve to 
illustrate the difference between the artillery of 1760 and that 
of fifty years later. According to Tempelhof, who was present, 
Kunersdorf was the finest opportunity for field artillery that 



he had ever seen. Yet the field artillery of the 18th century was, 
if anything, more powerful than that of Napoleon's time; it 
was the want of mobility alone which prevented the Prussians 
from turning to good account an opportunity fully as favourable 
as that of the German artillery at Sedan. That Frederick made 
more use of his guns in the later campaigns of the Seven Years' 
War is accounted for by the fact that his infantry and cavalry 
were no longer capable of forcing a decision, and also by changes 
in the general character of the queries. These were fought
in and about broken country and entrenched positions, and the 
mobility of the other arms sank to that of the artillery. Thus 
power came to the front again, and the heavier weapons regained 
their former supremacy. In a bataille rangee in the open field 
the proportion of guns to men had been, in 1741, 2 per 1000. 
At Leu then (1757) heavy fortress guns were brought to the front 
for a special purpose. At Kunersdorf the proportion was 4 and 5 
per 1000 men, with what degree of effectiveness we have seen. 
In the later campaigns the Austrian artillery, which was, through- 
out the Seven Years' War, the best in Europe, placed its numerous 
and powerful ordnance (an " amphitheatre of 400 guns," as 
Frederick said) in long lines of field works. The combination 
of guns and obstacles was almost invariably too formidable to 
offer the slightest chance of a successful assault. It was at this 
stage that Frederick, in 1739, introduced horse artillery to keep 
pace with the movements of cavalry, a proof, if proof were needed, 
of the inability of the field artillery to manoeuvre. The field 
howitzer, the weapon par excellence for the attack of field works, 
has never perhaps been more extensively employed than it was 
by the Prussians at that time. At Burkersdorf (1762) Frederick 
placed 45 howitzers in one battery. In those days the mobile 
artillery was always formed in groups or " batteries " of from 
10 to 20 pieces. England too was certainly abreast of other 
countries in the organization of the field artillery arm. About 
the middle of the 18th century the guns in use consisted of 24- 
pounders, 12-pounders, 6-pounders and 3-pounders. The guns 
were divided into " brigades " of four, five and six guns re- 
spectively, and began to be separated into "heavy" and "light" 
brigades. Each field gun was drawn by four horses, the two 
leaders being ridden by artillerymen, and had 100 rounds of 
shot and 30 rounds of grape. The British artillery distinguished 
itself in the latter part of the Seven Years' War. Foreign critics 
praised its lightness, its elegance and the good quality of its 
materials. At Marburg (1760) " the English artillery could 
not have been better served; it followed the enemy with such 
vivacity, and maintained its fire so well, that it was impossible 
for the latter to re-form," says Tempelhof, the Prussian artillery 
officer who records the lost opportunity of Kunersdorf. The 
merits and the faults of the artillery had been made clear, and 
nowhere was the lesson taken to heart more than in France, 
where General Gribeauval, a French officer who had served in 
the war with the Austrian artillery, initiated reforms which in 
the end led to the artillery triumphs of the Napoleonic era. 
While Frederick had endeavoured to employ, as profitably as 
possible, the existing heavy equipments, Gribeauval sought 
improvement in other directions. 

9. Gribeauval' s Reforms. — At the commencement of the 1 8th 
century, French artillery had made but little progress. The 
carriages and wagons were driven by wagoners on foot, and on 
the field of battle the guns were dragged about by ropes or 
remained stationary. Towards the middle of the century 
some improvements were made. Field guns and carriages were 
lightened, and the guns separated into "brigades. Siege carriages 
were introduced. From 1765 onwards, however, Gribeauval 
strove to build up a complete system both of personnel and 
materiel, creating a distinct materiel for field, siege, garrison 
and coast artillery. Alive to the vital importance of mobility 
for field artillery, he dismissed to other branches all pieces of 
greater calibre than 12-pounders, and reduced the weight of 
those retained. His reforms were resisted, and for a time 
successfully; but in 1776 he became first inspector-general 
of artillery, and was able to put his ideas into force. The field 
artillery of the new system included 4-pounder regimental guns, 



688 



ARTILLERY 



and for the reserve 8- and 12-pounders, with 6-inch howitzers. 
For siege and garrison service Gribeauval adopted the 16-pounder 
and 12-pounder guns, 8-inch howitzer and 10-inch mortar, 12-, 
10- and 8-inch mortars being introduced in 1785. 

The carriages were constructed on a uniform model and 
technically improved. The horses were harnessed in pairs, 
instead of in file as formerly, but the manner in which the teams 
were driven remained much the same. The prolong (a sort of 
tow-rope) was introduced, to unite the trail of the gun and the 
limber in slow retiring movements. Siege carriages differed from 
those of field artillery only in details. Gribeauval also introduced 
new carriages for garrison and coast service. The great step 
made was in a uniform construction being adopted for all 
materiel, and in making the parts interchangeable so far as 
possible. In 1765 the personnel of the French artillery was 
reorganized. The corps or reserve artillery was organized in 
divisions of eight guns. The battery or division was thus 
made a unit, with guns, munitions and gunners complete, the 
horses and drivers being added at a later date. Horse artillery 
was introduced into the French army in 1701. The last step was 
made in 1800, when the establishment of a driver corps of 
soldiers put an end to the old system of horsing by contract. 

10. British Artillery, 1JQ3-1815. — Meanwhile the numbers of 
the English artillery had increased to nearly 4000 men. For 
some five centuries the word " artillery " in England meant 
entirely garrison artillery; the field artillery only existed in 
time of war. When war broke out, a train of artillery was 
organized, consisting of a certain number of field (or siege) guns, 
manned by garrison gunners; and when peace was proclaimed 
the train was disbanded, the materiel being returned into store, 
and the gunners reverting to some fort or stronghold. In 1793 
the British artillery was anything but efficient. Guns were still 
dispersed among the infantry, mobility had declined again since 
the Seven Years' War, and the American war had been fought 
out by the other arms. The drivers were mere carters, on foot 
with long whips, and the whole field equipment was scarcely 
able to break from a foot-pace. Prior to the Peninsular War, 
however, the exertions of an able officer, Major Spearman, had 
done much to bring about improvement. Horse artillery had 
been introduced in 1793, and the driver corps established in 
1 794. Battalion guns were abolished in 1802, and field " brigades 
of six guns " were formed, horse artillery batteries being styled 
" troops." Military drivers were introduced, and the horses 
teamed in pairs. The drivers were mounted on the near horses, 
the gunners either rode the off horses or were carried on the 
limbers and wagons. The equipment was lightened, and a new 
system of manoeuvres introduced. A troop of horse artillery and a 
field brigade each had five guns and one howitzer. The " driver 
corps," raised in 1794, was divided into troops, the addition 
of one of which to a company of foot artillery converted it into a 
field brigade. The horse artillery possessed both drivers and 
horses, and required very limited assistance from the driver corps. 

n. French Revolutionary Wars. — During the long wars of the 
French Revolution and Empire the artillery of the field army by 
degrees became field artillery as we know it to-day. The develop- 
ment of musketry in the 16th century had taken the work of 
preparing an assault out of the hands of the gunners. Per contra, 
the decadence of infantry fire-power in the latter part of the 
Seven Years' War had reinstated the artillery arm. A similar 
decadence of the infantry arm was destined to produce, in 1807, 
artillery predominance, but this time with an important differ- 
ence, viz. mobility, and when mobility is thus achieved we have 
the first modern field artillery. The new tactics of the French in 
the Revolutionary wars, forced upon them by circumstances, 
involved an almost complete abandonment of the fire-tactics of 
Frederick's day, and the need for artillery was, from the first 
fight at Valmy onwards, so obvious that its moral support was 
demanded even in the outpost line of the new French armies. 
St Cyr (Armies of the Rhine, p. 112) quotes a case in which " right 
in the very farthest outpost line " the original 4-pounder guns 
were replaced by 8-, 16-, and in the end by 24-pounders. The 
cardinal principle of massing batteries was not, indeed, forgotten, 



notwithstanding the weakness of raw levies. But though, as we 
have seen, the materiel had already been greatly improved, and 
the artillery was less affected by the Revolution than other arms 
of the service, circumstances were against it, and we rarely find 
examples of artillery work in the Revolutionary wars which show 
any great improvement upon older methods. The field guns were 
however, at last organized in batteries each complete in itself, 
as mentioned above. The battalion gun disappeared; it was a 
relic of days in which it was thought advisable, both for other 
reasons and also because the short range of guns forbade any 
attempt at concentration of fire from several positions at one 
target, to have some force of artillery at any point that might be 
threatened. Though it was officially retained in the regulations 
of the French army, " officers and men combined to reject it " 
(Rouquerol, Q. F. Field Artillery, p. 121), and its last appearances, 
in 1809 and in 181 3, were due merely to an endeavour on the 
part of Napoleon to give cohesion thereby to the battalions of 
raw soldiers which then constituted his army. But, with the 
development of mobility, it was probably found that sufficient 
guns could be taken to any threatened point, and no one had ever 
denied the principle of massed batteries, although, in practice, 
dispersion had been thought to be unavoidable. 

12. Napoleon's Artillery Tactics. — During the war the French 
artillery steadily improved in manoeuvring power. But many 
years elapsed before perfection was attained. Meanwhile, the 
infantry, handled without regard to losses in every fight, had 
in consequence deteriorated. The final production of the field 
artillery battle, usually dated as from the battle of Friedland 
(June 14, 1807), therefore saved the situation for the French. 
Henceforward Napoleon's battles depend for their success on an 
" artillery preparation," the like of which had never been seen. 
Napoleon's own maxim illustrates the typical tactics of 1807- 
1815. " When once the mUee has begun," he says, "themanwho 
is clever enough to bring up an unexpected force of artillery, 
without the enemy knowing it, is sure to carry the day." The 
guns no longer " prepared " the infantry advance by slowly 
disintegrating the hostile forces. Still less was it their business 
merely to cover a deployment. On the contrary, they now went 
in to the closest ranges and, by actually annihilating a portion of 
the enemy's line with case-shot fire, " covered " the assault so 
effectively that columns of cavalry and infantry reached the gap 
thus created without striking a blow. It is unnecessary to give 
examples. Every one of Napoleon's later battles illustrates the 
principle. The most famous case is that of the great battery of 
100 guns at Wagram (q.v.) which preceded the final attack of the 
centre. When Napoleon at Leipzig saw the allied guns forming 
up in long lines to prepare the assault, he exclaimed, " At last 
they have learned something." This " case-shot preparation," 
of course, involved a high degree of efficiency in manoeuvre, as 
the guns had to gallop forward far in front of the infantry. The 
want of this quality had retarded the development of field 
artillery for 300 years, during which it had only been important 
relatively to the occasional inferiority of other troops. After 
Napoleon's time the art of tactics became the art of combining 
the three arms. 

13. Artillery, 18 75- 1865. — Henceforward, therefore, the his- 
tory of artillery becomes the history of its technical effectiveness, 
particularly in relation to infantry fire, and of improvements 
or modifications in the method of putting well-recognized 
principles into action. Infantry fire, however, being more 
variable in its effectiveness than that of artillery, the period 
1815-1870 saw many changes in the relations of the two arms. 
In the time of Napoleon, infantry fire never equalled that of the 
Seven Years' War, and after the period of the great wars the 
musket was less and less effectively used. Economy was, 
however, practised to excess in every army of Europe during the 
period 181 5-1850, and even if there had been great battles at 
this time, the artillery, which was maintained on a minimum 
strength of guns, men and horses, would not have repeated the 
exploits of Senarmont and Drouot in the Napoleonic wars. The 
principle was well understood, but under such conditions the 
practice was impossible. It was at this stage that the general 



ARTILLERY 



Plate I. 




Plate II. 



ARTILLERY 




Photo, GjU & Polden. 



BREACH LOADING FIELD BATTERY (15-PR. B.L.). 




P)wlo, Galc&Polden. 



QUICK-FIRING HORSE ARTILLERY (ROYAL HORSE .ARTILLERY, 13-PR. Q.F.). 




Photo, Gale 4- Polden. Photo, Topical Press. 

Q.F. FIELD ARTILLERY (18-PE. Q.F., R.F.A.). FRENCH (75-MM. Q.F.) FIELD ARTILLERY MANCEUVRING. 



ARTILLERY 



689 



introduction of the rifled musket put an end, once for all, to the 
artillery tactics of the smooth-bore days. Infantry, armed with a 
far-ranging rifle, as in the American Civil War, kept the guns 
beyond case-shot range, compelling them to use only round shot 
or common shell. In that war, therefore, attacking infantry met, 
on reaching close quarters, not regiments already broken by a 
feu d'enfer, but the full force of the defenders' artillery and 
infantry, both arms fresh and unshaken, and the full volume of 
their case shot and musketry. At Fredericksburg the Federal 
infantry attacked, unsupported by a single field piece; at 
Gettysburg the , Federal artillery general Hunt was able to 
reserve his ammunition to meet Lee's assault, although the 
infantry of his own side was meanwhile subjected to the fire of 137 
Confederate guns. Thus, in both these cases the assault became 
one of infantry against unshaken infantry and artillery. On 
many occasions, indeed, the batteries on either side went into 
close ranges, as the traditions of the old United States army 
dictated, but their losses were then totally out of proportion to 
their effectiveness. Indeed, the increased range at which battles 
were now fought, and the ineffectiveness of the projectiles 
necessarily used by the artillery at these ranges, so far neutral- 
ized even rifled guns that artillery generals could speak of " idle 
cannonades " as the " besetting sin " of some commanders. 

14. The Franco-German War, 1870-71. — In the next great 
war, that of 1866 (Bohemia), guns were present on both sides in 
great numbers, the average for both sides being three guns per 
1000 men. Artillery, however, played but a small part in the 
Prussian attacks, this being due to the inadequate training then 
afforded, and also to the mixture of rifled guns and smooth-bores 
in their armament. In Prussia, however, the exertions of 
General v. Hindersin, the improvement of the materiel, and above 
all the better tactical training of the batteries, were rewarded 
four years later by success on the battlefield almost as decisive 
as Napoleon's. In 1870 the French artillery was invariably 
defeated by that of the Germans, who were then free to turn 
their attention to the hostile infantry. At first, indeed, the 
German infantry was too impatient to wait until the victorious 
artillery had prepared the way for them by disintegrating the 
opposing line of riflemen. Thus the attack of the Prussian 
Guards at St Privat (August 18, 1870) melted away before the 
unbroken fire-power of the French, as had that of the Federals 
at Fredericksburg and that of the Confederates at Gettysburg. 
But such experiences taught the German infantry commanders 
the necessity of patience, and at Sedan the French army was 
enveloped by the fire of nearly 600 guns, which did their work 
so thoroughly that the Germans annihilated the Imperial army 
at the cost of only 5 % of casualties. 

15. Results of the War. — The tactical lessons of the war, so far 
as field artillery is concerned, may be briefly summarized as (a) 
employment of great masses of guns; (b) forward position of guns 
in the order of march, in order to bring them into action as 
quickly as possible; (c) the so-called " artillery duel," in which 
i.he assailant subdues the enemy's artillery fire; and (d) when this 
is achieved, and not before, the thorough preparation of all 
iifantry attacks by artillery bombardment. This theory of 
iield artillery action has not, even with the almost revolutionary 
improvements of the present period, entirely lost its value, and 
it may be studied in detail in the well-known work of von Schell, 
Taktik der Feldartillerie (1877), later translated into English by 
Major-General Sir A. E. Turner (Tactics of Field Artillery, 1900). 
In one important matter, however, the precepts of Schell and his 
contemporaries no longer hold good. " It is absolutely necessary 
that the object of the infantry's attack should be cannonaded 
before it advances. To accomplish this, sufficient time should 
be given to the artillery, and on no account should the infantry 
be ordered to advance until the fire of the guns has produced the 
desired effect." This, the direct outcome of the slaughter at St 
Privat, represents the best possibilities of breechloading guns 
with common shell — no more than a slow disintegration of the 
enemy's power of resistance by a thorough and lengthy " artillery 
preparation." Against troops sheltered behind works (as in the 
Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78) the common shell usually failed 



to give satisfactory results, if for no other reason, because the 
" preparation " consumed an inordinate time, and in any case 
the hostile artillery had first of all to be subdued in the artillery 
duel. 

16. Quick-firing Field Guns. — In 1891, a work by General 
Wille of the German army ( The Field Gun of the Future) and in 
1892 another by Colonel Langlois of the French service (Field 
Artillery with the other Arms) foreshadowed many revolutionary 
changes in materiel and tactics which have now taken place. 
The new ideas spread rapidly, and the quick-firing gun came by 
degrees to be used in every army. The original designs have 
been greatly improved upon (see Ordnance: Field artillery 
equipments), but the principles of these designs have not under- 
gone serious modification. These are, briefly, the mechanical 
absorption of the recoil, by means of brakes or buffers, and the 
development of " time shrapnel " as the projectile of field 
artillery. The absorption of recoil of itself permits of a higher 
rate of fire, since the gun does not require to be run up and relaid 
after every shot. Formerly such an advantage was illusory 
(since aim could not be taken through the thick bank of smoke 
produced by rapid fire), but the introduction of smokeless 
powder removed this objection. Artillerists, no longer handi- 
capped, at once turned their attention to the increase of the rate 
of fire. At the same time a shield was applied to the gun, for the 
protection of the detachment. This advantage is solely the 
result of the non-recoiling carriage. The gunners had formerly 
to stand clear of the recoiling gun, and a shield was therefore of 
but slight value. 

17. Time Shrapnel.— The power of modern artillery owes even 
more to the improvement of the projectile than to that of the 
gun (see Ammunition). The French, always in the forefront of 
artillery progress, were the first nation to realize the new signifi- 
cance of the time-fuze and the shrapnel shell. These had been 
in existence for many years; to the British army are due both the 
invention and the development of the shrapnel, which made its 
first appearance in European warfare at Vimeira in 1808. But, 
up to the introduction of rifled pieces, the Napoleonic case-shot 
attack was universally and justly considered the best method of 
fighting, and in the transition stage of the materiel many soldiers 
continued to put faith in the old method, — hence the Prussian 
artillery in 1866 had many smooth-bore batteries in the field, — 
and between i860 and 1870 gunners, now convinced of the 
superiority of the new equipments, undoubtedly sought to turn 
to account the minute accuracy of the rifled weapons in un- 
necessarily fine shooting. Thus, in 1870 the French time-fuze 
was only graduated for two ranges, and the Germans used 
percussion fuzes only. But this phase has passed, and General 
Langlois has summarized the tactics of the newest field artillery 
in one phrase: " It results in transferring to 3000 yds. the point- 
blank and case-shot fire of the smooth-bore." The meaning of 
this will be discussed later; here it will be sufficient to say that it 
is claimed for the modern gun and the modern shell that the 
Napoleonic method * of annihilating by a rain of bullets has been 
revived, with the distinction that the shell, and not the gun, 
fires the bullets close up to the enemy. In the Boer War, Pieter's 
Hill furnished a notable example of this " covering," as distinct 
from " preparation," of an assault by artillery fire. 

18. Heavy Field, Siege and Garrison Artillery. — Amongst 
other results of this war was a recrudescence of the idea of 
" dispersion." This will be noticed later; the more material 
result of the Boer War, and of the generally increasing specializa- 
tion in the various functions of the artillery arm, has been the 
reintroduction of heavy ordnance into field armies. The field 
howitzer reappeared some time before the outbreak of that war, 
and the British howitzers had illustrated their shell-power in the 
Sudan campaign of 1898. During the latter part of the 19th 
century, siege and fortress artillery underwent a development 
hardly less remarkable than that of field artillery in the same 
time. Rifled guns, " long " and " short " for direct and curved 
fire, formed the siege artillery of the Germans in 1870-71, and 

1 Napoleon's maxim, quoted above, reappears in spirit in the 
British F. A. Training of 1906 (p. 225). 



6qo 



ARTILLERY 



with the reduction of the old-fashioned fortresses of France 
began a new era in siegecraft (see Fortification and Siege- 
craft). At the present time howitzers 1 (B.L. rifled) are the 
principal siege weapons, while heavy direct-fire guns (see 
Ordnance passim) still retain a part of the work formerly 
assigned to the artillery of the attack. For an account of a siege 
with modern artillery see Macalik and Langer, Kampf um eine 
Feslung, which describes an imaginary siege of Kbniggratz. On 
the whole, it may be said that modern artillery has caused a 
revolution in methods of fortification and siegecraft, which is 
little less far-reaching than the original change from the 
trebuchet to the bombard. 

Organization 

19. Field Artillery Organization. — A battery of field artillery 
comprises three elements, viz. materiel, — guns, carriages, 
ammunition and stores; personnel, — officers, non-commissioned 
officers, gunners, drivers and artificers; and transport, — almost 
invariably horses, though other animals, and also motor and 
mechanical transport, are used under special circumstances. As 
for the materiel, the guns used by field artillery in almost all 
countries are quick-firers, throwing shells of 13 to 18 pounds; 
details of these will be found in the article Ordnance. The 
number of guns in a battery varies in different countries between 
four and eight; by far the most usual number is six. With the 
introduction of the quick-firing gun, the tendency towards small 
batteries (of four guns) has become very pronounced, the ruling 
motives being (a) better control of fire in action, and (b) more 
horses available to draw the increased number of ammunition 
wagons required. " Mixed " batteries of guns and howitzers 
were formerly employed on occasion, and were supposed to be 
adapted to every kind of work. However, the difference between 
the gun and the howitzer was so great that at all times one part of 
the armament was idle, while the general increase in the artillery 
arm has permitted batteries and brigades of howitzers to be 
formed, separately, as required. Machine guns (q.v.) are not 
treated in Great Britain as being artillery weapons, though abroad 
they are often organized in batteries. During, and subsequent 
to the Boer War, heavier machine guns, called pompoms, came 
into use. The rocket (q.v.), formerly a common weapon of the 
artillery, is now used, if at all, only for mountain and forest 
warfare against savages. 

20. Ammunition. — The vehicles of a battery include (besides 
guns and limbers) ammunition wagons, store and provision carts 
or wagons and forage wagons. On the amount of ammunition 
that should be carried with a field battery there was formerly a 
considerable diversity of opinion. The greater the amount a 
battery carries with it, the more independent it is; on the other 
hand, every additional wagon makes the battery more cumbrous 
and, by lengthening out the column, keeps back the combatant 
troops marching in rear. But since the introduction of the Q.F. 
gun it has been universally recognized that the gun must have 
a very liberal supply of ammunition present with it in action, and 
the old standard allowance of one wagon per gun has been 
increased to that of two and even three. Formerly batteries 
were further hampered by having to carry the reserve of small- 
arm ammunition for infantry and cavalry. But the greater 
distances of modern warfare accentuate the difficulties of such a 
system, and the reserve ammunition for all arms is now carried in 
special " ammunition columns " (see Ammunition), the personnel 
and transport of which is furnished by the artillery. 

2 1 . Interior Economy. — The organization and interior economy 
of a battery is much the same in all field artillery. In England the 
command is held by a major, the second in command is a captain. 
The battery is divided into three " sections " of two guns each, 
each under a subaltern officer, who is responsible for everything 
connected with his section — men, horses, guns, carriages, ammuni- 
tion and stores. Each section again consists of two sub-sections, 
each comprising one gun and its wagons, men and horses, and at 

1 The old smooth-bore mortar for high-angle fire has of course 
disappeared, but the name " mortar " is still applied in some 
countries to short rifled howitzers. 



the head of each is the " No. 1" of the gun detachment — usually 
a sergeant — who is immediately responsible to the section 
commander for his sub-section. 

The No. 1 rides with the gun, there is also another mounted 
non-commissioned officer who rides with the first wagon, and the 
gunners are seated on the gun-carriage, wagon and limbers. The 
increased number of wagons now accompanying the gun has, 
however, given more seating accommodation to the detachment, 
and this distribution has in some cases been altered. The three 
drivers ride the near horses of their respective pairs, each gun 
and each wagon being drawn by six horses. On the march, the 
gun is attached to the limber, a two-wheeled carriage drawn by 
the gun team; the wagon consists likewise of a " body " and a 
limber. A battery has also a number of non-combatant carriages, 
such as forge and baggage wagons. In addition to the gunners 
and drivers, there are men specially trained in range-taking, 
signalling, &c, in all batteries. 

22. Special Natures of Field Artillery. — Horse Artillery differs 
from field in that the whole gun detachment is mounted, and the 
gun and wagon therefore are freed from the load of men and their 
equipment. The organization of a battery of horse artillery 
differs but slightly from that of a field battery; it is somewhat 
stronger in rank and file, as horse-holders have to be provided for 
the gunners in action. Horse artillery is often lightened, more- 
over, by sacrificing power (see Ordnance). The essential feature 
of Mountain Artillery in general is the carrying of the whole 
equipment on the backs of mules or other animals. The total 
weight is usually distributed in four or five mule-loads. For 
action the loads are lifted off the saddles and " assembled," and 
the time required to do this is, in well-trained batteries, only one 
minute. For the technical questions connected with the gun and 
its carriage, see Ordnance. The weight of a shell in a mountain 
gun rarely exceeds 12 lb., and is usually less. In most armies 
the field howitzer has, after an eclipse of many years, reasserted 
its place. The weapons used are B.L. or Q.F. howitzers on field 
carriages; the calibre varies from about 4 to 5 in. In Great 
Britain the field howitzer batteries are organized as, and form 
part of, the Royal Field Artillery, two batteries of six howitzers 
each forming a brigade. 

23. Heavy Ordnance. — Heavy Field Artillery, officially defined 
as "all artillery equipped with mobile guns of 4-in. calibre and 
upwards," is usually composed, in Great Britain, of 5-in. or 
4-7-in. Q.F. guns on field carriages. 6-in. Q.F. guns have also 
been used. A battery (4 guns) is attached to the divisional 
artillery of each division, a company of the Royal Garrison 
Artillery furnishing the personnel. The four guns are divided 
into two sections, each section under an officer and each sub- 
section under a non-commissioned officer, as in the horse and 
field batteries. Siege and garrison artillery have not usually 
the complete and permanent organization that distinguishes field 
artillery. For siege trains the materiel is usually kept in store, 
and the personnel and transport are supplied from other sources 
according to requirement. In garrison artillery, the guns 
mounted in fortresses and batteries, or stored in arsenals for 
the purpose, furnish the materiel, and the companies of garrison 
artillery the personnel. In Great Britain, the Royal Garrison 
Artillery finds the mountain batteries and the heavy field 
artillery in addition to its own units. The siege trains are, as 
has been said, organized ad hoc on each particular occasion 
(see Fortification and Siegecraft). In Great Britain, the 
guns and howitzers manned by the R.G.A. would be 6-in. and 
8-in. howitzers, 4-7-in. and 6-in. guns, and still heavier howitzers, 
as well as the field and heavy batteries belonging to the divisions 
making the siege. 

24. Higher Organization of Artillery. — The higher units, in 
almost every country except Great Britain, are the regiment, 
and, sometimes, the brigade of two or more regiments. These 
units are distributed to army corps, divisions and districts, 
in the same way as units of other arms (see Army). In Great 
Britain the Royal Regiment of Artillery still comprises the whole 
personnel of the arm, being divided into the Royal Horse, Royal 
Field and Royal Garrison Artillery; to each branch Special 



ARTILLERY 



691 



Reserve and Territorial artillery are affiliated. Over and 
above the military command of these higher units, provision is 
usually made for technical control of the materiel, and a variety 
of training and experimental establishments, such as schools 
of gunnery, are maintained in all countries. The more special 
unit of organization in mobile artillery is the brigade, formerly 
called brigade-division (German, Abteilung; French groupe). 
The brigade is in Great Britain the administrative and tactical 
unit. Mountain artillery is not organized in brigades in the 
British empire. The unit consists, in the case of guns, of three 
batteries (18 guns, heavy artillery 12), in the case of field 
howitzers of two batteries (12 howitzers), and in the horse 
artillery of two batteries (12 guns), and is commanded by a 
lieutenant-colonel. To each brigade is allotted an ammunition 
column. The necessity for such a grouping of batteries will be 
apparent if the reader notes that 54 field guns, 12 howitzers 
and 4 heavy field guns form the artillery of a single British 
division of about 15,000 combatants. 

25. Grouping of the Artillery. — The "corps artillery" (formerly 
the " reserve artillery ") now consists only of the howitzer and 
heavy brigades, with a brigade of horse artillery. The latter is 
held at the disposal of the corps commander for the swift reinforce- 
ment of a threatened point; the howitzers and the heavy guns 
have, of course, functions widely different from those of the 
mass of guns. As the field artillery is required to come into 
action at the earliest possible moment, it has now been dis- 
tributed amongst the infantry divisions, and marches almost 
at the head of the various combatant columns, instead of being 
relegated perhaps to the tail of the centre column. The redis- 
tribution of the British army (1907) on a divisional basis is a 
remarkable example of this; even the special natures of artillery 
(except horse artillery) are distributed amongst the divisions. 
In Germany two "regiments" (each of 2 Abteilungen = 6 
batteries) form a brigade, under an artillery general in each 
division who thus disposes of 72 field guns, and the howitzers, 
with such horse artillery batteries as remain over after the 
cavalry has been supplied, still form a corps or reserve artillery. 
In 1903 the French, after long hesitation, assigned the whole 
of the field artillery to the various divisions, but later (for reasons 
stated in the article Tactics) arranged to reconstitute the old- 
fashioned corps artillery in war. (See also Army, § 49). 

Tactical Work 

26. General Characteristics of Field Artillery Action. — The duty 
of field artillery in action is to fire with the greatest effect on the 
target which is for the moment of the greatest tactical importance. 
This definition of field artillery tactics brings the student at once 
to questions of combined tactics, for which consult the article 
Tactics. The purpose of the present article is to indicate the 
methods employed by the gunners to give effect to their fire at 
the targets mentioned. For this purpose the artillery has at 
its disposal two types of projectile, common (or rather, high 
explosive) shell and shrapnel, and two fuzes, " time " and 
" percussion " (see Ammunition). The actual process of coming 
into action may be described in a few words. The gun is, at or 
near its position in action, " unlimbered " and the gun limber 
and team sent back under cover. Ammunition for the gun 
is first taken from the wagon that accompanies it, as it is very 
desirable to keep the limbers full as long as possible, in case of 
emergencies such as that of a temporary separation from the 
wagon. Limber supply is, however, allowed in certain circum- 
stances. The wagon is now placed as a rule by the side of the 
gun, an arrangement which immensely simplifies the supply 
of ammunition, this being done under cover of the armour on 
the wagon and of the gun-shield and also without fatigue to the 
men. The older method of placing the wagon at some distance 
behind the gun is still occasionally used, especially in the case of 
unshielded equipments. No horses are allowed, in any case, 
to be actually with the line of guns. According to the British 
Field Artillery Training of 1906, a battery in action would be 
thus dis'tributed: first, the " fighting battery " consisting of the 
six guns, each with its wagon alongside, and the limbers of the 



two flank guns; then, under cover in rear, the " first line of 
wagons " comprising the teams of the fighting battery, the 
four remaining gurt limbers, and six more wagons. The 
non-combatant vehicles form the " second line of wagons." 

27. Occupation of a Position. — This depends primarily upon 
considerations of tactics, for the accurate co-operation of the 
guns is the first essential to success in the general task. In 
details, however, the choice of position varies to some extent 
with the nature of the equipment: for instance, an elevated 
position is better adapted than a low one for high velocity guns 
firing over the heads of their own infantry, and again, the 
" spade " with which nearly all equipments are furnished (see 
Ordnance) should have soil in which it can find a hold. Cover 
for the gun and its detachment cannot well be obtained from the 
configuration of the ground, because, if the gun can shoot over 
the covering mass of earth, the hostile shells can of course do 
likewise. Sufficient protection is given by the shield, and thus 
" cover " for field-guns simply means concealment. Cover for 
the " first line of wagons " is, however, a very serious considera- 
tion. As to concealment, it is stated that " the broad white 
flash from a gun firing smokeless powder is visible " to an enemy 
" unless the muzzle is at least 10 ft. below the covering crest " 
(Bethell, Modern Guns and Gunnery, 1907, p. 147). Concealment 
therefore, means only the skilful use of ground in such a way as 
to make the enemy's ranging difficult. This frequently involves 
the use of retired positions, on reverse slopes, in low ground, &c, 
and in all modern artillery the greatest stress is laid on practice 
in firing by indirect means. Controversy has, however, arisen as 
to whether inability to see the foreground is not a drawback so 
serious that direct fire from a crest position, in spite of its 
exposure, must be taken as the normal method. The latter is 
of course immensely facilitated by the introduction of the shield. 
A great advantage of retired positions is that, provided unity of 
direction is kept, an overwhelming artillery surprise (see F. A . 
Training, 1906, p. 225) is carried out more easily than from a 
visible position. The extent of front of a battery in action is 
governed by the rule that no two gun detachments should be 
exposed to being hit by the bullets of one shell, and also by the 
necessity of having as many guns as possible at work. These 
two conditions are met by the adoption of a 20-yards interval 
between the muzzles of the guns. At the present time the gun 
and its wagon are placed as close together as possible, to obtain 
the full advantage of the armoured equipment. The shield, 
behind which the detachments remain at all times covered from 
rifle (except at very short range) and shrapnel bullets, 1 enables 
the artillery commander to handle his batteries far more boldly 
than formerly was the case. General Langlois says " the shield- 
protected carriage is the corollary to the quick-firing gun." 
Armour on the wagon, enabling ammunition supply as well as 
the service of the gun, to be carried on under cover, soon followed 
the introduction of the shield. The disadvantage of extra weight 
and consequently increased difficulty of " man-handling " the 
equipment is held to be of far less importance than the advantages 
obtained by the use of armour. 

28. Laying. — " Elevation " may be defined as the vertical 
inclination of the gun, " direction " as the horizontal inclination 
to the right or left, necessary to direct the path of the projectile 
to the object aimed at. " Laying " the gun, in the case of most 
modern equipments, is divided, by means of the device called 
the independent line of sight (see Ordnance), into two processes, 
performed simultaneously by different men, the adjustment of 
the sights and that of the gun. The first is the act of finding 
the " line of sight," or line joining the sights and the point aimed 
at; for this the equipment has to be " traversed " right or left 
so as to point in the proper direction, and also adjusted in the 
vertical plane. The simplest form of laying for direction, or 
" line," is called the " direct " method. If the point aimed at is 
the target, and it can be seen by the layer, he has merely to look 
over the " open " sights. But the point aimed at is rarely the 
target itself. In war, the target, even if visible, is often indistinct, 

1 Though not of course against the direct impact of shrapnel or 
H.E. shells. 



692 



ARTILLERY 



and in this case, as also when the guns are under cover or engaging 
a target under cover, an " aiming point" or "auxiliary mark," 
a conspicuous point quite apart and distinct from the target, has 
to be employed (" indirect " method). In the Russo-Japanese 
War the sun was sometimes used as an aiming point. When the 
guns are behind cover and the foreground cannot be seen, an 
artificial aiming point is often made by placing a line of " aiming 
posts " in the ground. If an aiming point can be found which is 
in line with the target, as would be the case when aiming posts 
are laid out, the laying is simple, but it is as often as not out of 
the line. Finding the "line " in this case involves the calculation, 
from a distant observing point, of the angle at which the guns 
must be laid in order that, when the sights are directed upon 
the aiming point, the shell will strike the target. It is further 
necessary to find the " angle of sight " or inclination of the line 
of sight to the horizontal plane. If aim be taken over the open 
sights at the target, the line of sight naturally passes through 
the target, but in any other case it may be above or below it. 
Then the point where the projectile will meet the line of sight, 
which should coincide with the target, is beyond it if the line of 
sight is below or angle of sight is too small, and short of it if the 
line of sight is too high — that is, range and fuze will be wrong. 
The process of indirect laying for elevation therefore is, first, the 
measurement of the angle of sight, and secondly, the setting of 
the sights to that angle by means of a clinometer; this is called 
clinometer laying. In all cases the actual elevation of the gun 
to enable the shell to strike the target is a purely mechanical 
adjustment, performed independently; the gun is moved 
relatively to the sights, which have been previously set as 
described. Frequently the battery commander directs the guns 
from a point at some distance, communication being maintained 
by signallers or by field telephone. This is the normal procedure 
when the guns are firing from cover. Instruments of precision 
and careful calculations are, of course, required to fight a battery 
in this manner, many allowances having to be made for the 
differences in height, distance and angle between the position of 
the battery commander and that of the guns. 

29. Ranging 1 (except on the French system alluded to below) 
is, first, finding the range (i.e. elevation required), and secondly, 
correcting the standard length of fuze for that range in accordance 
with the circumstances of each case. To find the elevation 
required, it is necessary to observe the bursts of shells " on graze " 
with reference to the target. The battery commander orders two 
elevations differing by 300 yds., e.g. " 2500, 2800," and tells off a 
" ranging section " of two guns. These proceed to fire percus- 
sion shrapnel at the two different elevations, in order to obtain 
bursts "over" (+) and "short" ( — ). When it is certain that 
this " long bracket " is obtained, the " 100 yds. bracket " is 
found, the elevations in the given case being, perhaps, 2600 and 
2700 yds. " Verifying " rounds are then fired, to make certain 
of the 100 yds. bracket. The old " short bracket " (50 yds.) is 
not now required except at standing targets. Circumstances 
may, of course, shorten the process ; for instance, a hit upon the 
target itself could be " verified " at once. The determination of 
the fuze (by time shrapnel) follows. The fuze has a standard 
length for the ascertained range, but the proper correction of this 
standard length to suit the atmospheric conditions has to be 
made. The commander has therefore already given out a series 
of corrector 2 lengths, his object being to secure bursts both in air 
1 Finding the line is also an integral part of ranging. When an 
aiming point is used, the angle at which the guns must be laid 
with reference to it is calculated and given out by the battery 
commander. The modern goniometric sight permits of a wide angle 
(in England 180 right or left) being given. " Deflection " is a small 
angular correction applied to individual guns. 

■ The " corrector " is an adjustment on the sights of the gun used 
to determine the correct fuze. In the British Q.F. equipment, a 
graduated dial or drum shows the elevation of the gun above the 
line of sight. The fuze lengths are marked on a movable scale 
opposite the range graduations to which they apply, and the " cor- 
rector " moves this fuze scale so as to bring different fuze lengths 
opposite the range graduation. For example, a certain corrector 
setting gives 11^ on the fuze scale opposite 4000 yds. on the range 
scale, and if the shells set to 1 1 \ burst too high, a new corrector 
setting is taken, the fuze length 12 is now opposite to the 4000 range 



and on graze. When he is finally satisfied he opens fire " for 
effect." 

30. An example of the ordinary method of ranging, adapted 
from Field Artillery Training, 1906, is given below. 

Battery commander gives target, &c, and orders: " Right 
section ranging section; remainder corrector 150 increase 10, 
4400-4700," for the long bracket. 

No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4400 yds., P.S., round observed- 
No. 2 ,, ,, ,, 4700 ,, ,, ,, ,, + 

B.C. orders " 4500-4600." 
No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4500 yds., P.S., round observed — 
No. 2 ,, „ ,, 4600 ,, „ „ .. +» 

The 100 yds. bracket appears to be 4500-4600. B.C. orders: 
" Remainder 4500 time shrapnel," and gives the ranging section 
4500-4600 to "verify." Guns 3, 4, 5, 6 set fuzes for 4500 with 
correctors 150, 160, 170, 180. 

No. 1 gun fires, elevation 4500 yds., P.S., round observed — 
No. 2 ,, ,, ,, 4600 ,, ,, ,, „ + 

B.C. orders: " Remainder 4500, one round gun fire, 3 seconds." 
No. 3 elevation 4500 yds. T. S. corrector 150 air 
No. 4 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, 160 air 

No. 5 ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, 170 graze 

No. 6 ,, „ „ „ „ 180 

B.C. selects corrector 160 and goes to " section fire." 
The battery now begins to fire " for effect." 

No. 1 elevation 4500 yds. T.S. corrector 160 air 

No. 3 „ „ , „ „ 

followed by Nos. 5, 2, 4 and 6. 

There is another method of ranging, viz. with time shrapnel 
only. In this the principle is that several shells, fired with the 
same corrector setting, but at different elevations, will burst in 
air at different points along one line. Bursts high in the air 
cannot be judged, and it is therefore necessary to bring down the 
line of bursts to the target, so that the bursts in air appear 
directly in front or directly in rear of it. Rounds are therefore 
fired (in pairs owing to possible imperfections in the fuzes) to 
ascertain the corrector which gives the best line of observation. 
This found, the target is bracketed by bursts low in the air 
observed + and — , as in the ordinary method with percussion 
shrapnel. 

The queries of finding the " line of fire " and the proper
elevation may be combined, as the shells in ranging can be made 
to " bracket " for direction as well as for elevation. The line can 
be changed towards a new target in any kind of direct and 
indirect laying, in the latter case by observing the angle made 
with it by the original line of fire and giving deflection to the guns 
accordingly. Further, the fire of several dispersed batteries may 
be concentrated, distributed, or " switched " from one target to 
another on a wide front, at the will of the commander. 

31. Observation of Fire, on the accuracy of which depends 
the success of ranging, may be done either by the battery com- 
mander himself or by a special "observing" party. Ineithercase 
the shooting is carefully observed throughout, and corrections 
ordered at any time, whether during the process of ranging or 
during fire for effect. The difficulties of observation vary 
considerably with the ground, &c, for instance, the light may be 
so bad that the target can hardly be seen, or again, if there be a 
hollow in front of the target, a shell may burst in it so far below 
that the smoke appears thin, the round being then judged 
" over " instead of " short." On the other hand, a hollow 
behind the target may cause a .round to be lost altogether. 
Ranging with time shrapnel has the merit of avoiding most of 
these " traps." The " French system of fire discipline," referred 
to below, has this method as the usual procedure. 

32. Fire. — Field Artillery ranges are classed in the British 
service as: "distant," 6000 to 4500 yds.; "long," 4500 to 
3500; "effective," 3500 to 2000: and "decisive," 2000 and 

graduation, and this length gives bursts closer up and lower. In 
the German service a corrector (Aufsatzschieber) alters the real 
elevation given to the gun, so that while throughout the battery all 
guns have the same (nominal or ordered) elevation shown on the 
sights, the real elevations of individual guns vary according to the 
different corrector settings. Thus bursts at different heights and 
distances from the target are obtained by shifting the trajectory of 
the shell. The fuze, being set for the nominal elevation common to 
all the guns, burns for the same time in each case, and thus the burst 
will be lower and closer to the target with a less (real) elevation, 
and higher and farther from it with a greater. 



ARTILLERY 



6 93 



under. The actual methods of fire employed are matters of 
detail; it will be sufficient to say that " section fire," in which 
the two guns of a section are fired alternately at a named interval, 
usually 30 seconds, and " rapid fire," in which two, three or more 
rounds as ordered are fired by each gun as quickly as possible, 
are the normal methods. Each battery usually engages a portion 
of the objective equal in length to its own front, owing to the 
spread of the cone of shrapnel bullets (see below). The fire is, of 
course, almost always frontal, though enfilade and oblique fire, 
when opportunities occur for their employment, are more deadly 
than ever, because of the depth of the cone. As for the general 
conduct of an artillery action, accurate fire for effect, at a medium 
rate, is used in most armies, but in the French and, since 1906, in 
the British services a new method has arisen, in consequence of 
the introduction of the modern quick-firer and the perfection of 
the time shrapnel. The French battery (1900 Q.F. equipment) 
consists of four guns and twelve wagons. The gun is shielded, as 
also are the wagons; the high velocity and flat trajectory give a 
maximum depth to the cone of shrapnel bullets. In the hope of 
obtaining a rapid and overwhelming fire, the French artillery 
ranges only for a long bracket, and once this bracket is found, the 
ground within its limits is swept from end to end in a burst of 
rapid fire. This is termed a rafale (squall or gust), and techni- 
cally signifies " a series of eight rounds per gun, each two rounds 
being laid with 100 metres more elevation than the last pair, the 
whole fired off as rapidly as possible." The cone of time shrapnel 
being assumed as 300 yds. (or metres) , it is clear that four pairs of 
rounds, bursting, say, at 1000,' 1 100, 1200 and 1300 yds. (adding, 
for the last, 300 yds. for its forward effect), sweep the whole 
ground between 1000 and 1600 yds. from the guns. The 
maximum depth would, of course, be obtained with four eleva- 
tions differing by the depth of the cone; in such a case the space 
from 1000 to 2200 yds. would be covered, though much less 
effectively, since the same number of bullets are distributed over 
a larger area. On the other hand, the rafale, at a minimum, 
covers 300 yds., all the guns in this case being laid at the same 
elevation throughout. Here the maximum number of bullets is 
obtained for every square yard attacked. Between these extremes, 
a skilful artillery officer can vary the rafale to the needs of each 
several case almost indefinitely. " Sweeping " fire is a series of 
three rounds per gun, one in the original line, one to the right and 
one to the left of it; this is significantly called " mowing " itir 
fauchant) . A further refinement in both services is the combined 
" search and sweep." Forty-eight rounds, constituting in the 
French army a series of this last kind, can, it is said, be fired in 
1 minute and 15 seconds, without setting fuzes beforehand, to 
cover an area of 600 X 200 metres. The result of such a series, 
worked out mathematically, is that 19 % of all men and 75 % of 
all horses, in the area and not under cover, should be hit by 
separate bullets (Bethell, Modem Guns and Gunnery, 1907). 
Even allowing a liberal deduction for imperfect distribution of 
bullets, we may feel certain that nothing but shielded guns could 
live long in the fire-swept zone. This is, of course, a rate of fire 
which could not be kept up for any length of time by the same 
battery. A French battery, firing at the maximum rate, would 
expend every available round in 13 minutes. 

33. Projectiles Employed. — " Time shrapnel," say the German 
Field Artillery regulations, " is the projectile par excellence . . . 
against all animate targets which are not under cover." It 
achieves its purpose, as has been said, by sending a shower of 
bullets over an area of ground in such quantity that this is swept 
from end to end. These bullets are propelled, in a cone, forward 
from the point of burst of the shell, and the effective depth of this 
cone at medium ranges with a fairly high velocity gun may be 
taken at 300 yds. Further, the corrector enables the artillery 
commander to burst his shells at any desired point; for example, 
a long fuze may be given, to burst them close up when firing upon 
a deep target (such as troops in several lines, one behind the other) , 
and thereby to obtain the maximum searching effect, or to obtain 
direct hits on shielded guns, while a short corrector, bursting the 
shell well in front of the enemy, allows the maximum lateral 
spread of the bullets, and therefore sweeps the greatest front. The 



number of bullets in the shell is such that troops in the open 
under effective shrapnel fire must suffer very heavily, and may be 
almost annihilated. If the enemy is close behind good cover, 
the bullets, indeed, pass harmlessly overhead. This, however, 
leads to a very important fact, viz. that artillery can keep down 
the fire of hostile infantry, " blind " the enemy, in Langlois' 
phrase, by pinning it down to cover. Under cover the men are 
safe, but if they raise their heads to take careful aim, they will 
almost certainly be hit. Their fire under such conditions is 
therefore unaimed and wild at the best, and may be wholly 
ineffective. Common shell and high-explosive shell (see Ammu- 
nition) belong to another class of projectile. The former is now 
not often used, but a certain proportion of H.E. shell is carried 
by the field artillery in many armies (see table in Ordnance: 
Field Equipments). This has a very violent local effect within a 
radius of 20 to 25 yds. of the point of burst (see Ammunition, 
fig. 10). It therefore covers far less ground than shrapnel, and is 
naturally used either (a) against troops under substantial cover 
or (b) to wreck cover and buildings. In the former case the shell 
is supposed to send a rain of splinters vertically downwards. 
This it will do, provided the fuze is minutely accurate, and a burst 
is thus obtained exactly over the heads of the enemy, but this is 
now generally held to be unlikely, and in so far as effect against 
personnel is concerned the H.E. shell is not thought to be of much 
value. Indeed, in the British and several other services, no H.E. 
shells at all are carried by field batteries, reliance being placed 
upon percussion shrapnel in attacking localities, buildings, &c, 
and for ranging. Experiments have been made towards pro- 
ducing a "H.E. shrapnel," which combines the characteristics 
of both types (see, for a description, Ammunition). For the pro- 
jectiles used in attacking shielded guns, see section on " field 
howitzers " below. Case shot is now rarely employed. In the 
war of 1870-71 Prince Kraft von Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen, who 
commanded the Prussian Guard artillery, reported the ex- 
penditure of only one round of case, and even that was merely 
" broken in transport." The close-quarters projectile of to-day 
is more usually shrapnel with the fuze set at zero. Langlois, 
however, calls case shot " the true projectile for critical moments, 
which nothing can replace." 

34. Tactics of Field Artillery. — On the march, the position 
and movement of the guns are regulated by the necessity of 
coming quickly into action; the usual place for the arm is at 
or near the heads of the combatant columns, i.e. as far forward 
as is consistent with safety. Safety is further provided for by 
an " escort," or, if such be not detailed, by the nearest infantry 
or cavalry. In attack, the role of the field artillery is usually 
(1) to assist if necessary the advanced guard in the preliminary 
fighting — for this purpose a battery is usually assigned to that 
corps of troops, other batteries also being sent up to the front 
as required, (2) to prepare, and (3) to support or cover the 
infantry attack. "Preparation " consists chiefly in engaging 
and subduing the hostile artillery. This is often spoken of as 
the " artillery duel," and is not a meaningless bombardment, 
but an essential preliminary to the advance. Massed guns with 
modern shrapnel would, if allowed to play freely upon the attack, 
infallibly stop, and probably annihilate, the troops making it. 
The task of the guns, then, is to destroy the opposing guns and 
artillerymen, a task which will engage almost all the resources of 
the assailant's artillery in the struggle for artillery superiority. 
Shielded guns, enhanced rate of fire, perfection in indirect laying 
apparatus, and many other factors, have modified the lessons 
of 1870, and complicated the work of achieving victory in the 
artillery duel so far that the simple " hard pounding " of former 
days has given way to a variety of expedients for inflicting the 
desired loss and damage, as to which opinions differ in and 
within every army. One point is, however, clear and meets with 
universal acceptance. " The whole object of the duel is to enable 
the artillery subsequently to devote all available resources to its 
principal task, which is the material and moral support of the 
infantry during each succeeding stage of the fight " (French 
regulations). One side must be victorious in the end, and when, 
and not until, the hostile artillery is beaten out of action, the 



6 9 4 



ARTILLERY 



victor has acquired the power of pressing home the attack. The 
British regulations (1906), indeed, deal with the steps to be taken 
when, though the artillery of the attack is beaten, the infantry 
advance is continued, but only so as to order the guns to " reopen 
at all costs," in other words, as a forlorn hope. The second part 
of the preparation, the gradual disintegration of the opposing 
line of infantry, has practically disappeared from the drill books. 
The next task of the guns, and that in which modern artillery 
asserts its power to the utmost, is the support of the infantry 
attack. The artillery and infantry co-operate, " the former by 
firing rapidly when they see their own infantry . . . press 
forward, and the latter by making full use of the periods of intense 
artillery fire to gain ground " (British F.A. Training, 1906). 
Thus aided, the infantry closes in to decisive ranges, and as it 
gains ground to the front, every gun " must be at once turned 
upon the points selected . . . the most effective support afforded 
to the attacking infantry by the concentrated fire of guns and 
field howitzers. The former tie the defenders to their entrench- 
ments (for retreat is practically impossible over ground swept 
by shrapnel bullets), distract their attention and tend to make 
them keep their heads down, while the shell from the field 
howitzers searches out the interior of the trenches, the reverse 
slopes of the position, and checks the movement of reinforcements 
towards the threatened point." In these words the British 
Field Artillery drill-book of 1902 summarizes the act of " cover- 
ing " the infantry advance. Unofficial publications are still 
more emphatic. The advance of the infantry to decisive range 
would often be covered by a mass of one hundred or more field 
guns, firing shrapnel at the rate of ten rounds per gun per minute 
at the critical moment. Against such a storm of fire the defend- 
ing infantry, even supposing that its own guns had refitted and 
were again in action, would be powerless. It is in recognition 
of the appalling power of field artillery (which has increased in 
a ratio out of all proportion to the improvements of modern 
rifles) that the French system has been elaborated to the perfec- 
tion which it has now attained. 

With modern guns and modern tactics artillery almost in- 
variably fires over the heads of its own infantry. The German 
regulations indeed say that it should be avoided as far as possible, 
but, as a matter of fact, if the numerous guns of a modern army 
(at Koniggratz there were 1550 guns on the field, at Gravelotte 
1 252, at Mukden 3000) were to be given a clear front, there would 
be no room for deploying the infantry. Consequently the French 
regulations, in which the power of the artillery is given the 
greatest possible scope, say that " it almost always fires over the 
heads of its own infantry." With field guns and on level ground 
it is considered dangerous that infantry in front of the guns 
should be less than 600 yds. distant — not for fear of the shells 
striking the infantry, but because the fragments resulting from 
a " premature " burst are dangerous up to that distance. The 
question of distance is more important in connexion with the 
" covering " of the assault. Up to a point, the artillery enables 
the attacking infantry to advance with a minimum of loss and 
exhaustion, and thus to close with the enemy at least on equal 
terms, if not with a serious advantage, for the fire of the guns may 
shake, perhaps almost destroy the enemy's power of resistance. 
But when the infantry approaches the enemy the guns can no 
longer fire upon the latter's front line without risk of injuring 
their friends. All that they can do, when the opposing infantries 
can see the whites of each other's eyes, is to lengthen the fuze, 
raise the trajectory and sweep the ground where the enemy's 
supports are posted. Under these circumstances it is practically 
agreed that the risk should be taken without hesitation at so 
critical a moment as that of a decisive infantry assault which 
must be pushed home at whatever cost. " It will be better for 
the infantry to chance a few friendly shells than to be received 
at short range with a fresh outburst of hostile rifle fire " 
(Rouquerol, Tactical Employment of Quick-firing Field Artillery). 
Thus, the distance at which direct support ceases, formerly 
600 yds., has been diminished to 100, and even to 50 yds. 
Howitzers can, of course, maintain their fire almost up to the 
very last stage, and, in general, high-explosive shell, owing to its 



purely local effect, may be employed for some time after it has 
become unsafe to use shrapnel. 

35. Field artillery in defence, which would presumably be 
inferior to that of the attack, must, of course, act according to 
circumstances. We are here concerned not with the absolute 
strength or weakness of the passive defensive, which is a matter 
of tactics (q.v.), but with the tactical procedure of artillery, 
which, relatively to other methods, is held to offer the best chance 
of success, so far as success is attainable. On the defensive 
in a prepared position, which in European warfare at any rate 
will be an unusually favourable case for the defender — the guns 
have two functions, that of engaging and holding the hostile 
artillery, and that of meeting the infantry assault. The dilemma 
is this, that on the one hand a position in rear of the line of 
battle, with modern improvements in communicating and indirect 
laying apparatus, is well suited for engaging the hostile guns, but 
not for meeting the assault; and on the other, guns on the for- 
ward slope of the defender's ridge or hill can fire direct, but are 
quickly located and overwhelmed, for they can hardly remain 
silent while their own infantry bears the fire of the assailant's 
shrapnel. Thus the defender's guns would, as a rule, have to 
be divided. One portion would seek to fight from rearward 
concealed positions, and use every device to delay the victory 
of the enemy's guns and the development of the battle until 
it is too late in the day for a serious infantry attack. Further, 
the enemy's mistakes and the " fortune of war " may give oppor- 
tunities of inflicting severe losses; such opportunities have always 
occurred and will do so again. In the possible (though very far 
from probable) case of the defender not merely baffling, but 
crushing his opponent in the artillery duel, he may, if he so 
desires, himself assume the role of assailant, and at any rate he 
places a veto on the enemy's attack. 

The portion told off to meet the infantry assault would be 
entrenched on the forward slope and would take no part in 
the artillery duel. Very exceptionally, this advanced artillery 
might fire upon favourable targets, but its paramount duty is to 
remain intact for the decisive moment. Here again the defender 
is confronted with grave difficulties. It is true that his advanced 
batteries may be of the greatest possible assistance at the crisis 
of the infantry assault, yet even so the covering fire of the hostile 
guns, as soon as the hostile infantry had found them their target, 
may be absolutely overwhelming; moreover, once the fight has 
begun, the guns cannot be withdrawn, nor can their positions 
easily be modified to meet unexpected developments. The 
proportion of the whole artillery force which should be com- 
mitted to the forward position is disputed. Colonel Bethell 
(Journal Royal Artillery, vol. xxxiii. p. 67) holds that all the 
mountain guns, and two-thirds of the field guns, should 
be in the forward, all the howitzers and heavy guns and 
one-third of the field guns in the retired position. But 
in view of the facts that if once the advanced guns are 
submerged in the tide of the enemy's assault, they will be 
irrecoverable, and that a modern Q.F. gun, with plenty of 
ammunition at hand, may use " rapid fire " freely, artillery 
opinion, as a whole, is in favour of having fewer guns and an 
abnormal ammunition supply in the forward entrenchments, 
and the bulk of the artillery (with the ammunition columns at 
hand) in rear. But the purely passive defensive is usually but a 
preliminary to an active counter-stroke. This counter-attack 
would naturally be supported to the utmost by the offensive 
tactics of the artillery, which might thus at the end of a battle 
achieve far greater results than it could have done at the begin- 
ning of the day. In pursuit, it is universally agreed that the 
action of the artillery may be bold to the verge of rashness. 
The employment of field artillery in advanced and rear guard 
actions varies almost indefinitely according to circumstances; 
with outposts, guns would only be employed exceptionally. 

36. Marches. — The importance of having the artillery well up 
at the front of a marching column is perhaps best expressed in 
the phrase of Prince Kraft von Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen, " save 
hours and not minutes." The Germans in 1870 so far acted up to 
the principle that Prince Hohenlohe, when asked, at the beginning 



ARTILLERY 



°95 



of the battle of Sedan, for a couple of guns, was able to reply, 
" You shall have ninety " (see, for details of the march of the 
Guard artillery, his Letters on Artillery, 6th letter). The German 
regulations for field service say, very plainly, " the horses have 
not done their work until they have got the guns into action, 
even at the cost of utter exhaustion." A notable march was 
made by the 62nd battery, R.F.A., in the South African War. On 
the day of the battle of Modder River, the battery marched 
32 m. (mostly through deep sand) arriving in time to take part in 
the action. Such forced marches, if rare, are nowadays expected 
to be within the power of field artillery to accomplish. Horse 
artillery is capable of more than this, and as to pace, manoeuvr- 
ing at the cavalry rate. Heavy guns are the least mobile, and 
would rarely be able to keep pace with infantry in a forced 
march. Field artillery walks 4, trots 9, and gallops at the rate 
of 1 5 m. an hour. A fair marching pace (trot and walk) is 4 m. 
an hour for field, 5 for horse batteries. A march of 14 m. would, 
according to the German regulations, be performed by 

a field battery in 5 hours, 

a horse battery in 4 hours, 
under favourable circumstances (Bronsart von Schellendorf). 

37. Power and Mobility. — It will have been made clear that 
every gun represents a compromise between these two require- 
ments, and that each type of artillery has been evolved in accord- 
ance with the relative requirements of these conditions in respect 
of the work to be performed. The classification which has been 
followed in this article represents the practically unanimous 
decision of every important military state. Still, there has 
always been controversy between the individual adherents of 
each side, and the Boer War experiences raised the question as 
to whether field artillery, as the term is usually understood, should 
not be abolished, with a view to having only heavy guns and 
horse artillery with a field army. 

38. Concentration and Dispersion. — The use of their artillery 
made by the Boers in the South African War led to the revival of 
the idea of " dispersing " guns instead of " concentrating " them. 
It would be more accurate to say that military thinkers had, 
after the introduction of the quick-firing gun, challenged every 
received principle, and amongst others the employment of 
artillery in masses, which, as a result of the war of 1870, " had 
become almost an article of faith." The idea was to make use 
of the increased power of the guns to gain equally great results 
with the employment of less material than formerly. Thus the 
dispersion of guns is bound up with the passive defensive. The 
first editions of the British Field Artillery Training and Combined 
Training, strongly influenced as they were by South African 
experience, did not legislate, even in dealing with defence, for 
" dispersion " in the Boer manner, but only for adaptability (see 
Field Artillery Training, 1902, p. 15). In the Boer War, whilst 
the Boers nearly always scattered their guns, almost the only 
occasion upon which their artillery played a decisive part was at 
Spion Kop, where its fire was concentrated upon the point of 
assault. At Pieter's Hill, the fire of seventy guns covered the 
British infantry assault in the Napoleonic manner. On the whole 
it may be accepted as a general truth that guns are safe, and may 
be locally effective, when dispersed, but that they cannot produce 
decisive effect except when used in masses. It must, however, 
be clearly understood that a " mass " in this sense means a large 
number of guns, under one command, and susceptible of being 
handled as a unit, so far as the direction and effectiveness of their 
fire is concerned. This being secured, and on that condition only, 
it does not matter whether the actual gun positions are scattered 
over a few square miles, or are closed in one long line .and using 
direct fire — they are still a mass, and capable of acting effectively 
as such. While there are undoubtedly grave dangers in using 
the indirect method too freely, technical improvements in laying, 
telephones, &c, have had much to do with the possibility, at any 
rate under favourable circumstances, of a concentration which 
may be described as one of shells rather than of guns, and the 
reader is reminded in this connexion that the work formerly done 
by the gun is now performed by the shell. 

39. Horse Artillery is to be regarded as field artillery of great 



mobility and manoeuvring power. Its value may be said, in 
general terms, to lie in augmenting the weak fire-power of the 
mounted troops, and in facilitating their work as much as possible. 
Thus, when cavalry meets serious opposition in reconnoitring, the 
guns may be able to break down the enemy's resistance without 
calling for assistance from the main body of the cavalry, and, in 
the action of cavalry versus cavalry, the "paramount duty of the 
horse artillery is to shatter the enemy's cavalry " {Field Artillery 
Training, 1906), i.e. to "prepare" the success of the cavalry 
charge by breaking up as far as possible the enemy's power of 
meeting it. In the cavalry battle, covering fire is practically 
impossible, owing both to the short distances separating the 
combatants and to the rapidity of their movements, but steps 
are taken " to enable all the guns to bear on the enemy's cavalry 
at the points of collision." The ideal position for the horse 
artillery is out to a flank, the cavalry manoeuvring so as to draw 
the enemy's cavalry under enfilade fire, and at the same time to 
force them to mask the fire of their own horse artillery. Another 
and a most important function of the horse batteries is to rein- 
force, with the greatest possible speed, any point in the general 
line of battle which is in need of artillery support. For this 
reason the corps artillery generally includes horse batteries. 

40. Field Howitzers are somewhat less mobile than field guns; 
they have, however, far greater shell power. The special features 
of the weapon are, of course, the product of the special require- 
ments which have called it into existence. These are, briefly 
(a) the necessity of being able to " search " the interior of 
earthworks, a task which, as has been said, is beyond the power 
of high-velocity field guns, and (b) demolition work, which is 
equally beyond the power of even a H.E. shell of field-gun 
calibre. The first of these conditions implies a steep "angle of 
descent," which again implies a high angle of elevation. The 
second requires great shell power but does not call for high 
velocity. The howitzer, therefore, is a short gun, firing a heavy 
shell at high angles of elevation. Howitzers almost always are 
laid by the indirect method of fire from under cover, since it 
is clear that, with high angles of elevation, the gun may be 
brought close up to the covering mass, and still fire over it. 
Ranging must be done very accurately and yet economically, 
as but few of their heavy shells can be carried in the wagons 
and limbers, and the shells descending upon an enemy almost 
vertically lose the long sweeping effect of the field shrapnel 
which neutralizes minor errors of ranging. The projectiles 
employed are high explosive and shrapnel, the latter for use 
against personnel under cover, the former for demolition of field 
works, casemates or buildings. It is very generally held that 
howitzer time shrapnel is the best form of projectile for the 
attack of shielded guns. Here it may be said that no completely 
satisfactory method of dealing with these has yet been discovered. 
The best procedure with field guns is said to be lengthening the 
fuze to obtain a high percentage of bursts on graze. A shell 
striking the face of the shield will penetrate it, and should kill 
some at least of the gun detachment behind. The high-explosive 
shrapnel alluded to above is designed primarily for the attack 
of shielded guns. 

41. Heavy Field Artillery, alternatively called Artillery of 
Position, as has been said, includes all guns of 4-in. calibre and 
upwards, mounted on travelling carriages. In South Africa, 
where firm soil was usually to be found, 6-in. guns were employed 
as heavy field guns, but in Europe even the 5-in. (British Service) 
is liable to sink into the ground. In Great Britain, guns only 
are used by this branch; abroad, the "heavy artillery of the 
field army," the "light siege train," &c, as it is variously called, 
is as a rule composed of howitzers of a heavier calibre than the 
field howitzer, the 15-cm. (6-in.) howitzer being most commonly 
met with. This artillery has, however, a different tactical r61e 
from the heavy field artillery of the British service; and it is 
always with a view to the attack of permanent or semi- 
permanent fortifications that the materiel is organized. In 
Great Britain, heavy batteries armed with the 5-in. gun are 
considered as " an auxiliary to the horse and field artillery " 
{Heavy Artillery Training). Ranging is conducted with greater 



6 9 6 



ARTIODACTYLA 



deliberation than ranging with the lighter guns, though 
upon the same general lines. Parts of the process may, 
however, be omitted in certain circumstances. Heavy guns 
use high-explosive (lyddite) shells and time shrapnel, the 
former for ranging and for demolishing cover, the latter against 
personnel. Laying is usually indirect. The tactical principles 
upon which heavy artillery does its work are based, in the main, 
on the long range (up to 10,000 yds.) and great shell-power of the 
guns. This power enables the artillery to reach with effect 
targets which are beyond the range of lighter ordnance, and it 
is, therefore, considered possible to disperse the guns in batteries, 
and even in sections of two guns, along the front of the army, 
without forfeiting the power of concentrating their fire on any 
point — a power which otherwise they would not possess owing 
to their want of mobility. At the same time it is not forbidden 
to bring them into line with the rest of the artillery, in order to 
achieve a decisive result. In the attack, beside the general task 
of supplementing the effect of other natures of ordnance, heavy 
artillery may demolish cover, buildings, &c, held by the enemy, 
and during the infantry assault they may do excellent service in 
sweeping a great depth of ground, their smaller angle of descent, 
and the greater remaining velocity and heavier driving charge 
of their shrapnel, as compared with field guns, enabling them 
to do this effectively. In the defence, long-range fire has great 
value, especially in sweeping approaches which the enemy must 
use. In pursuit, the heavy artillery may be able to shell the main 
body of the enemy during its retreat, even if it has left a rear- 
guard. In retreat, the want of mobility of these guns militates 
against their employment in exposed positions, such as rearguards 
usually have to take up. 

Bibliography. 1 — Amongst general historical works may be 
mentioned Napoleon III. and Col. Fave, Htudes surle passe et Vavenir 
de Vartillerie (Paris, 1846-1871); C. von Decker, Geschichte des 
Geschiitzwesens (Berlin, 1822) ; H. W. L. Hime, Stray Military 
Papers (London, 1901); Die Beziehung Friedrichs des Grossen zu 
seiner Artillerie (Berlin, 1865); H. von Muller, Die Entwickelung 
der Feldartillerie, 1815-1892 (Berlin, 1893-1894); J. Campana, 
V Artillerie de campagne, 1792-1901 (Paris, 1901); v. Reitzenstein, 
Das Geschutzwesen, &c. in Hannover und Braunschweig 1365 bis.zur 
Gegenwart (Leipzig, 1900) ; Kretschmar, Gesch. d. sachsischen Feld- 
art. 1620-1878 (1879); Schoning, Gesch. des brandenbg.-preuss. 
Art. (1844-1845); Schneller, Litteratur d. Artillerie (1768); v. 
Tempelhof, Gesch. d. Artillerie (1797); Duncan, Hist, of the Royal 
Artillery. jA complete bibliography and criticism of the artillery 
works of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries will be found in Max 
Jahns, Geschichte der Kriegswissenschaften, pp. 221-236,382-424, 621, 
658 and 747-752. For the early 17th century, Diego Ufano, Tratado 
de la Artilleria (1613) is a standard treatise of the time, but the 
mystery preserved by artillerists in regard to their arm is responsible 
for an astonishing dearth of artillery literature even in the time 
of the Thirty Years' War. In 1650 appeared Casimir Simienowicz' 
Ars magnae artilleriae, an English translation of which was published 
in London in 1729, and in 1683 Michael Mieth published Artilleriae 
Recentior Praxis. The first edition of Surirey de S. Remy, Memoires 
d 'Artillerie, appeared in Paris in 1697. With the reorganization of the 
arm in the early 18th century came many manuals and other works 
(see Jahns, op. cit. pp. 1607-1621 and 1692-1698), amongst which 
may be mentioned the marquis de Quincy s Art de la guerre C1726). 
From 1740 onwards numerous manuals appeared, mostly official 
riglements — see French General Staff, L'A rtilleriefrancaise au X VIII' 
Steele (1908); and the tactical handling of the arm is treated in 
general works, such as Guibert's, on war. See also de Morla, Tratado 
de la Artilleria (1784), translated into German by Hoyer (Lehrbuch 
der Art.-Wissenschaft,Leipzig, 1821-1826); Du Service de Vartillerie 
i la guerre (Paris, 1780, German translation, Dresden, 1782, and 
English, by Capt. Thomson, R.A., London, 1789), Bardet de Ville- 
neuve's Traite de Vartillerie (Hague, 1741), and Hennebert, Gribeau- 
val, Lieut.-General des armees du Roy (Paris, 1896). Important works 
of the period 1800-1850 are Scharnhorst, Handbuch der Artillerie 
(Hanover, 1804-1806, French translation by Fourcy, Traite sur 
Vartillerie, Pans, 1840-1841); Rouvroy, Vorlesungen uber die 
Artillerie (Dresden, 1821-1825); Timmerhans, Essai d'un traite 
d'artillerie (Brussels, 1839-1846); C. v. Decker, Die Artillerie fur 
alle Waffen (1826); Griffiths, The Artillerist's Manual (Woolwich, 
1840); Piobert, Traite d'artillerie (Paris, 1845-1847); Taubert 
(translated by Maxwell), Use of Field Artillery on Service (London, 
1856); Capt. Simmonds, R.A., Application of Artillery in the Field 
(London, 1819); Gassendi, Aide-memoire a Vusage des officiers 
d'artillerie (Paris, 1819). See also Girod de l'Ain, Grands artilleurs, 
Drouot, Senarmont, Tible (Paris, 1894). Among the numerous works 

1 Most of the works named deal with technical questions of equip- 
ment, ammunition, ballistics, &c. 



on modern field artillery may be mentioned Prince Hohenlohe- 
Ingelfingen, Briefe uber Artillerie (Berlin, 1887, 2nd ed., English 
translation by Col. Walford, Letters on Artillery, Woolwich, 1887); 
Hoffbauer, Taktik der Feldartillerie, 1866 und 1870-1871 (Berlin, 
1876), and Applikatorische Studie uber Verwendung der Artillerie 
(Berlin, 1884) ; Erb, L' Artillerie dans les batailles de Metz (Paris, 
1906); Leurs, L'Art. de campagne prussienne 1864-1870 (Brussels, 
1874); v. Schell, Studie uber Taktik der Feldartillerie (quoted 
abova); Hennebert, Artillerie moderne (Paris, 1889); and for 
quick-firing artillery, Langlois, Artillerie de campagne en liaison 
avec les autres armes (Paris, 1892 and 1907) ; Wille, Feldgeschiitz 
der Zukunft (Berlin, 1891); Waffenlehre (2nd ed., 1901); and 
Zur Feldgeschiitzfrage (Berlin, 1896); Rohne, Die Taktik der Feld- 
artillerie (Berlin, 1900), Studie uber d. Schnellfeuergeschiitze in 
Rohrriicklauflafette (Berlin, 1901), Die franzosische Feldartillerie 
(Berlin, 1902) ; Eniwicklung des Massengebrauchs der Feldartillerie 
(Berlin, 1900); and articles in Jahrbucher f. d. Deutsche Armee und 
Marine (October 1901 and January 1905) ; Hoffbauer, Die Frage des 
Schnellfeuerfeldgeschutzes (Berlin, 1902), and Verwendung der Feld- 
haubitzen (Berlin, 1901); Wangemann, Fur die leichte Feldhaubitze 
(Berlin, 1904); von Reichenau, Studie uber . . . Ausbildung der 
Feldart. (Berlin, 1896), Einfluss der Schilde auf die Entwicklung des 
F.-A. Materials, and Neue Studien uber die Entwicklung der Feldart. 
(Berlin, 1902 and 1903); Smekal, Filhrung und Verwendung der 
Divisions- Artillerie (Vienna, 1901); Korzen and Kiihn, Waffen- 
lehre (Vienna, 1906) ; G. Rouquerol, Emploi de Vartillerie de campagne 
& tir rapide (Paris, 1901), and Organisation de Vartillerie de campagne 
(Paris, 1903) ; Girardon-Lagabbe, Organisation du matSriel de Var- 
tillerie de campagne (Paris, 1903) ; and in English, Capt. P. de B. 
Radcliffe's translation of Rouquerol 's work (The Tactical Employ- 
ment of Quick-firing Field Artillery, London, 1903), and especially 
Lt.-CoI.H. A. Bethell, Modern Guns and Gunnery (Woolwich, 1907). 
See also the current drill manuals of the British, French and German 
artillery. (C. F. A.) 

ARTIODACTYLA (from Gr. apnos, even, and So.ktv'Kos, a 
finger or toe, "even-toed"), the suborder of ungulate mammals 
in which the central (and in some cases the only) pair of toes in 
each foot are arranged symmetrically on each side of a vertical 
line running through the axes of the limbs. As contrasted with 
the Perissodactyla living, and in a great degree extinct, Artio- 
dactyla are characterized by the following structural features. 
The upper premolar and molar teeth are not alike, the former 
being single and the latter two-lobed; and the last lower molar 
of both first and second dentition is almost invariably three- 
lobed. Nasal bones not expanded posteriorly. No alisphenoid 
canal. Dorsal and lumbar vertebrae together always nineteen, 
though the former may vary from twelve to fifteen. Femur 
without third trochanter. Third and fourth digits of both feet 
almost equally developed, and their terminal phalanges flattened 
on their inner or contiguous surfaces, so that each is not sym- 
metrical in itself, but when the two are placed together they 
form a figure symmetrically disposed to a line drawn between 
them. Or, in other words, the axis or median line of the whole 
foot is a line drawn between the third and fourth digits (fig. 1). 
Lower articular surface of the astragalus divided into two nearly 
equal facets, one for the navicular and a second for the cuboid 
bone. The calcaneum with an articular facet for the lower end 
of the fibula. Stomach almost always more or less complex. 
Colon convoluted. Caecum small. Placenta diffused or cotyle- 
donary. Teats either few and inguinal, or numerous and 
abdominal. 

Artiodactyla date from the Eocene period, when they appear 
to have been less numerous than the Perissodactyla, although at 
the present day they are immeasurably ahead of that group, and 
form indeed the dominant ungulates. As regards the gradual 
specialization and development of the modern types, the follow- 
ing features are noteworthy. 

1. As regards the teeth, we have the passage of a simply 
tubercular, or bunodont (fiowos, a hillock) type of molar into one 
in which the four main tubercles, or columns, have assumed a 
crescentic form, whence this type is termed selenodont (oeh-qvi}, 
the new moon). Further, there is the modification of the latter 
from a short-crowned, or brachyodont type, to one in which the 
columns are tall, constituting the hypsodont, or hypsiselenodont, 
type. It is noteworthy, however, that in some instances there 
appears to have been a retrograde modification from the seleno- 
dont towards the bunodont type, the hippopotamus being a case 
in point. Other modifications are the loss of the upper incisors; 



ARTIODACTYLA 



697 



the development of the canines into projecting tusks; and the 
loss of the anterior premolars. 

2. As regards the limbs. Reduction of the ulna from a com- 
plete and distinct bone to a comparatively rudimentary state in 
which it coalesces more or less firmly with the radius. Reduction 
of the fibula till nothing but its lower extremity remains. Reduc- 
tion and final loss of outer pair of digits (second and fifth), with 
coalescence of the metacarpal and metatarsal bones of the two 
middle digits to form a cannon-bone. Union of the navicular and 
cuboid, and sometimes the ectocuneiform bone, of the tarsus. 

3. Change of form of the odontoid process of the second or 
axis vertebrae from a cone to a hollow half-cylinder. 

4. Development of horns or antlers on the frontal bones, and 
gradual complication of form of antlers. 

5. By inference only, increasing complication of stomach with 
ruminating function superadded. Modification of placenta from 
simple diffused to cotyledonary form. 

ABC 





Fig. 1. — Bones of Right Fore Feet of existing Artiodactyla. 

A, Pig (Sus scrofa). U, Ulna. u, Unciform. 

B, Red deer (Cervus elaphus). R, Radius. m, Magnum. 

c, Cuneiform. td, Trapezoid. 

C, Camel (Camelus bactrianus). I, Lunar. 

s. Scaphoid. 
In the Sheep and the Camel the long compound bone, supporting 
the two main (or only) toes is the cannon-bone. 

The primitive Artiodactyla thus probably had the typical 
number (44) of incisor, canine and molar teeth, brachyodont 
molars, conical odontoid process, four distinct toes on each foot, 
with metacarpal, metatarsal and all the tarsal bones distinct, 
and no frontal appendages. 

As regards classification, the first group is that of the Pecora, 
or Cotylophora, in which the cheek-teeth are selenodont, but 
there are no upper incisors or canine-like premolars, 
while upper canines are generally absent, though some- 
times largely developed. Inferior incisors, three on each side 
with an incisiform canine in contact with them. Cheek-teeth 
consisting of />.§, w.f ,in continuous series. Auditory bulla simple 
and hollow within. Odontoid process of second vertebra in the 
form of a crescent, hollow above. Lower extremity of the fibula 
represented by a distinct malleolar bone articulating with the 
outer surface of the lower end of the tibia. Third and fourth 
metacarpals and metatarsals confluent into cannon-bones (fig. 1 
B), and the toes enclosed in hoofs. Outer toes small and rudi- 
mentary, or in some cases entirely suppressed; their metacarpal 
or metatarsal bones never complete. Navicular and cuboid 
bones of tarsus united. The skull generally lacks a sagittal 
crest; and the condyle of the lower jaw is transversely elongated. 
Horns or antlers usually present, at least in the male sex. Left 
brachial artery arising from a common innominate trunk, 



instead of coming off separately from the aortic arch. Stomach 
with four complete cavities. Placenta cotyledonous. Teats 2 or 4. 

The group at the present day is divided into Giraffidae (giraffe 
and okapi), Cervidae (deer), Antilocapridae (prongbuck), and 
Bovidae (oxen, sheep, goats, antelopes, &c). (See Pecora.) 

The second group is represented at the present day by the 
camels (Camelus) of the Old, and the llamas (Lama) of the New 
World, collectively constituting the family Camelidae. 
They derive their name of Tylopoda (" boss-footed ") T y'°P° da - 
from the circumstance that the feet form large cushion-like pads, 
supporting the weight of the body, while the toes have broad 
nails on their upper surface only, instead of being encased in 
hoofs. The cheek-teeth are selenodont, and one pair of upper 
incisors is retained, while some of the anterior premolars assume 
a canine-like shape, and are separated from the rest of the cheek- 
series. Auditory bulla filled with honeycombed bony tissue 
Odontoid process of second vertebra semi-cylindrical; skull with a 
sagittal crest; and the condyle of the lower jaw rounded. Third 
and fourth metacarpals and metatarsals (which are alone present) 
fused into cannon-bones for the greater part of their length, but 
diverging inferiorly (fig. 1, C) and with their articular surfaces 
for the toes smooth, instead of ridged $s in the Pecora. Navi- 
cular and cuboid bones of tarsus distinct. No horns or antlers. 
Stomach, although complex, differing essentially from that of 
the Pecora. Placenta diffuse, without cotyledons. Teats few. 
(See Tylopoda.) 

In the same sectional group is included the North American 
family of oreodonts (Oreodontldae) , which are much more primi- 
tive ruminants, "with shorter necks and limbs, the full series of 
44 teeth, all in apposition, and the metacarpal and metatarsal 
bones separate, and the toes generally of more normal type, 
although sometimes claw-like. (See Oreodon.) The Eocene 
American genus Homacodon is regarded as representing a third 
family group, the Homacodontidae ( = Pantolestidae), in which the 
molars were of a bunodont type, and approximate to those of the 
Condylarthra from which this family appears to have sprung, 
and to have given origin on the one hand to the Oreodontldae, 
and on the other to the Camelidae. The family is represented in 
the Lower, or Wasatch, Eocene by Trigonolestes, in the Middle 
(Bridger) Eocene by Hcmacodon (Pantolestes), and in the Upper 
(Uinta) Eocene by Bunomeryx. 

The third group is that represented by the chevrotains or 
mouse-deer, forming the family Tragulidae, with Tragulus in 
south-eastern Asia and Dorcatherium (or Hyomoschus) j- rajm j] nai 
in equatorial Africa. The cheek-teeth are selenodont, 
as in the two preceding groups; there are no upper incisors, but 
there are long, narrow and pointed upper canines, which attain a 
large size in the males; the lower canines are incisor-like, as in 
the Pecora, and there are no caniniform premolars in either jaw. 
Cheek-teeth in a continuous series consisting of p.%, w.f . Odon- 
toid process of axis conical. Fibula complete. Four complete 
toes on each foot. The middle metacarpals and metatarsals 
generally confluent, the outer ones (second and fifth) slender but 
complete, i.e. extending from the carpus or tarsus to the digit. 
Navicular, cuboid and ectocuneiform bones of tarsus united. 
Auditory bulla of skull filled with cancellar tissue. No frontal 
appendages. Ruminating, but the stomach with only three 
distinct compartments, the maniplies or third cavity of the 
stomach of the Pecora being rudimentary. Placenta diffused. 
(See Chevrotain.) 

In this place must be mentioned the extinct Oligocene Euro- 
pean group typified by the well-known genus Anoplolherium 
of the Paris gypsum-quarries, and hence termed 
Anoplotherina, although the alternative title Dicho- 
bunoidea has been suggested. It includes the two 
families Anoplotheriidae and Dichobunidae, of which the first 
died out with the Oligocene, while the second may have given 
origin to the Tragulina and perhaps the Pecora. There is the 
full series of 44 teeth, generally without any gaps, and most 
of the bones of the skeleton are separate and complete; while, 
in many instances at any rate, the tail was much longer 
than in any existing ungulates, and the whole bodily form 



Aaopfo" 
therina. 



6 9 8 



ARTISAN— ARTOIS 



approximated to that of a carnivore. The upper molars, which 
may be either selenodont or buno-selenodont, carry five cusps 
each, instead of the four characteristic of all the preceding 
groups; and they are all very low-crowned, so as to expose the 
whole of the valleys between the cusps. In Anoplotherium, some 
of the species of which were larger than tapirs, there were either 
two or three toes, the latter number being almost unique among 
the Artiodactyla. Allied genera are Diplobune and Dacrytherium. 
The Dichobunidae include the genus Dichobune, of which the 
species were small animals with buno-selenodont molars. 
Xiphcdon and Dichodon represent another type with cutting 
premolars and selenodont molars; while Caenotherium and 
Plesiomeryx form yet another branch, with resemblances to the 
ruminants. The most interesting genera are, however, the Upper 
Oligocene and Lower Miocene Gelocus and Prodremotherium, 
which have perfectly selenodont teeth, and the third and fourth 
metacarpal and metatarsal bones respectively fused into an 
imperfect cannon-bone, with the reduction of the lateral meta- 
carpals and metatarsals to mere remnants of their upper and 
lower extremities. While Gelocus exhibits a marked approxima- 
tion to the Tragulidac, Prodremotherium comes nearer to the 




Sulna. 



Fig 2. — Restoration of Anoplotherium commune. 

Cervidac, of which it not improbably indicates the ancestral type. 
The Dichobunidae may be regarded as occupying a position 
analogous to that of the Homacodontidae in the Tylopoda, and like 
the latter, are probably the direct descendants of Condylarthra. 
The last section of the Artiodactyla is that of the Suina, 
represented at the present day by the pigs (Suidae), and the 
hippopotamuses"(.H'i/>/>0^0to»Mdae), and in past times 
by the Anthracotheriidae, in which may probably be 
included the Elotheriidae. In the existing members of the group 
the cheek-teeth approximate to the bunodont type, although 
showing signs of being degenerate modifications of the selenodont 
modification. There is at least one pair of upper incisors, while 
the full series of 44 teeth may be present. The metacarpals 
and metatarsals are generally distinct (fig. 1 A), and never fuse 
into a complete cannon-bone; and the navicular and cuboid 
bones of the tarsus are separate. The odontoid process of the 
second vertebra is pig-like : and the tibia and fibula and radius 
and ulna are severally distinct. The stomach is simple or some- 
what complex, and the placenta diffused. The Suidae include 
the Old World pigs {Suinae) and the American peccaries (Dicoty- 
linae), and are characterized by the snout terminating in a fleshy 
disk-like expansion, in the midst of which are perforated the 
nostrils; while the toes are enclosed in sharp hoofs, of which the 
lateral ones do not touch the ground. There is a caecum. The 
Dicotylinae differ from the Suinae in that the upper canines are 
directed downwards (instead of curving upwards) and have 
sharp cutting-edges, while the toes are four in front and three 
behind (instead of four on each foot), and the stomach is complex 
instead of simple. In the Old World a large number of fossil 
forms are known, of which the earliest is the Egyptian Eocene 
Geniohyus. Originally the family was an Old World type, but 
in the Miocene it gained access into North America, where the 
earliest form is Bothriolabis, an ancestral peccary showing signs 
of affinity with the European Miocene genus Palaeochoerus. 
(See Swine and Peccary.) 

The Hippopotamidae are an exclusively Old World group, in 
which the muzzle is broad and rounded and quite unlike that of 
the Suidae, while the crowns of the cheek-teeth form a distinctly 
trefoil pattern, when partially worn, which is only foreshadowed 



in those of the latter. The short and broad teeth terminate in 
four subequal toes, protected by short rounded hoofs, and all 
reaching the ground. The hinder end of the lower jaw is provided 
with a deep descending flange. Both incisors and canines are 
devoid of roots and grow throughout life, the canines, and in 
the typical species one pair of lower incisors, growing to an 
immense size. The stomach is complex; but there is no caecum. 
Although now exclusively African, the family (of which all the 
representatives may be included in the single genus Hippo- 
potamus, with several subgeneric groups) is represented in the 
Pliocene of Europe and the Lower Pliocene of northern India. 
Its place of origin cannot yet be determined. 

The extinct Anthracotheriidae were evidently nearly allied to 
the Hippopotamidae, of which they are in all probability the 
ancestral stock. They agree, for instance, with that family in the 
presence of a descending flange at the hinder end of each side 
of the lower jaw; but their dentition is of a more generalized 
type, comprising the full series of 44 teeth, among which the 
incisors and canines are of normal form, but specially enlarged, 
and developing roots in the usual manner. The molars are 
partially selenodont in the typical genus Anthracotherium, with 
five cusps, or columns, on the crowns of those of the upper jaw, 
which are nearly square. The genus has a very wide distribution, 
extending from Europe through Asia to North America, and 
occurring in strata which are of Oligocene and Miocene age. 
In Ancodon (Hyopolamus) the cusps on the molars are taller, so 
that the dentition is more decidedly selenodont; the distribution 
of this genus includes not only Europe, Asia and North Africa, 
but also Egypt where it occurs in Upper Eocene beds in company 
with the European genus Rhagatherium, which is nearer Anthra- 
cotherium. On the other hand, in Merycopolamus, of the Lower 
Pliocene of India and Burma, the upper molars have lost the 
fifth intermediate cusp of Ancodon; and thus, although highly 
selenodont, might be easily modified, by a kind of retrograde 
development, into the trefoil-columned molars of Hippopotamus. 
In the above genera, so far as is known, the feet were four-toed, 
although with the lateral digits relatively small; but in Elotherium 
(or Entelodon), from the Lower Miocene of Europe and the 
Oligocene of North America, the two lateral digits in each foot 
had disappeared. This is the more remarkable seeing that 
Elotherium may be regarded as a kind of bunodont Anthraco- 
therium. It shows the characteristic hippopotamus-flange to the 
lower jaw, but has also a large descending process from the jugal 
bone of the zygomatic arch of the skull. Finally, we have in the 
Pliocene of India the genus Tetraconodon, remarkable for the 
enormous size attained by the bluntly conical premolars; as 
the molars are purely bunodont, this genus seems to be a late 
and specialized survivor of a primitive type. (R. L.*) 

ARTISAN, or Artizan, a mechanic; a handicraftsman in 
distinction to an artist. The English word (from Late Lat. 
artilianus, instructed in arts) at one time meant " artist," but has 
been restricted to signify the operative workman only. 

ARTOIS, an ancient province of the north of France, corre- 
sponding to the present department of Pas de Calais, with the 
exclusion of the arrondissements of Boulogne and Montreuil, 
which belonged to Picardy. It is a rich and well-watered 
country, producing abundance of grain and hops, and yielding 
excellent pasture for cattle. The capital of the province was 
Arras, and the other important places were Saint-Omer, Bethune, 
Aire, Hesdin, Bapaume, Lens, Lillers, Saint-Pol and Saint- 
Venant. The name Artois (still more corrupted in " Arras ") is 
derived from the Atrebates, who possessed the district in the time 
of Caesar. From the 9th to the 12th century Artois belonged to 
the counts of Flanders. It was bestowed in 11 80 on Philip 
Augustus of France by Philip of Alsace, as the dowry of his niece 
Isabella of Hainaut. At her death in 1 190, Baldwin IX., count of 
Flanders (d. 1206), and then his son-in-law, Ferrand (Ferdinand) 
of Portugal, count of Flanders, disputed the possession of the 
country with the king of France, P'errand being in the coalition 
which was overthrown by Philip Augustus at Bouvines (1214). 
In 1237 Artois, which was raised to a countship the following 
year, was conferred as an appanage by Saint Louis on his brothe* 



ART SALES 



699 



Robert, who died on crusade in 1250. His son, Robert II., took 
part in the wars in Navarre, Sicily, Guienne and Flanders, and 
was killed at the battle of Courtrai in 1302. After his death, his 
son Philip having predeceased him (1298), Artois was adjudged 
to his daughter Mahaut, or Matilda, as against her nephew 
Robert, son of Philip, who attempted to support his claim to the 
countship by forged titles. Banished from France for this crime 
(1322), Robert of Artois took refuge in England, where he became 
earl of Richmond, and incited Edward III. to make war upon 
Philip of Valois. His descendants, the counts of Eu (q.v.), con- 
tinued to style themselves counts of Artois. By the marriage 
of Mahaut (d. 1329) with Otto IV., Artois passed to the house of 
Burgundy, in whose possession it remained till the marriage of 
Mary, the daughter of Charles the Bold, to the archduke Maxi- 
milian brought it to the house of Austria. Louis XL, however, 
occupied portions of Artois, and the claims of Austria were 
contested by France until the treaty of Senlis (1493). The 
emperor Charles V. established the council of Artois, with 
sovereign authority. At the end of the Thirty Years' War 
Artois was again conquered by the French, and the conquest 
was ratified in the treaty of the Pyrenees (1659) by Spain, to 
whom the province had fallen in 1634. During the war between 
France and Holland (1672-77) and that of the Spanish Succes- 
sion, Artois was invaded again, but the treaties of Nijmwegen 
(1678) and of Utrecht (1713) confirmed the sovereignty of France. 
The title of count of Artois was borne by Charles X. of France 
before his accession to the throne. This new creation became 
extinct on the death of the comte de Chambord in 1883. 

ART SALES. The practice of selling objects of art by auction 
in England dates from the latter part of the 17th century, when 
in most cases the names of the auctioneers were suppressed. 
Evelyn (under date June 21, 1693) mentions a "great auction of 
pictures (Lord Melford's) in the Banquetting House, Whitehall," 
and the practice is frequently referred to by other contemporary 
and later writers. Before the introduction of regular auctions 
the practice was, as in the case of the famous collection formed 
by Charles I., to price each object and invite purchasers, just as 
in other departments of commerce. But this was a slow process, 
especially in the case of pictures, and lacked the incentive of 
excitement. The first really important art collection to come 
under the hammer was that of Edward, earl of Oxford, dispersed 
by Cock, under the Piazza, Covent Garden, on 8th March 1741/2 
and the five following days, six more days being required by 
the coins. Nearly all the leading men of the day, including 
Horace Walpole, attended or were represented at this sale, and 
the prices varied from five shillings for an anonymous bishop's 
'• head " to 165 guineas for Vandyck's group of " Sir Kenelm 
Digby, lady, and son." The next great dispersal was Dr Richard 
Mead's extensive collection, of which the pictures, coins and 
gems, &c, were sold by Langford in February and March 1754, 
the sale realizing the total, unprecedented up to that time, of 
£16,069. The thirty-eight days' sale (1786) of the Duchess of 
Portland's collection is very noteworthy, from the fact that it 
included the celebrated Portland vase, now in the British 
Museum. Many other interesting and important 18th-century 
sales might be mentioned. High prices did not become general 
until the Calonne, Trumbull (both 1795) and Bryan (1798) sales. 
As to the quality of the pictures which had been sold by auction 
up to the latter part of the 18th century, it may be assumed that 
this was not high. The importation of pictures and other objects 
of art had assumed extensive proportions by the end of the 18th 
century, but the genuine examples of the Old Masters probably 
fell far short of 1 %. England was felt to be the only safe 
asylum for valuable articles, but the home which was intended to 
be temporary often became permanent. Had it not been for the 
political convulsions on the continent, England, instead of being 
one of the richest countries in the world in art treasures, would 
have been one of the poorest. This fortuitous circumstance had, 
moreover, another effect, in that it greatly raised the critical 
knowledge of pictures. Genuine works realized high prices, as, 
for example, at Sir William Hamilton's sale (1801), when Beckford 
paid 1300 guineas for the little picture of "A Laughing Boy " by 



Leonardo da Vinci; and when at the Lafontaine sales (1807 and 
181 1) two Rembrandts each realized 5000 guineas, " The Woman 
taken in Adultery," now in the National Gallery, and " The 
Master Shipbuilder," now at Buckingham Palace. The Beckford 
sale of 1823 (41 days, £43,869) was the forerunner of the great 
art dispersal of the 19th century; Horace Walpole's accumula- 
tion at Strawberry Hill, 1842 (24 days, £33,45°), and the Stowe 
collection, 1848 (41 days, £75,562), were also celebrated. 
They comprised every phase of art work, and in all the quality 
was of a very high order. They acted as a most healthy stimulus 
to art collecting, a stimulus which was further nourished by the 
sales of the superb collection of Ralph Bernal in 1855 (32 days, 
£62,690), and of the almost equally fine but not so comprehensive 
collection of Samuel Rogers, 1856 (18 days, £42,367). Three 
years later came the dispersal of the 1500 pictures which formed 
Lord Northwick's gallery at Cheltenham (pictures and works of 
art, 18 days, £94,722). 

Towards the latter part of the first half of the 19th century an 
entirely new race of collectors gradually came into existence; 
they were for the most part men who had made, or were making, 
large fortunes in the various industries of the midlands and north 
of England and other centres. They were untrammelled by 
" collecting " traditions, and their patronage was almost ex- 
clusively extended to the artists of the day. The dispersals of 
these collections began in 1863 with the Bicknell Gallery, and 
continued at irregular intervals for many years, e.g. Gillott 
(1872), Mendel (1875), Wynn Ellis and Albert Levy (1876), 
Albert Grant (1877) and Munro of Novar (1878). These patrons 
purchased at munificent prices either direct from the easel or 
from the exhibitions not only pictures in oils but also water- 
colour drawings. As a matter of investment their purchases 
frequently realized far more than the original outlay; sometimes, 
however, the reverse happened, as, for instance, in the case of 
Landseer's "Otter Hunt," for which Baron Grant is said to have 
paid £10,000 and which realized shortly afterwards only 5650 
guineas. One of the features of the sales of the 'seventies was 
the high appreciation of water-colour drawings. At the Gillott 
sale (1872) 160 examples realized £27,423, Turner's " Bam- 
borough Castle " fetching 3150 gns. ; at the Quilter sale (1875) 
David Cox's " Hayfield," for which a dealer paid him 50 gns. 
in 1850, brought 2810 gns. The following are the most remark- 
able prices of later years. In 1895 Cox's " Welsh Funeral " 
(which cost about £20) sold for 2400 gns., and Burne-Jones's 
" Hesperides " for 2460 gns. In 1908, 13 Turner drawings 
fetched £12,415 (Acland-Hood sale) and 7 brought £11,077 
(Holland sale), the " Heidelberg " reaching 4200 gns. For Fred 
Walker's " Harbour of Refuge " 2580 gns. were paid (Tatham 
sale) and 2700 gns. for his " Marlow Ferry " (Holland). The 
demand for pictures by modern artists, whose works sold at 
almost fabulous prices in the 'seventies, has somewhat declined; 
but during all its furore there was still a small band of col- 
lectors to whom the works of the Old Masters more especially 
appealed. The dispersal of such collections as the Bredel 
(1875), Watts Russell (1875), Foster of Clewer Manor (1876), 
the Hamilton Palace (17 days, £397,562) — the greatest art sale 
in the annals of Great Britain — Bale (1882), Leigh Court (1884), 
and Dudley (1892) resulted, as did the sale of many minor 
collections each season, in many very fine works of the Old 
Masters finding eager purchasers at high prices. A striking 
example of the high prices given was the £24,250 realized by the 
pair of Vandyck portraits of a Genoese senator and his wife in 
the Peel sale, 1900. 

Since the last quarter of the 19th century the chief feature 
in art sales has been the demand for works, particularly female 
portraits, by Reynolds, his contemporaries and successors. 
This may be traced to the South Kensington Exhibitions of 
1867 and 1868 and the annual winter exhibitions at Burlington 
House, which revealed an unsuspected wealth and charm in the 
works of many English artists who had almost fallen into oblivion. 
A few of the most remarkable prices for such pictures may be 
quoted: Reynolds's "Lady Betty Delme " (1894), 11,000 
gns.; Romney's "The Ladies Spencer" (1896), 10,500 gns.; 



700 



ARTS AND CRAFTS 



Gainsborough's "Duchess of Devonshire" (1876), 10,100 gns. (for 
the history of its disappearance see Gainsborough, Thomas), 
" Maria Walpole," 12,100 gns. (Duke of Cambridge's sale, 1904) ; 
Constable's "Stratford Mill" (1895), 8500 gns.; Hoppner's 
"Lady Waldegrave " (1906), 6000 gns. ; Lawrence's " Childhood's 
Innocence" (1907), 8000 gns.; Raeburn's "Lady Raeburn " 
(1905), 8500 gns. Here may also be mentioned the 12,600 gns. 
paid for Turner's " Mortlake Terrace " in 1908 (Holland sale). 

The " appreciation " of the modern continental schools, 
particularly the French, has been marked since 1880; of high 
prices paid may be mentioned Corot's " Danse des Amours " 
(1898), £7200; Rosa Bonheur's " Denizens of the Highlands " 
(1888), 5550 gns.; Jules Breton's "First Communion," £9100 
in New York (1886) ; Meissonier's " Napoleon I. in the Campaign 
of Paris," i2j in. by 9! in. (1882), 5800 gns., and " The Sign 
Painter" (1891), 6450 gns. High prices are also fetched by 
pictures of Daubigny, Fortuny, Gallait, Ger6me, Troyon and 
Israels. The most marked feature of late has been the demand for 
the 18th-century painters Watteau, Boucher, Fragonard, Pater 
and Lancret; thus " La Ronde Champetre " of the last named 
brought £11,200 at the Say Sale in 1908, and Fragonard's " Le 
Reveil de Venus " £5520 at the Sedelmeyer sale, 1907. 

" Specialism " is the one important development in art col- 
lecting which has manifested itself since the middle of the 19th 
century. This accounts for and explains the high average quality 
of the Wellesley (1866), the Buccleuch (1888) and the Holford 
(1893) collections of drawings by the Old Masters; for the 
Sibson Wedgwood (1877), the Due de Forli Dresden (1877), 
the Shuldham blue and white porcelain (1880), the Benson 
collection of antique coins (1909), and for the objects of art at 
the Massey-Mainwaring and Lewis-Hill sales of 1907. Very many 
other illustrations in nearly every department of art collecting 
might be quoted — the superb series of Marlborough gems (1875 
and 1899) might be included in this category but for the fact 
that it was formed chiefly in the 18th century. The appreciation 
— commercially at all events — of mezzotint portraits and of 
portraits printed in colours, after masters of the early English 
school, was one of the most remarkable features in art sales 
during the last years of the 19th century. The shillings of fifty 
years before were then represented by pounds. The Fraser 
collection (December 4 to 6, 1900) realized about ten times 
the original outlay, the mezzotint of the "-Sisters Frank- 
land," after Hoppner, by W. Ward, selling for 290 guineas as 
against 10 guineas paid for it about thirty years previously. 
The H. A. Blyth sale (March n to 13, 1901, 346 lots, 
£21,717: 10s.) of mezzotint portraits was even more remarkable, 
and as a collection it was the choicest sold within recent times, 
the engravings being mostly in the first state. The record prices 
were numerous, and, in many cases, far surpassed the prices which 
Sir Joshua Reynolds received for the original pictures; e.g. the 
exceptionally fine example of the first state of the " Duchess of 
Rutland," after Reynolds, by V. Green, realized 1000 guineas, 
whereas the artist received only £150 for the painting itself. 
Even this unprecedented price for a mezzotint portrait was 
exceeded on the 30th of April 1901, when an example of the first 
published state of " Mrs Carnac," after Reynolds, by J. R. Smith, 
sold for 1160 guineas. At the Louis Huth sale (1905) 83 lots 
brought nearly £10,000, Reynolds's " Lady Bampfylde " by T. 
Watson, first state before letters, unpublished, fetching 1200 
guineas. Such prices as these and many others which might 
be quoted are exceptional, but they were paid for objects of 
exceptional rarity or quality. 

It is not necessary to pursue the chronicle of recent sales, 
which have become a feature of every season. It is worth men- 
tioning, however, that the Holland sale, in June 1908, realized 
£138,118 (432 lots), a " record " sum for a collection of pictures 
mainly by modern artists; and that for the Rodolphe Kann 
collection (Paris) of pictures and objects of art, including 1 1 mag- 
nificent Rembrandts, Messrs Duveen paid £1,000,000 in 1907. 
In every direction there has been a tendency to increase prices 
for really great artistic pieces, even to a sensational extent. The 
competition has become acute, largely owing to American and 



German acquisitiveness. The demand for the finest works of art 
of all descriptions is much greater than the supply. As an 
illustration of the magnitude of the art sale business it may be 
mentioned that the " turnover " of one firm in London alone 
has occasionally exceeded £1,000,000 annually. 

Bibliography. — The chief compilations dealing with art sales 
in Great Britain are: G. Redford, Art Sales (1888) ; and W. Roberts, 
Memorials of Christie's (1897); whilst other books containing much 
important matter are W. Buchanan, Memoirs of Painting; The 
Year's Art (1880 and each succeeding year); F. S. Robinson, The 
Connoisseur; and L. Soullie, Les Ventes de tableaux, dessins et objets 
d'art au XIX' siecle (chiefly French). 

ARTS AND CRAFTS, a comprehensive title for the arts of 
decorative design and handicraft — all those which, in association 
with the mother-craft of building (or architecture), go to the 
making of the house beautiful. Accounts of these will be found 
under separate headings. " Arts and crafts " are also associated 
with the movement generally understood as the English revival 
of decorative art, which began about 1875. The title itself only 
came into general use when the Arts and Crafts Exhibition 
Society was founded, and held its first exhibition at the New 
Gallery, London, in the autumn of 1888, since which time arts 
and crafts exhibitions have been common all over Great Britain. 
The idea of forming a society for the purpose of showing con- 
temporary work in design and handicraft really arose out of a 
movement of revolt or protest against the exclusive view of art 
encouraged by the Royal Academy exhibitions, in which oil 
paintings in gilt frames claimed almost exclusive attention — 
sculpture, architecture and the arts of decorative design being 
relegated to quite subordinate positions. In 1886, out of a feeling 
of discontent among artists as to the inadequacy of the Royal 
Academy exhibitions, considered as representing the art of 
Great Britain, a demand arose for a national exhibition to include 
all the arts of design. One of the points of this demand was for 
the annual election of the hanging committee by the whole body 
of artists. After many meetings the group representing the arts 
and crafts (who belonged to a larger body of artists and craftsmen 
called the Art-workers' Guild, founded in 1884),' perceiving that 
the painters, especially the leading group of a school not hitherto 
well represented in the Academy exhibitions, only cherished 
the hope of forcing certain reforms on the Academy, and were 
by no means prepared to lose their chances of admission to its 
privileges, still less to run any risk in the establishment of a really 
comprehensive national exhibition of art, decided to organize 
an exhibition themselves in which artists and craftsmen might 
show their productions, so that contemporary work in decorative 
art should be displayed to the public on the same footing, and 
with the same advantages as had hitherto been monopolized by 
pictorial art. For many years previously there had been great 
activity in the study and revival in the practice of many of the 
neglected decorative handicrafts. Amateur societies and classes 
were in existence, like the Home Arts and Industries Association, 
which had established village classes in wood-carving, metal 
work, spinning and weaving, needlework, pottery and basket- 
work, and the public interest in handicraft was steadily growing. 
The machine production of an industrial century had laid its 
iron hands upon, what had formerly been the exclusive province 
of the handicraftsman, who only lingered on in a few obscure 
trades and in forgotten corners of England for the most part. 
The ideal of mechanical perfection dominated British workmen, 
and the factory system, first by extreme division of labour, 
and then by the further specialization of the workman under 
machine production, left no room for individual artistic feeling 
among craftsmen trained and working under such conditions. 
The demand of the world-market ruled the character and quality 
of production, and to the few who would seek some humanity, 
simplicity of construction or artistic feeling in their domestic 
decorations and furniture, the only choice was that of the trades- 
man or salesman, or a plunge into costly and doubtful experi- 
ments in original design. From the 'forties onward there had 

1 Whose members, comprehending as they do the principal living 
designers, architects, painters and craftsmen of all kinds, have played 
no inconsiderable part in the English revival. 



ART SOCIETIES 



701 



been much research and study of medieval art in England; 
there had been many able designers, architects and antiquaries, 
such as the Pugins and Henry Shaw (1800-1873) and later 
William Burges (1827-1881), William Butterfield (i8i4-i9co)and 
G. E. Street and others. The school of pre-Raphaelite painters, by 
their careful and thorough methods, and their sympathy with 
medieval design, were among the first to turn attention to beauty 
of design, colour and significance in the accessories of daily life, 
and artists like D. G. Rossetti, Ford Madox Brown, and W. 
Holman Hunt themselves designed and painted furniture. 
The most successful and most practical effort indeed towards 
the revival of sounder ideas of construction and workmanship 
may be said to have arisen out of the work of this group of artists, 
and may be traced to the workshop of William Morris and his 
associates in Queen Square, London. William Morris, whose 
name covers so large a field of artistic as well as literary and 
social work, came well equipped to his task of raising the arts 
of design and handicraft, of changing the taste of his countrymen 
from the corrupt and vulgar ostentation of the Second Empire, 
and its cheap imitations, which prevailed in the 'fifties and 
'sixties, and of winning them back, for a time at least, to the 
massive simplicity of plain oak furniture, or the delicate beauty 
of inlays of choice woods, or the charm of painted work, the 
richness and frank colour of formal floral and heraldic pattern 
in silk textiles and wall-hangings and carpets, the gaiety and 
freshness of printed cotton, or the romantic splendour of arras 
tapestry. Both William Morris and his artistic comrade and life- 
long friend, Edward Burne-Jones, were no doubt much influenced 
at the outset by the imaginative insight, the passionate artistic 
feeling, and the love of medieval romance and colour of Dante 
Gabriel Rossetti, who remains so remarkable a figure in the great 
artistic and poetic revival of the latter half of the 19th century. 
To William Morris himself, in his artistic career, it was no small 
advantage to gain the ear of the English public first by his 
poetry. His verse-craft helped his handicraft, but both lived 
side by side. The secret of Morris's great influence in the re- 
vival was no doubt to be attributed to his way of personally 
mastering the working details and handling of each craft he took 
up in turn, as well as to his power of inspiring his helpers and 
followers. He was painter, designer, scribe, illuminator, wood- 
engraver, dyer, weaver and finally printer and papermaker, 
and having mastered these crafts he could effectively direct and 
criticize the work of others. His own work and that of Burne- 
Jones were well known to the public, and in high favour long 
before the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society was formed, and 
though largely helped and inspired by the work of these two 
artists, the aims and objects of the society rather represented 
those of a younger generation, and were in some measure a fresh 
development both of the social and the artistic ideas which 
were represented by Ruskin, Rossetti and Morris, though the 
society includes men of different schools. Other sources of in- 
fluence might be named, such as the work of Norman Shaw and 
Philip W T ebb in architecture and decoration, of Lewis Day in 
surface pattern, and William de Morgan in pottery. The demand 
for the acknowledgment of the personality of each responsible 
craftsman in a co-operative work was new, and it had direct 
bearing upon the social and economic conditions of artistic pro- 
duction. The principle, too, of regarding the material, object, 
method and purpose of a work as essential conditions of its 
artistic expression, the form and character of which must always 
be controlled by such conditions, had never before been so 
emphatically stated, though it practically endorsed the somewhat 
vague aspirations current for the unity of beauty with utility. 
Again, a very notable return to extreme simplicity of design 
in furniture and surface decoration may be remarked ; and 
a certain reserve in the use of colour and ornament, and a love 
of abstract forms in decoration generally, which are characteristic 
of later taste. Not less remarkable has been the new develop- 
ment in the design and workmanship of jewelry, gold- and 
silversmiths' work, and enamels, with which the names of 
Alexander Fisher, Henry Wilson, Nelson Dawson and C. R. 
Ashbee are associated. Among the arts and crafts of design 



which have blossomed into new life in recent years — and there 
is hardly one which has not been touched by the new spirit — 
book-binding must be named as having attained a fresh and 
tasteful development through the work of Mr Cobden-Sanderson 
and his pupils. The art and craft of the needle also must not 
be forgotten, and its progress is a good criterion of tasie in 
design, choice of colour and treatment. The work of Mrs Morris, 
of Miss Burden (sometime instructress at the Royal School of Art 
Needlework, which has carried on its work from 1875), of Miss 
May Morris, of Miss Una Taylor, of Miss Buckle, of Mrs Walter 
Crane, of Mrs Newbery, besides many other skilled needlewomen, 
has been frequently exhibited. Good work is often seen in the 
national competition works of the students of the English art 
schools, shown at South Kensington in July. The increase of 
late years in these exhibitions of designs worked out in the 
actual material for which they were intended is very remarkable, 
and is an evidence of the spread of the arts and crafts movement 
(fostered no doubt by the increase of technical schools, especially 
of the type of the Central School of Arts and Crafts under the 
Technical Education Board of the London County Council), 
of which it may be said that if it has not turned all British 
craftsmen into artists or all British artists into craftsmen, it 
had done not a little to expand and socialize the idea of art, 
and (perhaps it is not too much to say) has made the tasteful 
English house with its furniture and decorations a model for the 
civilized world. (W. Cr.) 

ART SOCIETIES. In banding themselves into societies and 
associations artists have always been especially remarkable. 
The fundamental motive of such leaguing together is apparent, 
for, by the establishment of societies, it becomes possible for the 
working members of these to hold exhibitions and thereby to 
obtain some compensation or reward for their labours. With the 
growth of artistic practice and public interest, however, art 
societies have been instituted where this primary object is either 
absent or is allied to others of more general scope. The further- 
ance of a cult and the specializing of work have also given rise 
to many new associations in Great Britain, besides the Royal 
Academy (see Academy, Royal). At the outset, therefore, it 
will be well to mention the leading art societies thus described. 
The (now Royal) Society of Painters in Water Colours, founded 
in 1804, and the (now Royal) Society of British Artists (1823), 
are typical of those societies which exist merely for purposes 
of holding exhibitions and conferring diplomas of membership. 
The British Institution (for the encouragement of British artists) 
was started in 1806 on a plan formed by Sir Thomas Bernard; 
and in the gallery, erected by Alderman Boydell to exhibit the 
paintings executed for his edition of Shakespeare, were from 
time to time exhibited pictures by the old masters, deceased 
British artists and others, till 1867, when the lease of the premises 
expired. A fund of £16,200, then in the hands of trustees, had 
accumulated to £24,610 in 1884. The Artists' Society, formed 
in 1830, has for its object the providing of facilities to enable 
its members to perfect themselves in their art. To this end there 
is a good library of works on art, and abundant opportunities 
are afforded for general study from the life. In the furtherance 
of a cult the Japan Society, devoted to the encouragement of 
the study of the arts and industries of Japan, is a typical example; 
and the Society of Mezzotint Engravers is representative of 
those bodies formed in the interests of particular groups of 
workers. One of the remarkable features in the history of art 
in Great Britain has been the rapid increase of the artistic rank 
and file. Taking the number of exhibitors at the principal 
London and provincial exhibitions, it is found that in the period 
1 885-1900 the ranks were doubled. At the end of the 1 9th century 
it was estimated that there were quite 7000 practising artists. 
Coincident with this astonishing development there has been a 
corresponding addition of new art societies and the enlargement 
of older bodies. For instance, the membership of the Royal 
Society of British Artists advanced in the period mentioned from 
80 to 150. Similar extensions can be noted in other societies, 
or in such a case as that of the Royal Institute of Painters 
in Water Colours, where the membership is limited to 100, 



J02 



ART SOCIETIES 



it is to be noticed that more space is given to the works of 
outsiders. But the expansion of older exhibiting societies has 
not proved sufficient. Portrait painters, pastellists, designers, 
miniaturists and women artists have felt the necessity of forming 
separate coteries. Interesting though these movements from 
within may be, the growth of societies originating in the spirit 
of altruism associated with such names as Ruskin and Kyrle 
is equally instructive. Nearly all these are the products of the 
last quarter of the 19th century, and include the Sunday Society, 
which in 1896 secured the Sunday opening of the national 
museums and galleries in the metropolis. 

The specializing of study and work has also given rise to much 
artistic endeavour. For a long time archaeology — British and 
Egyptian — claimed almost exclusive attention. Latterly the 
arts of India and Japan have engaged much notice, and societies 
have been organized to further their study. Finally, bands of 
workers in particular branches of art have felt the need of 
clubbing together in order to protect their special interests. A 
slight suspicion of trade-unionism is attached to some of these; 
but on the whole the establishment of such bodies as the Society 
of Illustrators, the Society of Designers, and the Society of 
Mezzotint Engravers has been with a view to advancing the 
public knowledge of the merits of these branches of artistic 
enterprise. 

Exhibiting Societies. — (a) Old Established. — These in 
London are: The Royal Academy, the Royal Water Colour 
Society, the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours, the 
Society of Oil Painters, and the Royal Society of British Artists. 
In the provinces, the Birmingham Royal Society of Artists has 
been in existence since 1825, and has a life academy with professors 
attached, (b) Modern. — In this category are many which reflect 
the new spirit which came into artistic life in the last quarter of 
the 19th century. The New English Art Club, founded in 1885 
as a protest against academic art, achieves its purpose by 
exhibition only. The International Society of Painters and 
Engravers, again, represents the wider ideas of the 20th century. 
The Royal Society of Painter-Etchers and Engravers, consisting of 
fellows and associates, not exceeding 150 in all, conserves the 
interests of a numerous body of workers, and, in addition to 
holding exhibitions, confers diplomas (R.E. and A.R.E.) on the 
exhibitors of meritorious etchings or engravings. The Society 
of Women Artists (formerly the Society of Lady Artists) is wholly 
devoted to the display of works by female artists, and in 1891 
the Society of Portrait Painters was formed to carry out the 
object conveyed in its title. Two associations advance the art 
of the miniature-painter, and the Pastel Society, formed in 1898, 
holds displays of members' work at the Royal Institute Galleries. 
In Scotland there is the Royal Scottish Academy. The Royal 
Scottish Society of Painters in Water Colours (Glasgow) grants 
the title R.S.W. to its members, and the Society of Scottish 
Artists (Edinburgh), founded in 1891, has a membership of nearly 
500 young artists. Other exhibiting societies which call for 
mention are: The Yorkshire Union of Artists (Leeds), which 
consolidates many local societies; the Nottingham Society of 
Artists, which also encourages drawing from the living model; 
and the Liverpool Sketching Club, founded in 1870, which holds 
an annual exhibition. 

Societies of Instruction and Popular Encouragement. 
— It is under this head that the chief evidence of the modern 
art revival will be found. First it should be noted that there 
are very few societies designed for the artistic improvement 
of artists. The Artists' Society has already been mentioned; 
and the Art Workers' Guild, which meets at Clifford's Inn Hall, 
provides meetings, from which the public is excluded, where 
profitable discussions take place on questions of craft and design. 
But, as a rule, the art society, of which only artists are mem- 
bers, is organized for exhibition purposes or for the protection of 
interests. With regard to those societies of popular and educa- 
tional intention the old Society of Arts in the Adelphi, founded 
in 1 7 54, enjoys a good record. Numerous lectures on art subjects 
have from time to time been given, and in 1887 a scheme was 
devised by which awards are made to student-workers in design. 



The Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts (Conduit 
Street) has also laboured since its foundation in 1858 to increase 
a technical knowledge, its members holding conversazioni at 
various picture galleries. The Artists' and Amateurs' Conver- 
sazione, instituted in 183 1, which used to meet at the Piccadilly 
Galleries and is now defunct, carried out a similar plan. Two 
other societies, now obsolete, should be mentioned whose method 
were directly educational. The Arundel Society, which fo 
many years promoted the knowledge of art by copying an 
publishing important works of ancient masters, issued to it 
members on payment of annual subscriptions, was eventually 
wound up on the last day of 1897. The Arundel Club, founded 
in 1904, continues the aim, but with a wider scope, reproducing 
works of art rendered somewhat inaccessible by being in private 
collections. The International Chalcographical Society, formed 
for the study of the early history of engraving, also did useful 
work. Another association of painters, sculptors, architects 
and engravers, the Graphic Society, ceased on the 29th of 
October 1890. This was one of the most interesting of 
societies, rare works of art being exhibited and discussed at 
its meetings. A very active educational body, originated in 
1888, namely the Royal Drawing Society, has for its definite 
object the teaching of drawing as a means of education. The 
methods of instruction are based on the facts that very young 
children try to draw before they can write, and that they have 
very keen perception and retentive memory. The society aims, 
therefore, at using drawing as a means of developing these innate 
characteristics of the young, and already nearly 300 important 
schools follow out its system. Lord Leighton, Sir Jojjn Millais, 
and Sir Edward Burne-Jones took an active part in the society's 
labours. The Art for Schools Association, founded in 1883, has 
also done steady work in endeavouring to provide schools with 
works of art. These are chiefly reproductions of standard works 
of art or of historical and natural subjects. The wave of enthusi- 
asm aroused by Mr Ruskin 's teachings caused Societies of the 
Rose to be founded in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Birming^- 
ham, Aberdeen and Glasgow; but some of these eventually 
ceased active work, to be revived again, however, by the Ruskin 
Union, formed in the year of the great writer's death (1900). 
Most of these societies were formed in 1879; but it should not 
be forgotten that two years earlier the Kyrle Society was started 
with the object of bringing the refining and cheering influences 
of natural and artistic beauty to the homes of the people. Under 
the presidency of Earl Brownlow, the Home Arts and Industries 
Association continues a work which was started in 1884, and 
anticipated much of the present system of technical education. 
Voluntary teachers organize classes for working people, at which 
a practical knowledge of art handiwork is taught. Training 
classes for voluntary teachers are held at the studios at the 
Albert Hall, as well as an annual exhibition. An interesting 
type of society has been established in Bolton, Lancashire. 
Under the title of an Arts Guild the members, numbering 
over 200, devote themselves to the advancement of taste in 
municipal improvements. 

Societies or Special Study, Practice and Protection. — 
Under this head should be placed those associations which affect 
a cult, or are composed of particular workers, or which protect 
public or private interests. Perhaps the chief of the first kind 
is the Japan Society, which, since its inception in 1892, has been 
joined by over 1350 members interested in matters relating to 
Japanese art and industries. The Diirer Society, formed in 1897, 
has for its main object the reproduction of works by Albrecht 
Diirer, and his German and Italian contemporaries. The Vasari 
Society, founded in 1905, works in harmony with the Arundel 
Club and the Diirer Society, reproducing drawings by the Old 
Masters. In this category of special study may also be placed the 
Society for the Encouragement and Preservation of Indian Art, 
the Egypt Exploration Fund, and the Society for the Promo- 
tion of Hellenic Studies. Of the societies of special practice it 
has already been noticed that some are purely exhibiting associa- 
tions, such as the Portrait Painters, the Pastel Society, and the 
two miniature bodies. The formation of the Society of Mezzotint 



ART TEACHING 



703 



Engravers in 1898 is an example of the leaguing together of 
particular workers to call attention to their interests. Original 
and translator engravers, together with collectors and con- 
noisseurs, comprise the membership. The decaying art of wood 
engraving is also fostered by the International Society of Wood 
Engravers, and the Society of Designers, founded in 1896, safe- 
guards the interests of professional designers for applied art, 
without holding exhibitions. Special practice and protection are 
also considered by the Society of Illustrators, composed of artists 
who work in black and white for the illustrated press. This 
society was inaugurated in 1894, and fifteen of the members of 
the committee must be active workers in illustration. As an 
instance of the tendency of art workers to combine, the Society 
of Art Masters is a good illustration. This is an association of 
teachers of art schools, controlled by the art branch of the Board 
of Education, and has a membership of over 300. Good work of 
another kind occupies the National Trust for Places of Historic 
Interest or Natural Beauty. The council of the Trust includes 
representatives of such bodies as the National Gallery, the 
Royal Academy, the Royal Society of Painters in Water Colours, 
the Society of Antiquaries, the Royal Institute of British Archi- 
tects, the Universities, Kyrle Society, Society for the Protection 
of Ancient Buildings and the Selborne Society. 

Foreign Art Societies. — The following are brief particulars 
of the chief art societies elsewhere than in Great Britain: — 

Austria. — Vienna, Vereinigung bildender Kunstler Osterreichs 
(Society of Austrian Painters) and the Wiener Kiinstlergenossenschaft 
(Association of Viennese Artists). 

Belgium. — Brussels, Societe des beaux-arts, the Libre Esthetique, 
Societe des aquarellistes et pastellistes , Societe royale beige des 
aquarellistes, and numerous private societies (cercles) in Brussels, 
Antwerp, Liege, Ghent and other cities. 

France. — Paris, the Societe des artistes francais (The Salon), 
Societe nationale des beaux-arts (The New Salon), Societe des 
aquarellistes. Exhibiting societies are the Societe des artistes 
independants , Societe des orientalistes, and Salon des pastellistes. 

Germany. — The small local societies are affiliated to one large 
parent body, the Deutsche Kiinstlergenossenschaft, in Berlin under 
the presidency of Anton von Werner. The Deutsche Illustratoren- 
verband watches over the interests of illustrators and designers. In 
Munich there are two bodies — the Kiinstlergenossenschaft (old society 
of artists), holding its exhibitions in the Glaspalast, and the Verein 
bildender Kunstler, the Secessionists. 

Italy. — Four exhibiting societies: Rome, Societa in Arte Libertas, 
Scuola degli Aquarellisti; Milan, Famiglia Artistica, Societa degli 
Artiste; Florence, Circolo Artistico; Naples, Instituti di Belli Arti. 

Portugal. — Sociedade promotora das Bellas-Artes and Gremio 
Artistico. 

Russia. — There is no exclusively art society of importance, but 
there is at St Petersburg the Societe litteraire et artistique. 

Spain. — Madrid, L' Association des artistes espagnols. 

Sweden. — Stockholm, Svenska Konstuareruas Forening. 

Switzerland. — Berne, La Societe des peintres et sculpteurs 
suisses. 

United States. — New York, National Academy of Design, 
American Water Color Society, and National Sculpture Society. 

(A. C. R. C.) 

ART TEACHING. It is the tendency of all departments of the 
human mind to outgrow their original limits. Traditions of 
teaching are long-lived, especially in art, and new ideas only 
slowly displace the old, so that art teaching as a whole is seldom 
abreast of the ideas and practice of the more advanced artists. 
The old academic system adapted to the methods and aims in art 
in the 18th century, which has been carried on in the principal 
art schools of Great Britain with but slight changes of method, 
consisted chiefly of a course of drawing from casts of antique 
statues in outline, and in light and shade without backgrounds, of 
anatomical drawings, perspective, and drawing and painting 
from the living model. Such a training seems to be more or less 
a response to Lessing's definition of painting as " the imitation of 
solid bodies upon a plane surface." It seems to have been 
influenced more by the sculptor's art than any other. Indeed, 
the academic teaching from the time of the Italian Renaissance 
was no doubt principally derived from the study of antique 
sculpture; the proportions of the figure, the style, pose, and 
sentiment being all taken from Graeco-Roman and Roman 
sculptures, discovered so abundantly in Italy from the 16th 
century onwards. As British ideas of art were principally 



derived from Italy, British academics endeavoured to follow the 
methods of teaching in vogue there in later times, and so the art 
student in Great Britain has had his intention and efforts 
directed almost exclusively to the representations of the abstract 
human form in abstract relief. Traditions in art, however, may 
sometimes prove helpful and beneficial, and preservative of beauty 
and character, as in the case of certain decorative and constructive 
arts and handicrafts in common use, such as those of the rural 
waggon-maker and wheelwright, and horse-harness maker. 

Some schools of painting, sculpture and architecture have 
preserved fine and noble traditions which yet allowed for in- 
dividuality. Such traditions may be said to have been character- 
istic of the art of the middle ages. It often happens, too, when 
many streams of artistic influence meet, there may be a certain 
domination or ascendancy of the traditions of one art over the 
others, which is injurious in its effects on those arts and diverts 
them from their true path. The domination of individualistic 
painting and sculpture over the arts of design during the last 
century or two is a case in point. 

With the awakening of interest in industrial art — sharply 
separated by pedantic classification from fine art — which began 
in England about the middle of the 19th century, schools of 
design were established which included more varied studies. 
Even as early as 1836 a government grant was made towards the 
opening of public galleries and the establishment of a normal 
school of design with a museum and lectures, and in 1837 the 
first school of design was opened at Somerset House. In 1840 
grants were made to establish schools of the same kind in 
provincial towns, such as Manchester, Birmingham, Glasgow, 
Leeds and Paisley. The names of G. Wallis in 1847, and 
Ambrose Poynter in 1850, are associated with schemes of art 
instruction adopted in the government art schools, and the year 
1851, the year of the Great Exhibition, was also marked by the 
first public exhibition of students' works, and the first institu- 
tion of prizes and scholarships. In 1852 " the Department 
of Practical Art " was constituted, and a museum of objects 
collected at Marlborough House which afterwards formed the 
nucleus of the future museum at South Kensington. In 1853 
" the Department of Science and Art " was established, and in 
1857, under the auspices of Henry Cole, the offices of the depart- 
ment and the National Art Training School were removed from 
Marlborough House to South Kensington. Classes for instruction 
in various crafts had been carried on both at Somerset House and 
Marlborough House, and the whole object of the government 
schools of design was to give an artistic training to the designer 
and craftsman, so that he could carry back to his trade or craft 
improved taste and skill. The schools, however, became largely 
filled by students of another type — leisured amateurs who sought 
to acquire some artistic accomplishment, and even in the case of 
genuine designers and craftsmen who developed pictorial skill in 
their studies, the attraction and superior social distinction and 
possibility of superior commercial value accruing to the career 
of a painter of easel pictures diverted the schools from their 
original purpose. 

For some time after the removal to South Kensington, during 
the progress of the new buildings, and under the direction of 
Godfrey Sykes and F. W. Moody, practical decorative work both 
in modelling and painting was carried out in the National Art 
Training School; but on the completion of these works, the 
school relapsed into a more or less academic school on the 
ordinary lines, and was regarded chiefly as a school for the train- 
ing of art teachers and masters who were required to pass through 
certain stereotyped courses and execute a certain series of 
drawings in order to obtain their certificates. Thus model- 
drawing, freehand outline, plant-drawing in outline, outline 
from the cast, light and shade from the cast, drawing of the 
antique figure, still life, anatomical drawings, drawing and 
painting from the life, ornamental design, historic studies of 
ornament, perspective and geometry, were all taken up in a 
cut-and-dried way, as isolated studies, and with a view solely 
to obtaining the certificate or passing an examination. This 
theoretic kind of training, though still in force, and though it 



7°4 



ART TEACHING 



enabled the department to turn out certificated teachers for the 
schools of the country of a certain standard, and to give to 
students a general theoretic idea of art, has been found wanting, 
since, in practice, when the student in design leaves his school 
and desires to take up practical work as a designer or craftsman, 
he requires special knowledge, and specialized skill in design for 
his work to be of use; and though he may be able to impart to 
others what he himself has laboriously acquired, the theoretic 
and general character of his training proves of little or no use, 
face to face with the ever shifting and changing demands of the 
modern manufacturer and the modern market. 

A growing conviction of the inadequacy of the schools of the 
Science and Art Department (now the Board of Education), 
considered as training grounds for practical designers and 
craftsmen, led to the establishment of new technical schools in 
the principal towns of Great Britain. The circumstance of 
certain large sums, diverted from their original purpose of com- 
pensation to brewers, being available for educational purposes 
and at the disposal of the county councils and municipal bodies, 
provided the means for the building and equipment of these 
new technical schools, which in many cases are under the same 
roof as the art school in the provincial towns, and, since the 
Education Act of 1902, are generally rate-supported. The art 
schools formerly managed by private committees and supported 
by private donors, assisted by the government grants, are now, 
in the principal industrial towns of Great Britain, taken over 
by the municipality. Birmingham is singularly well organized 
in this respect, and its art school has long held a leading position. 
The school is well housed in a new building with class-rooms 
with every appliance, not only for the drawing, designing and 
modelling side, but also for the practice of artistic handicrafts 
such as metal repousse, enamelling, wood-carving, embroidery, 
&c. The municipality have also established a jewelry school, 
so as to associate the practical study of art with local industry. 
Manchester and other cities are also equipped with well-organized 
art schools. 

The important change involved in the incorporation of the 
Science and Art Department with the Board of Education also 
led to a reorganization of the Royal College of Art. A special 
council of advice on art matters was appointed, consisting of re- 
presentatives of painting, sculpture, architecture and design, who 
deal with the Royal College of Art* and appoint the professors 
who control the teaching in the classes for architecture, design 
and handicraft, decorative painting and sculpture, modelling 
and carving. The council decide upon the curriculum, and 
examine and criticize the work of the college from time to time. 
They also advise the board in regard to the syllabus issued to 
the art schools of the country, and act as referees in regard to 
purchases for the museum. 

Of other institutions for the teaching of art, the following may 
be named: The Royal Drawing Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, which was formed principally to promote the teaching 
of drawing in schools as a means of education. The system 
therein adopted differs from the ordinary drawing courses, and 
favours the use of the brush. Brushwork has generally been 
adopted for elementary work, too, by London County Council 
teachers, drawing being now a compulsory subject. Remarkable 
results have been obtained by the Alma Road Council schools in 
the teaching of boys from eight to twelve by giving them spaces 
to fill with given forms — leaf shapes — from which patterns are 
constructed to fill the spaces, brush and water-colour being the 
means employed. At the Royal Female School of Art in Queen 
Square, London, classes in drawing and painting from life are 
held, and decorative design is also studied. There are also the 
Royal School of Art Needlework and the School of Art Wood- 
carving, all aided by the London County Council. The City 
and Guilds of London Institute has two departments for what 
is termed " applied " art, one at the South London School of 
Technical Art, and the other at the Art Department in the 
Technical College, Finsbury. The Slade School of Drawing, 
Painting and Sculpture, University College, Gower Street, con- 
fines itself to drawing and painting from the antique and life, 



and exercise in pictorial composition. There are also lectures on 
anatomy and perspective. The Slade professorships at Oxford 
and Cambridge universities are concerned with the teaching and 
literature of art, but they do not concern themselves with the 
practice. There are also, in addition to the schools of art named 
and those in connexion with the Board of Education and the 
London County Council in the various districts of London, many 
and various private clubs and schools, such as the Langham and 
" Heatherley's," chiefly concerned in encouraging drawing and 
painting from the life, and for the study of art from the pictorial 
point of view, or for the preparation of candidates for the Royal 
Academy or other schools. The polytechnics and technical insti- 
tutes also provide instruction in a great variety of artistic crafts. 

A general survey, therefore, of the various institutions which 
are established for the teaching of art in Great Britain gives the 
impression that the study of art is not neglected, although, 
perhaps, further inquiry might show that, compared with the 
great educational establishments, the proportion is not excessive. 
Now that the Education Act 1902 has given the county councils 
control of elementary and secondary education and charged 
them with the task of promoting the co-ordination of all forms 
of education in consultation with the Board of Education, it is 
probable that an elementary scholar who shows artistic ability 
will be enabled to pass on from the elementary classes in one 
school to the higher art and technical schools, secondary and 
advanced, without retracing his steps, thus escaping the depres- 
sion of going over old ground. 

The general movement of revival of interest in the arts of 
decorative design and the allied handicrafts, with the desire 
to re-establish their influence in art-teaching, has been due to 
many causes, among which the work of the Arts and Crafts 
Exhibition Society may count as important. From the leading 
members of this body the London County Council Technical 
Educational Board, when it was face to face with the problem 
of organizing its new schools and its technical classes, sought 
advice and aid. Success has attended their schools, especially 
the Central School of Arts and Crafts at Morley Hall, Regent 
Street. The object of the school is to provide the craftsman in 
the various branches of decorative design with such means of 
improving bis taste and skill as the workshop does not afford. 
It does not concern itself with the amateur or with theoretic 
drawing. The main difference in principle adopted in this school 
in the teaching of design is the absence of teaching design apart 
from handicraft. It is considered that a craftsman thoroughly 
acquainted with the natural capacities of his material and strictly 
understanding the conditions of his work, would be able, if he 
had any feeling or invention, to design appropriately in that 
material, and no designing can be good apart from a knowledge 
of the material in which it is intended to be carried out. It 
should be remembered, too, that graphic skill in representing the 
appearances of natural objects is one sort of skill, and the execu- 
tive skill of the craftsman in working out his design, say in wood 
or metal, is quite another. It follows that the works of drawing 
or design made by the craftsman would be of quite a different 
character from a pictorial drawing, and might be quite simple 
and abstract, while clear and accurate. The training for the 
pictorial artist and for the craftsman would, therefore, naturally 
be different. 

The character of the art-teaching adopted in any country 
must of course depend upon the dominant conception of art and 
its function and purpose. If we regard it as an idle accomplish- 
ment for the leisured few, its methods will be amateurish and 
superficial. If we regard art as an important factor in education, 
as a language of the intelligence, as an indispensable companion 
to literature, we shall favour systematic study and a training in 
the power of direct expression by means of line. We shall value 
the symbolic drawing of early civilizations like the Egyptian, 
and symbolic art generally, and in the history of decorative art 
we shall find the true accompaniment and illustration of human 
history itself. From this point of view we shall value the acquisi- 
tion of the power of drawing for the purpose of presenting and 
explaining the facts and forms of nature. Drawing will be the 



ARTUSI— ARUNDEL 



7°5 



most direct means at the command of the teacher to explain, to 
expound, to demonstrate where mere words are not sufficiently 
definite or explicit. Drawing in this sense is taking a more 
important place in education, especially in primary education, 
though there is no need for it to stop there, and one feels it may 
be destined to take a more important position both as a training 
for the eye and hand and an aid to the teacher. Then, again, 
we may regard art more from its social aspect as an essential 
accompaniment of human life, not only for its illustrative and 
depicting powers, but also and no less for its pleasure-giving 
properties, its power of awakening and stimulating the observa- 
tion and sympathy with the moods of nature, its power of 
touching the emotions, and above all of appealing to our sense 
of beauty. We shall regard the study of art from this point of 
view as the greatest civilizer, the most permeating of social and 
human forces. Such ideas as these, shared no doubt by all who 
take pleasure and interest in art, or feel it to be an important 
element in their lives, are crossed and often obscured by a 
multitude of mundane considerations, and it is probably out of 
the struggle for ascendancy between these that our systems of art 
teaching are evolved. There is the demand of the right to live 
on the part of the artist and the teacher of art. There is the 
demand on the part of the manufacturer and salesman for such 
art as will help him to dispose of his goods. In the present 
commercial rivalry between nations this latter demand is brought 
into prominent relief, and art is apt to be made a minister, or 
perhaps a slave to the market. These are but accidental relation- 
ships with art. All who care for art value it as a means of expres- 
sion, and for the pleasure and beauty it infuses into all it touches, 
or as essential and inseparable from life itself. Seeing then the 
importance of art from any point of view, individual, social, 
commercial, intellectual, emotional, economic, it should be 
important to us in our systems of art-teaching not to lose sight of 
the end in arranging the means — not to allow our teaching to be 
dominated by either dilettantism or commercialism, neither to 
be feeble for want of technical skill, nor to sacrifice everything 
to technique. The true object of art-teaching is very much like 
that of all education — to inform the mind, while you give skill 
to the hand — not to impose certain rigid rules, or fixed recipes 
and methods of work, but while giving instruction in definite 
methods and the use of materials, to allow for the individual 
development of the student and enable him to acquire the power 
to express himself through different media without forgetting 
the grammar and alphabet of design. Practice may vary, but 
principles remain, and there is a certain logic in art, as well as in 
reasoning. All art is conditioned in the mode of its expression 
by its material, and even the most individual kind of art has a 
convention of its own by the very necessities and means of its 
existence. Methods of expression, conventions alter as each 
artist, each age seeks some new interpretation of nature and the 
imagination — the well-springs of artistic life, and from these 
reviving streams continually flow new harmonies, new inventions 
and recombinations, taking form and colour according to the 
temperaments which give them birth. ( W. C r.) 

ARTUSI, GIOVANNI MARIA, Italian composer and musical 
theorist, was born in Bologna, and died on the 18th of August 
1613. He was canonico regulare at the church of San Salvatore 
in his native city. He is chiefly famous in the history of music 
for his attacks upon Monteverde (q.v.) embodied in his L'Artusi 
overo d. imp. (1600). For an exhaustive explanation and a 
tfanslation of excerpts from these the studies of Dr G. Vogel and 
O. Riemann should be consulted. These will be found in the 
Vierteljahrsschrift filr Musikwissenschaft, Leipzig, vol. 3, pp. 326, 
380 and 426. 

ARU ISLANDS (Dutch Aroe), a group in the residency of 
Amboyna, Dutch East Indies; between 5° 18' and 7 5' S., 
and 134° and 135° E.; the member nearest to the south-west 
coast of New Guinea lying about 70 m. from it. The larger 
islands (Wokan, Kobrur, Maikor and Trangan), and certain of 
the lesser ones, are regarded by the Malays as one land mass which 
they call tana besar (" great land "). This is justified inasmuch 
as its parts are only isolated by narrow creeks of curious form, 

11. 23 



having the character of rivers. The smaller islands number some 
eighty; the total land area is 3244 sq. m.; and the population 
about 22,000. The islands are low, but it is only on the coast 
that the ground is swampy. The principal formation is coralline 
limestone; the eastern coast is defended by coral reefs, and the 
neighbouring sea (extending as far as New Guinea, and thus 
demonstrating a physical connexion with that land) is shallow, 
and abounds in coral in full growth. A large part of the surface 
is covered with virgin forest, consisting of screw-pines, palm trees, 
tree ferns, canariums, &c. The fauna is altogether Papuan. 
The natives are also Papuans, but of mixed blood. They are 
divided into two confederations, the Uli-luna and the Uli-sawa, 
which are hostile to each other. The houses are remarkable as 
being built on piles sunk in the solid rock and having two rooms, 
the one surrounding the other. The people are in manners 
complete savages. The natives are governed by rajas (prang 
kajas), the Dutch government being represented by a posthouder. 
In the interior is said to exist a tribe — the Korongoeis — with 
white skins and fair hair, but it has never been seen by travellers. 
A few villages are nominally Christian, and the Malays have 
introduced Mabommedanism, but most of the natives have no 
religion. Dobbo, on a small western island, is the chief place; 
its resident population is reinforced annually, at the time of the 
west monsoon, by traders from that quarter, who deal in the 
tripang, pearl shell, tortoise-shell, and other produce of the 
islands. 

ARUNDEL, EARLDOM OF. This historic dignity, the premier 
earldom of England, is popularly but erroneously supposed to 
be annexed to the possession of Arundel Castle. Norman earls 
were earls of counties, though sometimes styled from their chief 
residence or from the county town, and Mr J.H.Round has shown 
that the earldom of " Arundel " was really that of Sussex. Its 
origin was the grant by Henry I. to his second wife, in dower, of 
the forfeited " honour " of Arundel, of which the castle was the 
head, and which comprised a large portion of Sussex. After his 
death she married William " de Albini " {i.e. d'Aubigny), who 
from about the year 1141 is variously styled earl of Sussex, of 
Chichester, or of Arundel, or even Earl William " de Albini." 
His first known appearance as earl is at Christmas 1141, and it 
has been ascertained that, after acquiring the castle by marriage, 
he had not thereby become an earl. Henry II., on his accession, 
" gave " him the castle and honour of Arundel, in fee, together 
with " the third penny of the pleas of Sussex, of which he is 
earl." His male line of heirs became extinct on the death of 
Hugh " de Albini," earl of Arundel, in 1243, who had four sisters 
and co-heirs. In the partition of his estates, the castle and 
honour of Arundel were assigned to his second sister's son, John 
Fitzalan of a Breton house, from which sprang also the royal 
house of Stuart. It is proved, however, by record evidence, that 
neither John nor his son and successor were ever earls; but 
from about the end of 1 289, when his grandson Richard came of 
age, he is styled earl of Arundel. Richard's son Edmund was 
forfeited and beheaded in 1326, and Arundel was out of posses- 
sion of the family till 1331, when his son was restored, and 
regained the castle and also the earldom by separate grants. 
Both were again lost in 1397 on his son being beheaded and 
attainted. But the latter's son was restored to both the earldom 
and the estates by Henry IV. in 1400. He died without issue in 

1415- 

The castle and estates now passed to the late earl's cousin and 
heir-male under a family entail, but the representation in blood 
of the late earl passed to his sisters and co-heirs, of whom the 
eldest had married Thomas Mowbray, duke of Norfolk. The 
descent of the earldom remained in doubt, till the heir-male's 
son and heir successfully claimed it in 1433, in virtue of his 
tenure of the castle, alleging that it was " a dignity or name 
united and annexed to the castle and lordship of Arundel for 
time whereof memory of man was not to the contrary." His* 
claim was opposed on behalf of the Mowbrays, and the allegation 
on which it was based is discussed and refuted at great length 
in the Lords' Reports on the Dignity of a Peer (i. 404-429). 
In the descendants of his brother the earldom remained vested 



706 



ARUNDEL 



till i 580, when the last Fitzalan earl died, leaving as his sole heir 
his daughter's son Philip Howard, whose father Thomas, duke of 
Norfolk, had been beheaded and attainted in 1572. 

Philip, who was through his father senior representative of the 
earls of Arundel down to 14 15, and through his mother sole 
representative of the subsequent earls, was summoned to parlia- 
ment as earl in January 1581, but was attainted in 1589. His 
son Thomas was restored to the earldom and certain other 
honours in 1604, and, in 1627, obtained an act of parliament 
" concerning the title, name and dignity of Earl of Arundel, and 
for the annexing of the Castle, Honour, Manor and Lordship of 
Arundel . . . with the titles and dignities of the Baronies of 
Fitzalan, Clun and Oswaldestre, and Maltravers, ... to the 
same title, name and dignity of Earl of Arundel." This act, 
which was based on the earl's allegation that the title had been 
" invariably used and enjoyed " by the owners of the castle, 
" and by reason of the said inheritance and seisin," has been 
much discussed, especially in the Lords' Reports (i. 430-434). 
There is no doubt that the earl's object was to entail the earldom 
and the castle strictly on a certain line of heirs, and this was 
effected by elaborate remainders (passing over the Howards, 
earls of Suffolk). It is under this act of parliament that the 
earldom has been held ever since, and that it passed with the 
castle in 1777 to the heir-male of the Howards, although the 
representation in blood then passed to heirs general. Thus the 
castle and the earldom cannot be alienated from the line of heirs 
on whom it is entailed by the act of 1627; while the heirship in 
blood of the earlier earls (to 1415) is vested in Lords Mowbray 
and Petre and the Baroness Berkeley, and that of the later earls 
(to 1777) in Lords Mowbray and Petre. 

The precedence of the earldom was challenged in 1446 by 
Thomas Courtenay, earl of Devon, owing to the question as to 
its descent spoken of above, but the king in council confirmed to 
the earl the precedence of his ancestors " by reason of the Castle, 
Honour and Lordship of Arundel." In the act of 1627 the 
" places " and " pre-eminences " belonging to the earldom were 
secured to it. It would appear, however, that the decision of 
the dispute with the earl of Devon in 1446 restricts that prece- 
dency to such as the earl's ancestors had enjoyed, if indeed it 
goes farther than to guarantee his precedence over the earl of 
Devon. But as there is no other existing earldom older than 
that of Shrewsbury (1442), the present position of Arundel as 
the premier earldom is beyond dispute. 

See Lords' Reports on the Dignity of a Peer; Dugdale's Baronage; 
Tierney's History of Arundel; G. E. C[okayne]'s Complete Peerage; 
Round's Geoffrey de Mandeville; Pike's Constitutional History of 
the House of Lords. (J. H. R.) 

ARUNDEL, EARLS OF. According to Cokayne {Complete 
Peerage, i. p. 138, note a) there is an old Sussex tradition to the 
effect that 

" Since William rose and Harold fell 
There have been earls of Arundel." 
This, he adds, " is the case if for ' of ' we read ' at.' " The 
questions involved in this distinction are discussed in the pre- 
ceding article on the earldom of Arundel, now held by the duke 
of Norfolk. The present article is confined to a biographical 
sketch of the more conspicuous earls of Arundel, first in the 
Fitzalan line, and then in the Howard line. 

Richard Fitzalan (1267-1302), earl of Arundel, was a son of 
John, lord of Arundel (1246-12 7 2), and a grandson of another 
John, lord of Arundel, Clun and Oswaldestre (Oswestry), who 
took a prominent, if somewhat wavering, part in the troubles 
during the reign of Henry III., and who died in November 1267. 
Richard, who was called earl of Arundel about 1289, fought for 
Edward I. in France and in Scotland, and died on the 9th of 
March 1302. 

He was succeeded by his son, Edmund (1285-1326), who 
married Alice, sister of John, earl de Warenne. A bitter enemy 
of Piers Gaveston, Arundel was one of the ordainers appointed 
in 13 10; he declined to march with -Edward II. to Bannockburn, 
and after the king's humiliation he was closely associated with 
Thomas, earl of Lancaster, until about 1321, when he became 
connected with the Despensers and sided with the king. He 



was faithful to Edward to the last, and was executed at Hereford 
by the partisans of Queen Isabella on the 17th of November 1326. 

His son, Richard (c. 1307-1376), who obtained his father's 
earldom and lands in 1331, was a soldier of renown and a faithful 
servant of Edward III. He was present at the battle of Sluys 
and at the siege of Tournai in 1340; he led one of the divisions 
of the English army at Crecy and took part in the siege of 
Calais; and he fought in the naval battle with the Spaniards off 
Winchelsea in August 1350. Moreover, he was often employed 
by Edward on diplomatic business. Soon after 1347 Arundel 
inherited the estates of his uncle John, earl de Warenne, and in 
1361 he assumed the title of earl de Warenne or earl of Surrey. 
He was regent of England in 1355, and died on the 24th of 
January 1376, leaving three sons, the youngest of whom, Thomas, 
became archbishop of Canterbury. 

Richard's eldest son, Richard, earl of Arundel and Surrey 
(c. 1346-1397), was a member of the royal council during the 
minority of Richard II., and about 1381 was made one of the 
young king's governors. As admiral of the west and south he 
saw a good deal of service on the sea, but without earning any 
marked distinction except in 1387 when he gained a victory over 
the French and their allies off Margate. About 1385 the earl 
joined the baronial party led by the king's uncle, Thomas of 
Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, and in 1386 was a member of 
the commission appointed to regulate the kingdom and the royal 
household. Then came Richard's rash but futile attempt to 
arrest Arundel, which was the signal for the outbreak of 
hostilities. The Gloucester faction quickly gained the upper 
hand, and the earl was one, and perhaps the most bitter, of the 
lords appellant. He was again a member of the royal council, 
and was involved in a quarrel with John of Gaunt, duke of 
Lancaster, whom he accused in the parliament of 1394. After a 
personal altercation with the king at Westminster in the same 
year Arundel underwent a short imprisonment, and in 1397 
came the final episode of his life. Suspicious of Richard he 
refused the royal invitation to a banquet, but his party had 
broken up, and he was persuaded by his brother, Thomas 
Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury, to surrender himself and to 
trust to the king's clemency. At once he was tried, was attainted 
and sentenced to death, and, bearing himself with great intre- 
pidity, was beheaded on the 21st of September 1397. He was 
twice married and had three sons and four daughters. The earl 
founded a hospital at Arundel, and his tomb in the church of the 
Augustinian Friars, Broad Street, London, was long a place of 
pilgrimage. 

His only surviving son, Thomas (1381-1415), was a ward of 
John Holand, duke of Exeter, from whose keeping he escaped 
about 1398 and joined his uncle, Archbishop Thomas Arundel, 
at Utrecht, returning to England with Henry of Lancaster, after- 
wards King Henry IV., in 1399. After Henry's coronation he 
was restored to his father's titles and estates, and was employed 
in fighting against various rebels in Wales and in the north of 
England. Having left the side of his uncle, the archbishop, 
Arundel joined the party of the Beauforts, and was one of the 
leaders of the English army which went to France in 141 1; then 
after a period of retirement he became lord treasurer on the 
accession of Henry V. From the siege of Harfleur he returned 
ill to England and died on the 13th of October 1415. His wife 
was Beatrix (d. 1439), a natural daughter of John I., king of 
Portugal, but he left no children, and the lordship of Arundel 
passed to a kinsman, John Fitzalan, Lord Maltravers (1385- 
142 1), who was summoned as earl of Arundel in 1416. 

John's son, John (1408-1435), did not secure the earldom 
until 1433, when as the " English Achilles " he had already 
won great distinction in the French wars. He was created duke 
of Touraine, and continued to serve Henry VI. in the field until 
his death at Beauvais from the effects of a wound on the 12th 
of June 1435. The earl's only son, Humphrey, died in April 
1438, when the earldom passed to John's brother, William 
(1417-1488). 

Henry Fitzalan, 12th earl of Arundel (c. 1517-1580), son of 
William, nth earl, by Anne, daughter of Henry Percy, 4th earl 



ARUNDEL 



707 



of Northumberland, was born about 1517. He entered King 
Henry's household, attending the latter to Calais in 1532. In 
1533 he was summoned to parliament in his father's barony of 
Maltravers, and in 1540 he was made deputy of Calais, where his 
vigorous administration was much praised. He returned to 
England in April 1544 after the death of his father, and was 
made a knight of the Garter. In July of the same year he 
commanded with Suffolk the English expedition to France as 
lord marshal, and besieged and took Boulogne. On his return 
to England he was made lord chamberlain, an office which he 
retained after the accession in 1547 of Edward VI., at whose 
coronation he acted as high constable. He was one of the twelve 
counsellors nominated in Henry VIII. 's will to assist the executors, 
but he had little power during the protectorship of Somerset or 
the ascendancy of Warwick (afterwards dukeof Northumberland), 
and in 1550 by the latter's device he was accused of embezzle- 
ment, removed from the council, confined to his house, and fined 
£'r 2,000 — £8000 of this sum being afterwards remitted and the 
charges never being proved. Subsequently he allied himself 
with Somerset, and was implicated in 1551 in the latter's plot 
against Northumberland, being imprisoned in the Tower in 
November. On the 3rd of December 1552, though he had never 
been brought to trial, he signed a submission and confession 
before the privy council, and was liberated after having been 
again heavily fined. As Edward's reign drew to its close, 
Arundel's support was desired by Northumberland to further 
his designs on the throne for his family, and he was accordingly 
reinstated in the council and discharged of his fine. In June 1553 
he opposed Edward's " device " for the succession, which passed 
over his sisters Mary and Elizabeth as illegitimate, and left the 
crown to the children of the duchess of Suffolk, and alone of the 
council refused the " engagement " to support it, though he 
signed the letters patent. On the death of Edward (July 6, 
1553) he ostensibly joined in furthering the duke's plans, but 
secretly took measures to destroy them, and according to some 
accounts sent a letter to Mary the same evening informing her 
of Edward's death and advising her to retreat to a place of 
security. Meanwhile he continued to attend the meetings of 
the council, signed the letter to Mary declaring her illegitimacy 
and Lady Jane Grey's right to the throne, accompanied North- 
umberland to announce to Jane her accession, and urged 
Northumberland to leave London and place himself at the head 
of the forces to attack Mary, wishing him God-speed on his 
departure. In Northumberland's absence, he gained over his 
fellow-councillors, and having succeeded with them in getting 
out of the Tower, called an assembly of the corporation and 
chief men of the city, denounced Northumberland, and had 
Mary proclaimed queen, subsequently riding off to join her with 
the Great Seal at Framlingham. On the 20th of July he secured 
Northumberland at Cambridge, and returned in triumph with 
Mary to London on the 3rd of August, riding before her with the 
sword of state. He was now made a privy councillor and lord 
steward, and was granted several favours and privileges, acting 
as high constable at the coronation, and obtaining the right to 
crea te sixty knigh ts. He took a prominent part in various public 
acts of the reign, was a commissioner to treat for the queen's 
marriage, presided at the trial of the duke of Suffolk, assisted 
•in suppressing Wyatt's rebellion in 1554, was despatched on 
foreign missions, and in September 1555 accompanied Philip 
to Brussels. The same year he received, together with other 
persons, a charter under the name of the Merchant Adventurers 
of England, for the discovery of unknown lands, and was made 
high steward of Oxford University, being chosen chancellor in 
1559, but resigning his office in the same year. In 1557, on the 
prospect of the war with France, he was appointed lieutenant- 
general of the forces for the defence of the country, and in 1558 
attended the conference at the abbey of Cercamp for the negotia- 
tion of a peace. He returned to England on the death of Mary 
in November 1558, and is described to Philip II. at that time as 
" going about in high glee, very smart " and with hopes of 
marrying the queen, but as " flighty " and of " small ability." 
He was reinstated in all his offices by Elizabeth, served as high 



constable at her coronation, and was visited several times by 
the queen at Nonsuch in Surrey. As a Roman Catholic he 
violently opposed the arrest of his co-religionists and the war 
with Scotland, and in 1560 came to blows with Lord Clinton in 
the queen's presence on a dispute arising on those questions. 
He incurred the queen's displeasure in 1562 by holding a meeting 
at his house during her illness to consider the question of the 
succession and promote the claims of Lady Catherine Grey. 
In 1564, being suspected of intrigues against the government, 
he was dismissed from the lord-stewardship and confined to his 
house, but was restored to favour in December. In March 1 566 
he went to Padua, but being summoned back by the queen he 
returned to London accompanied by a large cavalcade on the 
17th of April 1567. Next year he served on the commission of 
inquiry into the charges against Mary, queen of Scots. Sub- 
sequently he furthered the marriage of Mary with the duke of 
Norfolk, his son-in-law, together with the restoration of the 
Roman Catholic religion and government, and deposition of 
Elizabeth, in collusion with Spain. He made use of the incident 
in 1 568, of the seizure of treasure at Southampton intended for 
Philip, as a means of effecting Cecil's overthrow, and urged upon 
the Spanish government the stoppage of trade. He is described 
in 1569 to Philip as having " good intentions," " whilst benefiting 
himself as he was very needy." In January he alarmed Elizabeth 
by communicating to her a supposed Spanish project for aiding 
Mary and replacing her on her throne, and put before the queen 
in writing his own objections to the adoption of extreme measures 
against her. In June he received with Norfolk and Lumley 6000 
crowns from Philip. In September, on the discovery of Norfolk's 
plot, he was arrested, but not having committed himself suffi- 
ciently to -incur the charge of treason in the northern rebellion 
he escaped punishment, was released in March 1570, and was 
recalled by Leicester to the council with the aim of embarrassing 
Cecil. He again renewed his treasonable intrigues, which were 
at length to some extent exposed by the discovery of the Ridolfi 
plot in September 1571. He was once more arrested, and not 
liberated till December 1572 after Norfolk's execution. He died 
on the 24th of February 1580, and was buried in the chapel at 
Arundel, where a monument was erected to his memory. 

He married (1) Catherine, daughter of Thomas Grey, 2nd 
marquess of Dorset, by whom he had Henry, who predeceased 
him, and two daughters, of whom Mary married Thomas Howard, 
4th duke of Norfolk; and (2) Mary, daughter of Sir John Arundell 
and dowager countess of Sussex, by whom he had no children. 
Arundel was the last earl of his family, the title at his death 
passing through his daughter Mary to the Howards. 

Authorities. — MS. Life by a contemporary in Royal MSS., 
British Museum, 17 A ix., printed with notes inGent. Mag. (i833)(ii.), 
pp. 11, 118, 210, 490; M. A. Tierney, Hist, of Arundel, p. 319; 
Chronicle of Queen Jane (Camden Soc. 1850); Literary Remains 
of Edward VI. (Roxburghe Club, 1857); J. Nichols, Progresses of 
Queen Elizabeth (1823), i. 74; Wood, Fasti Oxon. (Bliss), i. 153, 156; 
Cal. State Papers, Simancas, i. 18, ii. 152, &c, Notes and Queries, 
2 Ser. iv. 84, &c. 

Philip Howard, 1st earl 1 of Arundel (1557-1595), eldest son 
of Thomas Howard, 4th duke of Norfolk, executed for high 
treason in 1572, and of Lady Mary, daughter and heiress of Henry 
Fitzalan, 12th earl of Arundel, was born on the 28th of June 
1557. He was married in 1571 to Anne, daughter and co-heiress 
of Thomas Dacre, Lord Dacre (1566), and was educated at 
Cambridge, being accorded the degree of M.A. in 1576. Sub- 
sequently Lord Surrey, as he was styled, came to court, partook 
in its extravagant gaieties and dissipations, and kept his wife 
in the background; but he nevertheless failed to secure the 
favour of Elizabeth, who suspected the Howards generally. 
On the death of his maternal grandfather in February 1580 he 
became earl of Arundel and retired from the court. In 1582 his 
wife joined the church of Rome, and was committed to the 
charge of Sir Thomas Shirley by the queen. He was himself 
suspected of disloyalty, and was regarded by the discontented 
Roman Catholics as the centre of the plots against the queen's 
government, and even as a possible successor. In 1583 he was 
1 i.e. in the Howard line. 



yo8 



ARUNDEL 



with some reason suspected of complicity in Throgmorton's plot 
and prepared to escape to Flanders, but his plans were interrupted 
by a visit from Elizabeth at his house in London, and by her 
order subsequently to confine himself there. In September 1584 
he became a Roman Catholic, dissembling his conversion and 
attempting next year once more to escape abroad; but having 
been brought back he was placed in the Tower on the 25th of 
April 1585, and charged before the Star Chamber with being a 
Romanist, with quitting England without leave, sharing in 
Jesuit plots, and claiming the dukedom of Norfolk. He was 
sentenced to pay £10,000 and to be imprisoned during the 
queen's pleasure. In July 1586 his liberty was offered to him 
if he would carry the sword of state before the queen to church. 
In 1 588 he was accused of praying, together with other Romanists, 
for the success of the Spanish Armada. He was tried for high 
treason on the 14th of April 1589, found guilty and condemned 
to death; but lingered in confinement under his sentence, which 
was never executed, till his death on the 19th of October 1595. 
He was buried in the Tower, whence his remains were removed 
in 1624 to Arundel. His career, his later religious constancy 
and his tragic end have evoked general sympathy, but his 
conduct gave rise to grave suspicions, and the punishment 
inflicted upon him was not unwarranted; while the account of 
the severity of his imprisonment given by his anonymous and 
contemporary biographer should be compared with his own 
letters expressing gratitude for favours allowed. 1 There appears 
no foundation for the belief that he was poisoned, and according 
to Camden his death was caused by his religious austerities. 2 
He was the author of a translation of An Epistle of Jesus Christ 
to the Faithful Soule by Johann Justus (1595, reprinted 187 1) 
and of three MS. treatises On the Excellence and Utility.of Virtue. 
Inscriptions carved by his hand are still to be seen in the Tower. 
He had two children, Elizabeth, who died young, and Thomas, 
who (restored in blood) succeeded him as 2nd earl of Arundel, 
and was created earl of Norfolk in 1644. 

Authorities. — Article in the Diet, of Nat. Biography and au- 
thorities there collected ; the contemporary Lives of Philip Howard, 
Earl of Arundel and of Anne Dacre his Wife, ed. by the duke of 
Norfolk (1857); M. Tierney, History of Arundel (1834), p. 357; 
C. H. Cooper, Athenae Cantabrigenses (1861), with bibliography, ii. 
187 and 547; H. Howard, Memoirs of the Howard Family (1824). 

Thomas Howard, 2nd earl of Arundel, and earl of Surrey and 
of Norfolk (c. 1585-1646), son of Philip, 1st earl of Arundel and 
of Lady Anne Dacre, was born in 1585 or 1586 and educated at 
Westminster school and at Trinity College, Cambridge. Owing 
to the attainder of his father he was styled Lord Maltravers, but 
at the accession of James I. he was restored to his father's earl- 
doms of Arundel and Surrey, and to the baronies of his grand- 
father, Thomas, 4th duke of Norfolk. He came to court, travelled 
subsequently abroad, acquiring a taste for art, and was created 
K.G. on his return in May 1611. In 1613 he escorted Elizabeth, 
the electress palatine, to Heidelberg, and again visited Italy. 
On Christmas day 161 5 Arundel joined the Church of England, 
and took office, being appointed a privy councillor in 1616. He 
supported Raleigh's expedition in 161 7, became a member of 
the New England Plantations Committee in 1620 and planned 
the colonization of Madagascar. He presided over the House 
of Lords Committee in April 1621 for investigating the charges 
against Bacon, whom he defended from degradation from the 
peerage, and at whose fall he was appointed a commissioner of 
the great seal. On the 16th of May he was sent to the Tower 
by the Lords on account of violent and insulting language used 
by him to Lord Spencer. He incurred Prince Charles's and 
Buckingham's anger by his opposition to the war with Spain 
in 1624, and by his share in the duke's impeachment, and on the 
occasion of his son's marriage to Lady Elizabeth Stewart without 
the king's approval he was imprisoned in the Tower by Charles I., 
shortly after his accession, but was released at the instance of 
the Lords in June 1626, being again confined to his house till 
March 1628, when he was once more liberated by the Lords. 

J See Cal. of St. Pap. Dom. 1581-15 go, 611 ; and Hist. MSS. 
Comm. Marq. of Salisbury's MSS. iii. 253, 414. 

* Camden's Elizabeth in Hist, of England (1706), 587. 



In the debates on the Petition of Right, while approving its 
essential demands, he supported the retention of some discre- 
tionary power by the king in committing to prison. The same 
year he was reconciled to the king and again made a privy 
councillor. On the 29th of August 1621 he had been appointed 
earl marshal, and in 1623 constable of England, in 1630 reviving 
the earl marshal's court. In 1625 he was made lord-lieutenant 
of Sussex and in 1635 of Surrey. He was sent to the Hague in 
1632 on a mission of condolence to the queen of Bohemia on her 
husband's death. In 1634 he was made chief justice in eyre of 
the forests north of the Trent ; he accompanied Charles the same 
year to Scotland on the occasion of his coronation, and in 1636 
undertook an unsuccessful mission to the emperor to procure the 
restitution of the Palatinate to the young elector. In 1638 he 
supported the king's exactions from the vintners, was entrusted 
with the charge of the Border forts, and, supporting alone 
amongst the peers the war against the Scots, was made general 
of the king's forces in the first Bishops' War, though according 
to Clarendon " he had nothing martial about him but his presence 
and looks." He was not employed in the second Bishops' War, 
but in August 1640 was nominated captain-general south of the 
Trent. In April he was appointed lord steward of the royal 
household, and in 1641 as lord high steward presided at the trial 
of Strafford. This closed his public career. He became again 
estranged from the court, and in 1641 he escorted home Marie 
de' Medici, remaining abroad, with the exception of a short visit 
to England in 1642,- for- the rest of his life, and taking up per- 
manent residence at Padua. He contributed a sum of £34,000 
to the king's cause, and suffered severe losses in the war. On 
the 6 th of June 1644 he was created earl of Norfolk. He died at 
Padua, when on the point of returning home, on the 14th of 
September 1646, and was buried at Arundel. 

Lord Arundel was a man of high character, an exemplary 
husband and parent, but reserved and unpopular, and Clarendon 
ridicules his family pride. His claim to fame rests upon his 
patronage of arts and learning and his magnificent collections. 
He employed Hollar, Oughtred, Francis Junius and Inigo Jones; 
included among his friends Sir Robert Cotton, Spelman, Camden, 
Selden and John Evelyn, and his portrait was painted by Rubens 
and Vandyck. He is called the " Father of vertu in England," 
and was admired by a contemporary as the person to whom 
" this angle of the world oweth the first sight of Greek and 
Roman statues." 3 He was the first to form any considerable 
collection of art in Great Britain. His acquisitions, obtained 
while on his travels or through agents, and including inscribed 
marbles, statues, fragments, pictures, gems, coins, books and 
manuscripts, were deposited at Arundel House, and suffered 
considerable damage during the Civil War; and, owing to the 
carelessness and want of appreciation of his successors, nearly 
half of the marbles were destroyed. After his death the treasures 
were dispersed. The marbles and many of the statues were 
given by his grandson, Henry, 6th duke of Norfolk, to the 
university of Oxford in 1667, became known as the Arundel 
(or Oxford) Marbles, and included the famous Parian Chronicle, 
or Marmor Chronicon, a marble slab on which are recorded in 
Greek events in Grecian history from 1582 B.C. to 354 B.C., said 
to have been executed in the island of Paros about 263 B.C. Its 
narration of events differs in some respects from the most trust- 
worthy historical accounts, but its genuineness, challenged by 
some writers, has been strongly supported by Porson and others, 
and is considered fairly established. Other statues were pre- 
sented to the university by Henrietta Louisa, countess of 
Pomfret, in 1755. The cabinets and gems were removed by the 
wife of Henry, 7th duke of Norfolk, in 1685, and after her death 
found their way into the Marlborough collection. The pictures 
and drawings were sold in 1685 and 1691, and Lord Stafford's 
moiety of the collection in 1720. The coins and medals wen, 
bought by Heneage Finch, 2nd earl of Winchelsea, and dispersed 
in 1696; the library, at the instance of John Evelyn, who feared 
its total loss, was given to the Royal Society, and a part, 

3 Peacham in the Compleat Gentleman (1634), p. 107, and Secret 
Hist, of James I. (1811), i. 199. 



ARUNDEL 



709 



consisting of genealogical and heraldic collections, to the College 
of Heralds, the manuscript portion of the Royal Society's moiety 
being transferred to the British Museum in 183 1 and forming the 
present Arundel Collection. The famous bust of Homer reached 
the British Museum after passing through various hands. 

Lord Arundel married in 1606 Lady Alethea, daughter and 
heir of Gilbert Talbot, 7 th earl of Shrewsbury, by whom, besides 
three sons who died young and one daughter, he had John, who 
predeceased him, Henry Frederick, who succeeded him as 3rd 
earl of Arundel and earl of Surrey and of Norfolk, and William, 
Viscount Stafford, executed in 1680. In 1849 the Arundel Society 
for promoting artistic knowledge was founded in his memory. 
Henry Frederick's grandson Thomas, by the reversal (1660) of 
the attainder of 1572, succeeded to the dukedom of Norfolk, in 
which the earldom has since then been merged. 

Authorities. — See the article in the Vict, of Nat. Biography, and 
authorities there collected; D. Lloyd, Memoires (1668), p. 284; 
Sir E. Walker, Historical Discourses (1705), p. 209 (MS. in Harleian, 
6272 f. 152); M. Tierney, History of Arundel (1834), p. 414; Sir 
Thomas Roe's Negotiations (1740: letters relating to his collections), 
334, 444, 495 ; W. Crowne, A True Relation of all the Remarkable 
Places . . . in the Travels of . . . Thomas, Earl of Arundell: 
^./'. 1636 (1637); Die englische Mission des Grafen v. Arundel in 
Numberg (archivalische Zeitschrift: neue Folge, Bd. xi., 1904); 
H. Howard, Memorials of the Howard Family (1834), p. 31 ; H. K. S. 
Causton, The Howard Papers (1862) ; Preface to Catalogue of Arundel 
MSS-, Brit. Museum (1840), &c. For publications relating to the 
Parian Chronicle see Marmora Arundelliana, publ. J. Selden (1628); 
Prideaux's Marmora Oxoniensia (1676); Maittaire's variorum 
edition (1732); Chandler's Marmora Oxoniensia (1763 and 1791), 
G. Roberts; J. Robertson, The Parian Chronicle (1788) ; J. Hewlett, 
A Vindication (1789); R. Porson, "The Parian Chronicle," in 
Tracts, ed. by T. Kidd (1815); Chronicon Parium, ed. by C. F. C. 
Wagner (1832-1833) ; C. Midler's Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum 
(1841), i. 533; F. Jacoby, Das Marmor Parium (1904). 

ARUNDEL, THOMAS (1353-1414), archbishop of Canterbury, 
was the third son of Richard Fitzalan, earl of Arundel and 
Warenne, by his second wife, Eleanor, daughter of Henry 
Plantagenet, earl of Lancaster. His family was an old and 
influential one, and when Thomas entered the church his prefer- 
ment was rapid. In 1373 he became archdeacon of Taunton, 
and in April 1374 was consecrated bishop of Ely. During the 
early years of the reign of King Richard II. he was associated 
with the party led by Thomas, duke of Gloucester, Henry, earl 
of Derby, afterwards King Henry IV., and his own brother 
Richard, earl of Arundel, and in 1386 he was sent with Gloucester 
to Eltham to persuade Richard to return to parliament. This 
mission was successful, and Arundel was made lord chancellor 
in place of Michael de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, and assisted to 
make peace between the king and the supporters of the commis- 
sion of regency. In April 1388 he was made archbishop of York, 
and. when Richard declared himself of age in 1389, he gave up 
the office of chancellor, to which, however, he returned in 1391. 
During his second tenure of this office he removed the courts of 
justice from London to York, but they were soon brought back 
to the metropolis. In September 1396 he was translated from 
York to Canterbury, and again resigned the office of chancellor. 
He began his new rule by a vigorous attempt to assert his rights, 
warned the citizens of London not to withhold tithes, and decided 
appeals from the judgments of his suffragans during a thorough 
visitation of his province. In November 1396 he had officiated 
at the marriage of Richard and Isabella, daughter of Charles V-L, 
king of France, and his fall was the sequel of the king's sudden 
attack upon the lords appellant in 1397. After the arrest of 
Gloucester, Warwick and Arundel, the archbishop was impeached 
by the Commons with the king's consent, although Richard, 
who had not yet revealed his hostility, held out hopes of safety 
to him. He was charged with assisting to procure the commission 
of regency in derogation of the royal authority, and sentence 
of banishment was passed, forty days being given him during 
which to leave the realm. Towards the end of 1397 he started 
for Rome, and Pope Boniface IX., at the urgent request of the 
king, translated him to the see of St Andrews, a step which the 
pope afterwards confessed he repented bitterly. This translation 
virtually deprived Arundel of all authority, as St Andrews did 



not acknowledge Boniface. He then became associated with 
Henry of Lancaster, but did not return to England before 1399, 
and the account which Froissart gives telling how he was sent by 
the Londoners to urge Henry to come and assume the crown is 
thought to refer to his nephew and namesake, Thomas, earl of 
Arundel. Landing with Henry at Ravenspur, he accompanied 
him to the west. He took his place at once as archbishop of 
Canterbury, witnessed the abdication of Richard in the Towel 
of London, led the new king, Henry IV., to his throne in presence 
of the peers, and crowned him on the 13th of October 1399. 

The main work of his later years was the defence of the church, 
and the suppression of heresy. To put down the Lollards, he 
called a meeting of the clergy, pressed on the statute de haeretico 
comburendo , and passed sentence of degradation upon William 
Sawtrey. He resisted the attempt of the parliament of 1404 to 
disendow the church, but failed to induce Henry to pardon 
Archbishop Scrope in 1405. In 1407 he became chancellor for 
the fourth time, and in 1408 summoned a council at Oxford, 
which drew up constitutions against the Lollards. These he 
published in January 1409, and among them was one forbidding 
the translation of the Bible into English without the consent of 
the bishop of the diocese, or of a provincial synod. In 141 1 he 
went on an embassy abroad, and in 141 2 became chancellor 
again, his return to power being accompanied by a change in the 
foreign policy of Henry IV. In 1397 he had sought to vindicate 
his right of visitation over the university of Oxford, but the 
dispute remained unsettled until 141 1 when a bull was issued by 
Pope John XXIII. recalling one issued by Pope Boniface IX., 
which had exempted the university from the archbishop's 
authority. In 1413 he took a leading part in the proceedings 
against Sir John Oldcastle, Lord Cobham, and in the following 
year he died on the 19th of February, and was buried at Canter- 
bury. A legend of a later age tells how, just before his death, 
he was struck dumb for preventing the preaching of the word of 
God. 

The chief authorities are T. Walsingham, Historia Anglicana, ed. 
by H. T. Riley (London, 1 863-1 864); Eulogium hisloriarum sive 
temporis, ed. by F. S. Haydon (London, 1858-1863); the Monk 
of Evesham, Historia vitae et regni Ricardi II., ed. by T. Hearne 
(Oxford, 1729) ; W. F. Hook, Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury, 
vol. iv. (London, 1 860-1 876). 

ARUNDEL, a market town and municipal borough in the 
Chichester parliamentary division of Sussex, England, 58 m. 
S.S.W. from London by the London, Brighton & South Coast 
railway. Pop. (1901) 2739. It is pleasantly situated on the 
slope of a hill above the river Arun, which is navigable for small 
vessels to Littlehampton at the mouth, 6 m. south. From the 
summit of the hill rises Arundel Castle, which guarded the passage 
along the river through the hills. For its connexion with the 
title of earl of Arundel see Arundel, Earldom or. A castle 
existed in the time of King Alfred, and at the time of the Conquest 
it was rebuilt by Roger de Montgomerie, but it was taken from 
his son, who rebelled against the reigning monarch, Henry I. 
In 1397 it was the scene of a conspiracy organized by the earl 
of Arundel, archbishop of Canterbury and duke of Gloucester, 
to dethrone Richard II. and murder the lords of his council, a 
plot which was discovered before it could be carried into execu- 
tion. During the civil wars of the 17 th century, the stronghold 
was frequently assaulted by the contending parties, and conse- 
quently greatly damaged; but it was restored by Charles, nth 
duke of Norfolk (d. 1815), who made it what it now is, one of 
the most splendid baronial mansions in England. Extensive 
reconstruction, in the style of the 13 th century, was undertaken 
towards the close of the 19th century. The town, according 
to the whimsical etymology shown on the corporation seal, takes 
its name from hirondelle (a swallow). The town hall is a castel- 
lated building, presented to the corporation by the duke of 
Norfolk. The church of St Nicholas, founded about 1375, is 
Perpendicular with a low tower rising from the centre. In the 
north aisle of the chancel there are several ancient monuments of 
the earls of Arundel. The church is otherwise remarkable for 
its reredos and iron work. The chancel is the property of the 
duke of Norfolk and is screened from the rest of the building, 



710 



ARUNDELL OF WARDOUR— ARUSIANUS MESSIUS 



although in 1880 this exercise of right by the owner was made 
the subject of an action at law and subsequent appeal. The 
Roman Catholic church of St Philip Neri was built by the duke 
of Norfolk (1873). Some remains of a Maison Dieu, or hospital, 
erected in the time of Richard II., still exist. The borough is 
under a mayor, 4 aldermen and 1 2 councillors. Area, 2053 acres. 
The first mention of Arundel (Harundell) comes as early as 877, 
when it was left by King Alfred in his will to his nephew JEthelm. 
In the time of Edward the Confessor the town seems to have con- 
sisted of the mill and a fortification or earthwork which was probably 
thrown up by Alfred as a defence against the Danes; but it had 
increased in importance before the Conquest, and appears in Domes- 
day as a thriving borough and port. It was granted by the Conqueror 
to Roger de Montgomery, who built the castle on the site of the 
ancient earthwork. From very early timas markets were held 
within the borough on Thursday and Saturday, and in 1285 Richard 
Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, obtained a grant of two annual fairs on 
the 14th of May and the 17th of December. The borough returned 
two members to parliament from 1302 to 1832 when the Reform 
Act reduced the membership to one; in 1868 it was disfranchised 
altogether. There are no early charters extant, but in 1586 Elizabeth 
acknowledged the right of the mayor and burgesses to be a body 
corporate and to hold a court for pleas under forty shillings, two 
weekly markets and four annual fairs — which rights they claimed 
to have exercised from time immemorial. James II. confirmed in 
1688 a charter given two years before, and incorporated the borough 
under the title of a mayor, 4 aldermen and 12 burgesses. The 
town was half destroyed by fire in 1338, but was soon rebuilt. 
Arundel was formerly a thriving seaport, and in 1813 was connected 
by canal with London. 

See M. A. Tierney, The History and Antiquities of the Castle and 
Town of Arundel (London, 1834); Victoria County History — Sussex. 
ARUNDELL OF WARDOUR, THOMAS ARUNDELL, ist 
Baron (c. 1562-1639), son of Sir Mathew Arundell of Wardour 
Castle in Wiltshire, a member of the ancient family of Arundells 
of Lanherne in Cornwall, and of Margaret, daughter of Sir Henry 
Willoughby, was born about 1562. In 1579 he was personally 
recommended by Queen Elizabeth to the emperor Rudolph II. 
He greatly distinguished himself while serving with the imperial 
troops against the Turks in Hungary, and at the siege of Gran or 
Esztergom on the 13th of August 159s, he captured the enemy's 
banner with his own hand. He was created by Rudolph II. a 
count of the Holy Roman Empire in December 1 595, and returned 
to England after suffering shipwreck and barely preserving his 
life in January 1596. His assumption of the foreign title created 
great jealousy among the English peers, who were wont to give a 
precedence by courtesy to foreign nobles, and he incurred the 
resentment of his father, who objected to his superior rank and 
promptly disinherited him. The queen, moreover, was seriously 
displeased, declared that " as chaste wives should have no glances 
but for their own spouses, so should faithful subjects keep their 
eyes at home and not gaze upon foreign crowns," and committed 
him to the Fleet immediately on his arrival, while she addressed 
a long letter of remonstrance on the subject to the emperor. 
Arundell remained under arrest till April, when he was liberated 
after an examination. In April 1597, however, he was again 
confined, but declared innocent of any charge save that of 
" practising to contrive the justification of his vain title with 
Ministers beyond the seas." In December he was liberated and 
placed under the care of his father, but next year he was again 
arrested and accused of a conspiracy against the government. 
His petitions for a licence to undertake an expedition by sea, 
wherein he declared " his end was honour which some base 
minds call ambition," were refused, but in 1 599 he was apparently 
again restored to favour. On the 4th of May 1605 he was 
created by James I. Baron Arundell of Wardour, but fell again 
under temporary suspicion at the time of the Gunpowder Plot. 
[n 1623 he once more got into trouble by championing the cause 
of the recusants, of whom he was himself one, on the occasion of 
the visit of the Spanish envoys, and he was committed to custody, 
and in 1625 all the arms were removed by the government from 
' Wardour Castle. After the accession of Charles I. he was 
pardoned, and attended the sittings of the House of Lords. He 
was indicted in the king's bench about the year 1627 for not 
paying some contribution, and in 1632 he was accused of har- 
bouring a priest. In 1637 he was declared exempt from the 
recusancy laws by the king's order, but in 1639 he again 



petitioned for relief. The same year he paid £500 in lieu of 
attending the king at York. He died on the 7 th of November 
1639. Arundell was an earnest Roman Catholic, but the sus- 
picions of the government as to his loyalty were probably un- 
founded and stifled a career destined by nature for successful 
adventure. He married (1) Mary, daughter of Henry Wriothesley, 
2nd earl of Southampton, by whom besides other children 
he had Thomas, who succeeded him as 2nd baron; and (2) Anne, 
daughter of Miles Philipson, by whom he had several daughters. 
Henry Arundell, 3rd Baron Arundell of Wardour (c. 1607- 
1694), son of Thomas, 2nd baron, and of Blanche, daughter of 
Edward, earl of Worcester, was born on the 21st of July 1607, 
and succeeded on his father's death in 1643 to the family title 
and estates. A strong royalist and Roman Catholic, he supported 
the king's cause, and distinguished himself in 1644 by the re- 
capture of his castle at Wardour from the parliamentarians, who 
had taken it in the previous year in spite of his mother's brave 
defence of the place. In 1648 he was one of the delinquents 
exempted from pardon in the proposals sent to Charles in the 
Isle of Wight. His estates had been confiscated, but he was 
permitted about 1653 to compound for them in the sum of 
£35,000. In 1652, in consequence of his being second at a duel 
in which one of the combatants was killed, he was arrested, and 
tried in 1653; he pleaded his peerage, but the privilege was 
disallowed as the House of Lords had been abolished. At the 
Restoration he regained possession of the family estates, and in 
1663 was made master of the horse to Henrietta Maria. He was 
one of the few admitted to the king's confidence concerning the 
projects for the restoration of the Roman Catholic religion and 
the alliance with France. In 1669 he took part in the secret 
council assembled by Charles II., and in October was sent to 
France, ostensibly for the funeral of Henrietta Maria, but in 
reality to negotiate with Louis XIV. the agreement which took 
shape in 1670 in the treaties of Dover (see Charles II.). In 
1676 he was privy to James's negotiations with Rome through 
Coleman. He was accused in 1678 by Titus Oates of participa- 
tion in the popish plot, and was one of the five Roman Catholic 
•peers arrested and imprisoned in the Tower in October, found 
guilty by the Middlesex grand jury of high treason, and 
impeached subsequently by the parliament. Lord Stafford was 
found guilty and executed in December 1680, but after the 
perpetration of this injustice the proceedings were interrupted, 
and the three surviving peers were released on bail on the 12 th 
of February 1684. On the 22nd of May 1685, after James II. 's 
accession, the charge was annulled, and on the ist of June 1685 
they obtained their full liberty. In February 1686, with other 
Roman Catholics, Arundell urged upon the king the removal 
of his mistress, Lady Dorchester, on account of her strong Pro- 
testantism. In spite of his religion he "was made a privy councillor 
in August 1686, and keeper of the privy seal in 1687, being 
excused from taking the oaths by the king's dispensation. He 
presented the thanks of the Roman Catholics to James in June 
1687 for the declaration of indulgence. His public career ended 
with the abdication of the king, and he retired to Breamore, the 
family residence since the destruction of Wardour Castle. He 
died on the 28th of December 1694. He was the author of five 
religious poems said to be composed during his confinement in 
the Tower in 1679, published the same year and reprinted in 
A Collection of Eighty-six Loyal Poems in 1685. His piety and 
benevolence to his unfortunate co-religionists were conspicuous. 
Evelyn calls him " very good company " and he was a noted 
sportsman, the Quorn pack being descended from his pack of 
hounds at Breamore. He married Cecily, daughter of Sir Henry 
Compton, by whom besides other children he had Thomas, who 
succeeded him as 4th baron. 

The barony is still held in the Arundell family, which has 
never ceased to be Roman Catholic. The 14th baron (b. 1859) 
was a direct descendent of the 6th. 

ARUSIANUS MESSIUS, or Messus, Latin grammarian, 
flourished in the 4th century a.d. He was the author of a small 
extant work Exempla Elocutionum, dedicated to Olybrius an& 
Probinus, consuls for the year 395. It contains an alphabetical 



ARVAL BROTHERS— ARYAN 



711 



list, chiefly of verbs admitting more than one construction, with 
examples from each of the four writers, Virgil, Sallust, Terence 
and Cicero. Cassiodorus, the only writer who mentions Arusianus, 
refers to it by the term Quadriga. 

See Keil, Grammatici Latini, vii. ; Suringar, Historia Critica Scholi- 
astarum Latinorum (1834-1835); Van der Hoeven, Specimen 
Literarium (1845). 

ARVAL BROTHERS (Fratres Arvales) , in Roman antiquities, 
a college or priesthood, consisting of twelve members, elected 
for life from the highest ranks in Rome, and always apparently, 
during the empire, including the emperor. Their chief duty was 
to offer annually public sacrifice for the fertility of the fields 
(Varro, L. L. v. 85). It is generally held that the college was 
founded by Romulus (see Acca Larentia). This legend probably 
arose from the connexion of Acca Larentia, as mater Larum, 
with the Lares who had a part in the religious ceremonies of the 
Arvales. But apart from this, there is proof of the high antiquity 
of the college, which was said to have been older than Rome itself, 
in the verbal forms of the song with which, down to late times, 
a part of the ceremonies was accompanied, and which is still 
preserved. It is clear also that, while the members were them- 
selves always persons of distinction, the duties of their office were 
held in high respect. And yet it is singular that no mention of 
them occurs in Cicero or Livy, and that altogether literary 
allusions to them are very scarce. On the other hand, we possess 
a long series of the acta or minutes of their proceedings, drawn 
up by themselves, and inscribed on stone. Excavations, com- 
menced in the 16th century and continued to the 19th, in the 
grove of the Dea Dia about 5 m. from Rome, have yielded 96 of 
these records from a.d. 14 to 241. The brotherhood appears 
to have languished in obscurity during the republic, and 
to have been revived by Augustus. In his time the college 
consisted of a master {magister), a vice-master {promagister), 
a flamen, and a praetor, with eight ordinary members, attended 
by various servants, and in particular by four chorus boys, sons 
of senators, having both parents alive. Each wore a wreath of 
corn, a white fillet and the praetexta. The election of members 
was by co-optation on the motion of the president, who, with a 
flamen, was himself elected for one year. The great annual 
festival which they had to conduct was held in honour of the 
anonymous Dea Dia, who was probably identical with Ceres. 
It occupied three days in May. The ceremony of the first day 
took place in Rome itself, in the house of the magister or his 
deputy, or on the Palatine in the temple of the emperors, where 
at sunrise fruits and incense were offered to the goddess. A 
sumptuous banquet took place, followed by a distribution of 
doles and garlands. On the second and principal day of the 
festival the ceremonies were conducted in the grove of the Dea 
Dia. They included a dance in the temple of the goddess, at 
which the song of the brotherhood was sung, in language so 
antiquated that it was hardly intelligible (see the text and 
translation in Mommsen, Hist, of Rome, bk. i. ch. xv.) even to 
Romans of the time of Augustus, who regarded it as the oldest 
existing document in their mother-tongue. Especial mention 
should be made of the ceremony of purifying the grove, which 
was held to be defiled by the felling of trees, the breaking of a 
bough or the presence of any iron tools, such as those used by 
the lapidary who engraved the records of the proceedings on 
stone. The song and dance were followed by the election of 
officers for the next year, a banquet and races. On the third day 
the sacrifice took place in Rome, and was of the same nature as 
that offered on the first day. The Arvales also offered sacrifice 
and solemn vows on behalf of the imperial family on the 3rd of 
January and on other extraordinary occasions. The brotherhood 
is said to have lasted till the time of Theodosius. The British 
Museum contains a bust of Marcus Aurelius in the dress of a 
Frater Arvalis. 

Marini, Atti e Monumenti de' Fratri Arvali (1795); Hoffmann, 
Die A: (185%); Oldenberg, De Sacris Fratrum A. (1875); Bergk, 
Das Lied d^r Arvalbruder (1856) ; Breal, " Le Chant des Arvals " in 
Mem. de la Soc. de Linguistique (1881); Edon, Nouvelle £lude sur 
le Chant Lemural (1884); Corpus Inscription-urn Latinarum, vi. 
2023-2119; Henzen, Acta Fratrum Arvalium (1874). 



ARVALS, Arvels or Arthels (0. Norse Arjr, inheritance, 
and 61, A.S. Ale, a banquet), primarily the funeral dinner, and 
later, especially in the north of England, a thin, light, sweet cake, 
spiced with cinnamon and nutmeg, served to the poor at such 
feasts. The funeral meal was called the Arvel-dinner. The 
custom seems to have been to hold on such occasions an informal 
inquest, when the corpse was publicly exposed, to exculpate the 
heir and those entitled to the property of the dead from all 
accusations of foul play. 

ARVERNI, the name of an ancient Gaulish tribe in the 
Auvergne, which still bears its name. It resisted Caesar longer 
than most of Gaul; when once vanquished it adopted Roman 
civilization readily. Its tribal deity, the god of the mountain, 
the Puy de Dome, rechristened in Roman phrase Mercurius 
Dumias, was famous far beyond its territory. Part of his temple 
has been excavated recently. 

ARYAN, a term which has been used in a confusing variety 
of significations by different philologists. By Max Miiller 
especially it was employed as a convenient short term for the 
whole body of languages more commonly known as Indo- 
European (q.v.) or Indo-Germanic. In the same way Max Miiller 
used Aryas as a general term for the speakers of such languages, 
as in his book published in 1888, Biographies of Words and the 
Home of the Aryas. " Aryas are those who speak Aryan lan- 
guages, whatever their colour, whatever their blood. In calling 
them Aryas we predicate nothing of them except that the 
grammar of their language is Aryan " (p. 245). It is to be 
observed, therefore, that Max Miiller is careful to avoid any 
ethnological signification. The Aryas are those who speak 
Aryan without regard to the question whether Aryan is their 
hereditary language or not. As he says still more definitely 
elsewhere in the same work (p. 120), " I have declared again and 
again that if I say Aryas, I mean neither blood nor bones, nor 
hair nor skull; I mean simply those who speak an Aryan 
language. The same applies to Hindus, Greeks, Romans 
Germans, Celts and Slaves. When I speak of them I commit 
myself to no anatomical characteristics. The blue-eyed and 
fair-haired Scandinavians may have been conquerors or con- 
quered, they may have adopted the language of their darker 
lords or their subjects, or vice versa. I assert nothing beyond 
their language when I call them Hindus, Greeks, Romans, 
Germans, Celts and Slaves; and in that sense, and in that sense 
only, do I say that even the blackest Hindus represent an earlier 
stage of Aryan speech and thought than the fairest Scandinavians 
... To me an ethnologist who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan 
blood, Aryan eyes and hair, is as great a sinner as a linguist 
who speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a brachycephalic 
grammar." 

From the popularity of Max Miiller's works on comparative 
philology this is the use of the word which is most familiar to 
the general public. The arguments in support of this use are 
set forth by him in the latter part of lecture vi. of the Lectures 
on the Science of Language (first series) and as an appendix to 
chap. vii. of the final edition (i. pp. 291 ff.). The Sanskrit usage 
of the word is fully illustrated by him from the early Sanskrit 
writings in the article " Aryan " in the ninth edition of this 
encyclopaedia. From the earliest occurrences of the word it is 
clear that it was used as a national name not only in India but 
also in Bactria and Persia (in Sanskrit drya- and arya-, in Zend 
airy a-, in Old Persian ariya-). That it is in any way connected 
with a Sanskrit word for earth, ira, as Max Miiller asserts, is far 
from certain. As Spiegel remarks {Die arische Periode, p. 105), 
though it is easy enough to connect the word with a root ar-, 
there are several roots of that form which have different meanings, 
and there is no certain criterion whereby to decide to which of 
them it is related. Nor are the other connexions for the word 
outside this group free from doubt. It is, however, certain that 
the .connexion with Erin (Ireland), which Pictet in his article 
" Iren and Arier " (Kuhn and Schleicher's Beitrdge, i. 1858, 
pp. 81 ff.) sought to establish, is impossible (Whitley Stokes in 
Max Miiller's Lectures, 1891, i. pp. 299 f.), though the word may 
have the same origin as the Ario- of names like Ariovistus, 



712 

which is found in both Celtic and Germanic words (Uhlenbeck, 
Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Worterbuch der altindischen Sprache, 
6.v.). The name of Armenia (Old Persian Armina-), which has 
often been connected, is of uncertain origin. Within Sanskrit 
itself probably two words have to be distinguished: (i) dry a, 
the origin of Aryan, from which the usual term arya is a deriva- 
tive; (2) aryd, which frequently appears in the Rig Veda as an 
epithet of deities. In many passages, however, ary&s may 
equally well be the genitive of ari, which is explained as " active, 
devoted, pious." Even in this word probably two originally 
separate words have to be distinguished, for the further mean- 
ings which Grassmann in his dictionary to the Rig Veda attaches 
to it, viz. " greedy " (for treasure and for battle), " godless," 
" enemy," seem more appropriately to be derived from the same 
source as the Greek Ipi-s, " strife." The word Arya- is not 
found as a national name in the Rig Veda, but appears in the 
Vajasaneyi-sainhita, where it is explained by Mahldhara as 
VaiSya-, a cultivator or a man of the third among the original 
four classes of the population. So in the Atharva Veda (iv. 20. 4; 
xix. 62. 1) it is contrasted with the Sudra or fourth class (Spiegel, 
Arische Periode, p. 102). In the Avesta, airya- is found both as 
adjective and substantive in the sense of Aryan, but no light is 
thrown upon the history of the word. Darius describes himself 
in an inscription as of Aryan stock, Ddraya h va K us ariyaHid r a h . 
In the Avesta the derivative airy ana- is also found in the sense 
of Aryan. In both India and Persia a word is found (Skt. 
aryatnan- ; Zend airydman-) which is apparently of the same origin. 
In both Sanskrit and Zend it means something like " comrade " 
or " bosom friend," but in Zend is used of the priestly or highest 
class. In Sanskrit, besides this use in which it is contrasted 
with the Ddsa or Ddsyu, the enemies, the earlier inhabitants, the 
word is often used for the bridegroom's spokesman, and in both 
languages is also employed as the name of a divine being. In the 
Rig Veda, Aryaman- as a deity is most frequently coupled with 
Mitra and Varuna (Grassmann, Worterbuch, s.v.); in Zend, 
according to Bartholomae (Altiranisches Worterbuch, s.v.), from 
the earliest literature, the Gathas, there is nothing definite to be 
learnt regarding Airyaman. 

Whatever the origin of arya-, however, it is clear that it is a 
word with dignified associations, by which the peoples belonging 
to the Eastern section of the Indo-Europeans were proud to call 
themselves. It is now used uniformly by scholars to indicate 
the Eastern branch as a whole, a compound, Indo-Aryan, being 
employed for that part of the Eastern branch which settled in 
India to distinguish them from the Iranians (Iran is of the same 
origin), who remained in Bactria and Persia, while Aryo-Indian 
is sometimes employed to distinguish the Indian people of this 
stock from the Dravidian and other stocks which also inhabit 
parts of the Indian peninsula. Of the stages in the occupation 
of the Iranian table-land by the Aryan people nothing is known, 
the people themselves having apparently no tradition of a time 
when they did not hold these territories (Spiegel, Arische Periode, 
p. 319). Though the Hindus have no tradition of their invasion 
of India, it is certain that they are not an indigenous people, 
and, if they are not, it is clear that they could have come in no 
other direction save from the other side of the Hindu Kusb. At 
the period of their earliest literature, which may be assigned 
roughly to about 1000 B.C., they were still settled in the valley 
of the Indus, and at this time the separation probably had not 
long taken place, the Eastern portion of the stock having pushed 
their way along the Kabul valley into the open country of the 
Indus. According to ProfeS§sffi t E. W. Hopkins {India Old and 
New, 1 001, p. 31) the Rig FSfowas composed in the district 
about Umballa. He argues that the people must have been then 
to the west of the great rivers, otherwise the dawn could not be 
addressed as one who " in shining light, before the wind arises, 
comes gleaming over the waters, making good paths." The 
vocabulary is still largely the same; whole sentences can be 
transliterated from one language to the other merely by making 
regular phonetic changes and without the variation of a single 
word (for examples see Bartholomae, Handbuch der alliranischen 
Dialekte, 1883, p. v.; Williams Jackson, Avesta Grammar, 1892, 



ARYA samaj 



pp. xxxi. f.; Grundriss der iranischen Philologie, 1895, i. p. 1). 
It is noteworthy that it is those who remain behind whose 
language has undergone most change. 

By four well-marked characteristics the Aryan group is easily 
distinguishable from the other Indo-European languages. (1) 
By the confusion of original e and 0, both long and short, with 
the original long and short a sound; (2) the short schwa-sound a 
is represented here, and in this group only, by i (pita, " father," 
as compared with irarfip, &c.) ; (3) original 5 after i, u and some 
consonants becomes s; (4) the genitive plural of stems ending 
in a vowel has a suffix-waw borrowed by analogy from the stems 
ending in -n (Skt. dsvdndm, "of horses"; Zend aspdndm; 
Old Persian aspdndm). The distinctions between Sanskrit and 
Iranian are also clear. (1) The Aryan voiced aspirates gh, dh, bh, 
which survive in Sanskrit, are confused in Iranian with original 
g, d, b, and further changes take place in the language of the 
later parts of the Avesta; (2) the Aryan breathed aspirates 
kh, th, ph, except in combination with certain consonants, 
become spirants in Iranian; (3) Aryan 5 becomes h initially 
before vowels in Iranian and also in certain cases medially, 
Iranian in these respects resembling Greek (cf. Skt. saptd; 
Zend hapta; Gr. exrd, " seven '*); (4) in Zend there are many 
vowel changes which it does not share with Old Persian. Some 
of these arise from the umlaut or epenthesis which is so prevalent, 
and which we have already seen in airya- as compared with the 
Skt. drya. In other respects the languages are remarkably alike, 
the only striking difference being in the numeral " one " — Skt. 
eka-; Zend aeva-; Old Persian aiva-, where the Iranian group 
has the same stem as that seen in the Greek 6t(F)o-s, " alone." 

For the subdivisions of the two groups see the articles on 
Persia: Language, and Indo-Aryan Languages. Dr Grierson 
has shown in his monograph on " The Pisaca Languages of 
North- Western India " (Royal Asiatic Society, 1906) that there 
is good reason for regarding various dialects of the north-western 
frontier (Kafiristan, Chitral, Gilgit, Dardistan) as a separate 
group descended from Aryan but independent of either Sanskrit 
or Iranian. 

The history of the separation of the Aryan from the other 
Indo-European languages is not yet clear (see Indo-European 
Languages). Various attempts have been made, with little 
success, to identify fragments of unknown languages in cuneiform 
inscriptions with members of this group. The investigation has 
entered a new and more favourable stage as the result of the 
discoveries made by German excavators at Boghaz Keui (said 
to be identical with Herodotus' Pteria in Cappadocia), where 
treaties between the king of the Hittites and the king of Mitanni, 
in the beginning of the 14th century B.C., seem almost certainly 
to contain the names of the gods Mitra, Varuna and Indra, 
which belong to the early Aryan mythology (H. Winckler, 
Mitteilungen der deutschen Orientgesellschaft, No. 35; E. Meyer, 
Sitzungsberichte der Berliner Akademie, 1908, pp. 14 ff.; Zeitschrift 
fur vergleichende Sprachforschung, 42, 1908, pp. 24 ff.). Still 
further light is to be expected when the vast collections of the 
German expedition to Turfan (Turkestan) have been sifted. Up 
to 1909 only a preliminary account had been given of Tocharish, 
a hitherto unknown Indo-European language, which is reported 
to be in some respects more akin to the Western groups than to 
Aryan. But further investigation is still required (see E. Sieg 
and W. Siegling, " Tocharisch, die Sprache der Indoskythen," in 
Sitzungsberichte der Berl. Akad. (July 1908, pp. 915 ff.). (P. Gi.) 

ARYA SAMAJ, a Hindu religious association with reforming 
tendencies, which was founded by a Guzerati Brahman named 
Dayanand Saraswati. This man was born of a Saivite family 
about 1825, but in early manhood grew dissatisfied with idol- 
worship. He undertook many pilgrimages and studied the Vedic 
philosophy in the hope of solving the old problem of the Buddha, 
— how to alleviate human misery and attain final liberation. 
About 1866, when he had begun to teach and to gather disciples, 
he first saw the Christian scriptures, which he vehemently 
assailed, and the Rig Veda, which he correspondingly exalted, 
though in the conception which he ultimately formed of God the 
former was much more influential than the latter. Dayanand's 



ARYTENOID— ASAFETIDA 



7*3 



treatment of the Vedas was peculiar, and consisted of 
reading into them his own beliefs and modern scientific dis- 
coveries. Thus he explains the Yajna (sacrificial cult) as " the 
entertainment of the learned in proportion to their worth, the 
business of manufacture, the experiment and application of 
chemistry, physics and the arts of peace; the instruction of the 
people, the purification of the air, the nourishment of vegetables 
by the employment of the principles of meteorology, called 
Agni-Notri in Sanskrit." He denied that the Vedas warranted 
the caste system, but wished to retain the four grades as orders 
of learning to which admission should be won by examination. 

These views naturally met with scanty acceptance among the 
Brahmans to whom he introduced them, and Dayanand turned 
to the masses and established Samajes in various parts of India, 
the first being at Bombay in 1875. He chose the epithet Arya 
as being more dignified than the slightly contemptuous term 
Hindu. After a successful series of tours, during which he 
debated publicly with orthodox pundits and with Christian 
missionaries, he died at Ajmere in 1883. 

The Arya Samaj is not an eclectic system like the Brahma 
Samaj, which strives to find the common basis underlying all 
the great religions, and its narrower scope and corresponding 
intensity of conviction have won it a greater strength. It 
seemed to meet the feeling of many educated natives whose faith 
in current Hinduism was undermined, but who were predisposed 
against any foreign religious influence. Their patriotic ardour 
gladly seized on "a view of the original faith of India that 
seemed to harmonize with all the discoveries of modern science 
and the ethics of European civilization," and they cheerfully 
supported their leader's strange polemic with the agnostic and 
rationalist literature of Europe. By 1890 their numbers had 
increased to 40,000, by 1900 to over 92,000. Divisions had, 
however, set in, especially a cleavage into the Ghasi or vegetarian, 
and the Mansi or flesh-eating sections. To the latter belong 
those Rajputs who though generally in sympathy with the 
movement declined to adhere to the tenet of the Samaj which 
forbade the destruction of animal life and the consumption of 
animal food. The age of admission to the Samaj is eighteen, 
and members are expected to contribute to its funds at least 
1 % of their income. 

The ten articles of their creed may be summarized thus: — 

1. The source of all true knowledge is God. 

2. God is " all truth, all knowledge, all bliss, boundless, almighty, 

just, merciful, unbegotten, without a beginning, incompar- 
able, the support and Lord of all, all-pervading, omniscient, 
imperishable, immortal, eternal, holy, and the cause of the 
universe; worship is due to him alone. 

3. The medium of true knowledge is the Vedas. 

4. and 5. The truth is to be accepted and to become the guiding 

principle. 

6. The object of the Samaj is to benefit the world by improving 

its physical, social, intellectual and moral conditions. 

7. Love and justice are the right guides of conduct. 

8. Knowledge must be spread. 

9. The good of others must be sought. 

10. In general interests members must subordinate themselves to 
the good of others; in personal interests they should retain 
independence. 

The sixth clause comprehends a wide programme of reform, 
including abstinence from spirituous liquors and animal food, 
physical cleanliness and exercise, marriage reform, the promotion 
of female education, the abolition of caste and of idolatry. 

ARYTENOID (or arytaenoid; from Gr. apircuva, a funnel or 
pitcher), a term, meaning funnel-shaped, applied to cartilages 
such as those of the larynx. 

ARZAMAS, a town of Russia, in the government of, and 76 m. 
by rail S. of the town of, Nizhniy-Novgorod, on the Tesha river, 
at its junction with the Arsha. It is an important centre of 
trade, and has tanneries, oil, flour, tallow, dye, soap and iron 
works; knitting is an important domestic industry. Sheep- 
skins and sail-cloth are articles of trade. The town has several 
churches. Pop. (1897) 10,591. 

AS, the Roman unit of weight and measure, divided into 
12 unciae (whence both " ounce " and " inch ") ; its fractions 
being deunx f£, dextans $, dodrans }, bes J, septunx A, 



semis %, quincunx^, triens J, quadrans 5, sextans 5, sescunciaf, 
uncia tV- As really denoted any integer or whole; whence the 
English word " ace." The unit or as of weight was the libra 
(pound: = about nf oz. avoirdupois); of length, pes (foot: 
= about 1 if in.); of surface, jugerum ( = about f acre); of 
measure, liquid amphora (about sf gal.)., dry tnodius (about 
1% peck). In the same way as signified a whole inheritance; 
whence heres ex asse, the heir to the whole estate, heres ex semisse, 
heir to half the estate. It was also used in the calculation of 
rates of interest. 

As was also the name of a Roman coin, which was of different 
weight and value at different periods (see Numismatics, 
§ Roman). The first introduction of coined money is ascribed to 
Servius Tullius. The old as was composed of the mixed metal 
aes, an alloy of copper, tin and lead, and was called as libralis, 
because it nominally weighed 1 lb or 12 ounces (actually 10). 
Its original shape seems to have been an irregular oblong bar, 
which was stamped with the figure of a sheep, ox or sow. This, 
as well as the word pecunia for money (pecus, cattle), indicates 
the fact of cattle having been the earliest Italian medium of 
exchange. The value was indicated by little points or globules, 
or other marks. After the round shape was introduced, the one 
side was always inscribed with the figure of a ship's prow, and 
the other with the double head of Janus. The subdivisions of 
the as had also the ship's prow on one side, and on the other the 
head of some deity. The First Punic War having exhausted 
the treasury, the as was reduced to 2 oz. In the Second Punic 
War it was again reduced to half this weight, viz. to 1 oz. 
And lastly, by the Papirian law (89 B.C.) it was further reduced 
to the diminutive weight of half an ounce. It appears to have 
been still more reduced under Octavian, Lepidus and Antony, 
when its value was J of an ounce. Before silver coinage was 
introduced (269 B.C.) the value of the as was about 6d., in the 
time of Cicero less than a halfpenny. In the time of the emperor 
Severus it was again lowered to about -^ of an ounce. During 
the commonwealth and empire aes grave was used to denote the 
old as in contradistinction to the existing depreciated coin; 
while aes rude was applied to the original oblong coinage of 
primitive times. 

ASA, in the Bible, son (or, perhaps, rather brother) of Abijah, 
the son of Rehoboam and king of Judah (1 Kings xv. 9-24). Of 
his long reign, during which he was a contemporary of Baasha, 
Zimri and Omri of Israel, little is recorded with the exception 
of some religious reforms and conflicts with the first-named. 
Baasha succeeded in fortifying Ramah (er-Rdm), 5 m. north of 
Jerusalem, and Asa was compelled to use the residue of the 
temple-funds (cf. 1 Kings xiv. 26) to bribe the king of Damascus 
to renounce his league with Baasha and attack Israel. Galilee 
was invaded and Baasha was forced to return; the building 
material which he had collected at Ramah being used by Asa to 
fortify Geba, and Mizpah to the immediate north of Jerusalem. 
The Book of Chronicles relates a story of a sensational defeat of 
Zerah the " Cushite," and a great religious revival in which Judah 
and Israel took part (2 Chron. xiv.-xv. 15) (see Chronicles). 
Asa was succeeded by his son Jehoshaphat. 

" Cushite " may designate an Ethiopian or, more probably, 
an Arabian (Cush, the " father " of the Sabaeans, Gen. x. 7). 
" If by Zerah the Ethiopian or Sabaean prince be meant, the 
only real difficulty of the narrative is removed. No king Zerah 
of Ethiopia is known at this period, nor does there seem to be 
room for such a person " (W. E. Barnes, Cambridge Bible, 
Chronicles, p. xxxi.). The identification with Osorkon I. or II. 
is scarcely tenable considering Asa's weakness; but inroads by 
desert hordes frequently troubled Judah, and if the tradition 
be correct in locating the battle at Mareshah it is probable that 
the invaders were in league with the Philistine towns. Similar 
situations recur in the reigns of Ahaz and Jehoram. 

See also Wellhausen, Prolegomena, 208; S. A. Cook, Expositor 
(June 1906), p. 540 sq. (S. A. C.) 

ASAFETIDA (asa, Lat. form of Persian aza = mastic, and 
fetidus, stinking, so called in distinction to asa dulcis, which was 
a drug highly esteemed among the ancients as laser cyrenaicwm, 



7H 



ASAF-UD-DOWLAH— ASBESTOS 



and is supposed to have been a gummy exudation from Thapsis 
garganica), a gum-resin obtained principally from the root of 
Ferula fetida, and probably also from one or two other closely 
allied species of umbelliferous plants. It is produced in eastern 
Persia and Afghanistan, Herat and Kandahar being centres of 
the trade. Ferula fetida grows to a height of from 5 to 6 ft., and 
when the plant has attained the age of four years it is ready for 
yielding asafetida. The stems are cut down close to the root, 
and the juice flows out, at first of a milky appearance, but quickly 
setting into a solid resinous mass. Fresh incisions are made as 
long as the sap continues to flow, a period which varies according 
to the size and strength of the plant. A freshly-exposed surface 
of asafetida has a translucent, pearly- white appearance, but it 
soon darkens in the air, becoming first pink and finally reddish- 
brown. In taste it is acrid and bitter; but what peculiarly 
characterizes it is the strong alliaceous odour it emits, from 
which it has obtained the name asafetida, as well as its German 
name Teufelsdreck (devil's dung) . Its odour is due to the presence 
of organic sulphur compounds. Asafetida is found in commerce 
in " lump " or in " tear," the latter being the purer form. 
Medicinally, asafetida is given in doses of 5 to 15 grains and acts 
as a stimulant to the intestinal and respiratory tracts and to 
the nervous system. An enema containing it is useful in relieving 
flatus. It is sometimes useful in hysteria, which is essentially 
a lack of inhibitory power, as its nasty properties induce sufficient 
inhibitory power to render its readministration superfluous. 
It may also be used in an effervescing draught in cases of 
malingering, the drug " repeating " in the mouth and making 
the malingering not worth while. The gum-resin is relished as a 
condiment in India and Persia, and is in demand in France for 
use in cookery. In the regions of its growth the whole plant is 
used as a fresh vegetable, the inner portion of the full-grown stem 
being regarded as a luxury. 

ASAF-UD-DOWLAH, nawab wazir of Oudh from 1775 to 1797, 
was the son of Shuja-ud-Dowlah, his mother and grandmother 
being the begums of Oudh, whose spoliation formed one of the 
chief counts in the charges against Warren Hastings. When 
Shuja-ud-Dowlah died he left two million pounds sterling buried 
in the vaults of the zenana. The widow and mother of the 
deceased prince claimed the whole of this treasure under the 
terms of a will which was never produced. When Warren 
Hastings pressed the nawab for the payment of debt due to the 
Company, he obtained from his mother a loan of 26 lakhs of 
rupees, for which he gave her a jagir of four times the value; 
he subsequently obtained 30 lakhs more in return for a full 
acquittal, and the recognition of her jagirs without interference 
for life by the Company. These jagirs were afterwards con- 
fiscated on the ground of the begum's complicity in the rising 
of Chai Singh, which was attested by documentary evidence. 
The evidence now available seems to show that Warren Hastings 
did his best throughout to rescue the nawab from his own 
incapacity, and was inclined to be lenient to the begums. 

See The Administration of Warren Hastings, 17 j -2-178 '5, by G. W. 
Forrest (1892). 

ASAPH, the eponym of the Asaphite gild of singers, one of the 
hereditary choirs that superintended the musical services of the 
temple at Jerusalem in post-exilic times. The names occur 
in the titles of certain Psalms, and the writer of the Book of 
Chronicles makes Asaph a seer (2 Chron. xxix. 30), contemporary 
with David and Solomon, and chief of the singers of his time. 

ASBESTOS, a fibrous mineral from Gr. aafteo-Tos, unquench- 
able, by transference, incombustible, in allusion to its power of 
resisting the action of fire. The word was applied by Dioscorides 
and other Greek authors to quicklime, but Pliny evidently used 
it in its modern sense. It was occasionally woven by the ancients 
into handkerchiefs, and, it has been said, into shrouds which were 
used in cremation to prevent the ashes of the corpse from 
mingling with the wood-ashes of the pyre. 

In different varieties of asbestos the fibres vary greatly in 
character. When silky and flexible they are sometimes known 
as mountain flax. The finer kinds are often termed amianthus 
(j.tf.). When the fibres are naturally interwoven, so as to form 



a felted mass, the mineral passes under such trivial names as 
mountain leather, mountain cork, mountain paper, &c. The 
asbestos formerly used in the arts was generally a fibrous form 
of some kind of amphibole, like tremolite, or anthophyllite, 
though occasionally perhaps a pyroxene. In recent years, 
however, most of the asbestos in the market is a fibrous variety 
of serpentine, known mineralogically as chrysotile, and probably 
some of the ancient asbestos was of this character (see Amian- 
thus). Both minerals possess similar properties, so far as 
resistance to heat is concerned. The amphibole-asbestos, or 
hornblende-asbestos, is usually white or grey in colour, and may 
present great length of fibre, some of the Italian asbestos reaching 
exceptionally a length of 5 or 6 ft., but it is often harsh and 
brittle. The serpentine-asbestos occurs in narrow veins, yielding 
fibres of only 2 or 3 in. in length, but of great tensile strength: 
they are usually of a delicate silky lustre, very flexible and elastic, 
and of yellowish or greenish colour. 

The Canadian asbestos, which of all kinds is at present the 
most important industrially, occurs in a small belt of serpentine 
in the province of Quebec, principally near Black Lake and 
Thetford, where it was first recognized as commercially valuable 
about 1877. The rock is generally quarried, cobbed by hand, 
dried if necessary, crushed in rock-breakers, and then passed 
between rollers; it is reduced to a finer state of division by 
so-called fiberizers, and graded on a shaking screen, where the 
loosened fibres are sorted. The process varies in different mills. 

In the United States asbestos is worked only to a very limited 
extent. An amphibole-asbestos is obtained from Sail Mountain, 
Georgia; and asbestos has also been worked in the serpentine 
of Vermont. It occurs also in South Carolina, Virginia, Massa- 
chusetts, Arizona and elsewhere. Dr G. P. Merrill has shown 
that some asbestos results from a process of shearing in the rocks. 

Formerly asbestos was obtained almost exclusively from Italy 
and Corsica, and a large quantity is still yielded by Italian 
workings. This is mostly an amphibole. It is in some cases 
associated with nodules of green garnet known as " seeds " — 
Semenze dell' amianto. Asbestos is widely distributed, but only 
in a few localities does it occur in sufficient abundance and purity 
to be worked commercially; it is found, for example, to a limited 
extent, at many localities in Tirol,' Hungary and Russia; 
Queensland, New South^Vales and New Zealand. In the British 
Isles it is not unknown, being found among the old rocks of North 
Wales and in parts of Ireland. Byssolite or asbestoid is a blue 
or green fibrous amphibole from Dauphiny. 

The Asbestos Mountains in Griqualand West, Cape Colony, 
yield a blue fibrous mineral which is worked under the name of 
Cape asbestos. This is referable to the variety of amphibole 
called crocidolite (q.v.). It occurs in veins in slaty rocks, 
associated with jaspers and quartzites rich in magnetite and 
brown iron-ore. Their geological position is in the Griqua Town 
series, belonging to what are known in South Africa as the 
Pre-Cape rocks. 

Asbestos was formerly spun and woven into fabrics as a rare 
curiosity. Charlemagne is said to have possessed a tablecloth 
of this material, which when soiled was purified by being thrown 
into the fire. At a meeting of the Royal Society in 1676 a 
merchant from China exhibited a handkerchief of " salamander's 
wool," or linum asbesti. By the Eskimos of Labrador asbestos 
has been used as a lamp- wick, and it received a similar application 
in some of the sacred lamps of antiquity. In recent times 
asbestos has been applied to a great variety of uses in the 
industrial arts, and its applications are constantly increasing. 
Its economic value depends not only on its power of withstanding 
a high temperature, but also on its low thermal conductivity 
and its partial resistance to the attack of acids: hence it is used 
for jacketing boilers and steam-pipes, and as a filtering medium 
for corrosive liquids. It has also come into use as an electric 
insulator. It is made into yarn, felt, millboard, &c, and is 
largely employed as packing for joints, glands and stopcocks 
in machinery. Fire-proof sheathing and felt are used for floor- 
ing and roofing; fire-proof curtains have been made for the 
stage, and even clothing for firemen. Asbestos enters into the 



ASBJORNSEN— ASBURY PARK 



composition of fire-proof cements, plasters and paints: it is used 
for packing safes; and is made into balls with fire-clay for gas- 
stoves. Various preparations of asbestos with other materials 
pass in trade under such names as uralite, salamandrite, asbes- 
tolith. gypsine, &c. "Asbestic " is the name given to a Canadian 
product formed by crushing the serpentine rock containing thin 
seams of asbestos, and mixing the result with lime so as to form 
a plaster. 

References. — Fritz Cirkel, Asbestos, its Occurrence, Exploitation 
and Uses (Ottawa, 1905) ; J. H. Pratt and J. S. Diller in Annual Reports 
on Mineral Resources, U.S. Geol. Survey; G. P. Merrill, The Non- 
metallic Minerals (New York, 1904); R. H. Jones, Asbestos and 
Asbestic (London, 1897). (F. W. R.*) 

ASBJORNSEN, PETER CHRISTEN (1812-1885), and MOE, 
JORGEN ENGEBRETSEN (1813-1882), collectors of Norwegian 
folklore, so closely united in their life's work that it is unusual 
to name them apart. Asbjornsen was born in Christiania on 
the 15th of January 181 2; he belonged to an ancient family of 
the Gudbrandsdal, which is believed to have died with him. 
He became a student at the university in 18,33, t> ut as early as 
1832, in his twentieth year, he had begun to collect and write 
down all the fairy stories and legends which he could meet with. 
Later he began to wander on foot through the length and breadth 
of Norway, adding to his stores. Moe, who was born at Mo i 
Hole parsonage, in Sigdal Ringerike, on the 22nd of April 1813, 
met Asbjornsen first when he was fourteen years of age. A close 
friendship began between them, and lasted to the end of their 
lives. In 1834 Asbjornsen discovered that Moe had started in- 
dependently on a search for the relics of national folklore; the 
friends eagerly compared results, and determined for the future to 
work in concert. By this time, Asbjornsen had become by pro- 
fession a zoologist, and with the aid of the university made a 
series of investigating voyages along the coasts of Norway, 
particularly in the Hardanger fjord. Moe, meanwhile, having 
left Christiania University in 1839, had devoted himself to the 
study of theology, and was making a living as a tutor in Chris- 
tiania. In his holidays he wandered through the mountains, in 
the most remote districts, collecting stories. In 1842-1843 
appeared the first instalment of the great work of the two friends, 
under the title of Norwegian Popular Stories (Norske Folkeeventyr) , 
which was received at once all over Europe as a most valuable 
contribution to comparative mythology as well as literature. 
A second volume was published in 1844, and a new collection in 
187 1. Many of the Folkeeventyr were translated into English 
by Sir George Dasent in 1859. In 1845 Asbjornsen pub- 
lished, without help from Moe, a collection of Norwegian 
fairy tales (huldreeventyr og folkesagn). In 1856 the attention 
of Asbjornsen was called to the deforestation of Norway, 
and he induced the government to take up this important 
question. He was appointed forest-master, and was sent 
by Norway to examine in various countries of the north of 
Europe the methods observed for the preservation of timber. 
From these duties, in 1876, he withdrew with a pension; he 
died in Christiania on the 6th of January 1885. From 1841 to 
1852 Moe travelled almost every summer through the southern 
parts of Norway, collecting traditions in the mountains. In 
1845 he was appointed professor of theology in the Military 
School of Norway. He had, however, long intended to take holy 
orders, and in 1853 he did so, becoming for ten years a resident 
chaplain in Sigdal, and then (1863) parish priest of Bragernes. 
He was moved in 1870 to the parish of Vestre Aker, near Chris- 
tiania, and in 1875 he was appointed bishop of Christiansand. 
In January 1882 he resigned his diocese on account of failing 
health, and died on the following 27th of March. Moe has a special 
claim on critical attention in regard to his lyrical poems, of which 
a small collection appeared in 1850. He wrote little original 
verse, but in his slender volume are to be found many pieces of 
exquisite delicacy and freshness. Moe also published a delightful 
collection of prose stories for children, In the Well and the Churn 
(/ Bronde og i Kjarnet), 1851; and A Little Christmas Present 
(En liden Julegave), i860. Asbjornsen and Moe had the advan- 
tage of an admirable style in narrative prose. It was usually 
said that the vigour came from Asbjornsen and the charm from 



7*5 

Moe, but the fact seems to be that from the long habit of writing 
in unison they had come to adopt almost precisely identical modes 
of literary expression. (E. G.) 

ASBURY, FRANCIS (1745-1816), American clergyman, was 
born at Hamstead Bridge in the parish of Handsworth, near 
Birmingham, in Staffordshire, England, on the 20th of August 
1 745. His parents were poor, and after a brief period of study in 
the village school of Barre, he was apprenticed at the age of 
fourteen to a maker of " buckle chapes," or tongues. It seems 
probable that his parents were among the early converts of 
Wesley; at any rate, Francis became converted to Methodism 
in his thirteenth year, and at sixteen became a local preacher. 
He was a simple, fluent speaker, and was so successful that in 
1767 he was enrolled, by John Wesley himself, as a regular 
itinerant minister. In 1771 he volunteered for missionary work 
in the American colonies. When he landed in Philadelphia in 
October 1771, the converts to Methodism, which had been intro- 
duced into the colonies only three years before, numbered 
scarcely 300. Asbury infused new life into the movement, and 
within a year the membership of the several congregations was 
more than doubled. In 1772 he was appointed by Wesley 
" general assistant " in charge of the work in America, and 
although superseded by an older preacher, Thomas Rankin 
(1738-1810), in 1773, he remained practically in control. After 
the outbreak of the War of Independence, the Methodists, who 
then numbered several thousands, fell, unjustly, under suspicion 
of Loyalism, principally because of their refusal to take the pre- 
scribed oath; and many of their ministers, including Rankin, 
returned to England. Asbury, however, feeling his sympathies 
and duties to be with the colonies, remained at his post, and 
although often threatened, and once arrested, continued his 
itinerant preaching. The hostility of the Maryland authorities, 
however, eventually drove him into exile in Delaware, where he 
remained quietly, but not in idleness, for two years. In 1782 
he was reappointed to supervise the affairs of the Methodist 
congregations in America. In 1784 John Wesley, in disregard 
of the authority of the Established Church, took the radical step 
of appointing the Rev. Thomas Coke (1 747-1814) and Francis 
Asbury superintendents or " bishops " of the church in the United 
States. Dr Coke was ordained at Bristol, England, in September, 
and in the following December, in a conference of the churches 
in America at Baltimore, he ordained and consecrated Asbury, 
who refused to accept the position until Wesley's choice had been 
ratified by the conference. From this conference dates the actual 
beginning of the " Methodist Episcopal Church of the United 
States of America." To the upbuilding of this church Asbury 
gave the rest of his life, working .with tireless devotion and 
wonderful energy. In 1785, at Abingdon, Maryland, he laid the 
corner-stone of Cokesbury College, the project of Dr Coke and 
the first Methodist Episcopal college in America; the college 
building was burned in 1795, and the college was then removed 
to Baltimore, wherein 1796, after another fire, it closed, and in 
1816 was succeeded by Asbury College, which lived for about 
fifteen years. Every year Asbury traversed a large area, 
mostly on horseback. The greatest testimony to the work that 
earned for him the title of the " Father of American Methodism " 
was the growth of the denomination from a few scattered bands 
of about 300 converts and 4 preachers in 1771, to a thoroughly 
organized church of 214,000 members and more than 2000 
ministers at his death, which occurred at Spottsylvania, 
Virginia, on the 31st of March 1816. 

His Journals (3 vols., New York, 1852), apart from their import- 
ance as a history of his life work, constitute a valuable commentary 
on the social and industrial history of the United States during the 
first forty years of their existence. Consult also F. W. Briggs, 
Bishop Asbury (London, 1874); W. P. Strickland, The Pioneer 
Bishop; or, The Life and Times of Francis Asbury (NewYork, 
1858); J. B. Wakeley, Heroes of Methodism (New York, 1S56): 
W. C. Larrabee, Asbury and His Co-Laborers (2 vols., Cincinnati, 
1853); H. M. Du Bose, Francis Asbury (Nashville, Tenn., 1909); 
see also under Methodism. 

ASBURY PARK, a city of Monmouth county, New Jersey, 
U.S.A., on the Atlantic Ocean, about 35 m. S. of New York City 
(50 m. by rail). Pop. (1900) 4148; (1905)4526; (1910)10,150. 



716 



ASCALON— ASCENSION 



It is served by the Central of New Jersey and the Pennsylvania 
railways, and by electric railway lines connecting it with other 
New Jersey coast resorts both north and south. Fresh-water 
lakes, one of which, Deal Lake, extends for some distance into 
the wooded country, form the northern and southern boundaries. 
It is one of the most popular seaside resorts on the Atlantic coast, 
its numerous hotels and cottages accommodating a summer 
population that approximates 50,°°°, and a large transient 
population in the autumn and winter months. There is an 
excellent beach, along which extends a board-walk about 1 m. 
long; the beach is owned and controlled by the municipality. 
The municipality owns and operates its water- works, water being 
obtained from artesian wells. Asbury Park was founded in 1869, 
was named in honour of the Rev. Francis Asbury, was incorpor- 
ated as a borough in 1874, and was chartered as a city in 1897. 
In 1906 territory to the west with a population estimated at 
6000 was annexed. 

ASCALON, now "Askalan, one of the five chief cities of 
the Philistines, on the coast of the Mediterranean, 12 m. N. of 
Gaza. The place is mentioned several times in the Tell el- 
Amarna correspondence. It revolted from Egypt on two 
occasions, but was reconquered, and a sculpture at Thebes 
depicts the storming of the city. Ascalon was a well-fortified 
town, and the seat of the worship of the fish-goddess Derketo. 
Though situated in the nominal territory of the tribe of Judah, 
it was never for any length of time in the possession of the 
Israelites. The only incident in its history recorded in the Bible 
(the spoliation by Samson, Judg. xiv. 19) may possibly have 
actually occurred at another place of the same name, in the hill 
country of Judaea. Sennacherib took it in 701 B.C. The 
conquest of Alexander hellenized its civilization, and after his 
time it became tributary alternately to Syria and Egypt. Herod 
the Great was a native of the city, and added greatly to its 
beauty; but it suffered severely in the later wars of the Romans 
and Jews. In the 4th century it again rose to importance; 
and till the 7th century, when it was conquered by the Moslems, 
it was the seat of a bishopric and a centre of learning. During 
the first crusade a signal victory was gained by the Christians in 
the neighbouring plain on the 15th of August 1099; but the city 
remained in the hands of the caliphs till 1157, when it was taken 
by Baldwin III., king of Jerusalem, after a siege of five months. 
By Baldwin IV. it was given to his sister Sibylla, on her marriage 
with William of Montferrat in 11 78. When Saladin (1187) had 
almost annihilated the Christian army in the plain of Tiberias, 
Ascalon offered but a feeble resistance to the victor. At first he 
repaired and strengthened its fortifications, but afterwards, 
alarmed at the capture of* St Jean d'Acre (Acre) by Richard 
Cceur de Lion in 1191, he caused it to be dismantled. It was 
restored in the following year by the English king, but only to 
be again abandoned. From this time Ascalon lost much of its 
importance, and at length, in 1270, its fortifications were almost 
totally destroyed by Sultan Bibars, and its port was filled up 
with stones. The place is now a desolate heap of ruins, with 
remains of its walls and fragments of granite pillars. The 
surrounding country is well watered and very fertile. 

See a paper by Guthe, " Die Ruinen Ascalons," in the Zeitschrift 
of the Deutsche Palastina-Verein, ii. 164 (translated in Palestine 
Exploration Fund Quarterly Statement, 1880, p. 182). See also 
C. R. Conder in the latter journal, 1875, p. 152. (R. A. S. M.) 

ASCANIUS, in Roman legend, the son of Aeneas by Creiisa or 
Lavinia. From Livy it would appear that tradition recognized 
two sons of Aeneas called by this name, the one the son of his 
Trojan, the other of 'his Latin wife. According to the usual 
account, he accompanied his father to Italy on his flight from 
Troy. On the death of Aeneas, the government of Latium was 
left in the hands of Lavinia, Ascanius being too young to under- 
take it. After thirty years he left Lavinium, and founded Alba 
Longa. Ascanius was also called Ilus and lulus, and the 
Julian gens claimed to be descended from him. Several more 
or less contradictory traditions may be found in Dionysius of 
Halicarnassus, Strabo and other writers. 

Virg. Aen. ii. 666; Livy i. 3; see also Klausen. Aeneas und die 
Penaten (1840). 



ASCENSION, an island in the Atlantic Ocean, between 7 53' 
and 8° S., and 14 18' and i4°26' W., 800 m. N.W. of St Helena, 
about i\ m. in length and 6 in breadth, with an area of 38 sq. m. 
and a circumference of about 22 m. The island lies within the 
immediate influence of the south-east trade- wind. The lee side of 
the island is subject to the visitation of " rollers," which break 
on the shore with very great violence. Ascension is a volcanic 
mass erected on a submarine platform. Numerous cones exist. 
Green Mountain, the principal elevation, is a huge elliptical 
crater, rising 2820 ft. above the sea, while the plains or table- 
lands surrounding it vary in height from 1 200 to 2000 ft. On the 
north side they sweep gradually down towards the shore, but 
on the south they terminate in bold and lofty precipices. Steep 
and rugged ravines intersect the plains, opening into small bays 
or coves on the shore, fenced with masses of compact and cellular 
lava; and all over the island are found products of volcanic 
action. Ascension was originally destitute of vegetation save 
on the summit of Green Mountain, which owes its verdure to 
the mists which frequently enshroud it, but the lower hills have 
been planted with grasses and shrubs. The air is clear and light, 
and the climate remarkably healthy, notwithstanding the high 
temperature — the average day temperature on the shore being 
85 F., on Green Mountain 75 F. The average rainfall is about 
20 in., March and April being the rainy months. Ascension is 
noted for the number of turtles and turtle eggs found on its 
shores, the season lasting from December to May or June. The 
turtles are caught and kept in large ponds. The coasts abound 
with a variety of fish of excellent quality, of which the most 
important are the rock-cod, the cavalli, the conger-eel and the 
" soldier." Numbers of sheep are bred on the island, and there 
are a few cattle and deer, besides goats and wild cats. Feathered 
game is abundant. Like St Helena, the island does not possess 
any indigenous vertebrate land fauna. The "wideawake" 
birds frequent the island in large numbers, and their eggs are 
collected and eaten. Beetles and land-shells are well represented . 
Flies, ants, mosquitoes, scorpions, centipedes and crickets abound. 
The flora includes purslane, rock roses and several species of 
ferns and mosses. 

The island was discovered by the Portuguese navigator, Joao 
da Nova, on Ascension Day 1501, and was occasionally visited 
thereafter by ships. In 1701 William Dampier was wrecked on 
its coast, and during his detention discovered the only spring of 
fresh water the island contains. Ascension remained uninhabited 
till after the arrival of Napoleon at St Helena (1815), when it 
w&s taken possession of by the British government, who sent 
a small garrison thither. A settlement, named George Town 
(locally known as Garrison), was made on the north-west coast, 
water being obtained from " Dampier's " springs in the Green 
Mountain, 6 m. distant. The island is under the rule of the 
admiralty, and was likened by Darwin to " a huge ship kept in 
first-rate order." It is governed by a naval captain borne on the 
books of the flagship of the admiral superintendent at Gibraltar. 
A depot of stores for the navy is maintained, but the island is used 
chiefly as a sanatorium. Ascension is connected by cable with 
Europe and Africa, and is visited once a month by mail steamers 
from the Cape. Formerly letters were left by passing ships in a 
crevice in one of the rocks. The population, about 300, consists 
of seamen, marines, and Krumen from Liberia. 

See Africa Pilot, part ii., 5th ed. (London, 1901) ; C. Darwin, 
Geological Observations on the Volcanic Islands visited during the 
Voyage of H. M.S." Beagle" (London, 1844); Report of the Scientific 
Results of the Voyage of the " Challenger," vol. i. part 2 (London, 
1885) ; and Six Months in Ascension, by Mrs Gill (London, 1878), an 
excellent sketch of the island and its inhabitants. It was at Ascen- 
sion that Mr, afterwards Sir, David Gill determined, in 1877, the 
solar parallax. > 

ASCENSION, FEAST OF THE, one of the oecumenical festivals 
of the Christian Church, ranking in solemnity with those of 
Christmas, of Easter and of Pentecost. It is held forty days after 
Easter, or ten days before Whitsunday, in celebration of Christ's 
ascension into heaven forty days after the resurrection. It 
always falls on a Thursday, and the day is known as Ascension 
' Day, or Holy Thursday. The festival is of great antiquity; and 



ASCETICISM 



717 



though there is no discoverable trace of it before the middle of 
the 4th century, subsequent references to it assume its long 
establishment. Thus St Augustine (Ep. 54a.dJa.nuar.) mentions 
it as having been kept from time immemorial and as probably 
instituted by the apostles Chrysostom, in his homily on the 
ascension, mentions a celebration of the festival in the church 
of Romanesia outside Antioch, and Socrates (Hist, eccles. vii. 26) 
records that in the year 390 the people of Constantinople " of 
old custom " (t£ Wovs) celebrated the feast in a suburb of the 
city. As these two references suggest, the festival was associated 
with a professional pilgrimage, in commemoration of the passing 
of Christ and his apostles to the Mount of Olives; such a pro- 
cession is described by Adamnan, abbot of Iona, as taking place 
at Jerusalem in the 7th century, when the feast was celebrated 
in the church on Mount Olivet (de loc. sand. i. 22). The Pere- 
grinaiio of Etheria (Silvia), which dates from c. a.d. 385, says 
that the festival was held in the Church of the Nativity at 
Bethlehem (Duchesne, Chr. Worship, p. 515)- In the West, 
however, in the middle ages, the procession with candles and 
banners outside the church was taken as symbolical of Christ's 
triumphant entry into heaven. 

In the East the festival is known as the ava\ri\f/is, " taking 
up," or iruru^oniyri, a term first used in the Cappadocian 
church, and of which the meaning has been disputed, but which 
probably signifies the feast " of completed salvation." The 
word ascensio, adopted in the West, implies the ascension of 
Christ by his own power, in contradistinction to the assumptio, 
or taking up into heaven of the Virgin Mary by the power of God. 

In the Roman Catholic Church the most characteristic ritual 
feature of the festival is now the solemn extinction of the paschal 
candle after the Gospel at high mass. This candle, lighted at 
every mass for the forty days after Easter, symbolizes the 
presence of Christ with his disciples, and its extinction his parting 
from them. The custom dates from 1263, and was formerly 
confined to the Franciscans; it was prescribed for the universal 
church by the Congregation of Rites on the 19th of May 1697. 
Other customs, now obsolete, were formerly associated with the 
liturgy of this feast; e.g. the blessing of the new beans after the 
Commemoration of the Dead in the canon of the mass (Duchesne, 
p. 183). In some churches, during the middle ages, an image 
of Christ was raised from the altar through a hole in the roof, 
through which a burning straw figure representing Satan was 
immediately thrown down. 

In the Anglican Church Ascension Day and its octave con- 
tinue to be observed as a great festival, for which a special 
preface to the consecration prayer in the communion service is 
provided, as in the case of Christmas, Easter, Whitsunday, and 
Trinity Sunday. The celebration of the Feast of the Ascension 
was also retained in the Lutheran churches as warranted by 
Holy Scripture. 

See Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie (1900), s. "Himmelfahrtsfesf" ; 
L. Duchesne, Christian Worship (2nd Eng. ed., London, 1904) ; 
The Catholic Encyclopaedia (London and New York, 1907). 

ASCETICISM, the theory and practice of bodily abstinence 
and self-mortification, generally religious. The word is derived 
from the Gr. verb honko), " I practise," whence the noun &.<tkit<w 
and the adjective dff/cijriKos ; and it embodies a metaphor taken 
from the ancient wrestling-place or palaestra, where victory 
rewarded those who had best trained their bodies. Not a few 
other technical terms of Greek philosophic asceticism, used in 
the first instance by Cynics and Neo-pythagoreans, and then 
continued among the Greek Jews and Christians, were metaphors 
taken from athletic contests — but only metaphors, for all 
asceticism, worthy of the name, has a moral purport, and is 
based on the eternal contrast of the proposition, " This is right," 
with the proposition, " That is pleasant." The ascetic instinct 
is probably as old as humanity, yet we must not forget that early 
religious practices are apt to be deficient in lofty spiritual mean- 
ing, many things being esteemed holy that are from a modern 
point of view trifling and even obscene. We may therefore 
expect in primitive asceticism to find many abstentions and 
much self-torture apparently valueless for the training of 



character and discipline of the feelings, which are the essence of 
any healthy asceticism. Nevertheless these non-moral taboos or 
restraints may have played a part in building up in us that 
faculty of preferring the larger good to the impulse of the moment 
which is the note of real civilization. Aristotle in his Ethics 
defines, as the barbarian's ideal of life, " the living as one likes." 
Yet nothing is less true; for the savage, more than the civilized 
man, is tied down at every step with superstitious scruples and 
restrictions barely traceable in higher civilizations except as 
primitive survivals. It is not that savages are devoid of the 
ascetic instinct. It is on the contrary over-developed in them, 
but ill-informed and working in ways unessential or even morally 
harmful. It is the note of every great religious reformer, Moses, 
Buddha, Paul, Mani, Mahomet, St Francis, Luther, to enlighten 
and direct it to higher aims, substituting a true personal holiness 
for a ritual purity or taboo, which at the best was viewed as a 
kind of physical condition and contagion, inherent as well in 
things and animals as in man. 

It is useful, therefore, in a summary sketch of asceticism, to 
begin with the facts as they can be observed among less advanced 
races, or as mere survivals among people who have reached the 
level of genuine moral reflection ; and from this basis to proceed 
to a consideration of self-denial consciously pursued as a-method 
of ethical perfectton. The latter is as a rule less cruel and 
rigorous than primitive forms of asceticism. Under this head 
fall the following: — Fasting, or abstention from certain meats 
and drinks; denial of sexual instinct; subjection of the body 
to physical discomforts, such as nakedness, vigils, sleeping on 
the bare ground, tattooing, deformation of skull, teeth, feet, &c, 
vows of silence to be observed throughout life or during pilgrim- 
ages, avoidance of baths, of hair-cutting and of clean raiment, 
living in a. cave; actual self-infliction of pain, by scourging, 
branding, cutting with knives, wearing of hair shirts, fire- walking, 
burial alive, hanging up of oneself by hooks plunged into the 
skin, suspension of weights by such hooks to the tenderer parts 
of the body, self-mutilation and numerous other, often ingenious, 
modes of torture. Such customs repose on various superstitions; 
for example, the self-mutilation of the Galli or priests of Cybele 
was probably a magical ceremony intended to fertilize the soil 
and stimulate the crops. Others of the practices enumerated, 
probably the greater part of them, spring from demonological 
beliefs. 

Fasting (q.v.) is used in primitive asceticism for a variety of 
reasons, among which the following deserve notice. Certain 
animals and vegetables are taboo, i.e. too holy, or — what among 
Semites and others was the same thing — too defiling and unclean, 
to be eaten. Thus in Leviticus xi. the Jews are forbidden to 
eat animals other than cloven-footed ruminants; thus the 
camel, coney, hare and swine were forbidden; so also any water 
organisms that had not fins and scales, and a large choice of 
birds, including swan, pelican, stork, heron and hoopoe. All 
winged creeping things that have four feet were equally abomin- 
able. Lastly, the weasel, mouse and most lizards were taboo. 
All or nearly all of these were at one time totem animals among 
one or another of the Semitic tribes, and were not eaten because 
primitive men will not eat animals between which and themselves 
and their gods they believe a peculiar tie of kinship to exist. 
Men do not eat an animal for which they have a reverential 
dread, or if they eat it at all, it is only in a sacramental feast and 
in order to absorb into themselves its life and holy properties. 
Such abstinences as the above, though based on taboo, that is, on 
a reluctance to eat the totem or sacred animal, are yet ascetic 
in so far as they involve much self-denial. No flesh is more 
wholesome or succulent than beef, yet the Egyptians and 
Phoenicians, says Porphyry (de Abst. ii. n), would rather eat 
human flesh than that of the cow, and so would two hundred and 
fifty millions of modern Hindus. The privation involved in 
abstention from the flesh of the swine, a taboo hardly less wide- 
spread, is obvious. 

Similar prohibitions are common in Africa, where fetish priests 
are often reduced to a diet of herbs and roots. That such dietary 
restrictions were merely ceremonial and superstitious, and not 



7i8 



ASCETICISM 



intended to prevent the consumption of meats which would revolt 
modern tastes, is certain from the fact that the Levitical law 
freely allowed the eating of locusts, grasshoppers, crickets and 
cockroaches, while forbidding the consumption of rabbits, hares, 
storks, swine, &c. The Pythagoreans were forbidden to eat beans. 

Another widespread reason for avoiding flesh diet altogether 
was the fear of absorbing the irrational soul of the animal, 
which especially resided in the blood. Hence the rule not to eat 
meats strangled, except in sacramental meals when the god 
inherent in the animal was partaken of. It is equally a soul or 
spirit in wine which inspires the intoxicated; the old Egyptian 
kings avoided wine at table and in libations, because it was the 
blood of rebels who had fought with the gods, and out of whose 
rotting bodies grew the vines; to drink the blood was to imbibe 
the soul of these rebels, and the frenzy of intoxication which 
followed was held to be possession by their spirits. The medieval 
Jews also held that there is a cardiac demon in wine which 
takes possession of drunken men; and the Mahommedan 
prohibition of wine-drinking is based on a similar superstition. 
The avoidance of wine, therefore, by Rechabites, Nazirites, Arab 
dervishes and Pythagoreans, and also of leaven in bread, is 
parallel to and explicable in the same way as abstention from 
flesh. Porphyry (de Abst. i. 19) acquaints us with another wide- 
spread scruple against flesh diet. It was this, that the souls of 
men transmigrated into animals, so that if you ate these, you 
might consume your own kind, cannibal-wise. Contemporary 
meat-eaters set themselves to combat this prejudice, and argued 
that it was a pious duty to kill animals and so release the human 
souls imprisoned. In the same tract Porphyry relates (ii. 48) 
how wizards acquired the mantic powers of certain birds, such 
as ravens and hawks, by swallowing their hearts. The soul of 
the bird, he explains, enters them with its flesh, and endows 
them with power of divination. The lover of wisdom, who is 
priest of the universal God, rather than risk the taking into him- 
self of inferior souls and polluting demons, will abstain from 
eating animals. Such is Porphyry's argument. 

The same fear of imbibing the irrational soul of animals, and 
thereby reinforcing the lower appetites and instincts of the 
human being, inspired the vegetarianism of Apollonius of Tyana 
and of the Jewish Therapeutae, who in their sacred meals were 
careful to have a table free from blood-containing meats; and 
the fear of absorbing the animal's psychic qualities equally 
motived the Jewish and early Christian rule against eating 
things strangled. It was an early belief, which long survived 
among the Manichaean sects, that fish, being born in and of the 
waters, and without any sexual connexion on the part of other 
fishes are free from the taint which pollutes all animals quae 
copulatione generantur. Fish, therefore, unlike flesh, could be 
safely eaten. Here we have the origin of the Catholic rule of 
fasting, seldom understood by those who observe it. The same 
scruple against flesh-eating is conveyed in the beautiful confes- 
sion, in the Cretans of Euripides, of one who had been initiated 
in the mysteries of Orpheus and became a " Bacchos." The last 
lines of this, as rendered by Dr Gilbert Murray, are as follows: — 

" Robed in pure white, I have borne me clean 
From man's vile birth and coffined clay, 
And exiled from my lips alway 
Touch of all meat where life hath been." 

This Orphic fast from meat was only broken by an annual 
sacramental banquet, originally, perhaps, of human, but later of 
raw bovine flesh. 

The Manichaeans held that in every act of begetting, human or 
otherwise, a soul is condemned afresh to a cycle of misery by 
imprisonment in flesh — a thoroughly Indian notion, under the 
influence of which their perfect or elect ones scrupulously 
abstained from flesh. The prohibition of taking life, which 
they took over from the Farther East, in itself entailed fasting 
from flesh. A fully initiated Manichaean would not even cut his 
own salad, but employed a catechumen to commit on his behalf 
this act of murder, for which he subsequently shrived him. 

We come to a third widespread reason for fasting, common 
among savages. Famished persons are liable to morbid excite- 



ment, and fall into imaginative ecstasies, in the course of which 
they see visions and spectres, converse with gods and angels, 
and are the recipients of supernatural revelations. Accordingly 
King Saul " ate no bread all the day nor all the night" in which 
the witch of Endor revealed to him the ghost of Samuel. Weak 
and famished, he. hardly wanted to eat the fatted calf when the 
vision was over. Among the North American Indians ecstatic 
fasting is regularly practised. A faster writes down his visions 
and revelations for a whole season. They are then examined by 
the elders of the tribe, and if events have verified them, he is 
recognized as a supernaturally gifted being, and rewarded with 
chieftaincy. All over the world fasting is a recognized mode of 
evoking, consulting and also of overcoming the spirit world. 
This is why the Zulus and other primitive races distrust a 
medicine man who is not an ascetic and lean with fasting. In 
the Semitic East it is an old belief that a successful fast in the 
wilderness of forty days and nights gives power over the Djinns. 
The' Indian yogi fasts till he sees face to face all the gods of his 
Pantheon; the Indian magician fasts twelve days before pro- 
ducing rain or working any cure. The Bogomils fasted till they 
saw the Trinity face to face. From the first, fasting was practised 
in the church for similar reason. In the Shepherd of Hermas a 
vision of the church rewards frequent fasts and prayer; and it is 
related in extra-canonical sources that James the Less vowed 
that he would fast until he too was vouchsafed a vision of the 
risen Lord. After a long and rigorous fast the Lord appeared 
to him. Not a few saints were rewarded for their fasting by 
glimpses of the beatific vision. Dr Tylor writes on this point as 
follows (Prim. Cult. ii. 415): "Bread and meat would have 
robbed the ascetic of many an angel's visit: the opening of the 
refectory door must many a time have closed the gates of heaven 
to his gaze." 

Among the Semites and Tatars worshippers lacerate themselves 
before the god. So in 1 Kings xviii. 28 the priests of Baal 
engaged in a rain-making ceremony, gashed themselves with 
knives and lances till the blood gushed out upon them. The 
Syriac word ethkashshaph, which means literally to " cut one- 
self," is, the regular equivalent of to " make supplication." 
Among Greeks and Arabs, mourners also cut themselves with 
knives and scratched their faces; the Hebrew law forbade such 
mourning, and we find the prohibition repeated in many canons 
of the Eastern churches. At first sight these rites seem intended 
to call down the pity of heaven on man, but as Robertson Smith 
points out, their real import was by shedding blood on a holy 
stone or in a holy place to tie or renew a blood-bond between 
the* God and his faithful ones. We have no clear information 
about the mind of the Flagellants, who in 1259, and again in 
1349, swarmed through the streets of European cities, naked 
and thrashing themselves, till the blood ran, with leather thongs 
and iron whips. They were penitents, and no doubt imbued 
with the ancient belief that without the shedding of blood there 
is no remission of sins. 

Asceticism then in its origin was usually not ascetic in a 
modern sense, that is, not ethical. It was rather of the nature 
of the savage taboo (q.v.), the outcome of totemistic beliefs or a 
mode of averting the contaminating presence of djinns and 
demons. Above all, fasting was a mode of preparing oneself 
for the sacramental eating of a sacred animal, and as such often 
assisted by use of purgatives and aperients. It was essential 
in the old Greek rites of averting the Keres or djinns, the ill 
regulated ghosts who return to earth and molest the living, to 
abstain from flesh. The Pythagoreans and Orphic mystae so 
abstained all their life long, and Porphyry eloquently insists on 
such a discipline for all who " are not content merely to talk 
about Reason, but are really intent on casting aside the body 
and living through Reason with Truth. Naked and without 
the tunic of the flesh these will enter the arena and strive in the 
Olympic contest of the soul." 

It is time to pass on to Buddhist asceticism, in its essence 
a more ethical and philosophical product than some of the 
forms so far considered. The keynote of Buddhist asceticism is 
deliverance from life and its inevitable suffering. Once >at a 



ASCETICISM 



719 



village where he rested the Blessed One (Buddha) addressed 
his brethren and said: " It is through not understanding and 
grasping four Noble Truths, O brethren, that we have had to 
run so long, to wander so long in this weary path of transmigra- 
tion, both you and I." These noble truths were about sorrow, 
its cause, its cessation and the path which leads to that cessation. 
Once they are grasped the craving for existence is rooted out, 
that which leads to renewed existence is destroyed, and there 
is no more birth. The Buddha believed he had a way of Truth, 
which if an elect disciple possessed he might say of himself, 
" Hell is destroyed for me, and rebirth as an animal, or a ghost, 
or in any place of woe. I am converted, I am no longer liable 
to be reborn in a state of suffering, and am assured of final 
salvation." 

Suffering, said the sage in his great sermon at Benares, is 
inseparable from birth and old age. Sickness is suffering, so is 
death, so is union with the unloved, and separation from the 
loved; not to obtain what one desires is suffering; the entire 
fivefold clinging to the earthly is suffering. Its origin is the 
thirst for being which leads from birth to birth, together with 
lust and desire, which find gratification here and there; the 
thirst for pleasures, for being, for power. This thirst must be 
extinguished by complete annihilation of desire, by letting it 
go, expelling it, separating oneself from it, giving it no room. 
This extinction is achieved in eight ways, namely rectitude of 
faith, resolve, speech, action, living, effort, thought, self-con- 
centration. 

In this gospel we must be done with the outer world, partici- 
pation in which is not the self, yet means for the self birth 
and death, appetites, longings, emotions, change and suffering, 
pleasure and pain. He that has put off all lust and desire, all 
hope and fear, all will to exist as a sinful, because a sentient, 
being, has won to the heaven of extinction or Nirvana. He may 
still tread the earth, but he is a saint or Brahman, is in heaven, 
has quitted the transient and enjoys eternity. 

Such was the Buddha's gospel, as his most ancient scriptures 
enunciate it. Nirvana is constantly defined in them as supreme 
happiness. It is not even clear how far, if we interpret it strictly, 
this philosophy leaves any self to be happy. However this be, 
its practical expression is the life of the monk who has separated 
himself from the world. Five commandments must be observed 
by him who would even approach the higher life of saint and 
ascetic. They are these: to kill no living thing; not to lay 
hands on another's property; not to touch another's wife; 
not to speak what is untrue; not to drink intoxicating drinks. 

Though couched in the negative, these rules must be inter- 
preted in the amplest and widest sense by all believers. The 
Order, however, which the would-be ascetic can enter by regular 
initiation, when he is twenty years of age, entails a discipline 
much more severe. He has gone forth from home into homeless- 
ness, and has not where to lay his head. He must eat only the 
morsels he gets by begging; must dress in such rags as he can 
pick up; must sleep under trees. Mendicancy is his recognized 
way of life. Furthermore, he must abstain all his life from 
sexual intercourse; he may not take even a blade of grass 
without permission of the owner; he must not kill even a worm 
or ant; he must not boast of his perfection. In practice the 
lives of Buddhist monks are not so squalid as these rules would 
lead us to suppose. Thanks to the reverent charity of the 
laymen, they do not live much worse than Benedictine monks; 
and the prohibition to live in houses does not extend to caves. 
Everywhere in India and Ceylon they hollowed out cells and 
churches in the cliffs and rocks, which are the wonder of the 
European tourist. 

But long before the advent of Buddhism, the hermit, or 
wandering beggar, was a familiar figure in India. No formal 
initiation was imposed on the would-be ascetic, save (in the case 
of young men) the duty to live at first in his teacher's house. 
One who had thus fulfilled the duties of the student order must 
" go forth remaining chaste," says the Apastamba, ii. 9. 8. He 
shall then " live without a fire, without a house, without pleasures, 
without protection; remaining silent and uttering speech only 



on the occasion of the daily recitation of the Veda; begging so 
much food only in the village as will sustain his life, he shall 
wander about, neither caring for this world nor for heaven. 
He shall only wear clothes thrown away by others. Some 
declare that he shall even go naked. Abandoning truth and 
falsehood, pleasure and pain, the Vedas, this world and the next, 
he shall seek the Universal Soul, in knowledge of which standeth 
eternal salvation." 

Such a life was specially recommended for one who has lived 
the life of a householder, and, having begotten sons according 
to the sacred law and offered sacrifices, desires in his old age to 
1 abandon worldly objects and direct his mind to final liberation. 
He leaves his wife, if she will not accompany him, and goes 
forth into the forest, committing her and his house to his sons. 
He must indeed take with him the sacred fire and implements 
for domestic sacrifice, but until death overtakes him he must 
wander silent, alone, possessing no hearth nor dwelling, begging 
his food in the villages, firm of purpose, with a potsherd for an 
alms bowl, the roots of trees for a dwelling, and clad in coarse 
worn-out garments. " Let him not desire to die, let him not 
desire to live; let him wait for his appointed time, as a servant 
waits for the payment of his wages. Let him drink water 
purified by straining with a cloth, let him utter speech purified 
by truth, let him keep his heart pure. Let him patiently bear 
hard words, let him not insult anybody, let him not become any 
one's enemy for the sake of this perishable body. . . . Let him 
reflect on the transmigrations of men, caused by their sinful 
deeds, on their falling into hell, and on their torments in tht 
world of Yama. ... A twice-born man who becomes an 
ascetic thus shakes off sin here below and reaches the highest 
Brahman " (Laws of Manu, by G. Biihler, vi. 85). 

This old-world wisdom of the Hindus, a thousand years before 
our era, is worthily to be paralleled from the Manichaeism of 
about the year 400. Augustine has preserved (contra Faustum, 
v. 1) the portraiture of a Manichaean elect as drawn by himself: — 

" I have given up father and mother, wife, children and all else 
that the gospel bids us, and do you ask if I accept the gospel ? 
Are you then still ignorant of what the word gospel means? It is 
nothing else than the preaching and precept of Christ. I have cast 
away gold and silver, and have ceased to carry even copper in my 
belt, being content with my daily bread, nor caring for the morrow, 
nor anxious how my belly shall be filled or my body clothed ; and 
do you ask me if I accept the gospel ? You behold in me those 
beatitudes of Christ which make up the gospel, and you ask me if 
I accept it. You behold me gentle, a peacemaker, pure of heart, 
a mourner, hungering, thirsting, bearing persecutions and hatreds 
for righteousness' sake, and do you doubt whether I accept the 
gospel. . . . All that was mine I have given up, father, mother, 
wife, children, gold, silver, eating, drinking, delights, pleasures. 
Deem this a sufficient answer to your question and deem yourself 
on the way to be blessed, if you have not been scandalized in me." 

The Greek Cynics (see Cynics) played a great part in the 
history of Asceticism, and they were so much the precursors of 
the Christian hermits that descriptions of them in profane 
literature have been mistaken for pictures of early monasticism. 
In striving to imitate the rugged strength and independence of 
their master Socrates, they went to such extremes as rather 
to caricature him. They affected to live like beggars, bearing 
staff and wallet, awning nothing, renouncing pleasures, riches, 
honours. For older thinkers like Plato and Aristotle the perfect 
life was that of the citizen and householder; but the Cynics 
were individualists, citizens of the world without loyalty or 
respect for the ancient city state, the decay of which was 
coincident with their rise. Their zeal for renunciation often 
extended not to pleasures, marriage and property alone, but to 
cleanliness, knowledge and good manners as well, and in this 
respect also they were the forerunners of later monks. 

Philo (20 b.c.-a.d. 40) has left us many pictures of the life 
which to his mind impersonated the highest wisdom, and they 
are all inspired by the more respectable sort of cynicism, which 
had taken deep root among Greek Jews of the day. One such 
picture merits citation from his tract On Change of Names (vol. 
i. 583, ed. Mangey): " All this company of the good and wise 
have of their own free will divested themselves of too copious 
wealth; nay, have spurned the things dear to the flesh. For of 



720 



ASCHAFFENBURG— ASCHAM 



good habit and lusty are athletes, since they have fortified 
against the soul the body which should be its servant; but the 
disciples of wisdom are pale and wasted, and in a manner reduced 
to skeletons, because they have sacrificed the whole of their 
bodily strength to the faculties of the soul." 

His own favourite ascetics, the Therapeutae, whose chief 
centre was in Egypt, had renounced property and all its tempta- 
tions, and fled, irrevocably abandoning brothers, children, wives, 
parents, throngs of kinsmen, intimacy of friends, the fatherlands 
where they were born and bred (see Therapeutae). Here we 
have the ideal of early Christian renunciation at work, but apart 
from the influence of Jesus. In the pages of Epictetus the same 
ideal is constantly held up to us. 

In the Christian Church there was from the earliest age a 
leaning to excessive asceticism, and it needed a severe struggle 
on the part of Paul, and of the Catholic teachers who followed 
him, to secure for the baptized the right to be married, to own 
property, to engage in war and commerce, or to assume public 
office. One and all of the permanent institutions of society were 
condemned by the early enthusiasts, especially by those who 
looked forward to a speedy advent of the millennium, as alien to 
the kingdom of God and as impediments to the life of grace. 

Marriage and property had already been eschewed in the 
Jewish Essene and Therapeutic sects, and in Christianity the 
name of Encratite was given to those who repudiated marriage 
and the use of wine. They did not form a sect, but represented 
an impulse felt everywhere. In early and popular apocryphal 
histories the apostles are represented as insisting that their 
converts should either not contract wedlock or should dissolve 
the tie if already formed. This is the plot of the Acts of Thecla, 
a story which probably goes back to the first century. Repudia- 
tion of the tie by fervent women, betrothed or already wives, 
occasioned much domestic friction and popular persecution. 
In the Syriac churches, even as late as the 4th century, the married 
state seems to have been regarded as incompatible with the 
perfection of the initiated. Renunciation of the state of wedlock 
was anyhow imposed on the faithful during the lengthy, often 
lifelong, terms of penance imposed upon them for sins committed; 
and later, when monkery took the place, in a church become 
worldly, partly of the primitive baptism and partly of that 
rigorous penance which was the rebaptism and medicine of the 
lapsed, celibacy and virginity were held essential thereto, no 
less than renunciation of property and money-making. 

Together with the rage for virginity went the institution of 
virgines subintroductae, or of spiritual wives; for it was often 
assumed that the grace of baptism restored the original purity 
of life led by Adam and Eve in common before the Fall. Such 
rigours are encouraged in the Shepherd of Hermas, a book which 
emanated from Rome and up to the 4th century was read in 
church. They were common in the African churches, where they 
led to abuses which taxed the energy even of a Cyprian. They 
were still rife in Antioch in 260. We detect them in the Celtic 
church of St Patrick, and, as late as the 7 th century, among the 
Celtic elders of the north of France. In the Syriac church as late 
as 340, such relations prevailed between the " Sons and daughters 
of the Resurrection." It continued among the Albigenses and 
other dissident sects of the middle ages, among whom it served 
a double purpose; for their elders were thus not only able to 
prove their own chastity, but to elude the inquisitors, who were 
less inclined to suspect a man of the catharism which regarded 
marriage as the " greater adultery " {mains adulterium) if they 
found him cohabiting (in appearance at least) with a woman. 
There was hardly an early council, great or small, that did not 
condemn this custom, as well as the other one, still more painful 
to think of, of self-emasculation. In the Catholic church, however, 
common sense prevailed, and those who desired to follow the 
Encratite ideal repaired to the monasteries. 

Authorities. — E. B. Tylor, Primitive Culture (London, 1903); 
Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites (London, 1901); J. E. 
Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion; F. Max Miiller, 
The Sacred Books of the East; Victor Henry, La Magie dans I'Inde 
antique; J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough (London, 1900), and 
Adonis, Attis, Osiris (London, 1906); Georges Lafay, Culte des 



divinitSs d' Alexandria (Paris, 1884); D611inger, Sectengeschichte des 
Mittelalters (Munich, 1890); Fr. Cumont, Mysteries of Miihra 
(Chicago, 1903); Zockler, Gesch. der Ascese (1863). See also under 
Purification. Goldziher, " De l'ascetisme aux premiers temps 
de l'lslam," in Revue de Vhistoire des religions (1898), p. 314; 
Muratori, De Synisactis et Agapetis (Pavia, 1709); Jas. Martineau, 
Types of Ethical Theory (Oxford, 1885); T. H. Green, Prolegomena 
to Ethics (Oxford, 1883); Franz Cumont, Les Religions orientates 
dans le paganisme romain (Paris, 1907); Porphyrius, De Absti- 
nentia; Plutarchus, De Carnium Esu. (F. C. C.) 

ASCHAFFENBURG, a town of Germany, in the kingdom of 
Bavaria, on the right bank of the Main, at its confluence with the 
Aschaff, near the foot of the Spessart, 26 m. by rail S.E. of 
Frankfort-on-Main. Pop. (1900) 18,091; (1905) 25,275. Its 
chief buildings are the Johannisburg, built (1605-1614) by 
Archbishop Schweikard of Cronberg, which contains a library 
with a number of incunabula, a collection of engravings and 
paintings; the Stiftskirche, or cathedral, founded in 980 by Otto 
of Bavaria, but dating in the main from the early 12th and the 
13 th centuries, in which are preserved various monuments by 
the Vischers, and a sarcophagus,. with the relics of St Margaret 
(1540); the Capuchin hospital; a theatre, which was formerly 
the house of the Teutonic order; and several mansions of the 
German nobility. The town, which has been remarkable for its 
educational establishments since the 10th century, has a gym- 
nasium, lyceum, seminarium and other schools. There is an 
archaeological museum in the old abbey buildings. The graves 
of Klemens Brentano and his brother Christian (d. 1851) are in 
the churchyard; and Wilhelm Heinse is buried in the town. 
Coloured .and white paper, ready-made clothing, cellulose, 
tobacco, lime and liqueurs are the chief manufactures, while 
a considerable export trade is done down the Main in wood, 
cattle and wine. 

Aschaffenburg, called in the middle ages Aschafaburg and also 
Askenburg, was originally a Roman settlement. The 10th and 
23rd Roman legions had their station here, and on the ruins of 
their castrum the Frankish mayors of the palace built a castle. 
Bonifacius erected a chapel to St Martin, and founded a Bene- 
dictine monastery. A stone bridge over the Main was built by 
Archbishop Willigis in 989. Adalbert increased the importance 
of the town in various ways about 1122. In 1292 a synod was 
held here, and in 1474 an imperial diet, preliminary to that of 
Vienna, in which the concordat was decided which has therefore 
been sometimes called the Aschaffenburg Concordat. 

The town suffered greatly during the Thirty Years' War, 
being held in turn by the various belligerents. In 1842-1849, 
King Louis built himself to the west of the town a country house, 
called the Pompeianum, from its being an imitation of the house 
of Castor and Pollux at Pompeii. In 1866 the Prussians inflicted 
a severe defeat on the Austrians in the neighbourhood. 

The principality of Aschaffenburg, deriving its name from the 
city, comprehended an area of 654 English sq. m. It formed part 
of the electorate of Mainz, and in 1803 was made over to the 
archchancellor, Archbishop Charles of Dalberg. In 1806 it was 
annexed to the grand-duchy of Frankfort; and in 1814 was 
transferred to Bavaria, in virtue of a treaty concluded on the 
19th of June between that power and Austria. With lower 
Franconia, it now forms a district of the kingdom of Bavaria. 

ASCHAM, ROGER (c. 1515-1568), English scholar and writer, 
was born at Kirby Wiske, a village in the North Riding of 
Yorkshire, near Northallerton, about the year 15 15. His name 
would be more properly spelt Askham, being derived, doubtless, 
from Askham in the West Riding. He was the third son of John 
Ascham, steward to Lord Scrope of Bolton. The family name 
of his mother Margaret is unknown, but she is said to have been 
well connected. The authority for this statement, as for most 
others concerning Ascham's early life, is Edward Grant, head- 
master of Westminster, who collected and edited his letters and 
delivered a panegyrical oration on his life in 1576. 

Ascham was educated not at school, but in the house of Sir 
Humphry Wingfield, a barrister, and in 1533 speaker of the 
House of Commons, as Ascham himself tells us, in the Toxophilus, 
p. 1 20 (not, as by a mistake which originated with Grant and has 
been repeated ever since, Sir Anthony Wingfield, who was nephew 



ASCHAM 



721 



of the speaker). Sir Humphry " ever loved and used to have 
many children brought up in his house," where they were under 
a tutor named R. Bond. Their sport was archery, and Sir 
Humphry " himself would at term times bring down from 
London both bows and shafts and go with them himself to the 
field and see them shoot." Hence Ascham's earliest English 
work, the Toxophilus, the importance which he attributed to 
archery in educational establishments, and probably the pro- 
vision for archery in the statutes of St Albans, Harrow and 
other Elizabethan schools. From this private tuition Ascham 
was sent "about 1530," at the age, it is said, of fifteen, to St 
John's College, Cambridge, then the largest and most learned 
college in either university. Here he fell under the influence of 
John Cheke, who was admitted a fellow in Ascham's first year, 
and Sir Thomas Smith. His guide and friend was Robert 
Pember, " a man of the greatest learning and with an admirable 
facility in the Greek tongue." On his advice he practised 
seriously the precept embodied in the saying, " I know nothing 
about the subject, I have not even lectured on it," and " to 
learn Greek more quickly, while still a boy, taught Greek to 
boys." In Latin he specially studied Cicero and Caesar. He 
became B.A. on the 18th of February 1534/5. Dr Nicholas 
Metcalfe was then master of the college, " a papist, indeed, and 
yet if any young man given to the new learning as they termed 
it, went beyond his fellows," he " lacked neither open praise, 
nor private exhibition." He procured Ascham's election to a 
fellowship, " though being a new bachelor of arts, I chanced 
among my companions to speak against the Pope . . . after 
grievous rebuke and some punishment, open warning was given 
to all the fellows, none to be so hardy, as to give me his voice at 
that election." The day of election Ascham regarded as his 
" birthday," and " the whole foundation of the poor learning I 
have and of all the furtherance that hitherto elsewhere I have 
obtained." He took his M.A. degree on the 3rd of July 1537. 
He stayed for some time at Cambridge taking pupils, among 
whom was William Grindal, who in 1 544 became tutor to Princess 
Elizabeth. Ascham himself cultivated music, acquired fame 
for a beautiful handwriting, and lectured on mathematics. 
Before 1 540, when the Regius professorship of Greek was estab- 
lished, Ascham " was paid a handsome salary to profess the 
Greek tongue in public," and held also lectures in St John's 
College. He obtained from Edward Lee, then archbishop of 
York, a pension of £2 a year, in return for which Ascham trans- 
lated Oecumenius' Commentaries on the Pauline Epistles. But 
the archbishop, scenting heresy in some passage relating to the 
marriage of the clergy, sent it back to him, with a present indeed, 
but with something like a reprimand, to which Ascham answered 
with an assurance that he was " no seeker after novelties," as 
his lectures showed. He was on safer ground in writing in 1 542- 
1543 a book, which he told Sir William Paget in the summer 
of 1544 was in the press, " on the art of Shooting." This was 
no doubt suggested partly by the act of parliament 33 Henry 
VIII. c. o, " an acte for mayntenaunce of Artyllarie and debar- 
ringe of unlawful games," requiring every one under sixty, of good 
health, the clergy, judges, &c, excepted, " to use shooting in the 
long bow," and fixing the price at which bows were to be sold. 
Under the title of Toxophilus he presented it to Henry VIII. at 
Greenwich soon after his triumphant return from the capture of 
Boulogne, and promptly received a grant of a pension of £10 a 
year, equal to some £200 a year of our money. A novelty of the 
book was that the author had " written this Englishe matter 
in the Englishe tongue for Englishe men," though he thought it 
necessary to defend himself by the argument that what " the 
best of the realm think it honest to use" he " ought not to suppose 
it vile for him to write." It is a Platonic dialogue between Toxo- 
philus and Philologus, and nowadays its chief interest lies in its 
incidental remarks. It may probably claim to have been the 
model for Izaak Walton's Compleat Angler. 

From 1 54 1, or earlier, Ascham acted as letter-writer to the 
university and also to his college. Perhaps the best specimen 
of his skill was the letter written to the protector Somerset in 
1548 on behalf of Sedbergh school, which was attached to St 



John's College by the founder, Dr Lupton, in 1525, and the 
endowment of which had been confiscated under the Chantries 
Act. In 1 546 Ascham was elected public orator by the university 
on Sir John Cheke's retirement. 

Shortly after the beginning of the reign of Edward VI., Ascham 
made public profession of Protestant opinions in a disputation 
on the doctrine of the Mass, begun in his own college and then 
removed for greater publicity to the public schools of the uni- 
versity, where it was stopped by the vice-chancellor. Thereon 
Ascham wrote a letter of complaint to Sir William Cecil. This 
stood him in good stead. In January 1548, Grindal, the princess 
Elizabeth's tutor, died. Ascham had already corresponded with 
the princess, and in one of his letters says that he returns her 
pen which he has mended. Through Cecil and at the princess's 
own wish he was selected as her tutor against another candidate 
pressed by Admiral Seymour and Queen Katherine. Ascham 
taught Elizabeth — then sixteen years old — for two years, chiefly 
at Cheshunt. In a letter to Sturm, the Strassburg schoolmaster, 
he praises her " beauty, stature, wisdom and industry. She 
talks French and Italian as well as English: she has often talked 
to me readily and well in Latin and moderately so in Greek. 
When she writes Greek and Latin nothing is more beautiful than 
her handwriting ... she read with me almost all Cicero and 
great part of Titus Livius: for she drew all her knowledge of 
Latin from those two authors. She used to give the morning 
to the Greek Testament and afterwards read select orations of 
Isocrates and the tragedies of Sophocles. To these I added 
St Cyprian and Melanchthon's Commonplaces." In 1550 Ascham 
quarrelled with Elizabeth's steward and returned to Cambridge. 
Cheke then procured him the secretaryship to Sir Richard 
Morrison (Moryson), appointed ambassador to Charles V. It* 
was on his way to join Morrison that he paid his celebrated 
morning call on Lady Jane Grey at Bradgate, where he found 
her reading Plato's Phaedo, while every one else was out hunting. 

The embassy went to Louvain, where he found the university 
very inferior to Cambridge, then to Innsbruck and Venice. 
Ascham read Greek with the ambassador four or five days a week. 
His letters during the embassy, which was recalled on Mary's 
accession, were published in English in 1553, as a "Report" 
on Germany. Through Bishop Gardiner he was appointed Latin 
secretary to Queen Mary with a pension of £20 a year. His 
Protestantism he must have quietly sunk, though he told Sturm 
that " some endeavoured to hinder the flow of Gardiner's 
benevolence on account of his religion." Probably his never 
having been in orders tended to his safety. On the 1st of June 
1554 he married Margaret Howe, whom he described as niece of 
Sir R. (? J., certainly not, as has been said, Henry) Wallop. By 
her he had two sons. From his frequent complaints of his 
poverty then and later, he seems to have lived beyond his income, 
though, like most courtiers, he obtained divers lucrative leases 
of ecclesiastical and crown property. In 1555 he resumed his 
studies with Princess Elizabeth, reading in Greek the orations of 
Aeschines and Demosthenes' Be Corona. Soon after Elizabeth's 
accession, on the 5th of October 1559, he was given, though a 
layman, the canonry and prebend of Wetwang in York minster. 
In 1563 he began the work which has made him famous, 
The Scholemaster. The occasion of it was, he tells us (though 
he is perhaps merely imitating Boccaccio), that during the 
" great plague " at London in 1563 the court was at Windsor, 
and there on the 10th of December he was dining with Sir 
William Cecil, secretary of state, and other ministers. Cecil 
said he had " strange news; that divers scholars of Eaton be 
run away from the schole for fear of beating " ; and expressed 
his wish that " more discretion was used by schoolmasters in 
correction than commonly is." A debate took place, the party 
being pretty evenly divided between floggers and anti-floggers, 
with Ascham as the champion of the latter. Afterwards Sir 
Richard Sackville, the treasurer, came up to Ascham a/id told 
him that " a fond schoolmaster " had,- by his brutality, made him 
hate learning, much to his loss, and as he had now a young son, 
whom he wished to be learned, he offered, if Ascham would name 
a tutor, to pay for the education of their respective sons under 



72.-2 



ASCHERSLEBEN— ASCOLI 



Ascham's orders, and invited Ascham to write a treatise on " the 
right order of teaching." The Scholemaster was the result. It 
is not, as might be supposed, a general treatise on educational 
method, but " a plaine and perfite way of teachyng children to 
understand, write and speake in Latin tong "; and it was not 
intended for schools, but " specially prepared for the private 
brynging up of youth in gentlemen and noblemens houses." 
The perfect way simply consisted in " the double translation of 
a model book "; the book recommended by this professional 
letter-writer being " Sturmius' Select Letters of Cicero." As a 
method of learning a language by a single pupil, this method 
might be useful; as a method of education in school nothing 
more deadening could be conceived. The method itself seems 
to have been taken from Cicero. Nor was the famous plea for 
the substitution of gentleness and persuasion for coercion and 
flogging in schools, which has been one of the main attractions 
of the book, novel. It was being practised and preached at that 
very time by Christopher Jonson (c. 1536-1597) at Winchester; 
it had been enforced at length by Wolsey in his statutes for his 
Ipswich College in 1528, following Robert Sherborne, bishop 
of Chichester, in founding Rolleston school; and had been re- 
peatedly urged by Erasmus and others, to say nothing of William 
of Wykeham himself in the statutes of Winchester College in 
1400. But Ascham's was the first definite demonstration in 
favour of humanity in the vulgar tongue and in an easy style 
by a well-known " educationist," though not one who had any 
actual experience as a schoolmaster. What largely contributed 
to its fame was its picture of Lady Jane Grey, whose love of 
learning was due to her finding her tutor a refuge from pinch- 
ing, ear-boxing and bullying parents; some exceedingly good 
criticisms of various authors, and a spirited defence of English 
as a vehicle of thought and literature, of which it was itself an 
excellent example. The book was not published till after 
Ascham's death, which took place on the 23rd of December 
1568, owing to a chill caught by sitting up all night to finish a 
New Year's poem to the queen. 

His letters were collected and published in 1576, and went through 
several editions, the latest at Nuremberg in 161 1; they were re- 
edited by William Elstob in 1703. His English works were edited 
by James Bennett with a life by Dr Johnson in 1 7 7 1 , reprinted in 
8vo in 1815. Dr Giles in 1864-1865 published in 4 vols, select letters 
with the Toxophilus and Scholemaster and the life by Edward Grant. 
The Scholemaster was reprinted in 1571 and 1589. It was edited 
by the Rev. J. Upton in 1711 and in 1743, by Prof. J. E. B. Mayor 
in 1863, and by Prof. Edward Arber in 1870. The Toxophilus was 
republished in 1571, 1589 and 1788, and by Prof. Edward Arber in 
1868 and 1902. . (A. F. L.) 

ASCHERSLEBEN, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Saxony, 36 m. by rail N.W. from Halle, and at the junction 
of lines to Cothen and Nienhagen. Pop. (1900) 27,245; (1905) 
27,876. It contains one Roman Catholic and four Protestant 
churches, a synagogue, a fine town-hall dating from the 16th 
century, and several schools. The discovery of coal in the 
neighbourhood stimulated and altered its industries. In addition 
to the manufacture of woollen wares, for which it has long been 
known, there is now extensive production of vinegar, paraffin, 
potash and especially beetroot-sugar; while the surrounding 
district, which was formerly devoted in great part to market- 
gardening, is now turned almost entirely into beetroot fields. 
There are also iron, zinc and chemical manufactures, and the 
cultivation of agricultural seeds is carried on. In the neighbour- 
hood are brine springs and a spa (Wilhelmsbad). Aschersleben 
was probably founded in the nth century by Count Esico of 
Ballenstedt, the ancestor of the house of Anhalt, whose grandson, 
Otto, called himself count of Ascania and Aschersleben, deriving 
the former part of the title from his castle in the neighbourhood 
of the town. On the death of Otto III. (13 15) Aschersleben 
passed into the hands of the bishop of Halberstadt, and at the 
peace of 1648 was, with the bishopric, united to Brandenburg. 

ASCIANO, a town of Tuscany, in the province of Siena, 19 m. 
S.E. of the town of Siena by rail. Pop. (1901) 7618. It is 
surrounded by walls built by the Sienese in 13 51, and has some 
14th-century churches with paintings of the same period. Six 
miles to the south is the large Benedictine monastery of Monte 



Oliveto Maggiore, founded in 1320, famous for the frescoes by 
Luca Signorelli (1497-1498) and Antonio Bazzi, called Sodoma 
(1505), in the cloister, illustrating scenes from the legend of St 
Benedict; the latter master's work is perhaps nowhere better 
represented than here. The church contains fine inlaid choir 
stalls by Fra Giovanni da Verona. The buildings, which are 
mostly of red brick, are conspicuous against the gray clayey and 
sandy soil. The monastery is described by Aeneas Sylvius 
Piccolomini (Pope Pius II.) in his Commentaria. Remains of 
Roman baths, with a fine mosaic pavement, were found within 
the town in 1898 (G. Pellegrini in Notizie degli scavi, 1899, 6). 

ASCITANS (or Ascitae; from da/cos, the Greek for a wine-skin), 
a peculiar sect of 2nd-century Christians (Montanists), who 
introduced the practice of dancing round a wine-skin at their 
meetings. 

ASCITES (Gr. aadr^, dropsical, from kancs, bag; sc. 
vocxos, disease), the term in medicine applied to an effusion 
of non-inflammatory fluid within the peritoneum. It is not a 
disease in itself, but is one of the nanifestations of disease 
elsewhere — usually in the kidneys, heart, or in connexion with 
the liver (portal obstruction). Portal obstruction is the 
commonest cause of well-marked ascites. It is produced by 
(1) diseases within the liver, as cirrhosis (usually alcoholic) and 
cancer; (2) diseases outside the liver, as cancer of stomach, 
duodenum or pancreas, causing pressure on the portal vein, 
or enlarged glands in the fissure of the liver producing the same 
effect. Ascites is one of the late symptoms in the disease, and 
precedes dropsy of the leg, which may come on later, due to 
pressure on the large veins in the abdominal cavity by the 
ascitic fluid. In ascites due to heart disease, the dropsy of the 
feet and legs precedes the ascites, and there will be a history of 
palpitation, shortness of breath, and perhaps cough. In the 
ascites of kidney troubles there will be a history of general 
oedema — puffiness of face and eyes on rising in the morning prob- 
ably having attracted the attention of the patient or his friends 
previously. Other less common causes of ascites are chronic 
peritonitis, either tuberculous in the young, or due to cancer in 
the aged, and more rarely still pernicious anaemia. 

ASCLEPIADES, Greek physician, was born at Prusa in Bithynia 
in 124 B.C., and flourished at Rome in the end of the 2nd century 
B.C. He travelled much when young, and seems at first to have 
settled at Rome as a rhetorician. In that profession he did not 
succeed, but he acquired great reputation as a physician. He 
founded his medical practice on a modification of the atomic or 
corpuscular theory, according to which disease results from an 
irregular or inharmonious motion of the corpuscles of the body. 
His remedies were, therefore, directed to the restoration of 
harmony, and he trusted much to changes of diet, accompanied 
by friction, bathing and exercise, though he also employed 
emetics and bleeding. He recommended the use of wine, and 
in every way strove to render himself as agreeable as possible 
to his patients. His pupils were very numerous, and the school 
formed by them was called the Methodical. Asclepiades died 
at an advanced age. 

ASCLEPIADES, of Samos, epigrammatist and lyric poet, friend 
of Theocritus, .flourished about 270 b.c. He was the earliest 
and most important of the convivial and erotic epigramma- 
tists. Only a few of his compositions are actual " inscrip- 
tions "; others sing the praises of the poets whom he specially 
admired, but the majority of them are love-songs. It is doubtful 
whether he is the author of all the epigrams (some 40 in number) 
which bear his name in the Greek Anthology. He possibly gave 
his name to the Asclepiadean metre. 

ASCLEPIODOTUS, Greek military writer, flourished in the 
1st century B.C. Nothing is known of him except that he was 
a pupil of Poseidonius the Stoic (d. 51 B.C.). He is the supposed 
author of a treatise on Graeco- Macedonian tactics (TaKrucd 
K«</>dXeua) , which, however, is probably not his own work, but 
the skeleton outline of the lectures delivered by his master, who 
is known to have written a work on the subject. 

ASCOLI, GRAZIADIO ISAIA (1&20-1907), Italian philologist; 
of Jewish family, was born at Gdrz, and at an early age showed a 



ASCOLI PICENO— ASCOT 



723 



marked linguistic talent. In 1854 he published his Studii 
orientali e linguistici, and in i860 was appointed professor of 
philology at Milan. He made various learned contributions to 
the study of Indo-European and Semitic languages, and also of 
the gipsy language, but his special field was the Italian dialects. 
He founded the Archivio glottologico italiano in 1873, publishing 
in it his Saggi Ladini, and making it in succeeding years the 
great organ of original scholarship on this subject. He was 
universally recognized as the greatest authority on Italian 
linguistics, and his articie in the Encyclopaedia Britannica 
(9th ed., revised for this edition) became the classic exposition 
in English. (See Italy: Language.) 

ASCOLI PICENO 1 (anc. A senium), a town and episcopal see 
of the Marches, Italy, the capital of the province of Ascoli Piceno, 
1 7 m. W. of Porto d' Ascoli (a station on the coast railway, 56 m. 
S.S.E. of Ancona), and 53 m. S. of Ancona direct, situated on 
the S. bank of the Tronto (anc. Truentus) at its confluence with 
the Castellano, 500 ft. above sea-level, and surrounded by lofty 
mountains. Pop. (1901) town, 12,256; commune, 28,608. The 
Porta Romana is a double-arched Roman gate; adjacent are 
remains of the massive ancient city walls, in rectangular blocks 
of stone 2 ft. in height, and remains of still earlier fortifications 
have been found at this point (F. Barnabei in Notizie degli scavi, 
1887, 252). The church of S. Gregorio is built into a Roman 
tetrastyle Corinthian temple, two columns of which and the 
cella are still preserved; the site of the Roman theatre can be 
distinguished; and the church and convent of the Annunziata 
(with two fine cloisters and a good fresco by Cola d' Amatrice 
in the refectory) are erected upon large Roman substructures 
of concrete, which must have supported some considerable 
building. Higher up is the castle, which now shows no traces of 
fortifications older than medieval; it commands a fine view of 
the town and of the mountains which encircle it. The town 
has many good pre-Renaissance buildings; the picturesque 
colonnaded market-place contains the fine Gothic church of 
S. Francesco and the original Palazzo del Comune, now the 
prefecture (Gothic with Renaissance additions). The cathedral 
is in origin Romanesque, 2 but has been much altered, and was 
restored in 1888 by Count Giuseppe Sacconi (1855-1905). The 
frescoes in the dome, of the same date, are by Cesare Mariani. 
The cope presented to the cathedral treasury by Pope Nicholas 
IV. was stolen in 1904, and sold to Mr J. Pierpont Morgan, who 
generously returned it to the Italian government, and it was 
then placed for greater safety in the Galleria Corsini at Rome. 
The baptistery still preserves its ancient character; and the 
churches of S. Vittore and SS. Vincenzo ed Anastasio are also 
good Romanesque buildings. The fortress of the Malatesta, 
constructed in 1349, has been in the main destroyed; the part 
of it which remains is now a prison. The present Palazzo 
Comunale, a Renaissance edifice, contains a fine museum, 
chiefly remarkable for the contents of prehistoric tombs found 
in the district (including good bronze fibulae, necklaces, amulets, 
&c, often decorated with amber), and a large collection of 
acorn-shaped lead missiles (glandes) used by slingers, belonging 
to the time of the siege of Asculum during the Social War (89 B.C.). 
There is also a picture gallery containing works by local masters, 
Pietro Alamanni, Cola d' Amatrice, Carlo Crivelli, &c. The 
bridges across the ravines which defend the town are of consider- 
able importance; the Ponte di Porta Cappucina is a very fine 
Roman bridge, with a single arch of 71 ft. span. The Ponte di 
Cecco (so named from Cecco d' Ascoli), with two arches, is also 
Roman and belongs to the Via Salaria; the Ponte Maggiore 
and the Ponte Cartaro are, on the other hand, medieval, though 
the latter perhaps preserves some traces of Roman work. Near 
Ascoli is Castel Trosino, where an extensive Lombard necropolis 
of the 7th century was discovered in 1895; the contents of the 
tombs are now exhibited in the Museo Nazionale delle Terme 
at Rome (Notizie degli scavi, 1895, 35). 

The ancient Asculum was the capital of Picenum, and it 

'The epithet distinguishes it from Ascoli Satriano (anc. Ausculum) , 
which lies 19 m. S. of Foggia by rail. 

2 It contains a fine polyptych by Carlo Crivelli (1473). 



occupied a strong position in the centre of difficult country. 
It was taken in 268 B.C. by the Romans, and the Via Salaria was 
no doubt prolonged thus far at this period; the distance from 
Rome is 120 m. It took a prominent part in the Social War 
against Rome, the proconsul Q. Servilius and all the Roman 
citizens within its walls being massacred by the inhabitants 
in 90 B.C. It was captured after a long siege by Pompeius 
Strabo in 89 B.C. The leader, Judacilius, committed suicide, the 
principal citizens were put to death, and the rest exiled. The 
Roman general celebrated his triumph on the 25th of December 
of that year. Caesar occupied it, however, as a strong position 
after crossing the Rubicon; and it received a Roman colony, 
p£rhaps under the triumvirs, and became a place of some im- 
portance. In a.d. 301 it became the capital of Picenum Suburbi- 
carium. In 545 it was taken by Totila, but is spoken of by 
Paulus Diaconus as the chief city of Picenum shortly afterwards. 
From the time of Charlemagne it was under the rule of its 
bishops, who had the title of prince and the right to coin money, 
until 1 185, when it became a free republic. It had many struggles 
with Fermo, and in the 15th century came more directly under 
the papal sway. 

See N. Persichetti in Romische Mitteilungen (1903), 295 seq. 

(T. As.) 

ASCONIUS PEDIANUS, QUINTUS (9 b.c.-a.d. 76; or a.d. 
3-88), Roman grammarian and historian, was probably a native 
of Patavium (Padua). In his later years he resided at Rome, 
where he died, after having been blind for twelve years, at the 
age of eighty-five. During the reigns of Claudius and Nero he 
compiled for his sons, from various sources — e.g. the Gazette (Acta 
Publico,), shorthand reports or " skeletons " (commentarii) of 
Cicero's unpublished speeches, Tiro's life of Cicero, speeches and 
letters of Cicero's contemporaries, various historical writers, e.g. 
Varro, Atticus, Antias, Tuditanus and Fenestella (a contemporary 
of Livy whom he often criticizes) — historical commentaries on 
Cicero's speeches, of which only five, viz. in Pisonem, pro Scauro. 
pro Milone, pro Cornelio and in toga Candida, in a very mutilated 
condition, are preserved. In a note upon the speech pro Scauro, 
he speaks of Longus Caecina (d. a.d. 57) as still living, while his 
words imply that Claudius (d. 54) was not alive. This statement, 
therefore, must have been written between a.d. 54 and 57. 
These valuable notes, written in good Latin, relate chiefly to 
legal, historical and antiquarian matters. A commentary, of 
inferior Latinity and mainly of a grammatical character, on 
Cicero's Verrine orations, is universally regarded as spurious. 
Both works were found by Poggio in a MS. at St Gallen in 1416. 
This MS. is lost, but three transcripts were made by Poggio, 
Zomini (Sozomenus) of Pistoia and Bartolommeo da Monte- 
pulciano. That of Poggio is now at Madrid (Matritensis x. 81), 
and that of Zomini is in the Forteguerri library at Pistoia (No. 37) . 
A copy of Bartolommeo's transcript exists in Florence (Laur. 
liv. 5). The later MSS. are derived from Poggio's copy. Other 
works attributed to Asconius were: a life of Sallust, a defence 
of Virgil against his detractors, and a treatise (perhaps a 
symposium in imitation of Plato) on health and long life. 

Editions by Kiessling-Schoil (1875), and A. C. Clark (Oxford, 
1906), which contains a previously unpublished collation of Poggio's 
transcript. See also Madvig, De Asconio Pediano (1828). 

ASCOT, a village in the Wokingham parliamentary division 
of Berkshire, England, famous for its race-meetings. Pop. of 
parish of Ascot Heath (1901), 1927. The station on the South- 
western railway, 29 m. W.S.W. of London, is called Ascot and 
Sunninghill; the second name belonging to an adjacent town- 
ship with a population (civil parish) of 4719. The race-course is 
on Ascot Heath, and was laid out by order of Queen Anne in 
171 1, and on the nth of August in that year the first meeting 
was held and attended by the queen. The course is almost 
exactly 2 m. in circumference, and the meetings are held in June. 
The principal race is that for the Ascot Gold Cup, instituted in 
1807. The meeting is one of the most fashionable in England, 
and is commonly attended by members of the royal family. 
Trie royal procession, for which the meeting is peculiarly famous, 
was initiated by George IV. in 1820. 

See R. Herod, Royal Ascot (London, 1900). 



;24 



ASCUS— ASHANTI 



ASCUS (Gr. &<tk6s, a bag), a botanical term for the mem- 
branous sacs containing the reproductive spores in certain 
lichens and fungi. Various compounds of the word are used, 
e.g. ascophorous, producing asci; ascospore, the spore (or sporule) 
developed in the ascus; ascogonium, the organ producing it, &c. 

ASELLI [Asellius, or Asellio], GASPARO (1581-1626), 
Italian physician, was born at Cremona about 1581, became 
professor of anatomy and surgery at Pavia, and practised at 
Milan, where he died in 1626. To him is due the discovery of 
the lacteal vessels, published in De Lactibus (Milan, 1627). 

ASGILL, JOHN (1650-1738), English writer, was born at 
Hanley Castle, in Worcestershire, in 1659. He was bred to the 
law, and gained considerable reputation in his profession, in- 
creased by two pamphlets — the first (1696) advocating the 
establishment of some currency other than the usual gold and 
silver, the second (1698) on a registry for titles of lands. In 
1699, when a commission was appointed to settle disputed claims 
in Ireland, he set out for that country, attracted by the hopes 
of practice. Before leaving London he put in the hands of the 
printer a tract, entitled An Argument proving that, according to 
the Covenant of Eternal Life revealed in the Scripture, Man may 
be- translated from hence into that Eternal Life without passing 
through Death ( 1 700) . Coleridge has highly praised the " genuine 
Saxon English," the " irony " and " humour " of this extra- 
ordinary pamphlet, which interpreted the relation between God 
and man by the technical rules of law, and insisted that, Christ 
having wiped out Adam's sin, the penalty of death must conse- 
quently be illegal for those who claim exemption. How far it 
was meant seriously was doubted at the time, and may be 
doubted now. But its fame preceded the author to Ireland, 
and was of material service in securing his professional success, 
so that he amassed money, purchased an estate, and married 
a daughter of the second Lord Kenmare. He was returned both 
to the Irish and English parliaments, but was expelled from 
both on account of his " blasphemous " pamphlet. He was also 
involved in money difficulties, and litigation about his Irish estate, 
and these circumstances may have had somethirfg to do with his 
trouble in parliament. In 1707 he v/as arrested for debt, and 
the remainder of his life was spent in the Fleet prison, or within 
the rules of the king's bench. He died in 1738. Asgill also 
wrote in 1714-1715 some pamphlets defending the Hanoverian 
succession against the claims of the Pretender. 

ASH 1 (Ger. Esche), a common name (Fr. frene) given to certain 
trees. The common ash (Fraxinus excelsior) belongs to the 
natural order Oleaceae, the olive family, an order of trees and 
shrubs which includes lilac, privet and jasmine. The Hebrew 
word Oren, translated " ash " in Isaiah xliv. 14, cannot refer to 
an ash tree, as that is not a native of Palestine, but probably 
refers to the Aleppo pine (Pinus halepensis). The ash is a native 
of Great Britain and the greater part of Europe, and also extends 
to Asia. The tree is distinguished for its height and contour, 
as well as for its graceful foliage. It attains a height of from 
50 to 80 ft., and flowers in March and April, before the leaves 
are developed. The reddish flowers grow in clusters, but are 
not showy.. They are naked, that is without sepals or petals, 
and generally imperfect, wanting either stamens or pistil. The 
large leaves, which are late in appearing, are pinnately compound, 
bearing four to seven pairs of gracefully tapering toothed leaflets 
on a slender stalk. The dry winged fruits, the so-called keys, 
are a characteristic feature and often remain hanging in bunches 
long after the leaves have fallen in autumn. The leaves fall 
early, but the greyish twigs and black buds render the tree 
conspicuous in winter and especially in early spring. 

The ash is in Britain next in value to the oak as a timber-tree. 
It requires a good deep loam with gravelly subsoil, and a situation 
naturally sheltered, such as the steep banks of glens, rivers or 
lakes; in cold and wet clay it does not succeed. As the value of 
the timber depends chiefly on its toughness and elasticity, it is 
best grown in masses where the soil is good; the trunk is thus 

1 The homonym, ash or (pi.) ashes, the residue (of a body, &c.) 
after burning, is a common Teutonic word, Ger. Asche, connected 
with the root found in Lat. ardere, to burn. 



drawn up free from large side-branches. The tree is easily 
propagated from seeds; it throws up strong root shoots. The 
ash requires much light, but grows rapidly, and its terminal 
shoots pierce easily through thickets of beech, with which it is 
often associated. Unmixed ash plantations are seldom satisfac- 
tory, because the foliage does not sufficiently cover the ground; 
but when mixed with beech it grows well, and attains great 
height and girth. Owing to the dense mass of roots which it 
sends out horizontally a little beneath the surface of the ground, 
the ash does much harm to vegetation beneath its shade, and 
is therefore obnoxious as a hedgerow tree. Coppice shoots yield 
excellent hop-poles, crates, hoops, whip-handles, &c. The 
timber is much used for agricultural implements, and by coach- 
builders and wheelwrights. 

A variety of the common species, known as var. heterophylla, 
has simple leaves. It occurs wild in woods in Europe and 
England. Another variety of ash (pendula) is met with in which 
the branches are pendulous and weeping. Sometimes this 
variety is grafted on the tall stem of the common ash, so as to 
produce a pleasing effect. It is said that the weeping variety 
was first observed at Gamlingay, in Cambridgeshire. A variety 
(crispa) occurs with curled leaves, and another with warty stems 
and branches, called verrucosa. F. Ornus is the manna ash (see 
Manna), a handsome tree with greenish -white flowers and native 
in south Europe. In southern Europe there is a small-leaved 
ash, called Fraxinus parvifolia. F. floribunda, a large tree with 
terminal panicles of white flowers, is a native of the Himalayas. 
In America there are several species — such as Fraxinus americana, 
the white ash; F. pubescens, the red ash; and F. sambucifolia, 
the black ash. 

The " mountain ash " belongs to a totally different family 
from the common ash. It is called Pyrus Aucuparia, and belongs 
to the natural order Rosaceae, and the tribe Pomeae, which 
includes also apples, pears, &c. Its common name is probably 
due to its resemblance to the true ash, in its smooth grey bark, 
graceful ascending branches, and especially the form of the leaf, 
which is also pinnately compound but smaller than in the true 
ash. Its common name in Scotland is the rowan tree; it is 
well known by its clusters of white blossoms and succulent 
scarlet fruit. The name of poison ash is given to Rhus venenata, 
the North American poison elder or sumach, belonging to the 
Anacardiaceae (Cashew family). The bitter ash of the West 
Indies is Simaruba excelsa, which belongs to the natural order 
Simarubaceae. The Cape ash is Ekebergia capensis, belonging 
to the natural order Meliaceae, a large tree, a native of the Cape 
of Good Hope. The prickly ash, Xanthoxylon Clava-Herculis 
(nat. ord. Xanthoxyleae), a native of the south-eastern United 
States, is a small tree, the trunk of which is studded with corky 
tubercles, while the branches are armed with stout, sharp, 
brown prickles. 

A'SHA [Maimun ibn Qais], Arabian poet, was born before 
Mahomet, and lived long enough to accept the mission of the 
prophet. He was born in Manfuha, a village of al-Yemama in 
the centre of Arabia, and became a wandering singer, passing 
through all Arabia from Hadramut in the south to al-Hira in 
the north, and naturally frequenting the annual fair at Okaz 
(Ukaz). His love poems are devoted to the praise of Huraira, 
a black female slave. Even before the time of Mahomet he is 
said to have believed in the resurrection and last judgment, 
and to have been a monotheist. These beliefs may have been 
due to his intercourse with the bishop of Nejran (Najran) and the 
Tbadites (Christians) of al-Hira. His poems were praised for 
their descriptions of the wild ass, for the praise of wine, for their 
skill in praise and satire, and for the varieties of metre employed. 
His best-known poem is that in praise of Mahomet. 

His poems have been collected from various sources in L. Cheikho's 
Les Poetes arabes Chretiens (Jesuit press, Beirut, 1890), pp. 357-399. 
His eulogy of Mahomet has been edited by H. Thorbecke, At ASa's 
Lobgedicht auf Muhammad (Leipzig, 1875). (G. W. T.) 

ASHANTI, a British possession in West Africa, bounded W. 
by the (French) Ivory Coast colony, N. by the British Pro- 
tectorate known as Northern Territories of the Gold Coast (see 



ASHANTI 



725 



Gold Coast), and E. by the river Volta (which separates it from 
the German colony of Togoland); the southern frontier is 
conterminous with the northern frontier of the (British) Gold 
Coast colony. It forms an irregular oblong, with a triangular 
projection (the country of the Adansi) southward. It has an 
area of 23,000 sq. m., and a population estimated (1907) at 
500.000. 

Physical Features; Flora and Fauna. — A great part of Ashanti 
is covered with primeval and almost impenetrable forest. 1 
Many of the trees, chiefly silk-cotton and hardwood, attain 
splendid proportions, the bombax reaching a height of over 200 
ft., but the monotony is oppressive, and is seldom relieved by 
the sight of flowers, birds or beasts. Ferns are abundant, and 
the mimosa rises to heights of from 30 to 60 ft. All over the 
forest spread lianas, or monkey-ropes, their usual position being 
that of immense festoons hanging from tree to tree. To these 
lianas (species of which yield one kind of the rubber of commerce) 
is due largely the weird aspect of the forest. The country round 
the towns, however, is cultivated with care, the fields yielding 
in abundance grain, yams, vegetables and fruits. In the north- 
eastern districts the primeval forest gives place to park-like 
country, consisting of plains covered with high coarse grass, 
and dotted with occasional baobabs, as well as with wild plum, 
shea-butter, dwarf date, fan palms, and other small trees. Among 
the wild animals are the elephant (comparatively rare), the 
leopard, varieties of antelope, many kinds of monkeys and 
numerous venomous snakes. Crocodiles and two kinds of 
hippopotami, the ordinary and a pygmy variety, are found in 
the rivers. Of birds, parrots are the most characteristic. Insect 
life is abundant. 

About 25 m. south-east of Kumasi is Lake Busumchwi, the 
sacred lake of the Ashanti. It is surrounded by forest-clad hills 
some 800 ft. high, is nearly circular and has a maximum diameter 
of 6 m. The Black Volta, and lower down the Volta (q.v.), form 
the northern frontier, and various tributaries of the Volta, 
running generally in a northerly direction, traverse the eastern 
portion of the country. In the central parts are the upper 
courses of the Ofm and of some tributaries of the Prah. Farther 
west are the Tano and Bia rivers, which empty their waters into 
the Assini lagoon. In their course through Ashanti, the rivers, 
apart from the Volta, are navigable by canoes only. The 
elevation of the country is generally below 2000 ft., but it rises 
towards the north. 

Climate. — The climate, although unsuited to the prolonged 
residence of Europeans, is less unhealthy than that of the coast 
towns of West Africa. The water-supply is good and abundant. 
The rainy season lasts from the end of May until October; 
storms are frequent and violent. The mean temperature at 
Kumasi is 76° F., the mean annual rainfall 40 ins. 

Inhabitants. — The most probable tradition represents the 
Ashanti as deriving their origin from bands of fugitives, who in 
the 16th or 17th century were driven before the Moslem tribes 
migrating southward from the countries on the Niger and 
Senegal. Having obtained possession of a region of impenetrable 
forest, they defended themselves with a valour which, becoming 
part of their national character, raised them to the rank of a 
powerful and conquering nation. They are of the pure negro 
type, and are supposed to be originally of the same race as the 
Fanti, nearer the coast, and speak the same language. The 
separation of Fanti and Ashanti has been ascribed to a famine 
which drove the former south, and led them to live on fan, or 
herbs, while the latter subsisted on san, or Indian corn, &c, 
whence the names Fanti and Santi. The Ashanti are divided 
into a large number of tribes, of whom a dozen may be dis- 
tinguished, namely, the Bekwai, Adansi, Juabin, Kokofu, 
Kumasi, Mampon, Nsuta, Nkwanta, Dadiassi, Daniassi, Ofinsu 
and Adjisu. Each tribe has its own king, but from the beginning 
of the 1 8th century the king of Kumasi was recognized as king 
paramount, and was spoken of as the king of Ashanti. As 
paramount king he succeeded to the " golden stool," the symbol 

1 The exact area of dense forest land is unknown, but is estimated 
at fully 12,000 sq. m. 



of authority among the Ashanti. After the deposition of 
Prempeh (1896) no king of Kumasi was chosen; Prempeh 
himself was never " enstooled." The government of Ashanti 
was formerly a mixture of monarchy and military aristocracy. 
The confederate tribes were originally organized for purposes of 
war into six great divisions or clans, this organization developing 
into the main social fabric of the state. The chiefs of the clans, 
with a few sub-chiefs having hereditary rights, formed the King's 
Council, and the king, unless of exceptionally strong character, 
often exercised less power than the council of chiefs, each of 
whom kept his little court, making a profuse display of barbaric 
pomp. Land is held in common by the tribes, lands unallotted 
being attached to the office of head chief or king and called 
"stool lands." Polygamy is practised by all who can afford it. 
It is stated by the early chroniclers that the king of Ashanti was 
bound to maintain the " fetish " number of 3333 wives; many 
of these, however, were employed in menial services. The 
crown descended to the king's brother, or his sister's son, not to 
his own offspring. The queen mother exercised considerable 
authority in the state, but the king's wives had no power. The 
system of human sacrifices, practised among the Ashanti until 
the closing years of the 19th century, was founded on a senti- 
ment of piety towards parents and other connexions — the chiefs 
believing that the rank of their dead relatives in the future 
world would be measured by the number of attendants sent after 
them. There were two periods, called the great Adai and little 
Adai, at which human victims, chiefly prisoners of war or 
condemned criminals, were immolated. There is reason to 
believe that the extent of this practice was not so great as was 
currently reported. 

There are a few Mahommedans in Ashanti, most of them 
traders from other countries, and the Basel and Wesleyan 
missionaries have obtained some converts to Christianity; but 
the great bulk of the people are spirit-worshippers. Unlike many 
West African races, the Ashanti in general show a repugnance to 
the doctrines of Islam. 

Towns and Trade. — Besides the capital, Kumasi (q.v.), with a 
population of some 6000, there are few important towns in 
Ashanti. Obuassi, in the south-west, is the centre of the gold- 
mining industry. Warn is on the western border, Nkoranza, 
Atabubu and Kintampo in the north. Kintampo is a town of 
some size and is about 130 m. north-east of Kumasi. It is the 
meeting-place of traders from the Niger countries and from 
the coast. Formerly one of the great slave and ivory marts 
of West Africa, it is now a centre of the kola-nut commerce 
and a depot for government stores. The Ashanti are skilful in 
several species of manufacture, particularly in weaving cotton. 
Their pottery and works in gold also show considerable skill. 
A large quantity of silver-plate and goldsmiths' work of great 
value and considerable artistic elaboration was found in 1874 
in the king's palace at Kumasi, not the least remarkable 
objects being masks of beaten gold. The influence of Moorish 
art is perceptible. 

The vegetable products do not differ greatly from those found 
on the Gold Coast; the most important commercially is the 
rubber tree (Funtumia elastica). The nut of the kola tree is in 
great demand, and since 1905 many cocoa plantations have been 
established, especially in the eastern districts. Tobacco is 
cultivated in the northern regions. Gum copal is exported. 
Part of the trade of Ashanti had been diverted to the French port 
of Assini in consequence of the wars waged between England and 
the Ashanti, but on the suppression of the revolt of 1900 measures 
were taken to improve trade between Kumasi and Cape Coast. 
Kumasi is the distributing centre for the whole of Ashanti and 
the hinterland. Gold exists in the western districts of the 
country, and several companies were formed to work the mines 
in the period 1895-1901. Most of the gold exported from the 
Gold Coast in 1902 and following years came from the Obuassi 
mines. The gold output from Ashanti amounted in 1905 to 
68,259 oz., valued at £254,790. The railway to Kumasi from 
Sekondi, which was completed in 1903, passes through the 
auriferous region. As far as the trade goes through British 



726 



ASHANTI 



territory southward, the figures are included in those of the Gold 
Coast; but Ashanti does also a considerable trade with its 
French and German neighbours, and northwards with the Niger 
countries. Its revenue and expenditure are included in those of 
the Gold Coast. Revenue is obtained principally from caravan 
taxes, liquor licences, rents from government land and con- 
tributions from the gold-mining companies. 

Communications. — The railway to Kumasi, cut through one 
of the densest forest regions, is described under Gold Coast. 
The usual means of communication is by tortuous paths through 
the forest, too narrow to admit any wheeled vehicle. A wide 
road, 141 m. long, has been cut through the bush from Cape 
Coast to Kumasi, and from Kumasi ancient caravan routes go 
to the chief trading centres farther inland. Where rivers and 
swamps have to be crossed, ferries are maintained. A favourite 
mode of travelling in the bush is in a palanquin borne on the 
heads of four carriers. Telegraph lines connect Kumasi with the 
coast towns and with the towns in the Northern Territories. 
There is a well-organized postal service. 

History. — The Ashanti first came undcrthe notice of Europeans 
early in the 18th century, through their successful wars with the 
F H kingdoms bordering the maritime territory. Osai Tutu 

relations may be considered as the real founder of the Ashanti 
with the power. He either built or greatly extended Kumasi; 
British. ne subdued the neighbouring state of Denkera (17 19) 
and the Mahommedan countries of Gaman (Jaman) and Banna, 
and extended the empire by conquests both on the east and west. 
At last he was defeated and slain (1731); but his successor, Osai 
Apoko, made further acquisitions towards the coast. In 1800, 
Osai Tutu Quamina, an enterprising and ambitious man, who 
appears early to have formed the desire of opening a communica- 
tion with white nations, became king. About 1807, two chiefs 
of the Assin, whom he had defeated in battle, sought refuge 
among the Fanti, the ruling people on the coast. On the refusal 
of the Fanti to deliver up the fugitives, Osai Tutu invaded their 
country, defeated them and drove them towards the sea. The 
Ashanti reached the coast near Anamabo, where there was then 
a British fort. The governor exhorted the townsmen to come 
to terms and offered to mediate; but they resolved to abide 
the contest. The result was the destruction of the town, and the 
slaughter of 8000 of the inhabitants. The Ashanti, who lost over 
2000 men, failed, however, to storm the English fort, though the 
garrison was reduced from twenty-four to eight men. A truce 
was agreed to, and the king refusing to treat except with the 
governor of Cape Coast, Colonel G. Torrane (governor 180 5-1807) 
repaired to Anamabo, where he was received with great pomp. 
Torrane determined to surrender the fugitive Assin chiefs, but 
one succeeded in escaping; the other, on being given up, was 
put to death by the Ashanti. Torrane concluded an agreement 
with the Ashanti, acknowledging their conquest of Fantiland, and 
delivering up to them half the fugitives in Anamabo fort (most 
of the remainder were sold by Torrane and the members of his 
council as slaves). The governor also agreed to pay rent to the 
Ashanti for Anamabo fort and Cape Coast castle. The character 
of this man, who died on the coast in 1808, is indicated by Osai 
Tutu's eulogy of him. " From the hour Governor Torrane 
delivered up Tchibbu [one of the Assin fugitives] I took the 
English for my friends," said the king of Ashanti, " because I 
saw their object was trade only and they did not care for the 
people. Torrane was a man of sense and he pleased me 
much." ^ 

In consequence of repeated invasions of Fantiland by the 
Ashanti, the British in 181 7 sent Frederick James, commandant 
of Accra fort, T. E. Bowdich and W. Hutchinson on a mission to 
Kumasi. After one or two harmonious interviews, the king 
advanced a claim for the payment of the quit rents for Anamabo 
fort and Cape Coast castle, rents the major part of which the 
Fanti had induced the British to pay to them, leaving only a 
nominal sum for transmission to Kumasi. Mr James, the head 
of the mission, volunteered no satisfactory explanation, where- 
upon the king broke into uncontrollable rage, calling the emis- 
saries cheats and liars. Bowdich and Hutchinson, thinking 



that British interests and the safety of the mission were en- 
dangered, took the negotiation into their own hands. Mr James 
was recalled, and a treaty was concluded, by which the king's 
demands were satisfied, and the right of the British to control 
the natives in the coast towns recognized. 

The government at home, though they demurred somewhat 
to the course that had been pursued, saw the wisdom of cultivat- 
ing intercourse with this powerful African kingdom. They sent 
out, therefore, to Kumasi, as consul, Mr Joseph Dupuis, formerly 
consul at Mogador, who arrived at Cape Coast in January 1819. 
By that time fresh difficulties had arisen between the coast 
natives, who were supported by the British, and the Ashanti. 
Dupuis set out on the 9th of February 1820, and on the 28th 
arrived at Kumasi. After several meetings with the king, a 
treaty was drawn up, which acknowledged the sovereignty of 
Ashanti over the territory of the Fanti, and left the natives of 
Cape Coast to the mercy of their enemies. Mr J. Hope Smith, 
the governor of Cape Coast, disowned the treaty, as betraying 
the interests of the natives under British protection. Mr Hope 
Smith was supported by the government in London, which in 
1821 assumed direct control of the British settlements. s/r 
Sir Charles M'Carthy, the first governor appointed by Charles 
the crown, espoused the cause of the Fanti, but was McCarthy's 
defeated in battle by the Ashanti, the 21st of January fate ' 
1824, at a place beyond the Prah called Essamako. The Ashanti 
had 10,000 men to Sir Charles's 500. Sir Charles and eight other 
Europeans were killed. The skull of the governor was afterwards 
used at Kumasi as a royal drinking-cup. It was asserted that 
Sir Charles lost the battle through his ordnance-keeper bringing 
up kegs filled with vermicelli instead of ammunition. The fact is 
that the mistake, if made, only hastened the inevitable cata- 
strophe. On the very day of this defeat Osai Tutu Quamina 
died and was succeeded by Osai Okoto. A state of chronic 
warfare ensued, until the Ashanti sustained a signal defeat at 
Dodowah on the 7th of August 1826. From this time the power 
of the Ashanti over the coast tribes waned, and in 183 1 the king 
was obliged to purchase peace from Mr George Maclean, then 
administrator of the Gold Coast, at the price of 600 oz. of 
gold, and to send his son as a hostage to Cape Coast. The 
payment of ground rent for the forts held by the British had 
ceased after the battle of Dodowah, and by the treaty concluded 
by Maclean the river Prah was fixed as the boundary of the 
Ashanti kingdom, all the tribes south of it being under British 
protection. 

The king (Kwaka Dua I.), who had succeeded Osai Okoto in 
1838, was a peace-loving monarch who encouraged trade, but 
in 1852 the Ashanti tried to reassert authority over the Fanti 
in the Gold Coast protectorate, and in 1863 a war was caused by 
the refusal of the king's demand for the surrender by the British 
of a fugitive chief and a runaway slave-boy. The Ashanti were 
victorious in two battles and retired unmolested. The governor, 
Mr Richard Pine, urged the advisability of an advance on 
Kumasi, but this the British government would not allow. No 
further fighting followed, but the prestige of the Ashanti greatly 
increased. " The white men " (said Kwaka Dua) " bring many 
cannon to the bush, but the bush is stronger than the cannon. " 
In April 1867 Kwaka Dua died, and after an interval of civil 
war was succeeded by Kofi Karikari, who on being enstooled 
swore, " My business shall be war." Thereafter preparations 
were made throughout Ashanti to attack the Fanti tribes, and 
the result was the war of 1873-74. 

Two distinct events were the immediate cause of the war. 
The principal was the transference of Elmina fort from the 
Dutch to the British, which took place on the 2nd of 
April 1872. The Elminawere regarded by the Ashanti f 1873. 
as their subjects, and the king of Ashanti held the 1874. 
Elmina " custom-note," — that is, he received from 
the Dutch an annual payment, in its origin a ground rent for 
the fort, but looked upon by the Dutch as a present for trade 
purposes. The Ashanti greatly resented the occupation by 
Britain of what they considered Ashanti territory. Anothei 
but minor cause of the war was the holding in captivity by the 



ASHANTI 



727 



Ashanti of four Europeans.' An Ashanti force invaded Krepi, a 
territory beyond the Volta, and in June 1869 captured Mr Fritz 
A. Ramseyer, his wife and infant son (the child died of privation 
shortly afterwards), and Mr J. Kiihne, members of the Basel 
mission. Monsieur M. J. Bonnat, a French trader, was also 
captured at another place. .The captives were taken to Kumasi. 
Negotiations for their release were begun, but the Europeans 
were still prisoners when the sale of Elmina occurred. The 
Ashanti delayed war until their preparations were complete, 
whilst the Gold Coast officials appear to have thought the risk of 
hostilities remote. However, on the 22nd of January 1873 an 
Ashanti force crossed the Prah and invaded the British pro- 
tectorate. They defeated the Fanti, stirred up disputes at 
Elmina, and encamped at Mampon near Cape Coast, to the great 
alarm of the inhabitants. Measures were taken for the defence 
of the territory and the punishment of the assailants, which 
culminated in the despatch of Sir Garnet (afterwards Viscount) 
Wolseley as British administrator, £800,000 being voted by 
parliament for the expenses of the expedition. On landing 
(October 2) at Cape Coast, Wolseley found the Ashanti, who 
had been decimated by smallpox and fever, preparing to 
return home. He determined, however, to march to Kumasi, 
whilst Captain (afterwards Sir) John Glover, R.N., administrator 
of Lagos, was with a force of native levies to co-operate from 
the east and take the Ashanti in rear. Meanwhile the enemy 
broke up camp, and, although harassed by native levies raised 
by the British, effected an orderly retreat. The Ashanti army 
re-entered Kumasi on the 22nd of December. Wolseley asked 
for the help of white troops, and the 2nd battalion Rifle 
Brigade, the 23rd Fusiliers and 42nd Highlanders were de- 
spatched. Seeing the preparations made by his enemy, Kofi 
Karikari endeavoured to make peace, and in response to General 
Wolseley's demands the European captives were released 
(January 1874). Sir Garnet determined that peace must be 
signed in Kumasi and continued his advance. On the 20th of 
January the river Prah was crossed by the European troops; 
on the 24th the Adansi hills were reached; on the 31st there was 
severe fighting at Amoaful; on the 1st of February Bekwai was 
captured; and on the evening of the 4th the victorious army 
was in Kumasi, after seven hours' fighting. The king, who had 
led his army, fled into the bush when he saw the day was lost. 
As the 42nd Highlanders pushed forward to Kumasi, the town 
was found full of Ashanti soldiers, but not a shot was fired at the 
invaders. Sir Garnet Wolseley sent messengers to the king, 
but Kofi Karikari refused to surrender. As his force was small, 
provisions scarce, and the rainy season setting in, and as he was 
encumbered with many sick and wounded, the British general 
decided to retire. On the 6th, therefore, the homeward march 
was commenced, the city being left behind in flames. In the 
meantime Captain Glover's force had crossed the Prah on the 
15 th of January, and the Ashanti opposition weakening after 
the capture of Kumasi, Glover was able to push forward. On 
the nth of February, Captain (later General) R. W. Sartorius, 
who had been sent ahead with twenty Hausa only, found Kumasi 
still deserted. Captain Sartorius and his twenty men marched 
50 m. through the heart of the enemy's country. On the 12th 
Glover and his force of natives entered the Ashanti capital. 
The news of Glover's approach induced the king, who feared also 
the return of the white troops, to sue for peace. On the 9th of 
February a messenger from Kofi Karikari overtook Sir Garnet, 
who on the 13 th at Fomana received the Ashanti envoys. A 
treaty was concluded whereby the king agreed, among other 
conditions, to pay 50,000 oz. of gold, to renounce all claim to 
homage from certain neighbouring kings, and all pretensions of 
supremacy over any part of the former Dutch protectorate, to 
promote freedom of trade, to keep open a road from Kumasi to 
the Prah, and to do his best to check the practice of human 
sacrifice. Besides coloured troops, there were employed in this 
campaign about 2400 Europeans, who suffered severely from 
fever and otherwise, though the mortality among the men was 
slight. Seventy-one per cent of the troops were on the sick 
list, and more than forty officers died — only six from wounds. 



The success of the expedition was facilitated by the exertions of 
Captain (afterwards General Sir William) Butler and Captain 
(afterwards General W. L.) Dalrymple, who effected diversions 
with very inadequate resources. 

One result of the war of 1873-74 was that several states 
dependent on Ashanti declared themselves independent, and 
sought British protection. This was refused, and the ,4 British 
inaction of the colonial office contributed to the protector- 
reconsolidation of the Ashanti power. 1 Shortly after f. te . e t tal '" 
the war the Ashanti deposed Kofi Karikari, and 
placed on the golden stool — the symbol of sovereignty — his 
brother Mensa. This monarch broke almost every article of 
the Fomana treaty, and even the payment of the indemnity 
was not demanded. (In all, only 4000 oz. of gold, out of the 
50,000 stipulated for, were paid.) Mensa's rule was tyrannous 
and stained with repeated human sacrifices. In 1883 a revolution 
displaced that monarch, who was succeeded by Kwaka Dua II. — 
a young man who died (June 1884) within a few months of his 
election. In the same month died the ex-king Kofi Karikari, 
and disruption threatened Ashanti. At length, after a desolating 
civil war, Prince Prempeh — who took the name of Kwaka Dud 
III.— was chosen king (March 26, 1888), the colonial government 
having teen forced to intervene in the dispute owing to the 
troubles it occasioned in the Gold Coast. The election of 
Prempeh took place in the presence and with the sanction of an 
officer of the Gold Coast government. Prempeh defeated his 
enemies, and for a time peace and prosperity returned to Ashanti. 
However in 1893 there was fresh trouble between Ashanti and 
the tribes of the protectorate, and the roads were closed to 
traders by Prempeh's orders. The British government was 
forced to interfere, more especially as the country, by inter- 
national agreement, had been included in the British sphere of 
influence. A mission was despatched to Prempeh, calling upon 
him to fulfil the terms of the 1874 treaty, and further, to accept 
a British protectorate and receive a resident at Kumasi. The 
king declined to treat with the governor of the Gold Coast, and 
despatched informal agents to England, whom the secretary of 
state refused to receive. To the demands of the British mission 
relative to the acceptance of a protectorate and other matters, 
Prempeh made no reply in the three weeks' grace allowed, which 
expired on the 31st of October 1895. To enforce the British 
demands, to put an end to the misgovernment and barbarities 
carried on at Kumasi, and to establish law, order and security 
for trade, an expedition was at length decided upon. The force, 
placed under Colonel Sir Francis Scott, consisted of the 2nd West 
Yorkshire regiment, a " special service corps," made up of 
detachments from various regiments in the United Kingdom, 
under specially selected officers, the 2nd West India regiment, 
and the Gold Coast and Lagos Hausa. The composition of the 
special service corps was much criticized at the time; but as it 
was not called upon for fighting purposes, no inferences as to its 
efficiency are possible. The details of the expedition were care- 
fully organized. Before the arrival of the staff and contingent 
from England (December 1895) the native forces were employed 
in improving the road from Cape Coast to Prahsu (70 m.), and 
in establishing road stations to serve as standing camps for the 
troops. About 12,000 carriers were collected, the load allotted 
to each being 50 lb. In addition, a force of native scouts, which 
ultimately reached a total of 860 men, was organized in eighteen 
companies, and partly armed with Snider rifles, to cover the 
advance of the main column, which started on the 27th of 
December, and to improve the road. The king of Bekwai having 
asked for British protection, a small force was pressed forward 
and occupied this native town, about 25 m. from Kumasi, on the 
4th of January 1896. The advance continued, and at Ordahsu 
a mission arrived from King Prempeh offering unconditional 
submission. On the 17 th of January Kumasi was occupied, and 
Colonel Sir F. Scott received the king. Effective measures 

1 An attempt was made late in 1875, by the despatch of Dr V. S. 
Gouldsbury on a mission to Eastern Akim, Juabin and Kumasi, to 
repair the effects of the previous inaction of the colonial government, 
but without success. 



728 



ASHANTI 



were taken to prevent his escape, and on the 20th Prempeh 
made submission to Mr (afterwards Sir W. E.) Maxwell, the 
governor of Cape Coast, in native fashion. After this act 
deposed. °^ P UDUC humiliation, the king and the queen mother 
with the principal chiefs were arrested and taken as 
prisoners to Cape Coast, where they were embarked on board 
H.M.S. " Racoon " for Elmina. The fetish buildings at Bantama 
were burned, and on the 22nd of January Bokro, a village 5 m. 
from Kumasi, and Maheer, the king's summer palace, were 
visited by the native scouts and found deserted. On the same 
day, leaving the Hausa at Kumasi, the expedition began the 
return march of 150 m. to Cape Coast. The complete success 
of the expedition was due to the excellent organization of the 
supply and transport services, while the promptitude with which 
the queries were carried out probably accounts in great
measure for the absence of resistance. Although no fighting 
occurred, a heavy strain was thrown upon all ranks, and fever 
claimed many victims, among whom was Prince Henry of 
Battenberg, who had volunteered for the post of military 
secretary to Colonel Sir F. Scott. 

After the deportation of Prempeh no successor was appointed 
to the throne of Ashanti. A British resident, Captain Donald W. 
Stewart, was installed at Kumasi, and whilst the 
refle/o/ other states of the confederacy retained their king and 
Kumasi. tribal system the affairs of the Kumasi were adminis- 
tered by chiefs under British guidance. Mr and Mrs 
Ramseyer (two of the missionaries imprisoned by King Kofi 
Karikari for four and a half years) returned to Kumasi, and 
other missionaries followed. A fort was built in Kumasi and 
garrisoned with Gold Coast constabulary. Though outwardly 
submissive, the Kumasi chiefs were far from reconciled to 
British rule, and in 1900 a serious rebellion broke out. The 
tribes involved were the Kumasi, Adansi and Kokofu; the 
other tribes of the Ashanti confederation remained loyal. The 
rebels were, however, able to command a force reported to 
number 40,000. On the 28th of March, before the rebellion had 
declared itself, the governor of the Gold Coast, Sir F. Hodgson, 
in a public palaver at Kumasi, announced that the Ashanti 
chiefs would have to pay the British government 4000 oz. of 
gold yearly, and he reproached the chiefs with not having 
brought to him the golden stool, which the Kumasi had kept 
hidden since 1896. Three days afterwards the Kumasi warriors 
attacked a party of Hausa sent with the chief object of discovering 
the golden stool. (In the previous January a secret attempt to 
seize the stool had failed.) The Kumasi, who were longing to 
wipe out the dishonour of having let Prempeh be deported 
without fighting, next threatened the fort of Kumasi. Mr 
Ramseyer and the other Basel missionaries, and Sir F. and 
Lady Hodgson, took refuge in the fort, and reinforcements 
were urgently asked for. On the 18th of April 100 Gold Coast 
constabulary arrived. On the 29th the Kumasi attacked in 
force, but were repulsed. The same day a party of 250 Lagos 
constabulary reached Kumasi. They had fought their way up, 
and came in with little ammunition. On the 1 5th of May Major 
A. Morris arrived from the British territory north of Ashanti, 
also with 250 men. The garrison now numbered 700. The 29 
Europeans in the fort included four women. Outside the fort 
were gathered 3000 native refugees. Famine and disease soon 
began to tell their tale. Sir F. Hodgson sent out a message on 
the 4th of June (it reached the relieving force on the 1 2th of 
June), saying that they could only hold out to the nth of June. 
However, it was not till the 23rd of June that the governor and 
all the Europeans save three, together with 600 Hausa of all 
ranks, sallied out of the fort. Avoiding the main road, held by 
the enemy in force, they attacked a weakly held stockade, and 
succeeded in cutting their way through, with a loss of two 
British officers mortally wounded, 39 Hausa killed, and double 
that number wounded or missing. The governor's party reached 
Cape Coast safely on the 10th of July. 

A force of 100 Hausa, with three white men (Captain Bishop, 
Mr Ralph and Dr Hay), was left behind in Kumasi fort with 
rations to last three weeks. Meantime a relief expedition had 



been organized at Cape Coast by Colonel James Willcocks. This 
officer reached Cape Coast from Nigeria on the 26th of May. 
The difficulties before him were appalling. Carriers could 
scarcely be obtained, there were no local food supplies, the rainy 
season was at its height, all the roads were deep mire, the bush 
was almost impenetrable, and the enemy were both brave and 
cunning, fighting behind concealed stockades. It was not until 
the 2nd of July that Colonel Willcocks was able to advance to 
Fumsu. On the next day he heard of the escape of the governor 
and of the straits of the garrison left at Kumasi. He determined 
to relieve the fort in time, and on the 9th of July reached Bekwai, 
the king of which place had remained loyal. Making his final 
dispositions, the colonel spread a report that on the 13 th he 
would attack Kokofu, east of Bekwai, and this drew off several 
thousands of the enemy from Kumasi. After feinting to attack 
Kokofu, Colonel Willcocks suddenly marched west. There was 
smart fighting on the 14th, and at 4.30 p.m. on the 1 5th, after a 
march since daybreak through roads " in indescribably bad 
condition," the main rebel stockade was encountered. It was 
carried at the point of the bayonet by the Yoruba troops, who 
proved themselves fully equal to the Hausa. "The charge 
could not have been beaten in 6lan by any soldiers." Kumasi 
was entered the same evening, a bugler of the war-worn garrison 
of the fort sounding the " general salute " as the relieving 
column came in view. Most of the defenders were too weak to 
stand. Outside the fort nothing was to be seen but burnt-down 
houses and putrid bodies. The relieving force that marched 
into Kumasi consisted of 1000 fighting men (all West Africans), 
with 60 white officers and non-commissioned officers, two 
75-millimetre guns, four seven-pounder guns and six Maxims. 

Kumasi relieved, there remained the task of crushing the 
rebellion. Colonel Willcocks's force was increased by Yaos and 
a few Sikhs from Central Africa to a total of 3368 natives, with 
134 British officers and 35 British non-commissioned officers. 
In addition there were Ashanti levies. On the 30th of September 
the Kumasi were completely beaten at Obassa. Thereafter 
many of the rebel chiefs surrendered, and the only two remain- 
ing in the field were captured on the 28th of December. Thus 
1901 opened with peace restored. The total number of casualties 
during the campaign (including those who died of disease) was 
1007. Nine British officers were killed in action, forty-three 
were wounded, and six died of disease. The commander, 
Colonel Willcocks, was promoted and created a K.C.M.G. 

By an order in council, dated the 26th of September 1901, 
Ashanti was formally annexed to the British dominions, and 
given a separate administration under the control of progress 
the governor of the Gold Coast. A chief commissioner under 
represents the governor in his absence, and is assisted British 
by a staff of four commissioners and four assistant ^,™o"' s " 
commissioners. A battalion of the Gold Coast regiment 
is stationed in the country with headquarters at Kumasi. The 
order in council mentioned, which may be described as the first 
constitution granted Ashanti by its British owners, provides 
that the governor, in issuing ordinances respecting the adminis- 
tration of justice, the raising of revenue, or any other matter, 
shall respect any native laws by which the civil relations of any 
chiefs, tribes or populations are regulated, " except so far as 
they may be incompatible with British sovereignty or clearly 
injurious to the welfare of the natives themselves." After the 
annexation of the country in 1901 the relations between the 
governing power and the governed steadily improved. Mr F. C. 
Fuller, who succeeded Sir Donald Stewart as chief commissioner 
early in 1905, was able to report in the following year that 
among the Ashanti suspicion of the " white man's " ulterior 
motives was speedily losing ground. The marked preference 
shown by the natives to resort to the civil and criminal courts 
established by the British demonstrated their faith in the im- 
partial treatment awarded therein. Moreover, the maintenance 
of the tribal system and the support given to the lawful chiefs 
did much to win the confidence and respect of a people naturally 
suspicious, and mindful of their exiled king. 

Bibliography. — For a general survey of the country, see Travels 



ASH'ARI— ASHBURTON 



729 



in Ashanli and Jaman, by R. A. Freeman (London, 1898) ; Historical 
Geography of the British Colonies, vol. iii. " West Africa," by C. P. 
Lucas (Oxford, 1900) ; and the Annual Reports, Ashanti, issued from 
1906 onward by the Colonial Office, London. The Tshi-speaking 
Peoples of the Gold Coast, by Col. A. B. Ellis (London, 1887), deals 
with ethnology. Of early works on the country the most valuable 
are A Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee, by T. E. Bowdich 
(London, 1819); and Journal of a Residence in Ashantee (London, 
1824), by J. Dupuis. For history generally, see A History of the 
Gold Coast of West Africa, by Col. A. B. Ellis (London, 1893); an d 
History of the Gold Coast and Asante . . . from about 1500 to i860, 
by C. C. Reindorf, a native pastor of the Basel mission (Basel, 1895). 
For the British military campaigns, in addition to the official blue- 
books, consult: Narrative of the Ashantee War, 2 vols., by (Sir) 
Henry Brackenbury (London, 1874); The Story of a Soldier's Life 
by Viscount Wolseley, vol. ii. chs. xliii.-l. (London, 1903) ; Coomassie, 
by (Sir) H. M. Stanley, being the story of the 1873-74 expedition 
(new ed., London, 1896) ; Life of Sir John Hawley Glover, by Lady 
Glover, chs. iii.-x. (London, 1897); The Downfall of Prempeh, by 
(General) R. S. S. Baden-Powell, an account of the 1895-96 expedi- 
tion (London, 1896); From Kabul to Kumassi (chs. xv. to end), by 
Sir James Willcocks, (London, 1904); The Ashanti Campaign of 
1900, by Capt. C. H. Armitage and Lieut.-Col. A. F. Montanaro 
(London, 1901) ; The Relief of Kumasi, by Capt. H. C. J. Biss 
(London, 1901). The two bocks following are by besieged residents 
in Kumasi: The Siege of Kumasi, by Lady Hodgson (London, 
1901); Dark and Stormy Days at Kumasi, 1900, from the diary of 
the Rev. Fritz Ramseyer (London, 1901). Many of the works 
quoted under Gold Coast deal also with Ashanti. (F. R. C.) 

ASH'ARl [Abu-1 Hasan 'Ali ibn Isma'Il u]-Ash'arl], (873-935), 
Arabian theologian, was born of pure Arab stock at Basra, but 
spent the greater part of his life at Bagdad. Although belonging 
to an orthodox family, he became a pupil of the great Mu'tazalite 
teacher al-Jubba'I, and himself remained a Mu'tazalite until 
his fortieth year. In 912 he returned to the faith of his fathers 
and became its most distinguished champion, using the philo- 
sophical methods he had learned in the school of heresy. His 
theology, which occupied a mediate position between the 
extreme views on most points, became dominant among the 
Shafi'ites. He is said to have written over a hundred works, 
of which only four or five are known to be extant. 

See W. Spitta, Zur Geschichte Abu 'l-Hasan al As'ari's (Leipzig, 
1876) ; A. F. Mehren, Expose de la reforme de I'Islamisme commencee 
par Abou 'l-Hasan Alt el-Ash'ari (Leiden, 1878); and D. B. Mac- 
donald's Muslim Theology (London, 1903), especially the creed of 
Ash'ari in Appendix iii. (G. W. T.) 

ASHBOURNE, a market-town in the western parliamentary 
division of Derbyshire, England, 13 m. W.N.W. of Derby, on 
the London & North-Western and the North Staffordshire 
railways. Pop. of urban district (1901) 4039. It is pleasantly 
situated on rising ground between two small valleys opening 
into that of the Dove, and the most beautiful scenery of Dovedale 
is not far distant. The church of St Oswald is cruciform, Early 
English and later; a fine building with a central tower and 
lofty octagonal spire. Its monuments and brasses are of much 
interest. The town has a large agricultural trade and a manu- 
facture of corsets. The streams in the neighbourhood are in 
favour with trout fishermen. Ashbourne Hall, an ancient 
mansion, has associations with " Prince Charlie," who occupied 
it both before and after his advance on Derby in 1745. There 
are also many connexions with Dr Johnson, a frequent visitor 
here to his friend Dr Taylor, who occupied a house opposite 
the grammar school. 

ASHBURNHAM, JOHN (c. 1603-1671), English Royalist, was 
the son of Sir John Ashburnham of Ashburnham in Sussex. 
He early entered the king's service. In 1627 he was sent to 
Paris by his relative the duke of Buckingham to make overtures 
for peace, and in 1628 he prepared to join the expedition to 
Rochelle interrupted by the duke's assassination. The same 
year he was made groom of the bedchamber and elected member 
of parliament for Hastings, which borough he also represented 
in the Long Parliament of 1640. In this capacity he rendered 
services by reporting proceedings to the king. He made a 
considerable fortune and recovered the Ashburnham estates 
alienated by his father. He became one of the king's chief 
advisers and had his full confidence. He attended Charles at 
York on the outbreak of the war with Scotland. In the Civil 
War he was made treasurer of the royal army, in which capacity | 



he aroused Hyde's jealousy and remonstrances by infringing 
on his province as chancellor of the exchequer. In 1644 he was 
a commissioner at Uxbridge. He accompanied Charles in his 
flight from Oxford in April 1646 to the Scots, and subsequently 
escaped abroad, joining the queen at Paris, residing afterwards 
at Rouen and being sent to the Hague to obtain aid from the 
prince of Orange. After the seizure of Charles by the army, 
Ashburnham joined- him at Hampton Court in 1647, where he 
had several conferences with Cromwell and other army officers. 
When Charles escaped from Hampton Court on the 1 1 th of 
November, he followed Ashburnham's advice in opposition to 
that of Sir John Berkeley, who urged the king to go abroad, and 
took refuge in the Isle of Wight, being placed by Ashburnham 
in the hands of Robert Hammond, the governor. " Oh, Jack," 
the king exclaimed when he understood the situation, " thou 
hast undone me! " when Ashburnham, " falling into a great 
passion of weeping, offered to go and kill Hammond." By this 
fatal step Ashburnham incurred the unmerited charge of 
treachery and disloyalty. Clarendon, however, who censures 
his conduct, absolves him from any crime except that of folly 
and excessive self-confidence, and he was acquitted both by 
Charles I. and Charles II. He was separated with Berkeley from 
Charles on the 1st of January 1648, waited on the mainland in 
expectation of Charles's escape, and was afterwards taken and 
imprisoned at Windsor, and exchanged during the second Civil 
War for Sir W. Masham and other prisoners. He was one of the 
delinquents specially exempted from pardon in the treaty of 
Newport. In November he was allowed to compound for his 
estates, and declared himself willing to take the covenant. After 
the king's death he remained in England, an object of suspicion 
to all parties, corresponded with Charles II., and underwent 
several terms of imprisonment in the Tower and in Guernsey. 
At the Restoration he was reinstated in his former place of 
groom of the bedchamber and was compensated for his losses. 
He represented Sussex in parliament from 1661 till the 22nd of 
November 1667, when he was expelled the House for taking a 
bribe of £500 from French merchants for landing their wines. 
He died on the 15th of June 1671. 

He had eight children, the eldest of whom, William, left a 
son John (1656-1710), who in 1689 was created Baron Ashburn- 
ham. John's second son, John (1687-1737), who became 3rd 
Baron Ashburnham on his brother's death in 17 10, was created 
Viscount St Asaph and earl of Ashburnham in 1730. The 5th 
earl (b. 1840) was his direct descendant. Bertram (1797-1878), 
the 4th earl, was the collector of the famous Ashburnham 
library, which was dispersed in 1883 and 1884. 

A Letter from Mr Ashburnham to a Friend, defending John Ash- 
burnham's conduct with regard to the king, was published in 1648. 
His longer Narrative was published in 1830 by George, 3rd earl of 
Ashburnham (the latter's championship of his ancestor, however, 
being entirely uncritical and unconvincing) ; A Letter to W. Lenthall 
(1647) repudiates the charge brought against the king of violating 
his parole (Thomason Tracts, Brit. Museum, E 418 [4]). 

ASHBURTON, ALEXANDER BARING, 1st Baron 1 (1774- 
1848), English politician and financier, 2nd son of Sir Francis 
Baring (the founder of the house of Baring Brothers & Co.) 
and of Harriet, daughter of William Herring, was born on the 
27th of October 1774, and was brought up in his father's business. 
He was sent by the latter to the United States; married Anne, 
daughter of William Bingham, of Philadelphia, and formed wide 
connexions with American houses. In 1810, by his father's 
death, he became head of the firm. He sat in parliament for 
Taunton (1806-1826), Callington (1826-1831), Thetford (1831- 
1832), North Essex (1832-1835). He regarded politics from the 
point of view of the business man, opposed the orders in council, 
and the restrictions on trade with the United States in 181 2, 
and in 1826 the act for the suppression of small bank-notes. 
He was a strong antagonist of Reform. He accepted the post 
of chancellor of the exchequer in the duke of Wellington's 
projected ministry of 1832; but afterwards, alarmed at the 
scene in parliament, declared " he would face a thousand devils 
rather than such a House of Commons," and advised the recall 

1 i. e. in the existing line; see below for the earlier creation. 



73o 



ASHBURTON— ASHBY-DE-LA-ZOUCH 



of Lord Grey. In 1834 he was president of the board of trade 
and master of the mint in Sir Robert Peel's government, and on 
the latter's retirement was created Baron Ashburton on the 10th 
of April 1835, taking the title previously held by John Dunning, 
his aunt's husband. In 1842 he was despatched to America, 
and the same year concluded the Ashburton or Webster-Ash- 
burton treaty. A compromise was settled concerning the 
north-east boundary of Maine, the extradition of certain criminals 
was arranged, each state agreed to maintain a squadron of at 
least eighty guns on the coast of Africa for the suppression of the 
slave trade, and the two governments agreed to unite in an effort 
to persuade other powers to close all slave markets within their 
territories. Despite his earlier attitude, Lord Ashburton dis- 
approved of Peel's free-trade projects, and opposed the Bank 
Charter Act of 1844. He was a trustee of the British Museum 
and of the National Gallery, a privy councillor and D.C.L. of 
Oxford. He published, besides several speeches, An Enquiry 
into the Causes and Consequences of the Orders in Council (1808), 
and The Financial and Commercial Crisis Considered (1847). 
He died on the 13 th of May 1848, leaving a large family, his 
eldest son becoming 2nd baron. The 5th baron (b. 1866) suc- 
ceeded to the title in 1889. 

ASHBURTON, JOHN DUNNING, ist Baron 1 (1731-1783), 
English lawyer, the second son of John Dunning of Ashburton, 
Devonshire, an attorney, was born at Ashburton on the 18th of 
October 1731, and was educated at the free grammar school of 
his native place. At first articled to his father, he was admitted, 
at the age of nineteen, to the Middle Temple, and called to the bar 
in 1756, where he came very slowly into practice. He went the 
western circuit for several years without receiving a single brief. 
In i762he wasemployed todrawupa defence of the British East 
India Company against the Dutch East India Company, which 
had memorialized the crown on certain grievances, and the 
masterly style which characterized the document procured him 
at once reputation and emolument. In 1763 he distinguished 
himself as counsel on the side of Wilkes, whose cause he conducted 
throughout. His powerful argument against the validity of 
general warrants in the case of Leach v. Money (June 18, 1763) 
established his reputation, and his practice from that period 
gradually increased to such an extent that in 1776 he is said to 
have been in the receipt of nearly £10,000 per annum. In 1766 
he was chosen recorder of Bristol, and in December 1767 he was 
appointed solicitor-general. The latter appointment he held till 
May 1770, when he retired with his friend Lord Shelburne. In 
1 77 1 he was presented with the freedom of the city of London. 
From this period he was considered as a regular member of the 
opposition, and distinguished himself by many able speeches in 
parliament. He was first chosen member for Calne in 1768, and 
continued to represent that borough until he was promoted to 
the peerage. In 1780 he brought forward a motion that the 
" influence of the crown had increased, was increasing, and ought 
to be diminished," which he carried by a majority of eighteen. 
He strongly opposed the system of sinecure officers and pensions; 
but his probity was not strong enough to prevent his taking 
advantage of it himself. In 1782, when the marquis of Rocking- 
ham became prime minister, Dunning was appointed chancellor of 
the duchy of Lancaster, a rich sinecure; and about the same time 
he was advanced to the peerage, with the title of Lord Ashburton. 
Under Lord Shelburne's administration he accepted a pension of 
£4000 a year. He died at Exmouth on the 18th of August 1783. 
Though possessed of ah insignificant person, an awkward 
manner and a provincial accent, Lord Ashburton was one of 
the most fluent and persuasive orators of his time. He had 
married Elizabeth Baring, and was succeeded as 2nd baron by 
his son Richard, at whose death in 1823 the title became extinct, 
being revived in 1835 by Alexander Baring. 

Besides the answer to the Dutch memorial, Lord Ashburton is 
supposed to have assisted in writing a pamphlet on the law of libel, 
and to have been the author of A Letter to the Proprietors of East 
India Stock, on the subject of Lord Clive's Jaghire, occasioned by his 
Lordship's Letter on that Subject (1764, 8vo). He was at one time 
suspected of being the author of the Letters of Junius. 



1 i.e. of the first creation; for the present title see above. 



ASHBURTON, a river of Western Australia, rising in the 
mountains west of the Great Sandy Desert, and following a 
course north-westward for 400 m., into Exmouth Gulf. In its 
upper reaches it flows through a rich gold-bearing district to 
which it gives name, and nearer its mouth it traverses a vast 
tract of fine pastoral country. The outlet for both these districts 
is the port of Onslow, at the mouth of the river, near which there 
are several pearl -fishing stations. The river is not navigable. 

ASHBURTON, a market-town in the Ashburton parliamentary 
division of Devonshire, England, 24 m. N. W. by W. of Plymouth, 
on a branch of the Great Western railway. Pop. of urban 
district (1001) 2628. It lies in a valley surrounded by hills, 
at a short distance from the river Dart ; the scenery, towards 
Dartmoor and in the neighbourhood of Buckland and Holne 
Chase, being unsurpassed in the county. The church of St 
Andrew is cruciform with a lofty tower. It was built early in 
the 15 th century, and contains a fine old oak roof over the north 
aisle, and a tablet in memory of John Dunning, solicitor-general 
and ist Baron Ashburton (1731-1783). The inscription is by 
Dr Johnson. Lord Ashburton was educated at the grammar 
school, which was founded as a chantry in 1314. Serge is 
manufactured in Ashburton, and there are breweries, paint 
factories and saw-mills. A large deposit of umber is worked in 
the neighbourhood. Slate quarries and copper and tin mines 
were formerly valuable. A neighbouring centre of the serge 
industry is the urban district of Buckfastleigh (pop. 2520), 
3 m. S S.W. Between the two towns is Buckfast Abbey, 
said to have been," before the Conquest, a Benedictine house, and 
refounded for Cistercians in 1137. It was restored to use in 1882 
by a French Benedictine community, the fine Perpendicular 
abbot's tower remaining, while other parts have been rebuilt on 
the original lines. 

Ashburton (Essebretona, Asperton, Ashperton) is a borough by 
prescription and an ancient stannary town. It was governed by a 
portreeve and bailiff, elected annually at the court leet held by the 
lord of the manor. According to Domesday, Ashburton was held 
in chief by Osbern, bishop of Exeter, and rendered geld for six 
hides. In 1552, as the two manors of Ashburton Borough and 
Ashburton Foreign, it was sold by the bishop, and subsequently 
became crown property. Finally, it was acquired in moieties by the 
Clinton family, and the present Lord Clinton is joint lord of the 
manor with Sir Robert Jardine. In 1298 and 1407 Ashburton 
returned two members, from 1407 until 1640 one member only, 
and then again two members, until deprived of one by the Reform 
Act of 1832 and of the other by the Reform Act of 1885. In the 
reign of Edward II. Bishop Stapledon obtained a Saturday market, 
and two annual fairs lasting three days at the feasts of St Laurence 
(August 10) and St Martin in winter (November 11). In 1672 John 
Ford was granted a Tuesday market for the sale of wool and 
woollen goods made from English yarn, and in 1705 Andrew Quicke 
obtained two annual fairs, on the first Thursdays in March and 
June, for the sale of cattle, corn and merchandise. 

ASHBY, TURNER (1824-1862), American cavalry leader in 
the Confederate army, was born in Fauquier county, Virginia, 
in 1824. Before the Civil War he was a planter in Markham, 
Fauquier county, and a local politician. When hostilities 
began he raised a regiment of cavalry, which he led with con- 
spicuous success in the Valley campaigns of 1861-62, under 
Joseph Johnston and Stonewall Jackson. He was promoted a 
brigadier-general shortly before his death, which took place in 
a cavalry skirmish at Harrisonburg, Va., on the 6th of June 
1862. By his early death the Confederates lost one of the best 
cavalry officers in their service. 

ASHBY-DE-LA-ZOUCH, a market-town in the Bosworth 
parliamentary division of Leicestershire, England; 118 m. 
N.W. by N. from London by the Midland railway, on the 
Leicester-Burton branch. Pop. of urban district (1901) 4726. 
The church of St Helen is a fine Perpendicular building, restored 
and enlarged (1880); it contains monuments of the Huntingdon 
family, and an old finger-pillory for the punishment of mis- 
behaviour in church. The Ivanhoe baths, erected in 1826, are 
frequented for their saline waters, which, as containing bromine, 
are found useful in scrofulous and rheumatic complaints. The 
springs are at Moira, 3 m. west. There is a Queen Eleanor cross 
commemorating the countess of Loudoun, by Sir Gilbert Scott. 
To the south of the town are the extensive remains of Ashby 



A-SHE-HO— ASHEVILLE 



73i 



Castle. There are extensive coal-mines in the neighbouring 
district, as at Moira, whence the Ashby-de-la-Zouch canal runs 
south to the Coventry canal. 

At the time of the Domesday survey Ashby-de-la-Zouch formed 
part of the estates of Hugh de Grentmaisnel. Soon after it was held 
by Robert Beaumeis, from whom it passed by female descent to the 
family of !a Zouch, whence it derived the adjunct to its name, 
having been hitherto known as Ashby or Essebi. The earliest record 
of a grant of market rights is in 1219, when Roger la Zouch obtained 
a grant of a weekly market and a two days' fair at the feast of 
St Helen, in consideration of a fine of one palfrey. In the 15th 
century the manor was held by James Butler, earl of Ormond, after 
whose attainder it was granted in 1461 to Lord Hastings, who in 
1474 obtained royal licence to em park 3000 acres and to build and 
fortify a castle. At this castle Mary queen of Scots was detained 
in 1569 under the custody of the earls of Huntingdon and Shrews- 
bury. During the Civil War Colonel Henry Hastings fortified 
and held it for the king, and it was visited by Charles in 1645. In 
1648, at the close of the war, it was dismantled by order of parlia- 
ment. It plays a great part in Sir Walter Scott's Ivanhoe. In the 
18th century Ashby was celebrated as one of the best markets for 
horses in England, and had besides prosperous factories for woollen 
and cotton stockings and for hats. 

See Victoria County History — Leicestershire; History of Ashby- 
de-la-Zouch (Ashby-de-la-Zouch, 1852). 

A-SHE-HO (Manch. Alchuku), a town of Manchuria, China, 
125 m. N.E. of Kirin, and 30 m. S. of the Sungari. It is governed 
by a mandarin of the second class. Pop. about 60,000. 

ASHER, a tribe of Israel, called after the son of Jacob and 
Zilpah, Leah's maid. The name is taken by the narrator of 
Gen. xxx. 12 seq. (J) to mean happy or propitious, possibly an 
allusion to the fertility of the tribe's territory (with which cf. 
Gen. xlix. 20. Deut. xxxiii. 24); on the other hand, like Gad, it 
may have been originally a divine title. The district held by this 
tribe bordered upon Naphtali, and lay to the north of Issachar 
and Zebulun, and to the south of Dan. But the boundaries are 
not definite and the references to its territory are obscure. 
Asher is blamed for taking no part in the fight against Sisera 
(Judg. v. 17), and although it shares with Zebulun and Naphtali 
in Gideon's defeat of the Midianites (Judg. vi. 35, vii. 23), the 
narrative in question is not the older of the two accounts of the 
event, and the incorporation of the name is probably due to a 
late redactor. Lying as it did in the closest proximity to 
Phoenicians and Aramaeans, its population must have been 
exceptionally mixed, and the description of the occupation of 
Palestine in Judg. i. 31 seq. shows that it contained a strong 
Canaanite element. In the Blessing of Moses it is bidden to 
defend itself — evidently against invasion (Deut. xxxiii. 25). 

Even in the time of Seti I. and Rameses II. (latter half of 14th 
cent. B.C.) the district to the west of Galilee appears to have been 
known to the Egyptians as Aser(u), so that it is possible to infer 
either (a) that Asher was an Israelite tribe which, if it ever went 
down into Egypt, separated itself from its brethren in Egypt, 
and migrated north, " an example which was probably followed 
by some of the other tribes as well " (Hommel, Ancient Hebrew 
Tradition, p. 228); or (b) it was a district which, if never closely 
bound to Israel, was at least regarded as part of the national 
kingdom, and treated as Israelite by the genealogical device of 
making it a " son " of Jacob. It is possible that some of its 
Israelite population had followed the example of Dan and moved 
from an earlier home in the south. Two of the clans of Asher, 
Heber and Malchiel, have been associated with Milk-ili and 
Habiri, the names of a hostile chief and people in the Amarna 
Tablets (Jastrow, Journal Bibl. Lit. xi. pp. 118 seq., xii. 
pp. 61 seq., Hommel), but it is scarcely probable that events of 
about 1400 B.C. should have survived only in this form. This 
applies also to the suggestion that the name Asher has been 
derived from a famous Abd-ashirta of the same period (Barton, 
ib. xv. p. 174). Some connexion with the goddess Ashir(t)a, 
however, is not unlikely. 

See further H. W. Hogg, Ency. Bibl. col. 327 seq. ; E. Meyer, 
Israeliten, pp. 540 sqq. (S. A. C.) 

'ASHER BEN -YEHIEL (known as Rosh), Jewish rabbi and 
codilier, was born in the Rhine district c. 1250, and died in 
Toledo 1327. Endangered by the persecutions inflicted on the 
German Jews in the 13th century, 'Asher fled to Spain, where 



he was made rabbi of Toledo. His enforced exile impoverished 
him, and from this date begins an important change in the 
status of medieval rabbis. Before the 14th century, rabbis had 
obtained a livelihood by the exercise of some secular profession, 
particularly medicine, and received no salary for performing 
the rabbinic function. This was now changed. A disciple of 
Meir of Rothenburg, 'Asher's sole interest was in the Talmud. 
He was a man of austere piety, profound and narrow. He was 
a determined opponent of the study of philosophy, and thus was 
antipathetic to the Spanish spirit. The Jews of Spain continued, 
nevertheless, devotees of secular sciences as well as of rabbinical 
lore. 'Asher was the first of the German rabbis to display strong 
talent for systematization, and his chief work partook of the 
nature of a compendium of the Talmud. Compiled between 
1307 and 1314, 'Asher's Compendium resembled, and to a large 
extent superseded, the work of 'Al-phasi (<?.».). 'Asher's Com- 
pendium is printed in most editions of the Talmud, and it differed 
from previous Compendia in greater simplicity and in the 
deference shown to German authorities. 'Asher's son Jacob, 
who died at Toledo before 1340, was the author of the four Turim, 
a very profound and popular codification of rabbinical law. 
This work was the standard code until Joseph Qaro directly 
based on it his widely accepted Code of Jewish law, the Shulhan 
'Arukk. (I. A.) 

ASHEVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Buncombe county, 
North Carolina, U.S.A., in the mountainous Blue Ridge region in 
the west part of the state, about 210 m. W. of Raleigh. Pop. 
(1890) 10,235; (1900) 14,694, of whom 4724 were negroes; 
(1910, census) 18,762. Asheville is situated at the junction 
of three branches of the Southern railway, on a high terrace on 
the east bank of the French Broad river, at the mouth of the 
Swannanoa, about 2300 ft. above the sea. The city is best known 
as one of the most popular health and pleasure resorts in the 
south, being a summer resort for southerners and a winter 
resort for northerners. It has a dry and equable climate and 
beautiful scenery. Among its social clubs are the Albemarle, 
the Asheville, the Elks, the Tahkeeostee and the Swannanoa 
Country clubs. An extensive system of city and suburban 
parks, connected by a series of beautiful drives, adds to the 
city's attractiveness. There are great forests in the vicinity. 
Among the public buildings are the city hall, the court house, 
the Federal building, the public library and an auditorium. 
In or near Asheville are a normal and collegiate institute for 
young women (1892), and, occupying the same campus, a 
home industrial school (r887) for girls, both under the control 
of the Woman's Board of Home Missions of the Presbyterian 
Church; the Asheville farm school for boys, an industrial 
school for negroes; the Asheville school for boys (5 m. west of 
Asheville); and the Bingham school (1793), founded at Pittsboro, 
N.C., by William Bingham (d. 1826), and removed to its present 
site (3 m. north-west of Asheville) in 1891. About 2 m. south- 
east of the city is Biltmore, the estate of George W. Vanderbilt, 
its 125,000 acres constituting what is probably the finest country 
place in the United States. The central feature of the estate is 
a chateau (375X150 ft.) of French Renaissance design, after the 
famous chateau at Blois, France. In the neighbourhood is a 
model village, with an elementary school, an industrial school 
for whites, a hospital and a church, maintained by Mr Vanderbilt. 
Both the chateau and the village were designed by Richard M. 
Hunt; the landscape gardening was done by Frederick Law 
Olmsted. A collection of woody plants, one of the largest and 
finest in the world, and a broad forest and hunting preserve, 
known as Pisgah Forest (100,000 acres), are also maintained by 
the owner. Asheville is a market for live-stock, dairy products, 
lumber and fruits, and has various manufactories (in which a 
good water-power is utilized), including tanneries, cotton mills, 
brick and tile factories, and a wood-working and veneer plant. 
The value of the city's factory products increased from $1,300,698 
in 1900 to $1,918,362 in 1905, or 47-5%. The city was named 
in honour of Samuel Ashe (1725-1813), chief-justice of North 
Carolina from 1777 to 1796, and John Ashe (1720-1781), a 
North Carolina soldier who distinguished himself in the War of 



732 



ASHFORD— ASHLAND 



Independence, was settled about 1790, and was incorporated in 
1835. The city's boundaries were enlarged in 1005. 

ASHFORD, a market-town in the Southern or Ashford par- 
liamentary division of Kent, England, 56 m. S.E. of London by 
the South-Eastern & Chatham railway. Pop. of urban district 
(1901) 12,808. It is pleasantly situated on a gentle eminence 
near the confluence of the upper branches of the river Stour. It 
has a fine Perpendicular church dedicated to St Mary, with a 
lofty, well-proportioned tower and many interesting monuments. 
The grammar school was founded by Sir Norman Knatchbull in 
the reign of Charles I. Ashford has agricultural implement 
works and breweries; and the large locomotive and carriage 
works of the South-Eastern & Chatham railway are here. At 
Bethersden, between Ashford and Tenterden, marble quarries 
were formerly worked extensively, supplying material to the 
cathedrals of Canterbury and Rochester, and to many local 
churches. At Charing, north-west of Ashford, the archbishops 
of Canterbury had a residence from pre-Conquest times, and 
ruins of a palace, mainly of the Decorated period, remain. On 
the south-eastern outskirts of Ashford is the populous village of 
Willesborough (3602). 

Ashford (Esselesford, Asshatisforde, Essheford) was held at the 
time of the Domesday survey by Hugh de Montfort, who came to 
England with William the Conqueror. A Saturday market and an 
annual fair were granted to the lord of the manor by Henry III. in 
1243. Further annual fairs were granted by Edward III. in 1349 
and by Edward IV. in 1466. In 1672 Charles II. granted a market 
on every second Tuesday, with a court of pie-powder. James I. 
in 1607, at the petition of the inhabitants of Ashford, gave Sir John 
Smith, Kt., the right of holding a court of record in the town on every 
third Tuesday. The fertility of the pasture-land in Romney Marsh 
to the south and east of Ashford caused the cattle trade to increase 
in the latter half of the 1 8th century, and led to the establishment 
of a stock market in 1784. The town has never been incorporated. 

See Edward Hasted, History and Survey of Kent (Canterbury, 
1778-1799, 2nd ed. 1797-1801); Victoria County History — Kent. 

'ASHI (352-427), Jewish 'amora, the first editor of the Talmud, 
was born at Babylon. He was head of the Sura Academy, and 
there began the Babylonian Talmud, spending thirty years of his 
life at it. He left the work incomplete, and it was finished by his 
disciple Rabina just before the year 500 a.d. (See Talmud.) 

ASHINGTON, an urban district in the Wansbeck parliamentary 
division of Northumberland, England, 4 m. E. of Morpeth, on the 
Newbiggin branch of the North Eastern railway. Pop. (1901) 
13,956. The district, especially along the river Wansbeck, is not 
without beauty, but there are numerous collieries, from the 
existence of which springs the modern growth of Ashington. At 
Bothal on the river (from which parish that of Ashington was 
formed) is the castle originally belonging to the Bertram family, 
of which Roger Bertram probably built the gatehouse, the only 
habitable portion remaining, in the reign of Edward III. The 
ruins of the castle are fragmentary, but of considerable extent. 
The church of St Andrew here has interesting details from Early 
English to Perpendicular date, and in the neighbouring woods 
is a ruined chapel of St Mary. The mining centre of Ashington 
lies 2 m. north-east, on the high ground north of the Wansbeck. 

'ASHKENAZI, SEBI (1656-1718), known as Hakham Sebi, 
for some time rabbi of Amsterdam, was a resolute opponent of 
the followers of the pseudo-Messiah, Sabbatai Sebi (q.v.). He had 
a chequered career, owing to his independence of character. He 
visited many lands, including England, where he wielded much 
influence. His Responsa are held in high esteem. 

ASHLAND, a city of Boyd county, Kentucky, U.S.A., on the 
Ohio river, about 130 m. E. by N. of Frankfort. Pop. (1890) 
4195; (1900) 6800 (489 negroes); (1910) 8688. It is served by 
the Chesapeake & Ohio (being a terminal of the Lexington and 
Big Sandy Divisions) and the Norfolk & Western railways, and 
is connected with Huntington, West Virginia, by an electric line. 
The city has a fine natural park (Central Park) of about 30 
acres; and Clyffeside Park (maintained by a private corporation), 
of about 75 acres, just east of the city, is a pleasure resort and a 
meeting-ground (with a casino seating 3000 people) for the 
Tri-State " Chautauqua " (for certain parts of Kentucky, Ohio 
and West Virginia). The surrounding country abounds in coal, 



iron ore, oil, clay, stone and timber, for which the city is a 
distributing centre. Ashland has considerable river traffic, 
and various manufactures, including pig iron, nails, wire rods, 
steel billets, sheet steel, dressed lumber (especially poplar), 
furniture, fire brick and leather. Ashland was settled in 1854, 
and was chartered as a city in 1870. 

ASHLAND, a borough of Schuylkill county, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., about 50 m. N.E. of Harrisburg and about 100 m. N.W. 
of Philadelphia. Pop. (1890) 7346; (1900) 6438 (969 foreign- 
born); (19 10) 6855. It is served by the Lehigh Valley and the 
Philadelphia & Reading railways, and by the electric lines of 
the Schuylkill Railway Company and the Shamokin & Mount 
Carmel Transit Company. The borough is built on the slope 
of Locust Mountain, about 885 ft. above sea-level. Its chief 
industry is the mining of anthracite coal at several collieries 
in the vicinity; and at Fountain Springs, 1 m. south-east, is 
a state hospital for injured persons of the Anthracite Coal 
Region of Pennsylvania, opened in 1883. The municipality 
owns and operates the waterworks. Ashland was laid out as a 
town in 1847, and was named in honour of Henry Clay's home 
at Lexington, Ky. ; in 1857 it was incorporated. 

ASHLAND, a village of Hanover county, Virginia, U.S.A., 
17 m. N.W. of Richmond. Pop. (1900) 1147; (1910) 1324. 
It is served by the Richmond, Fredericksburg & Potomac 
railway, and is a favourite resort from Richmond. Here is 
situated the Randolph-Macon College (Methodist Episcopal, 
South), one of the oldest Methodist Episcopal colleges in the 
United States. In 1832, two years after receiving its charter, 
it opened near Boydton, Mecklenburg county, Virginia, and in 
1868 was removed to Ashland. The college in 1907-1908 had 
150 students and a faculty of 16; it publishes an endowed 
historical series called The John P. Branch Historical Papers 
of Randolph-Macon College; and it is a part of the " Randolph- 
Macon System of Colleges and Academies," which includes, 
besides, Randolph-Macon Academy (1890) at Bedford City, 
Virginia, and Randolph-Macon Academy (1892) at Front 
Royal, Virginia, both for boys; Randolph-Macon Woman's 
College (1893) at Lynchburg, Virginia, which in 1907-1908 had 
an enrolment of 390; and Randolph-Macon Institute, for girls, 
Danville, Virginia, which was admitted into the " System " 
in 1897. These five institutions are under the control of a single 
board of trustees; the work of the preparatory schools is thus 
correlated with that of the colleges. About 7 m. out of Ashland 
is the birthplace of Henry Clay, and about 15 m. distant is the 
birthplace of Patrick Henry. Ashland was settled in 1845 and 
was incorporated in 1856. 

ASHLAND, a city and the county-seat of Ashland county, 
Wisconsin, U.S.A., situated about 315 m. N.W. of Milwaukee, 
and about 70 m. E. of Superior and Duluth, in the N. part of 
the state, at the head of Chequamegon Bay, an arm of Lake 
Superior. Pop. (1890) 9956; (1900) 13,074, of whom 4417 
were foreign-born; (1910, census) 11,594. It is served by 
the Chicago & North- Western, the Northern Pacific, the Chicago, 
St Paul, Minneapolis & Omaha, and the Wisconsin Central 
railways, and by several steamboat lines on the Great Lakes. 
The city is attractively situated, has a dry, healthful climate, 
and is a summer resort. It has a fine Federal building, one of 
the best high-school buildings in Wisconsin, the Vaughn public 
library (1895), a Roman Catholic hospital, and the Rinehart 
hospital, and is the seat of the Northland College and Academy 
(Congregational). Ashland has an excellent harbour, has large 
iron-ore and coal docks, and is the principal port for the shipment 
of iron ore from the rich Gogebic Range, the annual ore ship- 
ment approximating 3,500,000 tons, valued at $12,000,000, and 
it has also an extensive export trade in lumber. Brownstone 
quarried in the vicinity is also an important export. The lake 
trade amounts to more than $35,000,000 annually. Ashland 
has large saw-mills, iron and steel rolling mills, foundries and 
machine shops, railway repair shops (of the Chicago & North- 
western railway), knitting works, and manufactories of 
dynamite, sulphite fibre, charcoal and wood-alcohol. In 1905 
its total factory product was valued at $4,210,265. Settled 



ASHLAR— ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE 



733 



about 1854, Ashland was incorporated as a village in 1863 and 
received a city charter in 1887. 

ASHLAR, also written Ashler, Ashelere, &c. (probably 
from Lat. axilla, diminutive of axis, an axle), hewn or squared 
stone, generally applied to that used for facing walls. In a 
contract of date 1398 we read — " Murus erit exterius de puro 
lapide vocato achilar, plane incisso, interius vero de lapide fracto 
vocato roghwall." " Clene hewen ashler " often occurs in medi- 
eval documents; this no doubt means tooled or finely worked, 
in contradistinction to rough-axed faces. 

An " ashlar piece " in building is an upright piece of timber 
framed between the common rafters and the wall plate. 

ASHLEY, WILLIAM JAMES (i860- ), English economist, 
was born in London on the 25th of February i860. He was 
educated at St Olave's grammar school and Balliol College, 
Oxford, and became a fellow of Lincoln College. In 1888 he was 
appointed professor of political economy and constitutional 
history in Toronto University, a post which he resigned in 1802, 
in order to become professor of economic history at Harvard 
University. In 1901 he was appointed professor of commerce 
and finance in Birmingham University and in 1902 dean of the 
faculty of commerce. Professor Ashley became well known for 
his work on the early history of English industry, and for his 
prominence among those English economists who supported 
Mr Chamberlain's tariff reform movement. His most important 
works are Early History of the English Woollen Industry (1887); 
Introduction to English Economic History and Theory (2 parts, 
1888-1893); Surveys, Historic and Economic (1900); Adjustment 
of Wages (1903); the Tariff Problem (2nd ed. 1904); Progress 
of the German Working Classes (1904). 

ASHMOLE. ELIAS (1617-1692), English antiquarian, and 
founder of the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, was born at 
Lichfield on the 23rd of May 1617, the son of a saddler. In 1638 
he became a solicitor, and in 1644 was appointed commissioner 
of excise. At Oxford, whither this brought him when the 
Royalist Parliament was sitting there, he made friends with 
Captain (afterwards Sir) George Wharton, through whose 
influence he obtained the 'king's commission as captain of horse 
and comptroller of the ordnance. In 1646 he was initiated as a 
Freemason — the first gentleman, or amateur, to be " accepted." 
In 1649 he married Lady Mainwaring, some twenty years his 
senior and a relative of his first wife who had died eight years 
before. This marriage placed him in a position of affluence that 
enabled him to devote his whole time to his favourite studies. 
His interest in astrology, aroused by Wharton, and by William 
Lilly, — whom with other astrologers he met in London in 1646, — 
seems, in the following years, to have subsided in favour of 
heraldry and antiquarian research. In 1657 his wife petitioned 
for a separation, but failing to gain her case returned to live with 
him. Between this crisis in his domestic life and the time of her 
death in 1668, Ashmole was in high favour at court. He was 
made successively Windsor herald, commissioner, comptroller 
and accountant-general of excise, commissioner for Surinam and 
comptroller of the White Office. He afterwards refused the 
office of Garter king-at-arms in favour of Sir William Dugdale, 
whose daughter he had married in 1668. In 1672 he published 
his Institutions, Laws and Ceremonies of the Order of the Garter, 
a work which was practically exhaustive, and is an example of 
his diligence and years of patient antiquarian research. Five 
years later he presented the Ashmolean Museum, the first public 
museum of curiosities in the kingdom, the larger part of which 
he had inherited from a friend, John Tradescant, to the university 
of Oxford. He made it a condition that a suitable building 
should be erected for its reception, and the collection was not 
finally installed until 1683. Subsequently he made the further 
gift to the university of his library. He died on the 18th of 
May 1692. 

ASHRAF (Shtjrefa, Sherifs), a small scattered tribe of 
African " Arabs " settled near Tokar, in the valleys of the Gash 
and Baraka, and in the Amarar country north of Suakin, They 
call themselves Beni Hashin, and claim descent from Mahomet; 
hence their name, sherif (plural ashraf) being the title applied to 



descendants of the prophet. In the time of the khalifa Abdulla 
(1885-1898), Ashraf was the name by which the family and 
adherents of his late master the mahdi were known, the mahdi's 
family claiming to be Ashraf. The Ashraf of Tokar remained 
loyal to Egypt during the Sudan troubles. 

See Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, edited by Count Gieichen (London, 
1905) ; Fire and Sword in the Sudan, by Slatin Pasha (London, 
1896) ; for the Ashraf or Sherifs in Arabia, see Arabia : Geography. 

ASHREF, a town of Persia in the province of Mazandaran, 
about 50 m. W. of Astarabad and 5 m. inland from the Caspian 
Sea, in 36 42' N. and 53° 32' E. The population is about 6000, 
comprising descendants of some Georgians introduced by Shah 
Abbas I. (1587-1629) and a number of Gudars, a peculiar pariah 
race, probably of Indian origin. The place was without import- 
ance until 161 2, when Shah Abbas began building and laying 
out the palaces and gardens in the neighbourhood now col- 
lectively known as Bagh i Shah (the garden of the shah). The 
palaces, completed in 1627, are now in ruins, but the gardens with 
their luxuriant vegetation and gigantic cypress and orange trees 
are well worth a visit. There were originally six separate gardens, 
all contained within one large wall but separated one from 
another by high walls. The principal palace was the Chehel 
Situn (forty pillars), destroyed by the Afghans in 1723, and, 
although rebuilt by Nadir Shah in 173 1, already in ruins in 1743. 
About I m. north of the town is the Safi-abad garden, with a 
palace built by Shah Sari (1629-1642) for his daughter. It is 
situated on a lovely wooded hill, and was repaired and in part 
renovated about 1870 by Nasiru'd-Din Shah. 

ASHTABULA, a city of Ashtabula county, Ohio, U.S.A., in 
Ashtabula township, on the Ashtabula river and Lake Erie, 
and 54 m. N.E. of Cleveland. Pop. (1890) 8338; (1900) 12,949, 
of whom 3688 were foreign-born; (1910, census) 18,266. 
There is a large Finnish-born population in the city and in Ash- 
tabula county, and the Amerikan Sanomat, established here in 
1897, is one of the most widely read Finnish weeklies in the 
country. Ashtabula is served by the Pennsylvania, the Lake 
Shore & Michigan Southern, and the New York, Chicago & St 
Louis railways, and by inter-urban electric lines. The city is 
built on the high bank of the river about 75 ft. above the lake,' 
and commands good views of diversified scenery. There is a 
public library. Ashtabula has an excellent harbour, to and from 
which large quantities of iron ore and coal are shipped. More 
iron ore is received at this port annually than at any other port 
in the country, or, probably, in the world; the ore is shipped 
thence by rail to Pittsburg, Youngstown and other iron manu- 
facturing centres. In 1907 the port received 7,542,149 gross tons 
of iron ore, and shipped 2,632,027 net tons of soft coal. Among 
the city's manufactures are leather, worsted goods, agricultural 
implements, and foundry and machine shop products; in 1905 
the total value of the factory product was $1,895,454, an increase 
of 114-3 % in five years. There are large green-houses in and 
near Ashtabula, and quantities of lettuce, cucumbers and 
tomatoes are raised under glass and shipped to Pittsburg and 
other large cities. The first settlement here was made about 
1801. Ashtabula township was created in 1808, and from it 
the townships of Kingsville, Plymouth and Sheffield have sub- 
sequently been formed. The village of Ashtabula was incor- 
porated in 1831, and received a city charter in 1891. The name 
Ashtabula is an Indian word first applied to the river and said 
to mean " fish river." 

ASHTON-IN-MAKERFIELD, an urban district in the Newton 
parliamentary division of Lancashire, England, 4 m. S. of Wigan, 
on the Great Central railway. Pop. (1901) 18,687. The district 
is rich in minerals, and has large collieries, and a colliery com- 
pany's institute; iron goods are manufactured. 

ASHTON-UNDER-LYNE, a market-town and municipal and 
parliamentary borough of Lancashire, England, on the river 
Tame, a tributary of the Mersey, 185 m. N.W. by N. from London 
and 65 E. from Manchester. Area, 1346 acres. Pop. (1891) 
40,486; (1901) 43,890. It is served by the London & North- 
western and the Lancashire & Yorkshire railways (Charles- 
town station), and by the Great Central (Park Parade station). 



734 



ASH WEDNESDAY— ASIA 



The church of St Michael is Perpendicular, but almost wholly 
rebuilt. In the vicinity are barracks. The Old Hall, or manor 
house of the Asshetons, remains in an altered form, with an 
ancient prison adjoining, and the name of Gallows Meadow, still 
preserved, recalls the summary execution of justice by the lords 
of the manor. In the vicinity of Ashton a few picturesque old 
houses remain among the numerous modern residences. Stam- 
ford Park, presented by Lord Stamford, is shared by the towns 
of Ashton and Stalybridge, which extends across the Tame into 
Cheshire. A technical school, school of art and free library, and 
several hospitals are maintained. Chief among industries are 
cotton-spinning, hat-making and iron-founding and machinery 
works; and there are large collieries in the neighbourhood. 
The parliamentary borough, which returns one member, extends 
into Cheshire. The corporation consists of a mayor, 8 aldermen 
and 24 councillors. 

The derivation from the Saxon cesc (ash) and tun (an enclosed 
place) accounts for the earliest orthography Estun. The addition 
subtus lineam is found in ancient deeds and is due to the -position 
of the place below the line or boundary of Cheshire, which once 
formed the frontier between the kingdoms of Northumbria and 
Mercia. The manor was granted to Roger de Poictou by 
William I., but before the end of his reign came to the Greslets 
as part of the barony of Manchester. It was held by the 
Asshetons from 1335 to 1515, when it passed by marriage to the 
Booths of Dunham Massey, and is now held by the earl of 
Stamford, the representative of that family. The lord of the 
manor still holds the ancient court-leet and court-baron half- 
yearly in May and November, in which cognizance is taken of 
breaches of agreement among the tenants, especially concerning 
the repair of roads and cultivation of lands. The place had long 
enjoyed 4he name of borough, but it was not till 1847 that a 
charter of incorporation was granted. Under the Reform Act 
(1832) it returns one member. One of the markets dates back 
to 1436. The ancient industry was woollen, but soon after the 
invention of the spinning frame the cotton trade was introduced, 
and as early as 1769 the weaving of ginghams, nankeens and 
calicoes was carried on, and the weaving of cotton yarn by 
machinery soon became the staple industry. A chapel or church 
existed here as early as 1 261-1262. 

ASH WEDNESDAY, in the Western Church, the first day of 
Lent (q.v.), so called from the ceremonial.use of ashes, as a symbol 
of penitence, in the service prescribed for the day. The custom, 
which is ultimately based on the penance of " sackcloth and 
ashes " spoken of by the prophets of the Old Testament, has been 
dropped in those of the reformed Churches which still observe 
the fast; but it is retained in the Roman Catholic Church, the 
day being known as dies cinerum (day of ashes) or dies cineris et 
cilicii (day of ash and sackcloth). The ashes, obtained by burning 
the palms or their substitutes used in the ceremonial of the 
previous Palm Sunday, are placed in a vessel on the altar before 
High Mass. The priest, vested in a violet cope, prays that God 
may send His angel to hallow the ash, that it become a remedium 
salubre for all penitents. After another prayer the ashes are 
thrice sprinkled with holy water and thrice censed. Then the 
priest invites those present to approach and, dipping his thumb 
in the ashes, marks them as they kneel with the sign of the cross 
on the forehead (or in the case of clerics on the place of tonsure), 
with the words: Memento, homo, quia pulvis es et in puherem 
reverteris (Remember, man, that thou art dust and unto dust thou 
shalt return). The celebrant himself either sprinkles the ash on 
his own head in silence, or receives it from the priest of highest 
dignity present. 

This ceremony is derived from the custom of public penance 
in the early Church, when the sinner to be reconciled had to 
appear in the congregation clad in sackcloth and covered with 
ashes (cf. Tertullian, De Pudicitia, 13). At what date this use 
was extended to the whole congregation is not known. The 
phrase dies cinerum appears in the earliest extant copies of the 
Gregorian Sacramentary, and it is probable that the custom 
was already established by the 8th century. The Anglo-Saxon 
homilist ^Elfric, in his Lives of the Saints (996 or 997), refers to 



it as in common use; but the earliest evidence of its authori- 
tative prescription is a decree of the synod of Beneventum in 
1091. 

Of the reformed Churches the Anglican Church alone marks 
the day by any special service. This is known as the Commina- 
tion service, its distinctive element being the solemn reading of 

the general sentences of God's cursing against sinners, gathered 
out of the seven and twentieth chapter of Deuteronomy, and 
other places of Scripture." The lections for the day are the 
same as in the Roman Church (Joel ii. 12, &c, and Matt. vi. 16, 
&c). In the American Prayer Book the office of Commination 
is omitted, with the exception of the three concluding prayers, 
which are derived from the prayers and anthems said or sung 
during the blessing and distribution of the ashes according to 
the Sarum Missal. The ceremonial of the ashes was not pro- 
scribed in England at the Reformation; it was indeed enjoined 
by a proclamation of Henry VIII. (February 26, 1538) and 
again in 1550 under Edward VI.; but it had fallen into complete 
disuse by the beginning of the 17 th century. 

See Wetzer and Welte, Kirchenlexikon, and Herzog-Hauck, 
Realencyklopadie (3rd ed.), s. " Aschermittwoch" ; L. Duchesne, 
Christian Worship, trans, by M. L. McClure (London, 1904). 

ASHWELL, LENA (1872- ), English actress, was the 
daughter of Commander Pocock, R.N. In 1896 she married 
the actor Arthur Play fair, whom she divorced in 1908; later in 
the latter year she married Dr Simson. In 1895 she played 
Elaine in Sir Henry Irving's production of King Arthur at 
the Lyceum, and again acted with him in 1903 in Dante. 
She made her first striking success, however, on the London 
stage in Mrs Dane's Defence with Sir Charles Wyndham in 1900, 
and a few years later her acting in Leah Kleschna confirmed her 
position as one of the leading actresses in London. In 1907 she 
started under her own management at the Kingsway theatre. 

ASIA, the name of one of the great continents into which the 
earth's surface is divided, embracing the north-eastern portion 
of the great mass of land which constitutes what is generally 
known as the Old World, of which Europe forms the north- 
western and Africa the south-western region. 

Much doubt attaches to the origin of the name. Some of the 
earliest Greek geographers divided their known world into two 
portions only, Europe and Asia, in which last Libya (the Greek 
name for Africa) was included. Herodotus, who ranks Libya 
as one of the chief divisions of the world, separating it from Asia, 
repudiates as fables the ordinary explanations assigned to the 
names Europe and Asia, but confesses his inability to say whence 
they came. It would appear probable, however, that the former 
of these words was derived from an Assyrian or Hebrew root, 
which signifies the west or setting sun, and the latter from a 
corresponding root meaning the east or rising sun, and that they 
were used at one time to imply the west and the east. There 
is ground also for supposing that they may at first have been 
used with a specific or restricted local application, a more 
extended signification having eventually been given to them. 
After the word Asia had acquired its larger sense, it was still 
specially used by the Greeks to designate the country around 
Ephesus. The idea of Asia as originally formed was necessarily 
indefinite, and long continued to be so; and the area to which 
the name was finally applied, as geographical knowledge increased, 
was to a great extent determined by arbitrary and not very 
precise conceptions, rather than on the basis of natural relations 
and differences subsisting between it and the surrounding 
regions. 

Geography 

The northern boundary of Asia is formed by the Arctic 
Ocean; the coast-line falls between 70 and 75° N., and so lies 
within the Arctic circle, having its extreme northern 
point in Cape Sivero-Vostochnyi {i.e. north-east) ar ies. ' 
or Chelyuskin, in 78 N. On the south the coast-line 
is far more irregular, the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and 
the China Sea reaching about to the northern tropic at the 
mouths of the Indus, of the Ganges and of the Canton river; 



GEOGRAPHY] 



ASIA 



735 



while the great peninsulas of Arabia, Hindostan and Cambodia 
descend to about 10° N., and the Malay peninsula extends 
within a degree and a half of the equator. On the west the 
extreme point of Asia is found on the shore of the Mediterranean, 
at Cape Baba, in 26° E., nor far from the Dardanelles. Thence 
the boundary passes in the one direction through the Mediter- 
ranean, and down the Red Sea to the southern point of Arabia, 
at the strait of Bab-el-Mandeb, in 45 E.; and in the other 
through the Black Sea, and along the range of Caucasus, following 
approximately 40 N. to the Caspian, whence it turns to the 
north on a line not far from the 60th meridian, along the Ural 
Mountains, and meets the Arctic Ocean nearly opposite the 
island of Novaya Zemlya. The most easterly point of Asia is 
East Cape (Vostochnyi, i.e. east, or Dezhnev), in 190 E., at the 
entrance of Bering Strait. The boundary between this point 
and the extremity of the Malay Peninsula follows the coast of 
the Northern Pacific and the China Sea, on a line deeply broken 
by the projection of the peninsulas of Kamchatka and Korea, 
and the recession of the Sea of Okhotsk, the Yellow Sea, and the 
Gulfs of Tongking and Siam. 

On the east and south-east of Asia are several important 
groups of islands, the more southern of which link this continent 

to Australia, and to the islands of the Pacific. The 
Islands. -^ UT [[ C Islands, the Japanese group, Luchu, Formosa 
and the Philippines, may be regarded as unquestionable outliers 
of Asia. Between the islands of the Malay archipelago from 
Sumatra to New Guinea, and the neighbouring Asiatic continent, 
no definite relations appear ever to have existed, and no dis- 
tinctly marked boundary for Asia has been established by the 
old geographers in this quarter. Modern science, however, has 
indicated a line of physical separation along the channel between 
Borneo and Celebes, called the Straits of Macassar, which 
follows approximately 120 E., to the west of which the flora 
and fauna are essentially Asiatic in their type, while to the south 
and east the Australian element begins to be distinctly marked, 
soon to become predominant. To this boundary has been given 
the name of Wallace's line, after the eminent naturalist, A. R. 
Wallace, who first indicated its existence. 

Owing to the great extent of Asia, it is not easy to obtain a 
correct conception of the actual form of its outline from ordinary 

maps, the distortions which accompany projections of 
Form of [ ar g e spherical areas on a flat surface being necessarily 

great and misleading. Turning, therefore, to a globe, 
Asia, viewed as a whole, will be seen to have the form of a great 
isosceles spherical triangle, having its north-eastern apex at 
East Cape (Vostochnyi), in Bering Strait; its two equal sides, 
in length about a quadrant of the sphere, or 6500 m., extending 
on the west to the southern point of Arabia, and on the east to 
the extremity of the Malay peninsula; and the base between 
these points occupying about 60° of a great circle, or 4500 m., 
and being deeply indented by the Arabian Sea and the Bay of 
Bengal on either side of the Indian peninsula. A great circle, 
drawn through East Cape and the southern point of Arabia, 
passes nearly along the coast-line of the Arctic Ocean, over the 
Ural Mountains, through the western part of the Caspian, and 
nearly along the boundary between Persia and Asiatic Turkey. 
Asia Minor and the north-western half of Arabia lie outside such 
a great circle, which otherwise indicates, with fair accuracy, the 
north-western boundary of Asia. In like manner a great circle 
drawn through East Cape and the extremity of the Malay 
peninsula, passes nearly over the coasts of Manchuria, China 
and Cochin-China, and departs comparatively little from the 
eastern boundary. 

Asia is divided laterally along the parallel of 40° north by a 
depression which, beginning on the east of the desert of Gobi, extends 

westwards through Mongolia to Chinese Turkestan. To 
General t ^ e west f Kashgar the central depression is limited by 
physio- t ]j e meridional range of Sarikol and the great elevation 
graphy. f t ^ e p am ; ri f which the Sarikol is the eastern face. 
The level of this depression (once a vast inland sea) between the 
mountains which enclose the sources of the Hwang-ho and the 
Sarikol range probably never exceeds 2000 ft. above sea, and modern 
researches tend to prove that in the central portions of the Gobi 
(about Lop Nor) it may be actually below sea-level. A vast pro- 



portion of the continent north of this central line is but a few hundred 
feet in altitude. Shelving gradually upward from the low flats of 
Siberia the general continental level rises to a great central water- 
parting, or divide, which stretches from the Black Sea through the 
Elburz and the Hindu Kush to the Tian-shan mountains in the 
Pamir region, and hence to Bering Strait on the extreme north-east. 
This great divide is not always marked by well-defined ranges facing 
steeply either to the north or south. There are considerable spaces 
where the strike, or axis, of the main ranges is transverse to the 
water-parting, which is then represented by intermediate highlands 
forming lacustrine regions with an indefinite watershed. Only a 
part of this great continental divide (including such ranges as the 
Hindu Kush, Tian-shan, Altai or Khangai) rises to any great height, 
a considerable portion of it being below 5000 ft. in altitude. South 
of the divide the level at once drops to the central depression of 
Gobi, which forms a vast interior, almost waterless space, where 
the local drainage is lost in deserts or swamps. South of this 
enclosed depression is another great hydrographic barrier which 
parts it from the low plains of the Amur, of China, Siam and India, 
bordered by the shallows of the Yellow Sea and the shoals which 
enclose the islands of Japan and Formosa, all of them once an in- 
tegral part of the continent. This second barrier is one of the most 
mighty upheavals in the world, by reason both of its extent and 
its altitude. Starting from the Amur river and reaching along the 
eastern margin of the Gobi desert towards the sources of the Hwang- 
ho, it merges into the Altyn-tagh and the Kuen-lun, forming the 
northern face of the vast Tibetan highlands which are bounded on 
the south by the Himalaya. The Pamir highlands between the base 
of the Tian-shan mountains and the eastern buttresses of the Hindu 
Kush unite these two great divides, enclosing the Gobi depression 
on the west ; and they would again be united on the east but for 
the transverse valley of the Amur, which parts the Khingan moun- 
tains from the Yablonoi system to the east of Lake Baikal. 

If we consider the whole continent to be divided into three sections, 
viz. a northern section with an average altitude of less than 5000 ft. 
above sea, where all the main rivers flow northward to the Mediter- 
ranean, the Arctic Sea, or the Caspian; a central section of depres- 
sion, where the drainage is lost in swamps or hamuns, and of which 
the average level probably does not exceed 2000 ft. above sea; and 
a southern section divided between highly elevated table-lands from 
15,000 to 16,000 ft. in altitude, and lowlands of the Arabian, Indian, 
Siamese and Chinese peninsulas, with an ocean outlet for its drainage ; 
we find that there is only one direct connexion between northern 
and southern sections which involves no mountain passes, and no 
formidable barrier of altitudes. That one is afforded by the narrow 
valley of the Hari Rud to the west of Herat. From the Caspian to 
Karachi it is possible to pass without encountering any orographic 
obstacle greater than the divide which separates the valley of the 
Hari Rud from the Helmund hamun basin, which may be repre- 
sented by an altitude of about 4000 ft. above sea-level. This fact 
possesses great significance in connexion with the development of 
Asiatic railways. 

If we examine the hydrographic basins of the three divisions of 
Asia thus indicated we find that the northern division, 
including the drainage falling into the Arctic Sea, the Aralo- Hydro- 
Caspian depression, or the Mediterranean, embraces an * rap y ' 
area of about 6,394,500 sq. m., as follows: — 



Area of Arctic river basins . 
,, Aralo-Caspian basin 
,, Mediterranean 



Sq. m. 

4,367,000 

i,759.ooo 

268,500 

6,394.500 



Total 
The southern division is nearly equal in extent- 

Sq. m. 

Pacific drainage 3,641,000 

Indian Ocean 2,873,000 



Total 



6,514,000 



The interior or inland basins, including the lacustrine regions south 
of the Arctic watershed, the Gobi depression, Tibetan plateau, the 
Iranian (or Perso-Afghan) uplands, the Syro-Arabian inland basin, 
and that of Asia Minor, amount to 3,141,500 sq. m. or about half 
the extent of the other two. 

By far the largest Asiatic river basin is that of the Ob, which 
exceeds 1,000,000 sq. m. in extent. On the east and south the Amur 
embraces no less than 776,000 sq. m., the Yang-tsze-kiang including 
685,000, the Ganges 409,500, and the Indus 370,000 sq. m. 1 

The lakes of Asia are innumerable, and vary in size from an inland 
sea (such as Lakes Baikal and Balkash) to a highland loch, or the 
indefinitely extended swamps of Persia. Many of them are at high 
elevations (Lake Victoria, 13,400 ft., being probably the most ele- 
vated), and are undoubted vestiges of an ancient period of glaciation. 
Such lakes, as a rule, show indications of a gradual decrease in size. 
Others are relics of an earlier geological period, when land areas 

1 Authorities differ in their methods and results of computation 
of these and other similar measurements. 



73b 



ASIA 



[GEOGRAPHY 



recently upheaved from the sea were spread at low levels with alter- 
nate inundations of salt and fresh water. Of these LopJNor and the 
Helmund hamuns are typical. Such lakes (in common with all the 
plateau hamuns of south-west Baluchistan and Persia) change their 
form and extent from season to season, and many of them are 
impregnated with saline deposits from the underlying strata. The 
kavirs, or salt depressions, of the Persian desert are more frequently 
widespread deposits of mud and salt than water-covered areas. 

Although for the purposes of geographical nomenclature, bound- 
aries formed by a coast-line — that is, by depressions of the earth's 
solid crust below the ocean level — are most easily recog- 
PollUcal n i ze( j am j are f special convenience ; and although such 

v s ons. boundaries, from following lines on which the continuity of 
the land is interrupted, often necessarily indicate important differences 
in the conditions of adjoining countries, and of their political and 
physical relations, yet variations of the elevation of the surface above 
the sea-level frequently produce effects not less marked. The changes 
of temperature and climate caused by difference of elevation are 
quite comparable in their magnitude and effect on all organized 
creatures with those due to differences of latitude ; and the relative 
position of the high and low lands on the earth's surface, by modify- 
ing the direction of the winds, the fall of rain, and other atmospheric 
phenomena, produce effects in no sense less important than those 
due to the relative distribution of the land and sea. Hence the study 
of the mountain ranges of a continent is, for a proper apprehension 
of its physical conditions and characteristics, as essential as the 
examination of its extent and position in relation to the equator 
and poles, and the configuration of its coasts. 

From such causes the physical conditions of a large part of Asia, 
and the history of its population, have been very greatly influenced 
by the occurrence of the mass of mountain above de- 
y lma ' scribed, which includes the Himalaya and the whole 

f ya " d elevated area having true physical connexion with that 

oun ary. ran g e| anc j occupies an area about 2000 m. in length and 
varying from 100 to 500 m. in width, between 65°and ioo°east and 
between 28 and 35 north. These mountains, which include the 
highest peaks in the world, rise, along their entire length, far above 
the line of perpetual snow, and few of the passes across the main 
ridges are at a less altitude than 15,000 or 16,000 ft. above the sea. 
Peaks of 20,000 ft. abound along the whole chain, and the points 
that exceed that elevation are numerous. A mountain range such 
as this, attaining altitudes at which vegetable life ceases, and the 
support of animal life is extremely difficult, constitutes an almost 
impassable barrier against the spread of all forms of living creatures. 
The mountain mass, moreover, is not less important in causing a com- 
plete separation between the atmospheric conditions on its opposite 
flanks, by reason of the extent to which it penetrates that stratum 
of the atmosphere which is in contact with the earth's surface and 
is effective in determining climate. The highest summits create 
serious obstructions to the movements of nearly three-fourths of the 
mass of the air resting on this part of the earth, and of nearly the 
whole of the moisture it contains; the average height of the entire 
chain is such as to make it an almost absolute barrier to one-half of 
the air and three-fourths of the moisture; while the lower ranges 
also produce important atmospheric effects, one-fourth of the air 
and one-half of the watery vapour it carries with it lying below 
9000 ft. 

This great mass of mountain, constituting as it does a complete 
natural line of division across a large part of the continent, will form 
a convenient basis from which to work, in proceeding, as will now 
be done, to give a general view of the principal countries contained 
in Asia. 

The summit of the great mountain mass is occupied by Tibet, a 
country known by its inhabitants under the name of Bod or Bodyul. 
Tib t Tibet is a rugged table-land, narrow as compared with its 

e ' length, broken up by a succession of mountain ranges, 

which follow as a rule the direction of the length of the table-land, 
and commonly rise into the regions of perpetual snow ; between the 
flanks of these lie valleys, closely hemmed in, usually narrow, having 
a very moderate inclination, but at intervals opening out into wide 
plains, and occupied either by rivers, or frequently by lakes from 
which there is no outflow and the waters of which are salt.. The 
eastern termination of Tibet is in the line of snowy mountains which 
flanks China on the west, between the 27th and 35th parallels of 
latitude, and about I03°east. On the west the table-land is prolonged 
beyond the political limits of Tibet, though with much the same 
physical features, to about 7o"east, beyond which it terminates; and 
the ranges which are covered with perpetual snow as far west as 
Samarkand, thence rapidly diminish in height, and terminate in low 
hills north of Bokhara. 

The mean elevation of Tibet may be taken as 15,000 ft. above the 
sea. The broad mountainous slope by which it is connected with 
the lower levels of Hindostan contains the ranges known as the 
Himalaya; the name Kuen-lun is generally applied to the northern 
slope that descends to the central plains of the Gobi, though these 
mountains are not locally known under those names, Kuen-lun 
being apparently a Chinese designation. 

The extreme rigour of the climate of Tibet, which combines great 
cold with great drought, makes the country essentially very poor, 
and the chief portion of it little better than desert. The vegetation 



British 
India. 



is everywhere most scanty, and scarcely anything deserving the name 
of a tree is to be found unless in the more sheltered spots, and then 
artificially planted. The population in the lower and warmer valleys 
live in houses, and follow agriculture ; in the higher regions they are 
nomadic shepherds, thinly scattered over a large area. 

China lies between the eastern flank of the Tibetan plateau and 
the North Pacific, having its northern and southern limits about 
on 40 and 20 N. respectively. The country, though 
generally broken up with mountains of moderate elevation, (*hlna. 
possesses none of very great importance apart from those of its 
western border. It is well watered, populous, and, as a rule, highly 
cultivated, fertile, and well wooded; the climate is analogous to 
that of southern Europe, with hot summers, and winters everywhere 
cold and in the north decidedly severe. 

From the eastern extremity of the Tibetan mountains, between 
the 95th and 100th meridians, high ranges extend from about 35° N. 
in a southerly direction, which, spreading outwards as 
they go south, reach the sea at various points in Cochin- ^L. 
China, the Malay peninsula, and the east flank of Bengal. &"«•«** 
Between these ranges, which are probably permanently re g»n. 
snowy to about 27 N., flow the great rivers of the Indo-Chinese 
peninsula, the Mekong, the Menam, the Salween, and the Irrawaddy, 
the valleys of which form the main portions of the states of Cochin- 
China (including Tongking and Cambodia), of Siam (including Laos) 
and of Burma. The people of Cochin-China are called Anam ; it 
is probably from a corruption of their name for the capital of Tong- 
king, Kechao, that the Portuguese Cochin has been derived. All 
these countries are well watered, populous and fertile, with a 
climate very similar to that of eastern Bengal. The geography of 
the region in which the mountains of Cochin-China and Siam join 
Tibet is still imperfectly known, but there is no ground left for doubt- 
ing that the great river of eastern Tibet, the Tsanpo, supplies the 
main stream of the Brahmaputra. The two great rivers of China, 
the Hwang-ho and the Yang-tsze-kiang take their rise from the 
eastern face of Tibet, the former from the north-east angle, the 
latter from the south-east. The main stream of this last is called 
Dichu in Tibet, and its chief feeder is the Ya-lung-kiang, which rises 
not far frpm the Hwang-ho, and is considered the territorial boundary 
between China and Tibet. 

British India comprises approximately the area between the 95th 
and 70th meridians, and between the Tibetan table-land and the 
Indian Ocean. The Indian peninsula from 25 N. south- 
wards is a table-land, having its greatest elevation on the 
west, where the highest points rise to over 8000 ft., though 
the ordinary altitude of the higher hills hardly exceeds 4000 ft. ; 
the general level of the table-land lies between 3000 ft. as a maximum 
and 1000 ft. 

From the delta of the Ganges and Brahmaputra on the east to 
that of the Indus on the west, and intervening between the table- 
land of the peninsula and the foot of the Himalayan slope of the 
Tibetan plateau, lies the great plain of northern India, which rises 
at its highest point to about 1000 ft., and includes altogether, with 
its prolongation up the valley of Assam, an area of about 500,000 
sq. m., comprising the richest, the most populous and most civilized 
districts of India. The great plain extends, with an almost unbroken 
surface, from the most western to the most eastern extremity of 
British India, and is composed of deposits so finely comminuted, 
that it is no exaggeration to say that it is possible to go from the 
Bay of Bengal up the Ganges, through the Punjab, and down the 
Indus again to the sea, over a distance of 2000 m. and more, without 
finding a pebble, however small. 

The great rivers of northern India — the Ganges, the Brahma- 
putra and the Indus — all derive their waters from the Tibetan 
mountain mass; and it is a remarkable circumstance that the 
northern water-parting of India should lie to the north of the Hima- 
laya in the regions of central Tibet. 

The population of India is very large, some of its districts being 
among the most densely peopled in the world. The country is 
generally well cleared, and forests are, as a rule, found only along 
the flanks of the mountains, where the fall of rain is most abundant. 
The more open parts are highly cultivated, and large cities abound. 
The climate is generally such as to secure the population the neces- 
saries of life without severe labour; the extremes of heat and 
drought are such as to render the land unsuitable for pasture, and 
the people everywhere subsist by cultivation of the soil or commerce, 
and live in settled villages or towns. 

The island of Ceylon is distinguished from the neighbouring parts 
of British India by little more than its separate administration 
and the Buddhistic religion of its population. The highest point in 
Ceylon rises to about 9000 ft. above the sea, and the mountain slopes 
are densely covered with forest. The lower levels are in climate 
and cultivation quite similar to the regions in the same latitude on 
the Malay peninsula. 

Of the islands in the Bay of Bengal the Nicobar and Andaman 
groups are alone worth notice. They are placed on a line joining 
the north end of Sumatra and Cape Negrais, the south-western 
extremity of Burma. They possibly owe their existence to th& 
volcanic agencies which are known to extend from Sumatra across 
this part of the Indian Ocean. 

The Laccadives and Maldives are groups of small coral islands, 



GEOGRAPHY] 



ASIA 



737 



situated along the 73rd meridian, at no great distance from the 
Indian peninsula, on which they have a political dependency. 

The portion of Asia west of British India, excluding Arabia and 
Syria, forms another extensive plateau covering an area as large 
The as tnat °^ Tibet, though at a much lower altitude. Its 

Nearer southern border runs along the Arabian Sea, the Persian 
g^ Gulf, the Tigris, and thence westward to the north-east 

angle of the Levant; on the north the high land follows 
nearly 36 N. to the southern shore of the Caspian, and thence to 
the Black Sea and Sea of Marmora. Afghanistan, Baluchistan, Iran 
or Persia, Armenia and the provinces of Asia Minor occupy this 
high region, with which they are nearly conterminous. The eastern 
flank of this tableland follows a line of hills drawn a short distance 
from the Indus, between the mouth of that river and the Himalaya, 
about on the 72nd meridian; these hills do not generally exceed 
4000 or 5000 ft. in elevation, but a few of the summits reach 10,000 ft. 
or more. The southern and south-western face follows the coast 
closely up the Persian Gulf from the mouth of the Indus, and is 
formed farther west by the mountain scarp, which, rising in many 
points to 10,000 ft., flanks the Tigris and the Mesopotamian plains, 
and extends along Kurdistan and Armenia nearly to the 40th 
meridian; beyond which it turns along the Taurus range, and the 
north - eastern angle of the Mediterranean. The north - eastern 
portion of the Afghan tableland abuts on the Himalaya and Tibet, 
with which it forms a continuous mass of mountain between the 
71st and 72nd meridians, and 34 ° and 36 N. From the point of 
intersection of the 71st meridian with the 36th parallel of latitude, 
an unbroken range of mountain stretches on one side towards the 
north-east, up to the crest of the northern slope of the Tibetan 
plateau, and on the other nearly due west as far as the Caspian. 
The north-eastern portion of this range is of great altitude, and 
separates the headwaters of the Oxus, which run off to the Aral Sea, 
from those of the Indus and its Kabul tributary, which, uniting 
below Peshawar, are thence discharged southward into the Arabian 
Sea. The western part of the range, which received the name of 
Paropamisus Mons from the ancients, diminishes in height west of 
the 65th meridian and constitutes the northern face of the Afghan 
and Persian plateau, rising abruptly from the plains of the Turkoman 
desert, which lies between the Oxus and the Caspian. These moun- 
tains at some points attain a height of 10,000 or 12,000 ft. Along 
the south coast of the Caspian this line of elevation is prolonged as 
the Elburz range(not to be confused with the Elburz of the Caucasus), 
and has its culminating point in Demavend, which rises to 19,400 ft. 
above the sea; thence it extends to the north-west to Ararat, which 
rises to upwards of 17,000 ft., from the vicinity of which the Euph- 
rates flows off to the south-west, across the high lands of Armenia. 
Below the north-east declivity of this range lies Georgia, on the other 
side of which province rises the Caucasus, the boundary of Asia and 
Europe between the Caspian and Black Seas, the highest points of 
which reach an elevation of nearly 19,000 ft. West of Ararat high 
hills extend along the Black Sea, between which and the Taurus 
range lies the plateau of Asia Minor, reaching to the Aegean Sea; 
the mountains along the Black Sea, on which are the Olympus and 
Ida of the ancients, rise to 6000 or 7000 ft. ; the Taurus is more 
lofty, reaching 8000 and 10,000 ft. ; both ranges decline in altitude 
as they approach the Mediterranean. 

This great plateau, extending from the Mediterranean to the 
Indus, has a length of about 2500 m. from east to west, and a breadth 
of upwards of 600 m. on the west and nowhere of less than 250 m. 
It lies generally at altitudes between 2000 ft. and 8000 ft. above 
the sea-level. Viewed as a whole, the eastern half of this region, 
comprising Persia, Afghanistan and Baluchistan, is poor and un- 
productive. The climate is very severe in the winter and extremely 
hot in summer. The rainfall is very scanty, and running waters 
\re hardly known, excepting among the mountains which form the 
•carps of the elevated country. The population is sparse, frequently 
nomadic and addicted to plunder; progress in the arts and habits 
of civilization is small. The western part of the area falls within 
the Turkish empire. Its climate is less hot and arid, its natural 
productiveness much greater, and its population more settled and 
on the whole more advanced? 

The peninsula of Arabia, with Syria, its continuation to the north- 
west, has some of the characteristics of the hottest and driest parts 
Arabia. °^ P ers ' a an d Baluchistan. Excepting the northern part 
of this tract, which is conterminous with the plain of 
Mesopotamia (which at its highest point reaches an elevation of about 
700 ft. above the sea), the country is covered with low mountains, 
rising to 3000 or 4000 ft. in altitude, having among them narrow 
valleys in which the vegetation is scanty, with exceptional regions 
of greater fertility in the neighbourhood of the coasts, where the 
rainfall is greatest. In northern Syria the mountains of Lebanon 
rise to about 10,000 ft., and with a more copious water supply 
the country becomes more productive. The whole tract, excepting 
south-eastern Arabia, is nominally subject to Turkey, but the people 
are to no small extent practically independent, living a nomadic, 
pastoral and freebooting life under petty chiefs, in the more arid 
districts, but settled in towns in the more fertile tracts, where agricul- 
ture becomes more profitable and external commerce is established. 

The area between the northern border of the Persian high lands 
and the Caspian and Aral Seas is a nearly desert low-lying plain, 

II. 24 



extending to the foot of the north - western extremity of the 
great Tibeto-Himalayan mountains, and prolonged east- T 
ward up the valleys of the Oxus (Amu-Darya) and Qasolan 
Jaxartes (Syr-Darya), and northward across the country re j£ a a „ a 
of the Kirghiz to the south-western border of Siberia, g^^,/ 
It includes Bokhara, Khiva and Turkestan proper, in ,t s / a- 
which the Uzbeg Turks are dominant, and for the most 
part is inhabited by nomadic tribes, who are marauders, enjoying 
the reputation of being the worst among a race of professed robbers. 
The tribes to the north, subject to Russia, are naturally more peace- 
able, and have been brought into some degree of discipline. In this 
tract the rainfall is nowhere sufficient for the purposes of agriculture, 
which is only possible by help of irrigation; and the fixed popula- 
tion (which contains a non-Turkish element) is comparatively small, 
and restricted to the towns and the districts near the rivers. 

The north-western extremity of the elevated Tibeto-Himalayan 
mountain plateau is situated about on 73° E. and 39° N. This 
region is known as Pamir ; it has all the characteristics of the highest 
regions of Tibet, and so far fitly receives the Russian designation 
of steppe; but it seems to have no special peculiarities, and the 
reason of its having been so long regarded as a geographical enigma 
is not obvious. From it the Oxus, or Amu, flows off to the west, 
and the Jaxartes, or Syr, to the north, through the Turki state of 
Khokand, while to the east the waters run down past Kashgar to 
the central desert of the Gobi, uniting with the streams from the 
northern slope of the Tibetan plateau that traverse the principalities 
of Yarkand and Khotan, which are also Turki. Here the Tibetan 
mountains unite with the line of elevation which stretches across 
the continent from the Pacific, and which separates Siberia from 
the region commonly spoken of under the name of central Asia. 

A range of mountains, called Stanovoi, rising to heights of 4000 
or 5000 ft., follows the southern coast of the eastern extremity of 
Asia from Kamchatka to the borders of Manchuria, as far Man- 
as the 135th meridian, in lat. 55 N. Thence the Yablonoi churla. 
range, continuing in the same direction, divides the 
waters of the river Lena, which flows through Siberia into the 
Arctic Sea, from those of the river Amur, which falls into the North 
Pacific; the basin of this river, with its affluents, constitutes Man- 
churia. From the north of Manchuria the Khingan range stretches 
southward to the Chinese frontier near Peking, east of which the 
drainage falls into the Amur and the Yellow Sea, while to the west 
is an almost rainless region, the inclination of which is towards the 
central area of the continent, Mongolia. 

From the western end of the Yablonoi range, on the 115th 
meridian, a mountainous belt extends along a somewhat irregular 
line to the extremity of Pamir, known under various names Mongolia. 
in its different parts, and broken up into several branches, 
enclosing among them many isolated drainage areas, from which 
there is no outflow, and within which numerous lakes are formed. 
The most important of these ranges is the Tian-shan or Celestial 
Mountains, which form the northern boundary of the Gobi desert; 
they lie between 40 and 43° N., and between 75 and 95 E., and 
some of the summits are said to exceed 20,000 ft. in altitude ; along 
the foot of this range are the principal cultivated districts of central 
Asia, and here too are situated the few towns which have sprung 
up in this barren and thinly peopled region. Next may be named 
the Ala-tau, on the prolongation of the Tian-shan, flanking the Syr on 
the north, and rising to 14,000 or 15,000 ft. It forms the barrier 
between the Issyk-kul and Balkash lakes, the elevation of which is 
about 5000 ft. Last is the Altai, near the 50th parallel, rising to 
10,000 or 12,000 ft., which separates the waters of the great rivers 
of western Siberia from those that collect into the lakes of north- 
west Mongolia, Dzungaria and Kalka. A line of elevation is con- 
tinued west of the Altai to the Ural Mountains, not rising to con- 
siderable altitudes; this divides the drainage of south-west Siberia 
from the great plains lying north-east of the Aral Sea. 

The central area bounded on the north and north-west by the 
Yablonoi Mountains and their western extension in the Tian-shan, 
on the south by the northern face of the Tibetan plateau, and on the 
east by the Khingan range before alluded to, forms the great desert 
of central Asia, known as the Gobi. Itsjeastern part is nearly con- 
terminous with south Mongolia, its western forms Chinese or eastern 
Turkestan. It appears likely that no part of this great central 
Asiatic desert is less than 2000 ft. above the sea-level. The elevation 
of the plain about Kashgar and Yarkand is from 4000 to 6000 ft. 
The more northern* parts of Mongolia are between 4000 and 6000 ft., 
and no portion of the route across the desert between the Chinese 
frontier and Kiakhta is below 3000 ft. The precise positions of the 
mountain ridges that traverse this central area are not properly 
known; their elevation is everywhere considerable, and many points 
are known to exceed 10,000 or 12,000 ft. 

In Mongolia the population is essentially nomadic, its wealth con- 
sisting in herds of horned cattle, sheep, horses and camels. The 
Turki tribes, occupying western Mongolia, are among the least 
civilized of human beings, and it is chiefly to their extreme barbarity 
and cruelty that our ignorance of central Asia is due. The climate is 
very severe, with great extremes of heat and cold. The drought is 
very great; rain falls rarely and in small quantities. The surface 
is for the most part a hard stony desert, areas of blown sand occurring 
' but exceptionally. There are few towns or settled villages, except 



738 



ASIA 



[EXPLORATION 



along the slopes of the higher mountains, on which the rain falls 
more abundantly, or the melting snow supplies streams for irrigation. 
It is only in such situations that cultivated lands are found, and 
beyond them trees are hardly to be seen. 

The portion of Asia which lies between the Arctic Ocean and the 
mountainous belt bounding Manchuria, Mongolia and Turkestan 
Siberia on tne nort h ' s Siberia. It includes an immense high 
and broken plateau which spreads from south-west to 
north-east, losing in width and altitude as it advances north-east. 
it is fringed on either side by high border ridges, which subside on 
the north-west into a stretch of high plains, 1500 to 2000 ft. high, 
finally dropping to lowlands a few hundred feet above sea-level. 
The extremes of heat and cold are very great. The rainfall, though 
not heavy, is sufficient to maintain such vegetation as is compatible 
with the conditions of temperature, and the surface is often swampy 
or peaty. The mountain-sides are commonly clothed with pine 
forests, and the plains with grasses or shrubs. The population is 
very scanty ; the cultivated tracts are comparatively small in extent 
and restricted to the more settled districts. The towns are entirely 
Russian. The indigenous races are nomadic Mongols, of a peaceful 
character, but in a very backward state of civilization. The Ural 
Mountains do not exceed 2000 or 3000 ft. in average altitude, the 
highest summits not exceeding 6000 ft., and one of the passes being 
as low as 1400 ft. In the southern half of the range are the chief 
mining districts of Russia. The Ob, Yenisei and Lena.which traverse 
Siberia, are among the largest rivers in the world. 

The southern group of the Malay Archipelago, from Sumatra to 
Java and Timor, extends in the arc of a circle between 95 and 
Mala I2 ?° ' anc ' f rom 5° to I0 ° S- The central part of the 

Archh g rou P ' s a volcanic region, many of the volcanoes being 

oelaeo st '" act ' ve > * ne summits frequently rising to 10,000 ft. 

or more. 

Sumatra, the largest of the islands, is but thinly peopled; the 
greater part of the surface is covered with dense forest, the cultivated 
area being comparatively small, confined to the low lands, and chiefly 
in the volcanic region near the centre of the island. Java is the most 
thickly peopled, best cultivated and most advanced island of the 
whole Eastern archipelago. It has attained a high degree of wealth 
and prosperity under the Dutch government. The people are peace- 
ful and industrious, and chiefly occupied with agriculture. The 
highest of the volcanic peaks rises to 12,000 ft. above the sea. The 
eastern islands of this group are less productive and less advanced. 

Borneo, the most western and the largest of the northern group 
of islands which extends between no° and 150° E., as far as New 
Guinea or Papua, is but little known. The population is small, rude 
and uncivilized; and the surface is rough and mountainous and 
generally covered with forest except near the coast, to the alluvial 
lands on which settlers have been attracted from various surround- 
ing countries. The highest mountain rises to nearly 14,000 ft., but 
the ordinary elevations do not exceed 4000 or 5000 ft. 

Of Celebes less is known than of Borneo, which it resembles in 
condition and natural characteristics. The highest known peaks 
rise to 8000 ft., some of them being volcanic. 

New Guinea extends almost to the same meridian as the eastern 
coast of Australia, from the north point of which it is separated by 
PaclH- Torres Straits. Very little is known of the interior. The 

Islands. mountains are said to rise to 20,000 ft., having the appear- 
ance of being permanently covered with snow; the surface 
seems generally to be clothed with thick wood. The inhabitants are 
of the Negrito type, with curly or crisp and bushy hair; those of 
the west coast have come more into communication with the traders 
of other islands and are fairly civilized. Eastward, many of the 
tribes are barbarous savages. 

The Philippine Islands lie between 5° and 20 N., between Borneo 
and southern China. The highest land does not rise to a greater 
height than 10,250 ft.; the climate is well suited for agriculture, 
and the islands generally are fertile and fairly cultivated, though not 
coming up to the standard of Java either in wealth or population. 

Formosa, which is situated under the northern tropic, near the coast 
|of China, is traversed by a high range of mountains, reaching nearly 
13,000 ft. in elevation. On its western side, which is occupied by 
an immigrant Chinese population, are open and well-cultivated 
plains' on the east it is mountainous, and occupied by independent 
indigenous tribes in a less advanced state. 

The islands of Japan, not including Sakhalin, of which half is 
Japanese, lie between the 30th and 45th parallels. The whole group 
is traversed by a line of volcanic mountains, some of which are in 
activity, the highest point being about 13,000 ft. above the sea. 
The country is generally well watered, fertile and well cultivated. 
The Japanese people have added to their ancient civilization and 
their remarkable artistic faculty, an adaptation of Western methods, 
and a capacity for progress in war and commerce, which single them 
out among Eastern races as a great modern world-force. 

Exploration 
The progress of geodetic surveys in Russia had long ago extended 
across the European half of the great empire, St Petersburg being 
connected with Tiflis on the southern slopes of the Caucasus by a 
direct system of triangulation carried out with the highest scientific 
precision. St Petersburg, again, is connected with Greenwich by 



European systems of triangulation ; and the Greenwich meridian 
is adopted by Russia as the zero for all her longitude values. But 
beyond the eastern shores of the Caspian no system of direct geodetic 
measurements by first-class triangulation has been possible, and the 
surveys of Asiatic Russia are separated from those of Europe by the 
width of that inland sea. The arid nature of the trans-Caspian 
deserts has proved an insuperable obstacle to those rigorous methods 
of geodetic survey which distinguish Russian methods in Europe, 
so that Russian geography in central Asia is dependent on other 
means than that of direct measurement for the co-ordinate values 
in latitude and longitude for any given point. The astronomical 
observatory at Tashkent is adopted for the initial starting-point of 
the trans-Caspian triangulation of Russia; the triangulation ranks 
as second-class only, and now extends to the Pamir frontier beyond 
Osh. The longitude of the Tashkent observatory has been deter- 
mined by telegraph differentially with Pulkova as follows: — 

H. m. s. 

In 1875 via Ekaterinburg and Omsk . 2 35 52-151 

,, 1891 „ Saratov ,, Orenburg . 2 35 52-228 

» 1895 „ Kiev „ Baku . . 2 35 51-997 

With these three independent values, all falling within a range of o s -25, 

it is improbable that the mean value has an error as large as o s -io. 

Exact surveys in Russia, based upon triangulation, extend as 
far east as Chinese Turkestan in longitude about 75° E. ^ x i en t / 
of Greenwich. In India geodetic triangulation furnishes ex actsur- 
the basis for exact surveys' as far east as the eastern veys !a 
boundaries of Burma in longitude about 100° E. Asia. 

The close of the 19th century witnessed the forging 
of the final links in the great geodetic triangulation of India, so far 
as the peninsula is concerned. Further geodetic connexion with the 
European systems remains to be accomplished. Since 1890 further 
and more rigorous application of the telegraphic method of deter- 
mining longitudes differentially with Greenwich has resulted in a 
slight correction (amounting to about 2" of arc) to the previous 
determination by the same method through Suez. This last deter- 
mination was effected through four arcs as follows : — 
I. Greenwich — Potsdam. 
II. Potsdam — Teheran. 

III. Teheran — Bushire. 

IV. Bushire — Karachi. 

Each arc was measured with every precaution and a multitude of 
observations. The only element of uncertainty was caused by the 
retardation of the current, which between Potsdam and Teheran 
(3000 m.) took o s -20 to travel ; but it is probable that the final value 
can be accepted as correct to within o s -o5. 

The final result of this latest determination is to place the Madras 
observatory 2' 27" to the west of the position adopted for it on the 
strength of absolute astronomical determinations. 

But while we have yet to wait for that expansion of principal trian- 
gulation which will bring Asia into connexion with Europe 
by the direct process of earth measurement, a topo- 



Connexlon 
between 



graphical connexion has been effected between Russian n assian 
and Indian surveys which sufficiently proves that the * d 
deductive methods employed by both countries for the / no y an 
determination of the co-ordinate values of fixed points so surveys , 
far agree that, for all practical purposes of future Asiatic 
cartography, no difficulty in adjustment between Indian and Russian 
mapping need be apprehended. 

In connexion with the Indian triangulation minor extensions 
carried out on systems involving more or less irregularity have 
been pushed outwards on all sides. They reach through Extension 
Afghanistan and Baluchistan to the eastern districts of f„ eo . 
Persia, and along the coast of Makran to that of Arabia, graphical 
They have long ago included the farther mountain surveys. 
peaks of Nepal, and they now branch outwards towards 
western China and into Siam. These far extensions furnish the 
basis for a vast amount of exploratory survey of a strictly geo- 
graphical character, and they have contributed largely towards 
raising the standard of accuracy in Asiatic geographical surveys to 
a level which was deemed unattainable fifty years ago. There is 
yet a vast field open in Asia for this class of surveys. While at 
the close of the 19th century western Asia (exclusive of Arabia) 
may be said to have been freed from all geographical perplexity, 
China, Mongolia and eastern Siberia still include enormous areas of 
which geographical knowledge is in a primitive stage of nebulous 
uncertainty. 

Of scientific geographical exploration in Asia (beyond the limits of 
actual surveys) the modern period has been so prolific that it is only 
possible to refer in barest outline to some of the principal / n( /; an 
expeditions, most of which have been directed either to eX ptorers. 
the great elevated tableland of Tibet or to the central 
depression which exists to the north of it. In southern Tibet the 
trans-Himalayan explorations of the native surveyors attached to 
the Indian survey, notably Pundits Nain Singh and Krishna, added 
largely to our knowledge of the great plateau. Nain Singh explored 
the sources of the Indus and of the Upper Brahmaputra in the years 
1 865-1 867; and in 1 874-1 875 he followed a line from the eastern 
frontiers of Kashmir to the Tengri Nor lake and thence to Lhasa, in 
which city he remained for some months. Krishna's remarkable 
journey in 1 879-1 882 extended from Lhasa northwards through 



EXPLORATION] 



ASIA 



739 



Tsaidam to Sachu, or Saitu, in Mongolia. He subsequently passed 
through eastern Tibet to the town of Darchendo, or Tachienlu, on 
the high road between Lhasa and Peking, and on the borders of 
China. Failing to reach India through Upper Assam he returned 
to the neighbourhood of Lhasa, and crossed the Himalayas by a more 
westerly route. Both these explorers visited Lhasa. 

In 1871-1873 the great Russian explorer, Nicolai Prjevalsky, 
crossed the Gobi desert from the north to Kansu in western China. 
Russian ^ e nrst defined the geography of Tsaidam, and mapped 
explorers. the hydrography of that remarkable region, from which 
emanate the great rivers of China, Siam and Burma. 
He penetrated southwards to within a month's march of Lhasa. 
In 1876 he visited the Lop Nor and discovered the Altyn Tagh range. 
In 1879 he followed up the Urangi river to the Altai Mountains, and 
demonstrated to the world the extraordinary physical changes which 
have passed over the heart of the Asiatic continent since Jenghiz 
Khan massed his vast armies in those provinces. He crossed, and 
named, the Dzungarian extension of the Gobi desert, and then 
traversed the Gobi itself from Hami to Sachu, which became a point 
of junction between his journeys and those of Krishna. He visited 
the sources of the Hwang-ho (Yellow river) and the Salween, and 
then returned to Russia. His fourth journey in 1883-1885 was to 
Sining (the great trade centre of the Chinese borderland), and thence 
through northern Tibet (crossing the Altyn Tagh to Lop Nor), and 
by the Cherchen-Keriya trade route to Khotan. From Khotan he 
followed the Tarim to Aksu. 

Following Prjevalsky the Russian explorers, Pevtsov and Robor- 
ovski, in 1889-1890 (and again in 1894), added greatly to our know- 
ledge of the topography of western Chinese Turkestan and the 
northern borders of Tibet; all these Russian expeditions being con- 
ducted on scientific principles and yielding results of the highest 
value. Among other distinguished Russian explorers in Asia, the 
names of Lessar, Annentkov (who bridged the Trans-Caspian deserts 
by a railway), P. K. Kozlov and Potanin are conspicuous during the 
19th century. 

Although the establishment of a lucrative trade between India 
and central Asia had been the dream of many successive Indian 
Other viceroys, and much had been done towards improving 

explora- tne a PP roacn es to Simla from the north, very little was 
tions in really known of the highlands of the Pamirs, or of the 
central regions of the great central depression, before the mission of 
Asia. Sir Douglas Forsyth to Yarkand in 1870. Robert Barkley 

Shaw and George Hayward were the European pioneers 
of geography into the central dominion of Kashgar, arriving at 
Yarkand within a few weeks of each other in 1868. Shaw subse- 
quently accompanied Forsyth's mission in 1870, when Henry Trotter 
made the first maps of Chinese Turkestan. The next great accession 
to our knowledge of central Asiatic geography was gained with the 
, Russo-Afghan Boundary Commission of 1884-1886, when Afghan 
Turkestan and the Oxus regions were mapped by Colonel Sir T. H. 
Holdich, Colonel St George Gore and Sir Adelbert Talbot; and when 
Ney Elias crossed from China through the Pamirs and Badakshan 
to the camp of the commission, identifying the great " Dragon 
Lake," Rangkul, on his way. About the same time a mission, 
under Captain (afterwards Sir Willaim) Lockhart, crossed the Hindu 
Kush into Wakhan, and returned to India by the Bashgol valley 
of Kafiristan. This was Colonel Woodthorpe's opportunity, and he 
was then enabled to verify the results of W. W. M'Nair's previous 
explorations, and to determine the conformation of the Hindu Kush. 
In 1885 Arthur Douglas Carey and Andrew Dalgleish, following 
more or less the tracks of Prjevalsky, contributed much that was 
new to the map of Asia ; and in 1886 Captain (afterwards Sir Francis) 
Younghusband completed a most adventurous journey across the 
heart of the continent by crossing the Muztagh, the great mountain 
barrier between China and Kashmir. 

It was in 1886-1887 that Pierre G. Bonvalot, accompanied by 
Prince Henri d'Orleans, crossed the Tibetan plateau from north 
Tibetan to south, but failed to enter Lhasa. In 1889-1891 the 
explora- American traveller, W. W. Rockhill, commenced his 
tions. Tibetan journeys, and also attempted .to reach Lhasa, 

without success. By his writings, as much as by his 
explorations, Rockhill has made his name great in the annals of 
Asiatic research. In 1891 Hamilton Bower made his famous journey 
from Leh to Peking. He, too, failed to penetrate the jealously- 
guarded portals of Lhasa; but he secured (with the assistance of 
a native surveyor) a splendid addition to our previous Tibetan 
mapping. In 1891-1892-1893 the gallant French explorer, Dutreuil 
de Rhins, was in the field of Tibet, where he finally sacrificed his life 
to his work; and the same years saw George N. (afterwards Lord) 
Curzon in the Pamirs, and St George Littledale on his first great 
Tibetan journey, accompanied by his wife. Littledale's first journey 
ended at Peking; his second, in 1 894-1895, took him almost within 
sight of the sacred walls of Lhasa, but he failed to pass inside. Great- 
est among modern Asiatic explorers (if we except Prjevalsky) is the 
brave Swede, Professor Sven Hedin, whose travels through the deserts 
of Takla Makan and Tibet, and whose investigations in the glacial 
regions of the Sarikol mountains, occupied him from 1894 to 1896. 
His is a truly monumental record. From 1896 to 1898 we find two 
British cavalry officers taking the front position in the list of Tibetan 
travellers — Captain M. S. Wellby of the 18th Hussars and Captain 



H. Deasy of the 16th Lancers, each striking out a new line, and 
rendering most valuable service to geography. The latter continued 
the Pamir triangulation, which had been carried across the Hindu 
Kush by Colonels Sir T. H. Holdich and R. A. Wahab during the 
Pamir Boundary Commission of 1895, into the plains of Kashgar 
and to the sources of the Zarafshan. 

Since the beginning of the century the work of Deasy in western 
Tibet has been well extended by Dr M. A. Stein and Captain C. 
G. Rawling, who have increased our knowledge of ancient fields 
of industry and commerce in Turkestan and Tibet. Ellsworth 
Huntington threw new light on the Tian-shan plateau and the Alai 
range by his explorations of 1903; and Sven Hedin, between 1899 
and 1902, was collecting material in Turkestan and Tibetan fields, 
and resumed' his journeys in 1905-1908, the result being to revolu- 
tionize our knowledge of the region north of the upper Tsanpo 
(see Tibet). The mission of Sir Francis Younghusband to Lhasa in 
1904 resulted in an extension of the Indian system of triangulation 
which finally determined the geographical position of that city, and in 
a most valuable reconnaissance of the valleys of the Upper Brahma- 
putra and Indus by Captains C. H. D. Ryder and C. G. Rawling. 

Meanwhile, in the Farther East so rapid has been the progress of 
