gave victory to the side they favoured. They were the patrons 
of hospitality, and founded the sacred festival called Theoxenia. 



4-8 2 



CASTOR OIL— CASTREN 



They presided over public games, Castor especially as the horse- 
tamer, Pollux as the boxer; .but both are represented as riding 
on horseback or driving in a chariot. In Sparta their ancient 
symbol was two parallel beams (Sonava), connected by cross-bars, 
which the Spartans took with them into the field (Plutarch, De 
Fraterno Amove, i; Herodotus v. 75); later, they were repre- 
sented by two amphorae with snakes twined round them. 
Their most important exploits were the invasion of Attica, to 
rescue their sister Helen from Theseus; their share in the hunting 
of the Calydonian boar (see Meleager) and the Argonautic 
expedition, and their battle with the sons of Aphareus, brought 
about by a quarrel in regard to some cattle, in which Castor, 
the mortal (as the son of Tyndareus), fell by the hand of Idas. 
Pollux, finding him dead after the battle, implored Zeus to be 
allowed to die with him; this being impossible by reason of his 
immortality, Pollux was permitted to spend alternately one day 
among the gods, the other in Hades with his brother. Accord- 
ing to another fable, the god marked his approval of their love 
by placing them together in the sky, as the Twins or the morning 
and evening star (Hyginus, Poet. Astronom. ii. 22). Like the 
Asvins of the Veda, the bringers of light in the morning sky, 
with whom they have been identified, the Dioscuri are repre- 
sented as youthful horsemen, naked or wearing only a light 
chlamys. Their characteristic attribute is a pointed egg-shaped 
cap, surmounted by a star. 

Though their worship was perhaps most carefully observed 
among people of Dorian origin, Castor and Pollux were held 
in no small veneration at Rome. It was the popular belief in 
that city from an early period that the battle of Lake Regillus 
had been decided by their interposition (Dion. Halic. vi. 13). 
They had fought, it was said, armed and mounted, at the head 
of the legions of the commonwealth, and had afterwards carried 
the news of the victory with incredible speed to the city. The 
well in the Forum at which they alighted was pointed out, and 
near it rose their ancient temple, in which the senate often held 
its sittings. On the 15 th of July, the supposed anniversary of 
the battle, a great festival with sumptuous sacrifices was cele- 
brated in their honour, and a solemn parade of the Roman 
knights (transvectio equitum), who looked upon the Dioscuri as 
their patrons, took place. (Apollodorus iii. 10. 7, 11. 2; Homer, 
Odyssey, xi. 299; Hyginus, Fab. 77. 155; Pindar, Nem. x. 60, 
80 and schol. ; Diod. Sic. iv. 43; Plutarch, Theseus, 32, 33; 
Theocritus, Idyll, xxii.) 

See Maurice Albert, Le Culte de Castor et Pollux en Italie (1883), 
with special descriptions and representations in art, on coins, vases 
and statues; S. Eitrem, " Die gottlichen ZwilHnge bei den Griechen " 
(treating of the divine beings mentioned in pairs in Greek mythology) , 
in Videnskabs-Selskab Skrifter (Christiania, 1902) ; W. R. Paton, 
De Cultu Dioscurorum apud Graecos (Bonn, 1894); L. Myriantheus, 
Asvins oder arische Dioskuren (Munich, 1876); J. R. Harris, The 
Dioscuri in the Christian Legends (1903), and The Cult of the Heavenly 
Twins (1906) ; W. Helbig, " Die Castores als Schutzgotter des 
romischen Equitatus," in Hermes, xl. (1905) ; C. Jaisle, Die Dio- 
skuren als Retter zur See bei Griechen und Rbmern, und ihr Fortleben 
in christlichen Legenden (Tubingen, 1907) ; L. Preller, Griechische 
und romische Mythologie; articles by A. Purtwangler in Roscher's 
Lexikon der Mythologie, and by M. Albert in Daremberg and Saglio's 
Pictionnaire des antiquites. 

CASTOR OIL, the fixed oil obtained from the seeds of the 
castor oil plant or Palma Christi, Ricinus communis, belonging 
to the natural order Euphorbiaceae. The botanical name is 
from Lat. ricinus, a tick, from the form and markings of the seed. 
The plant is a native of tropical Africa, but it has been introduced, 
and is now cultivated in most tropical and in the warmer 
temperate countries. In size it varies from a shrubby plant to a 
tree of from 30 to 40 ft. in height according to the climate in 
which it grows, being arborescent in tropical latitudes. On 
account of its very large beautiful palmate-peltate leaves, which 
sometimes measure as much as 2 ft. in diameter, it is cultivated 
as an ornamental plant. In the south of England, with the habit 
of an annual, it ripens its seeds in favourable seasons; and it has 
been known to come to maturity as far north as Christiania in 
Norway. Plants are readily grown from seed, which should be 
sown singly in small pots and placed in heat early in March I he 



young plants are kept under glass till early in June when they 
are hardened and put out. The fruit consists- of a three-celled 
capsule, covered externally with soft yielding prickles, and each 
cell develops a single seed. The seeds of the different cultivated 
varieties, of which there are a great number, differ much in'size 
and in external markings; but average seeds are of an oval 
laterally compressed form, with their longest diameter about 
four lines. They have a shining, marble-grey and brown, thick, 
leathery outer coat, within which is a thin dark-coloured brittle 
coat. A large distinct leafy embryo lies in the middle of a dense, 
oily tissue (endosperm). The seeds contain a toxic substance, 
which makes them actively poisonous; so much so that three 
have been known to kill an adult. 

The oil is obtained from the seeds by two principal methods — 
expression and decoction— the latter process being largely used 
in India, where the oil, on account of its cheapness and abundance 
is extensively employed for illuminating as well as for other 
domestic and medicinal purposes. The oil exported from 
Calcutta to Europe is prepared by shelling and crushing the 
seeds between rollers. The crushed mass is then placed in hempen 
cloths and pressed in a screw or hydraulic press. The oil which 
exudes is mixed with water and heated till the water boils, and 
the mucilaginous matter in the oil separates as a scum. It is 
next strained, then bleached in the sunlight, and stored for 
exportation. A considerable quantity of castor oil of an excellent 
quality is also made in Italy; and in California the manufacture 
is conducted on an extensive scale. The following is an outline 
of the process adopted in a Californian factory. The seeds are 
submitted to a dry heat in a furnace for an hour or thereby, by 
which they are softened and prepared to part easily with their oil. 
They are then pressed in a large powerful screw-press, and the 
oily' matter which flows out is caught, mixed with an equal 
proportion of water, and boiled to purify it from mucilaginous 
and albuminous matter. After boiling about an hour, it is 
allowed to cool, the water is drawn off, and the oil is transferred 
to zinc tanks or clarifiers capable of holding from 60 to 100 
gallons. In these it stands about eight hours, bleaching in the 
sun, after which it is ready for storing. By this method 100 lb 
of good seeds yield about 5 gallons of pure oil. 

Castor oil is a viscid liquid, almost colourless when pure, 
possessing only a slight odour, and a mild yet highly nauseous 
and disagreeable taste. Its specific gravity is -96, a little less 
than that of water, and it dissolves freely in alcohol, ether and 
glacial acetic acid. It contains palmitic and several other fatty 
acids, among which there is one — ricinoleic acid— peculiar to 
itself. This occurs in combination with glycerin, constituting 
the greater part of the bulk of the oil. 

The active principle to which the oil owes its purgative 
properties has not been isolated. It is, indeed, probable that it 
is formed in the intestine, as a result of some decomposition as 
yet unknown. The dose is from a drachm to an ounce. The 
pharmacopoeial mixture is best avoided, being almost uniquely 
nauseous. By far the best way to administer the oil is in capsules. 
It acts in about five hours, affecting the entire length of the bowel, 
but not increasing the flow of bile except in very large doses. 
The mode of its action is unknown. The oil will purge when 
rubbed into the skin or injected per rectum. It is an invaluable 
drug in temporary constipation and whenever a mild action is 
essential, as in pregnancy. It is extremely useful for children 
and the aged, but must not be employed in cases of chronic 
constipation, which it only aggravates, whilst relieving the 
symptoms. 

GASTRIN, MATTHIAS ALEXANDER (1813-1853), Finnish 
ethnologist and philologist, was born at Tervola, in the parish of 
Kemi in Finland, on the 20th of November (December 2, 1813). 
His father, Christian Castren, parish minister at Rovaniemi, 
died in 1825; and Matthias passed under the protection of 
his Uncle, Mathias Castren, the kindly and learned incumbent of 
Kemi. At the age of twelve he was sent to school at Uleaborg, 
and there he helped to maintain himself by teaching the younger 
children. On his removal to the Alexander University at 
Helsingf ors in 1830, he first devoted himself to Greek and Hebrew 



CASTRENSIS— CASTRO, INEZ DE 



4«3 



with the intention of entering the church; but his interest was 
soon excited by the language of his native country, and he even 
began before his course was completed to lay the foundations of a 
work on Finnish mythology. The necessity of personal explora- 
tions among the still unwritten languages of cognate tribes soon 
made itself evident; and in 1838 he joined a medical fellow- 
student, Dr. Ehrstrom, in a journey through Lapland. In the 
following year he travelled in Russian Karelia at the expense of 
the Literary Society of Finland; and in 1841 he undertook, in 
company with Dr Elias Lonnrot, the great Finnish philologist, a 
third journey, which ultimately extended beyond the Ural as far 
as Obdorsk, and occupied a period of three years. Before start- 
ing on this last expedition he had published a translation into 
Swedish of the Finnish epic of Kalevala; and on his return he 
gave to the world his Elementa grammatices Syrjaenae and 
Elemehia grammatices Tscheremissae, 1844. No sooner had he 
recovered from the illness which his last journey had occasioned 
than he set out, under the auspices of the Academy of St Peters- 
burg and the Helsingfors University, on an exploration of the 
whole government of Siberia, which resulted in a vast addition 
to previous knowledge, but seriously affected the health of the 
adventurous investigator. The first-fruits of his collections 
were published at St Petersburg in 1849 in the form of a Versuch 
einer ostjakischen Sprachlehre. In 1850 he published a treatise 
De affixis personalibus linguarum Altaicarum, and was appointed 
professor at Helsingfors of the new chair of Finnish language and 
literature. The following year saw him raised to the rank of 
chancellor of the university; and he was busily engaged in what 
he regarded as his principal work, a Samoyedic grammar, when 
he died on the 7th of May 1853. 

Five volumes of his collected works appeared from 1852 to 1858, 
containing respectively — (1) Reseminnen fr&n aren 1838-1844; 
(2) Reseberdttelser och bref aren 1845-1849; (3) Forelasningar i 
Finsk mythologi; (4) Ethnologiska forelasningar bfver Altaiska 
folken; and (5) Smarre afhandlingar och akademiska dissertationer. 
A German translation was published by Anton Schiefner, who was 
also entrusted by the St Petersburg Academy with the editing of 
his manuscripts, which had been left to the Helsingfors University 
and which were subsequently published. 

CASTRENSIS, PAULUS, an Italian jurist of the 14th century. 
He studied under Baldus at Perugia, and was a fellow-pupil 
with Cardinal Zabarella. He was admitted to the degree of 
doctor of civil law in the university of Avignon, but it is uncertain 
when he first undertook the duties of a professor. A tradition, 
which has been handed down by Panzirolus, represents him as 
having taught law for a period of fifty-seven years. He was 
professor at Vienna in 1396, at Avignon in 1394, and at Padua 
in 1429; and, at different periods, at Florence, at Bologna and at 
Perugia. He was for some time the vicar-general of Cardinal 
Zabarella at Florence, and his eminence as a teacher of canon 
law may be inferred from the language of one of his pupils, who 
styles him " famosissimus juris utriusque monarca." His most 
complete treatise is his readings on the Digest, and it appears from 
a passage in his readings on the Digcstum Veins that he delivered 
them at a time when he had been actively engaged for forty-five 
years as a teacher of civil law. His death is generally assigned 
to 1436, but it appears from an entry in a MS. of the Digestum 
Vetus, which is extant at Munich, made by the hand of one of 
his pupils who styles him " praeceptor meus," that he died on 
the 20th of July 1441. 

CASTRES, a town of south-western France, capital of an 
arrondissement in the department of Tarn, 29 m. S.S.E. of 
Albi on a branch line of the Southern railway. Pop. (1906) 
town, 19,864; commune, 28,272. Castres, the busiest and most 
populous town of its department, is intersected from north to 
south by the Agout; the river is fringed by old houses the 
upper stories of which project over its waters. Wide boulevards 
traverse the west of the town, which is also rendered attractive 
by numerous fountains fed by a fine aqueduct hewn in the rock. 
The church of St Benoit, once a cathedral, and the most im- 
portant of the churches of Castres, dates only from the 17th and 
18th centuries. The hotel de ville, which contains a museum 
and the municipal library, occupies the former bishop's palace, 



designed by Jules Mansart in the 17th century; the Romanesque 
tower beside it is the only survival of an old Benedictine abbey. 
The town possesses some old mansions of which the hotel de 
Nayrac, of the Renaissance, is of most interest. Castres has a 
sub-prefecture, tribunals of first instance and of commerce, 
a board of trade-arbitrators, a chamber of commerce, a branch 
of the bank of France and two hospitals. There are also 
communal colleges for boys and girls, a school of artillery 
and school of draughtsmanship. The industrial establishments 
include manufactories of earthenware and porcelain and metal- 
foundries, and tanning, leather-dressing, turnery, the making 
of wooden shoes and furniture, the weaving of woollen and other 
fabrics, dyeing, and the manufacture of machinery, paper and 
parchment are carried on. 

Castres grew up round a Benedictine abbey, which is believed 
to have been founded in the 7th century. It was a place of con- 
siderable importance as early as the 12th century, and ranked 
as the second town of the Albigenses. During the Albigensian 
crusade it surrendered of its own accord to Simon de Montfort; 
and in 1356 it was raised to a countship by King John of France. 
On the confiscation of the possessions of the D'Armagnac family, 
to which it had passed, it was' bestowed by Louis XL on Boffilo 
del Giudice, but the appointment led to so much disagreement 
that the countship was united to the crown by Francis I. in 1519. 
In the wars of the latter part of the 16th century the inhabitants 
sided with the Protestant party, fortified the town, and estab- 
lished an independent republic. They were brought to terms, 
however, by Louis XIII., and forced to dismantle their fortifica- 
tions; and the town was made the seat of the chambre de I' edit, 
or chamber for the investigation of the affairs of the Protestants, 
afterwards transferred to Castelnaudary (in 1679). The bishopric 
of Castres, which had been established by Pope John XXII. in 
13 1 7, was abolished at the Revolution. 

CASTRO, INEZ DE (d. 1355), mistress, and perhaps wife, of 
Peter I. (Pedro), king of Portugal, called Cotto de Garza, i.e. 
"Heron's Neck," was born in Spanish Galicia, in the earlier years 
of the 14th century. Tradition asserts that her father, Don 
Pedro Fernandez de Castro, and her mother, Dona Aldonca 
Soares de Villadares, a noble Portuguese lady, were unmarried, 
and that Inez and her two brothers were consequently of bastard 
birth. Educated at the semi-Oriental provincial court of Juan 
Manuel, duke of Penafiel, Inez grew up side by side with Costanca, 
the duke's daughter by a scion of the royal house of Aragon, 
and her own cousin. After refusing several crowned heads 
in marriage, Costanca was at last persuaded to accept the hand 
of the infante Dom Pedro, son of Alphonso the Proud, king of 
Portugal. In 1341 the two girls left Penafiel; Costanca's marriage 
was celebrated in the same year, and the young infanta and 
her cousin went to reside at Lisbon, or at Coimbra, where Dom 
Pedro conceived that luckless and furious passion for Inez which 
has immortalized them. 

The morality of the age was lax, and more especially so in 
Spain and Portugal, where the looseness of the marriage tie 
and the example of the Moors encouraged polygamy. Pedro's 
connexion par amours with Inez would of itself have aroused 
no opposition. He might even have married her, after the death 
of his wife in childbirth in 1345. According to his own assurance 
he did marry her in 1354. But by that time the rising power 
of the Castro family had created the most brutal hatred among 
their rivals, both in Spain and Portugal. Alvaro Gonzales, 
Pedro Coelho, and Diogo Lopes Pacheco persuaded the king, 
Alphonso, that his throne was in danger from an alliance between 
his son and the Castros, and with all the brutality of the age 
they urged the king to remove the danger by murdering the poor 
woman. The old kin 5 listened, refused, wavered and ended by 
yielding. He went ia secret to the palace at Coimbra, where 
Inez and the in ante resided, accompanied by his three familiars, 
and by others who agreed with them. The beauty and tears 
of Inez disarmed his resolution, and he turned to leave her; 
but the gentlemen about him had gone too far to recede. Inez 
was stabbed to death and was buried immediately in the church 
of Santa Clara. 



4 8 4 



CASTRO, J. DE— CASTRO Y BELLVIS 



The infante raised at once the flag of revolt against his father, 
and was only appeased by the concession of a large share in the 
government. The three murderers of Inez were sent out of the 
kingdom by Alphonso, who knew his son too well not to be aware 
that the vengeance would be tremendous as the crime. They 
took refuge in Castile. In 1357, however, Alphonso died, and 
the infante was crowned king of Portugal. Peter the Cruel, his 
nephew, reigned over Castile; and the murderers were given 
up' as soon as required. Diogo Lopes escaped through the grati- 
tude of a beggar to whom he had formerly done a kindness; 
but Coelho and Gonzales were executed, with horrible tortures, 
in the very presence of the king. 

The story of the exhumation and coronation of the corpse 
of Inez has often been told. It is said that to the dead body, 
crowned and robed in royal raiment, and enthroned beside the 
king, the assembled nobles of Portugal paid homage as to their 
queen, swearing fealty on the withered hand of the corpse. The 
gravest doubts, however, exist as to the authenticity of this 
story ; Fernao Lopes, the Portuguese Froissart, who is the great 
authority for the details of the death of Inez, with some of the 
actors in which he was acquainted, says nothing of the ghastly 
ceremony, though he tells at length the tale of the funeral honours 
that the king bestowed upon his wife. Inez was buried at Alcobaca 
with extraordinary magnificence, in a tomb of white marble, 
surmounted by her crowned statue; and near her sepulchre 
Pedro caused his own to be placed. The monument, after re- 
peatedly resisting the violence of curiosity, was broken into 
in 1 8 10 by the French soldiery; the statue was mutilated, and 
the yellow hair was cut from the broken skeleton, to be preserved 
in reliquaries and blown away by the wind. The children of 
Inez shared her habit of misfortune. From her brother, however, 
Alvaro Perez de Castro, the reigning house of Portugal directly 
descends. 

See Fernao Lopes, Chronica del Rey Dom Pedro (1735) ; Camoens, 
Os Lusiadas; Antonio Ferreira's Ines de Castro, — the first regular 
tragedy of the Renaissance after the Sofonisba of Trissino; Luis 
Velez de Guevara, Reinar despues de morir, an admirable play ; 
and Ferdinand Denis, Chronigues chevaleresgues de I'Espagne et du 
Portugal. _ 

CASTRO, JOAO DE (1500-1548), called by Camoens Castro 
Forte, fourth viceroy of the Portuguese Indies, was the son of 
Alvaro de Castro, civil governor of Lisbon. A younger son, and 
destined therefore for the church, he became at an early age a 
brilliant humanist, and studied mathematics under Pedro 
Nunez, in company with the infante Dom Luis, son of Emanuel 
the First, with whom he contracted a life-long friendship. At 
eighteen he went to Tangier, where he was dubbed knight by 
Duarte de Menezes the governor, and there he remained several 
years. In 1535 he accompanied Dom Luis to the siege of Tunis, 
where he had the honour of refusing knighthood and reward at 
the hands of the great emperor Charles V. Returning to Lisbon, 
he received from the king the small commandership of Sao 
Pablo de Salva terra in 1538. He was exceedingly poor, but his 
wife Lenor de Coutinho, a noble Portuguese lady, admired and 
appreciated her husband sufficiently to make light of their 
poverty. Soon after this he left for the Indies in company with 
his uncle Garcia de Noronha, and on his arrival at Goa enlisted 
among the aventureiros, " the bravest of the brave," told off 
for the relief of Diu. In 1540 he served on an expedition under 
EstevSo da Gama, by whom his son, Alvaro de Castro, a child 
of thirteen, was knighted, out of compliment to him. Returning 
to Portugal, Joao de Castro was named commander of a fleet, 
in 1543, to clear the European seas of pirates; and in 1545 he 
was sent, with six sail, to the Indies, in the room of Martin de 
Sousa, who had been dismissed the viceroyalty. The next three 
years were the hardest and most brilliant, as they were the last, 
of his life — years of battle and struggle, of glory and sorrow, of 
suffering and triumph. Valiantly seconded by his sons (one 
of whom, Fernao, was killed before Diu) and by Joao Masca- 
renhas, Joao de Castro achieved such popularity by the over- 
throw of Mahmud, king of Gujarat, by the relief of Diu, 
and by the defeat of the great army of the Adil Khan, that 
he could contract a very large loan with the Goa merchants on 



the simple security of his moustache. These great deeds were 
followed by the capture of Broach, by the complete subjugation 
of Malacca, and by the passage of Antonio Moniz into Ceylon; 
and in 1547 the great captain was appointed viceroy by Joao III., 
who had at last accepted him without mistrust. He did not live 
long to fill this charge, expiring in the arms of his friend, St 
Francis Xavier, on the 6th of June 1548. He was buried at Goa, 
but his remains were afterwards exhumed and conveyed to 
Portugal, to be reinterred under a splendid monument in the 
convent of Bemfica. 

See Jacinto Freire de Andrade, Vida de D. Jo&o de Castro (Lisbon, 
1651), English translation by Sir Peter Wyche (1664); Diogo de 
Couto, Decadas da Asia, vi. The Roteiros or logbooks of Castro's 
voyages in the East (Lisbon, 1833, 1843 and 1872) are of great 
interest. 

CASTROGIOVANNI (Arab. Kasr-Yani, a corruption of 
Castrum Ennae), a town and episcopal see of the province of 
Caltanisetta, Sicily, 95 m. by rail S.E. of Palermo, and 56 m. W. 
of Catania, situated 2605 ft. above sea-level, almost in the centre 
of the island, and commanding a magnificent view of the interior. 
Pop. (iqoi) 25,826. Enna Was one of the cities of the Sicels, and 
the statement of Stephanus Byzantinus that it was colonized 
by Syracuse in 664 B.C. is improbable. The question is dis- 
cussed by E. Pais, Atakta (Pisa, 1801), 63. It does not appear 
in history before the time of Dionysius I. of Syracuse, who, 
after unsuccessful attempts, finally acquired possession of it by 
treachery about 397 B.C. Its natural position rendered it a 
fortress of great importance, and it is frequently mentioned in 
subsequent history. In 134-132 it was the headquarters of the 
slave. revolt, and was only reduced by treachery. Cicero speaks 
of it as a place of some importance, but in imperial times it 
seems to have been of little account. In a.d. 837 the Saracens 
attempted to take it, but without success; and it was again 
only by treachery that they were able to take it in 859. In 
1087 it fell into the hands of the Normans; and the existing 
remains of fortifications are entirely medieval. There are 
indeed no remains of earlier days. The cathedral, founded in 
1307, is of some interest. There are no remains of the famous 
temple of Demeter, from which Verres, as Cicero tells us, re- 
moved the bronze statue of the goddess. The lake of Pergus, 
where Persephone, according to one of the myths, was carried 
off by Hades, lies 4 m. to the south. The myth itself must have 
had some local origin, but has had so much Greek detail grafted 
upon it that the very names of the earlier Sicel deities have 
been displaced. 

CASTRO URDIALES, a seaport of northern Spain, in the 
province of Santander, situated on the bay of Biscay and at 
the head of a branch railway connected with the Bilbao-San- 
tander line. Pop. (1870) about 3500; (1900) 14,191. Castro 
Urdiales is a modern town, although its castle and parish church 
date from the middle ages. It was destroyed by the French in 
1813, but speedily rebuilt and fortified. Its rapid rise in popu- 
lation and prosperity dates from the increased development 
of iron-mining and railway communication which took place 
after 1879. Its chief industries are iron-mining, fishing, and the 
preservation of fish, especially sardines, in oil. Between 1894 
and 1904 the exports of iron ore rose from 277,200 tons to 
516,574 tons. 

CASTRO Y BELLVIS, GUILLEN DE (1 569-1 631), Spanish 
dramatist, was a Valencian by birth, and early enjoyed a re- 
putation as a man of letters. In 1591 he became a member 
of a local literary academy called the Nocturnos. At one time a 
captain of the coast-guard, at another the protege of Benavente, 
viceroy of Naples, who appointed him governor of Scigliano, 
patronized by Osuna and Olivares, Castro was nominated a 
knight of the order of Santiago in 1623. He settled at Madrid 
in 1626, and died there on the 28th of July 1631 in such poverty 
that his funeral expenses were defrayed by charity. He pro- 
bably made the acquaintance of Lope de Vega at the festivals 
(1620-1622) held to commemorate the beatification and canon- 
ization of St Isidore, the patron saint of Madrid. On the latter 
occasion Castro's octavas were awarded the first prize. Lope de 
Vega dedicated to him a celebrated play entitled Las Almenas 



CASTRUCCIO— CASUISTRY 



485 



de Toro (1619), and when Castro's Comedias were published in 
1618-1621 he dedicated the first volume to Lope de Vega's 
daughter. The drama that has made Castro's reputation is 
Las Mocedades del Cid (1599?), to the first part of which Corneille 
was largely indebted for the materials of his tragedy. The two 
parts of this play, like all those by Castro, have the genuine 
ring of the old romances; and, from their intense nationality, 
no less than for their primitive poetry and flowing versification, 
were among the most popular pieces of their day. Castro's 
Fuerza de la costumbre is the source of Love's Care, a play as- 
cribed to Fletcher. He is also the reputed author of El Prodigio 
de los Monies, from which Calder6n derived El Mdgico prodigioso. 
Las Mocedades del Cid (Toulouse, 1890) and Ingratitud de amor 
(Philadelphia, 1899) have been well edited by E. Merimee and H. A. 
Rennert respectively. 

CASTRUCCIO CASTRACANI DEGLI ANTELMINELLI (1281- 
1328), duke of Lucca, was by birth a Lucuhese, and by descent 
and training a Ghibelline. Being exiled at an early age with 
his parents and others of their faction by the Guelphs, then in 
the ascendant, and orphaned at nineteen, he served as a con- 
dottiere under Philip IV. of France in Flanders, later with the 
Visconti in Lombardy, and in 13 13 under the Ghibelline chief, 
Uguccione della Faggiuola, lord of Pisa, in central Italy. He 
assisted Uguccione in many enterprises, including the capture 
of Lucca (1314) and the victory over the Florentines at Monte- 
catini (1315). An insurrection of the Lucchese having led to 
the expulsion of Uguccione and his party, Castruccio regained 
his freedom and his position, and the Ghibelline triumph was 
presently assured. Elected lord of Lucca in 13 16, he warred 
incessantly against the Florentines, and was at first the faithful 
ndviser and stanch supporter of Frederick of Austria, who made 
him imperial vicar of Lucca in 1320. After the battle of 
Muhlbach he went over to the emperor Louis the Bavarian, 
whom he served for many years. In 1325 he defeated the 
Florentines at Altopascio, and was appointed by the emperor 
duke of Lucca, Pistoja, Volterra and Luni, and two years later 
he captured Pisa, of which he was made imperial vicar. But, 
subsequently, his relations with Louis seem to have grown less 
friendly and he was afterwards excommunicated by the papal 
legate in the interests of the Guelphs. At his death in 1328 the 
fortunes of his young children were wrecked in the Guelphic 
triumph. 

Niccolo Machia velli's Life of Castruccio is a mere romance; it 
was translated into French, with notes, by Dreux de Radier in 1753. 
See Niccolo Negrini, Vita di Castruccio (Modena, 1496) ; Winkler s 
Castruccio, Herzog von Lucca (Berlin, 1897); also Gino Capponi's 
Storia di Firenze, and G. Sforza, Castruccio Castracani degli Antel- 
minelli in Lunigiana (Modena, 1891); S. de Sismondi, Histoire des 
republiques italiennes (Brussels, 1838). 

CASTRUM MINERVAE (mod. Castro), an ancient town of the 
Sallentini in Calabria, 10 m. south of Hydruntum, with an 
ancient temple of Minerva, said to have been founded by Ido- 
meneus, who formed the tribe of the Sallentini from a mixture 
of Cretans, Illyrians and Italian Locrians. It is also said to have 
been the place where Aeneas first landed in Italy,the port of which 
he named Partus Veneris. The temple had lost some of its 
importance in Strabo's day. 

CASUARINA, a genus of trees containing about 30 species, 
chiefly Australian, but a few Indo-Malayan. The long whip-like 
green branches are longitudinally grooved, and bear at the nodes 
whorls of small scale-leaves, the shoots resembling those of 
Equisetum (horse-tail). The flowers are unisexual; the stamin- 
ate are borne in spikes, each flower consisting of a central stamen 
which is surrounded by two scale-like perianth-leaves. The 
pistillate are borne in dense spherical heads; each flower stands 
in the axil of a bract and consists of two united carpels flanked 
by a pair of bracteoles; the long styles hang out beyond the 
bracts, and the one-chambered ovary contains two ovules. 
In the fruit the bracteoles form two woody valves between 
which is a nut; the aggregate of fruits resemble small cones. 
Pollen is transferred by the wind to the long styles. The pollen- 
tube does not penetrate the ovule through the micropyle but 
enters at the opposite end — the chalaza. This anomaly was 



discovered by Dr M. Treub (see Annal. Jardin Bolan.Buitenzorg, 
x. 1891), and is associated with a peculiar development of the 
ovule, and an increased number and peculiar form of the embryo- 
sacs (nacrospores). Treub proposed to separate Casuarina 
as a distinct group of Angiosperms, and suggested the following 
arrangement : — 

r ^ Dicotyledons. 

Angiosperma&j Por °£ amae J Monocotyledons. 

[Chalazogamae (Casuarina). 

The names of the two subdivisions recall the manner of entrance 
of the pollen-tube. More recent investigations, chiefly by 
Nawaschin and Miss Benson, on members of the orders Betu- 
laceae, Fagaceae, Juglans and Ulmus, showed a recurrence 
in a greater or less degree of the various anomalies previously 
observed in Casuarina, and suggest that the affinity of Casuarina 
is with these orders of Dicotyledons. 

The wood is very hard, and several species are valuable timber 
trees. From a fancied resemblance of the wood to that of the 
oak these trees are known as " oaks," and the same species has 
different names in different parts such as " she-oak," " swamp- 
oak," "shingle-oak," "river-oak," "iron-wood," "beef-wood," &c. 

See J. H. Maiden, Useful Native Plants of Australia (London and 
Sydney, 1889). 

CASUISTRY (from the Lat. casus, a point of law), the art of 
bringing general moral principles to bear on particular actions. 
It is, in short, applied morality; anybody is a casuist who 
reflects about his duties and tries to bring them into line with 
some intelligible moral standard. But morality at different 
times has worn very different dresses. It has sometimes been 
thought of as an outward law, sometimes as an inward disposi- 
tion; and each of these rival conceptions has developed a 
casuistical method of its own. Believers in law have put their 
trust in authority or logic; while believers in disposition chiefly 
look to our instinctive faculties— conscience, common-sense or 
sentiment. The legal is the older group, and to it the name of 
casuist is often exclusively reserved, generally with the implica- 
tion that its methods are too purely technical to commend 
themselves to mankind at large. But common-sense and con- 
science are quite as definite guides as logic or authority; and 
there seems no good reason for refusing to give the name of 
casuistry to their queries.

The casuistry of primitive man is uncompromisingly legal. 
His morality is not yet separated from his religion ; and religion 
for him means the cult of some superior being — the king or priest 
of his tribe — whose person is charged with a kind of sacred 
electricity. " His divinity is a fire, which, under proper restraints, 
confers endless blessings; but if rashly touched, or allowed 
to break bounds, it burns or destroys what it touches. Hence 
the disastrous effects supposed to follow a breach of taboo; 
the offender has thrust his hand into the divine fire, which shrivels 
up and consumes him on the spot " (Frazer, The Golden Bough, 
i. 169). Elaborate rules are accordingly drawn up to secure 
the maximum of benefit, and the minimum of inconvenience, 
from this sacred fire; and in the application of these rules does 
savage casuistry consist. At a higher stage of civilization the 
god is no longer present in person but issues to his worshippers 
categorical commands. These logic must seize upon and develop 
as far as they will go; for the breach of some trifling consequence 
of a rule might mean the loss of the deity's favour. Hence the 
rise of sacred books among most Eastern peoples. On the 
Jewish Decalogue, for instance, follows the law, and on the law 
the rabbinical schools. Some of these will be stricter, and some 
laxer; but on the whole all tend to " aggravate " the law — 
down to the point of forbidding the faithful to wear a girdle, 
or to kill a noxious insect on the Sabbath. Though indeed 
we might look nearer home than the Talmud for similar absur- 
dities; most Puritan communities could furnish strange freaks 
of Sabbatarian casuistry. Nor have the Catholics been one 
whit behind them. Their scholastic doctors gravely discuss 
whether — since water is the " matter " of baptism — a soul 
can be made regenerate by milk, or rose-water or wine. 

At the opposite pole stood ancient Greece. Here ceremonial 



4 86 



CASUISTRY 



casuistry found no place, because there were no sacred books. 
" Among the Greeks writing never attained the consecration of 
religion. No system of doctrine and observance, no manuals 
containing authoritative rules of morality, were ever transmitted 
in documentary form. In conduct they shrank from formulae. 
Unvarying rules petrified action; the need of flexibility, of 
perpetual adjustment, was strongly felt" (Butcher, The Greek 
Genius, p. 182). For this reason their interest in ethical specu- 
lations was all the keener; their great thinkers were endlessly 
engaged in settling what the relation ought to be between duty 
and self-interest. Ought one to swallow up the other — and, if 
so, which should prevail ? Or was it possible to patch up a 
compromise between them? The great Stoic philosophers 
took the austerest line, and held that duty should always and 
everywhere be our only law. But it was one thing to enunciate 
such magnificent theories in a lecture, and quite another to 
apply them in the market-place. Casuistry came to the aid of 
average human nature — that is to say, pupils began to confront 
the master with hard cases taken from daily life. And more 
than one master was disposed to make large — even startlingly 
large — concessions to the exigencies of practice. This concrete 
side of moral philosophy came specially into evidence when 
Stoicism was transplanted to Rome. Cicero's De Officiis abounds 
in the kind of question afterwards so warmly discussed by Dr 
Johnson and his friends. Is it ever right to tell a lie? May a 
lawyer defend a client whom he knows to be guilty? In selling 
my goods, is it enough not to disguise their shortcomings, or 
ought I candidly to admit them? Seneca even made the 
discussion of such problems into a regular discipline, claiming 
that their concrete character gave an interest in morality to 
those who had no love for abstractions; while they prevented 
those who had from losing themselves in the clouds. And M. 
Thamin maintains that, if his heroes did not form great characters, 
at any rate they taught the Roman child to train its conscience. 
But, then, Cicero and Seneca took common-sense as their guide. 
They decided each problem on its merits, looking more to the 
spirit than to the letter, and often showing a practical sagacity 
worthy of Johnson himself. Quite in the great doctor's spirit is 
Cicero's counsel to his son, to hear what the philosophers had 
to say, but to decide for himself as a man of the world. Such 
advice could not be grateful to the philosophers themselves — 
then a definite professional class, not unlike the " spiritual 
directors " of a later Rome, who earned their bread by smoothing 
away the doubts of the scrupulous on all matters intellectual 
and moral. Their great weapon was their logic; and a logician, 
as Pascal says, must be very unfortunate or very stupid if he 
cannot manage to find exceptions to every conceivable rule. 
In their hands casuistry became the art of finding such exceptions. 
From the Greek sophists they borrowed ingenious ways of 
playing off one duty against another, or duty in general against 
self-interest — leaving the doubter in the alternative of neglecting 
the one and being a knave, or neglecting the other and being a 
fool. Or else they raised a subtle distinction between the act 
and the intention. To get drunk for the sake of the drink was 
the mark of a beast; but wine was a powerful stimulant to the 
brain, and to fuddle oneself in order to think great thoughts was 
worthy of a sage. No doubt these airy paradoxes were not 
always seriously taken; but it is significant that a common 
Roman proverb identified " philosophizing " {philosophatur) 
with thinking out some dirty trick. 

Christianity swept the whole discussion on to a higher plane. 
All the stress now fell on the disposition, not on the outward act. 
The good deeds of a just man were a natural consequence of his 
justice; whereas a bad man was no whit the better, because he 
now and then deviated into doing right. Actions, in short, 
were of no account whatever, apart from the character that 
produced them. " All things are lawful unto me," said St Paul, 

but all are not expedient." And St Augustine sums the 
whole matter up in the famous phrase: " Have charity, and do 
as thou wilt." Narrow-minded Christian consciences, however, 
could not stay long on this level; law was so very much more 
satisfying a guide than vague, elusive charity. And law in 



plenty was forthcoming, so soon as the Church developed the 
discipline of public confessions followed by appropriate penances 
for each fault. At first the whole proceeding was informal and 
impulsive enough; but by the 7th century it had grown 
thoroughly stereotyped and formal. Libri Poenitentiales began 
to appear — detailed lists of all possible sins, with the forfeit to 
be exacted from each. As public penance finally decayed, and 
auricular confession took its place, these were superseded by 
the Summae de Poenitentia, — law-books in the strictest sense. 
These were huge digests of all that popes, councils, primitive 
fathers had decided on every kind of question pertaining to the 
confessional — what exactly is a sin, what kind of questions the 
priests must ask, under what conditions he could give absolution. 
As such, they were eagerly welcomed by the clergy; for a single 
magistrate, sitting in secret without appeal, necessarily grasps 
at whatever will lighten his burden of responsibility. Nor was 
their complexity a stumbling-block. The medieval mind was 
only too prone to look on morality as a highly technical art, 
quite as difficult as medicine or chancery law — a path where 
wayfaring men were certain to err, with no guide but their 
unsophisticated conscience. What could they possibly do but 
cling to their priest with a "blind and unexpressed faith" ? 

Against this state of things the Reformation was a violent 
protest. Catholicism increasingly took for granted that a man 
imperilled his soul by thinking for himself; Protestantism 
replied that he could certainly lose it, if he left his thinking to 
another. For it is to the individual conscience that God speaks; 
through the struggles of the individual conscience He builds up 
a strong and stable Christian character " A man may be a 
heretic in the truth," says Milton in his Areopagitica (1644), 
" if he believes things only because his pastor says so, or the 
Assembly so determines, without knowing other reason, though 
his belief be true, yet the very truth he holds becomes his heresy. 
There is not any burden that some would not gladlier post off 
to another than the charge and care of their religion. A wealthy 
man, addicted to his pleasures and his profits, finds religion to be 
a traffic so entangled, and of so many piddling accounts, that 
of all mysteries he cannot skill to keep a stock going upon that 
trade. What does he therefore but resolve to give over toiling, 
and find himself some factor, to whose care and conduct he may 
commit the whole managing of his religious affairs — some divine 
of note and estimation that must be. To him he adheres, resigns 
the whole warehouse of his religion with all the locks and keys 
into his custody, and indeed makes the very person of that man 
his religion. So that a man may say his religion is now no more 
within himself, but is become a dividual moveable, which goes or 
comes near him, according as that good man frequents the house. " 

Twelve years after the Areopagitica appeared Pascal's 
Provincial Letters (1656-1657). These deal with the casuists 
of the Counter-Reformation in the spirit of Milton, laying espe- 
cial stress on the artificiality of their methods and the laxity 
of their results. Not, of course, that they meant deliberate 
evil; Pascal expressly credits them with good intentions. But 
they were drawn, almost to a man, from Italy or Spain, the 
two countries least alive to the spirit of the Reformation; 
and most of them were Jesuits, the order that set out to be 
nothing Protestantism was, and everything that Protestantism 
was not. Hence they were resolutely opposed to any idea of 
reform; for to begin making changes in the Church's system 
would be a tacit admission that Luther had some show of 
reason on his side. On the other hand, they would certainly 
lose their hold on the laity, unless some kind of change were 
made; for many of the Church's rules were obsolete, and 
others far too severe to impose on the France of Montaigne 
or even the Spain of Cervantes. Thus caught between two fires 
the casuists developed a highly ingenious method, not unlike 
that of the Roman Stoics, for eviscerating the substance of a 
rule while leaving its shadow carefully intact. The next step 
was to force the confessors to accept their lax interpretation 
of the law; and this was accomplished by their famous theory 
of probabilism — first taught in Spain about 1580. This made 
it a grave sin in the priest to refuse absolution, whenever there 



CASUS BELLI— CAT 



487 



was some good reason for giving it even when there were other 
and better reasons for refusing it. This principle does not 
deserve all the abuse that has been lavished upon it. It secured 
uniformity in the confessional, and thereby protected the 
penitent from the caprices of individual priests; and by de- 
priving these of responsibility, it forced the penitent back on 
himself. But the gain was more than counterbalanced by the 
evil. The less the Church could expect from its penitents, the 
more it was driven to trust to the miraculous efficiency of sacra- 
mental grace. Once get a sinner to confession, and the whole 
work was done. However bad his natural disposition, the 
magical words of absolution would make him a new man. As 
for most penitents, all they cared for was to scrape through by 
the skin of their teeth. Casuistry might insist that it only 
proposed to fix the minimum of a minimum, and beg them for 
their soul's sake to aim a little higher. Human nature seldom 
resists the charms of a fixed standard — least of all when it is 
applied by a live judge in a visible court. If the priest must be 
satisfied with little, why be at the trouble of offering more? 
For this reason, probabilism found vigorous opponents in 
Bossuet and other eminent divines; and various of its excesses 
were condemned by the popes during the latter half of the 
17th century. After a long eclipse it was finally re-established, 
though in a very modified form, by Alfonso Liguori about the 
middle of the 18th century. 

In Protestant countries casuistry shrank and dwindled, 
though works on the subject continued to be written both in 
Germany and England during the 17 th century. The best known 
of the Anglican books is Jeremy Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium 
(1660). But the Protestant casuist never pretended to speak 
authoritatively; all he did was to give his reasons, and leave 
the decision to the conscience of his readers. " In all this 
discourse," says Bishop Sanderson, one of the best of the 
English writers, " I take it upon me not to write edicts, but to 
give my advice." Very soon, however, these relics of casuistry 
were swept away by the rising tide of common-sense. The 
18th century loved to discuss hard cases of conscience, as a 
very cursory glance at Fielding's novels (1742-1751) or Boswell's 
Life of Johnson (1791) will show. But the age was incurably 
suspicious of attempts to deal with such difficulties on any 
kind of technical system. Pope was never tired of girding at 
" Morality by her false guardians drawn, 
Chicane in furs, and casuistry in lawn "; 

while Fielding has embodied the popular conception of a casuist 
in Parson Thwackum and Philosopher Square, both of whom 
only take to argument when they want to reason themselves 
out of some obvious duty. Still more outspoken is the Savoy- 
ard vicar in the Emile (1762) of Jean Jacques Rousseau: 
" Whence do I get my rules of action? I find them in my 
heart. All I feel to be good is good; all I feel to be evil is evil. 
Conscience is the best of casuists; it is only when men wish 
to cheat it that they fly to logical quibbles." Extravagant 
as this sentiment sounds, it paved the way to better things. 
The great object of 17th-century moralists had been to find 
some general principle from which the whole of ethics could be 
deduced; common-sense, by turning its back on abstract 
principles of every kind, forced the philosophers to come down 
to the solid earth, and start by inquiring how the world does 
make up its mind in fact. During the last two centuries de- 
duction has gone steadily out, and psychology come in. Ethics 
have become more distinctively a science, instead of an awkward 
hybrid between a science and an art; their business has been 
to investigate what moral conduct is, not to lay down the law 
as to what it ought to be. Hence they deliberately refuse to 
engage in casuistry of the old-fashioned sort. Further, it is 
increasingly felt that ethical judgments do not depend on 
reason alone, but involve every element in our character; and 
that the real problem of practical morality is to establish a 
harmonious balance between the intelligence and the feelings 
— to make a man's " I think this is right " correspond with his 
" I feel that it is so." Whether systematic training can do 
anything to make the attainment of this balance easier is a 



question that has lately engaged the attention of many educa- 
tional reformers ; and whatever future casuistry may still have 
before it would seem to lie along the lines indicated by them. 

There is'an excellent study of the ancient casuists by M. Raymond 
'Thamin, Un Probleme moral dans I'antiguite (Paris, 1884). For the 
Roman Catholic casuists see Dollinger und Reusch, Moralstreitig- 
keiten im siebzehnten Jahrhundert (2 vols., N6rdlingen, 1889), and 
various articles (" Casuistik," " Ethik," " Moralsysteme," &c.) in 
Wetzer and Welte's Kirchenlexicon (Freiburg, 1 880-1 896). See 
also the editions of Pascal's Provincial Letters, by John de Soyres 
(with English notes, Cambridge, 1880), and A. Molinier (2 vols., 
Paris, 1891). The Anglican casuists are discussed in Whewell, 
Lectures on Moral Philosophy (London, 1862). For general reflec- 
tions on the subject see the appendix to Jowett's edition of the 
Epistle to the Romans (London, 1855). Most modern text-books on 
ethics devote some attention to the matter — notably F. H. Bradley 
in his Ethical Studies (London, 1876). See also Hastings Rashdall, 
Theory of Good and Evil (2 vols., Oxford, 1907). (St, C). 

CASUS BELLI, the technipal term for cases in which a state 
holds itself justified in making war, if a certain course to which 
it objects is persisted in. Interference with the full exercise 
of a nation's rights or independence, an affront to its dignity, 
an unredressed injury, are instances of casus belli. Most of the 
new compulsory treaties of arbitration entered into by Great 
Britain and other states exclude from their application cases 
affecting the "vital interests" or "national honour " of the 
contracting states. These may therefore be considered as a sort 
of definition of casus belli in so far as the high contracting 
parties to them are concerned. 

CAT, 1 properly the name of the well-known domesticated 
feline animal usually termed by naturalists Felis domestica, but 
in a wider sense employed to denote all the more typical members 
of the family Felidae. According to the New English Dictionary, 
although the origin of the word " cat " is unknown, yet the name 
is found in various languages as far back as they can be traced. 
In old Western Germanic it occurs, for instance, so early as from 
a.d. 400 to 450; in old High German it is chazza or catero, and in 
Middle German kattaro. Both in Gaelic and in old French it is 
cat, although sometimes taking the form of chafer in the latter; 
the Gaelic designation of the European wild cat being cat fiad- 
haich. In Welsh and Cornish the name is cath. If Martial's 
cattae refer to this animal, the earliest Latin use of the name 
dates from the 1st century of our era. In the work of Palladius 
on agriculture, dating from about the year a.d. 350, reference is 
made to an animal called catus or cattus, as being useful in 

1 The word "cat " is applied to various objects, in all cases an 
application of the name of the animal. In medieval si£gecraft the 
" cat " (Med. Lat. chattus or gattus, chatta or gatta, in Fr. chat or chat- 
chasteil) was a movable pent-house used to protect besiegers when 
approaching a wall or gateway, for the purpose of sapping, mining 
or direct attack, or to cover a ram or other battering-engine. The 
word is also sometimes applied to a heavy timber fitted with iron 
spikes or projections to be thrown down upon besiegers, and to the 
large work known as a. " cavalier." " Cat " or " cat-head," in 
nautical usage, is the projecting beam on the bows of a ship used to 
clear the anchor from the sides of the vessel when weighed. The 
stock of the anchor rests on the cat-head when hung outside the 
ship. The name is also used of a type of a vessel, now obsolete, 
and formerly used in the coal and timber trade on the north-east 
coast of England; it had a deep waist and narrow stem; it is still 
applied to a small rig of sailing boats, with a single mast stepped 
far forward, with a fore and aft sail. Among other objects also 
known by the name of " cat " is the small piece of wood pointed at 
either end used in the game of tip-cat, and the instrument of punish- 
ment, generally known as the " cat o' nine tails." This consists of 
a handle of wood or rope, about 18 in. long, with nine knotted cords 
or thongs. The multiplication of thongs for purposes of flogging is 
found in the old Roman flagellum, a scourge, which had sometimes 
three thongs with bone or bronze knots fastened to them. The 
" cat " was the regular instrument with which floggings were per- 
formed in the British army and navy. Since the abolition of flogging 
in the services, the use of the cat is now restricted to certain classes 
of offenders in military prisons (Army Act 1881, § 133). In the 
English criminal law, where corporal punishment is ordered by the 
court for certain criminal offences, the " cat " is used only where 
the prisoner is over sixteen years of age. It may not be used except 
when actually ordered in the sentence, and must be of a pattern 
approved by a secretary of state. Further floggings are Inflicted 
with the " cat " upon convicted prisoners for breaches of discipline 
in prison. They must be ordered by the visitors of the prison and 
confirmed by the home secretary. 



488 



CAT 



granaries for catching mice. This usage, coupled with the 
existence of a distinct term in Gaelic for the wild species, leaves 
little doubt that the word " cat " properly denotes only the 
domesticated species. This is confirmed by the employment in 
Byzantine Greek of the term Karros or Karra to designate 
domesticated cats brought from Egypt. It should be added that 
the aiXoupos of the Greeks, frequently translated by the older 
writers as " cat," really refers to the marten-cat, which appears 
to have been partially domesticated by the ancients and em- 
ployed for mousing. 

As regards the origin of the domesticated cats of western 
Europe, it is well known that the ancient Egyptians were in the 
habit of domesticating (at least in some degree) the Egyptian 
race of the African wild cat (Felis ocreata maniculata) , and also 
of embalming its remains, of which vast numbers have been 
found in tombs at Beni Hasan and elsewhere in Egypt. These 
Egyptian cats are generally believed by naturalists to have had 
a large share in the parentage of the European breeds, which 
have, however, in many cases been crossed to a greater or less 
extent with the European wild cat (F. catus). 

One of the features by which the Egyptian differs from the 
European wild cat is the longer and less bushy tail; and it has 
been very generally considered that the same feature is character- 
istic of European domesticated cats. According, however, to Dr 
E. Hamilton, " the measurement of a number of tails of the 
[European] wild cat and of the domestic cat gives a range 
between n in. and 14J in., the longer length being quite as often 
found in the wild cats as in the domestic. The bushy appearance 
depends entirely on the length of the fur, and accords with the 
thick fur of the rest of the body of the wild cat, while in the 
domestic race the fur both on the body and tail is thinner and 
softer." 

Possibly those domesticated cats with unusually short and 
bushy tails may have a larger share of European wild-cat blood; 
while, conversely, such wild cats as show long tails may have a 
cross of domesticated blood. 

More importance was attached by Dr A. Nehring of Berlin 
(SB. Ges. Naturfor., Berlin, 1887) to the colour of the soles of 
the hind-feet as a means of determining the relationship of the 
domesticated cat of Europe. According to his observations, in 
the Egyptian wild cat the pads of the toes are wholly black, 
while the black extends back either continuously or in long 
stripes as far as the calcaneum or heel-bone. In the European 
wild cat, on the other hand, the black is limited to a small round 
spot on the pads, while the colour of the hair as far back as the 
heel-bone is yellowish or yellowish-grey. Since in all domesticated 
cats retaining the colouring of the wild species the soles of the 
hind-feet correspond in this particular with the Egyptian rather 
than with the European wild cat, the presumption is in favour of 
their descent from the former rather than from the latter. 

Later, Dr Nehring (op. cit. 1889) came to the conclusion that 
the domesticated cat has a dual parentage, one stock coming' 
from south-eastern Asia and the other from north-eastern Africa; 
in other words, from a domesticated Chinese cat (itself derived 
from a wild Chinese species) on the one hand, and from the 
Egyptian cat on the other. The ordinary domesticated cats of 
Europe are, however, mainly of African origin, although they 
have largely crossed, especially in Germany (and probably also in 
Great Britain), with the wild cat. The same author was likewise 
of opinion that the domestication or taming of various species of 
wild cats took place chiefly among nationalities of stationary or 
non-nomadic habits who occupied themselves with agricultural 
pursuits, since it would be of vital importance that their stores 
of grain should be adequately protected from the depredations 
of rats and mice. 

The foregoing opinibn as to the dual parentage of our domestic- 
ated cats receives support from observations made many years 
ago by E. Blyth, which have recently been endorsed and amplified 
by R. I. Pocock (Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1907). According to 
these observations, two distinct types of so-called tabby cats are 
recognizable. In the one the pattern consists of narrow vertical 
stripes, and in the other of longitudinal or obliquely longitudinal 



stripes, which, on the sides of the body, tend to assume a spiral 
or sub-circular arrangement characteristic of the blotched tabby. 
This latter type appears to be the true " tabby "; since that word 
denotes a pattern like that of watered silk. One or other of these 
types is to be found in cats of almost all breeds, whether Persian, 
short-haired or Manx; and there appear to be no intermediate 
stages between them. Cats of the striped type are no doubt 
descended from the European and North African wild cats; 
but the origin of cats exhibiting the blotched pattern appears to 
be unknown. As it was to a cat of the latter kind that Linnaeus 
gave the name of Felis catus, Pocock urges that this title is not 
available for the European wild cat, which he would call Felis 
sylvestris. Without accepting this proposed change in nomen- 
clature, which is liable to lead to confusion without any com- 
pensating advantage, it may be suggested that the blotched 
tabby type represents Dr Nehring's presumed Chinese element 
in the cat's parentage, and that the missing wild stock may be 
one of the numerous phases of the leopard-cat (F. bengalensis) , 
in some of which an incipient spiral arrangement of the markings 
may be noticed on the shoulder. 

As to the introduction of domesticated cats into Europe, the 
opinion is very generally held that tame cats from Egypt were 
imported at a relatively early date into Etruria by Phoenician 
traders; and there is decisive evidence that these animals were 
established in Italy long before the Christian era. The progeny 
of these cats, more or less crossed with the indigenous species, 
thence gradually spread over Europe, to become mingled at some 
period, according to Dr Nehring's hypothesis, with an Asiatic 
stock. The earliest written record of the introduction of 
domesticated cats into Great Britain dates from about a.d. 936, 
when Hywel Dda, prince of South Wales, enacted a law for their 
protection. " The Romans," writes Dr Hamilton, " were 
probably the original introducers of this cat, and as the final 
evacuation of Britain by that nation took place under the 
emperor Valentinian about a.d. 436, the period of its introduc- 
tion may certainly be dated some 500 years previous to the Welsh 
chronicle and even much earlier." It is added that the remains 
of cats from Roman villas at Silchester and Dursley are probably 
referable to the domesticated breed. 

Before proceeding to notice some of the different types of 
domesticated cats, a few lines may be devoted to the wild 
European species, F. catus. Beyond stating that in colour it 
conforms very closely to the striped phase of domesticated tabby, 
it will be unnecessary to describe the species. Its geographical 
range was formerly very extensive, and included Great Britain, 
France, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Germany, Bohemia, 
Hungary, Poland, Transylvania, Galicia, the Caucasus as far as 
the Caspian, southern Russia, Italy, Spain, Greece, Rumania, 
Bulgaria, Servia, and portions of central and northern Asia. " At 
the present time," observes Dr Hamilton, " the wild cat has 
become almost extinct in many of the above districts. Examples 
may perhaps occasionally still be found in the uninhabited 
forests of Hungary and Transylvania, and occasionally in Spain 
and Greece, as well as in the Caucasus and in some of the Swiss 
cantons, but the original race has in most countries interbred 
with the domestic cat wherever the latter has penetrated." In 
Great Britain wild cats survive only in some of the Scottish 
forests, and even there it is difficult to decide whether pure-bred 
specimens are extant. Remains of the wild cat occur in English 
caverns; while from those of Ireland (where the wild species has 
apparently been unknown during the historic period) have been 
obtained jaws and teeth which it has been suggested are referable 
to the Egyptian rather than to the European wild cat. Such a 
determination is, however, extremely hazardous, even if it be 
admitted that the remains of cats from the rock-fissures of 
Gibraltar pertain to Felis ocreata. 

The favourite haunts of the wild cat are mountain forests 
where masses or rocks or cliffs are interspersed with trees, the 
crevices in these rocks or the hollow trunks of trees affording 
sites for the wild cat's lair, where its young are produced and 
reared. In the Spanish plains, however, the young are often 
produced in nests built in trees, or among tall bamboos j'd 



CAT 



Plate I. 




Fig. i.— SKINS OF THE BLOTCHED DOMESTIC CAT, 
SHOWING SOME OF THE VARIATIONS TO WHICH 
THE PATTERN IS LIABLE. (Cf. Fig. 5 on Plate II.) 




Fig. 2.— SKINS OF THE STRIPED DOMESTIC CAT, GIV- 
ING THE "TICKED" BREED AND A PARTIALLY 
ALBINO SPECIMEN. (Cf. Fig. 4 011 Plate II.) 




Fig. 3.-SKINS OF THE EUROPEAN WILD CAT, FROM 
ROSS-SHIRE, SCOTLAND. (Cf. Fig. 1 on Plate II.) 

Note —Of the two types of colouration found in modern domestic cats, the striped type obviously corresponds to the original 
wild cat as seen in various parts of North Europe to-day. The origin of the blotched as a special type is wholly unknown. 



(Photos from Plates VIII., IX., and X., P. Z. S., 1907, by permission of the Zoological Society of London.) 



Plate II. 



CAT 




CATABOLISM— CATACLYSM 



489 



cane-brakes. " To fight like a wild cat " is proverbial, and wild 
cats are described as some of the most ferocious and untamable 
of all animals. How far this untamable character lends sup- 
port to the view of the origin of our domesticated breeds has 
not yet been determined. Hares, rabbits, field-mice, water- 
rats, rats, squirrels, moles, game-birds, pigeons, and small 
birds, form the chief food of the wild cat. 

Apart from the above-mentioned division of the striped 
members of both groups into two types according to the pattern 
of their markings, the domesticated cats of western Europe 
are divided into a short-haired and a long-haired group. Of 
these, the former is the one which bears the closest relationship 
to the wild cats of Africa and of Europe, the latter being an 
importation from the East. The striped (as distinct from the 
blotched) short-haired tabby is probably the one most nearly 
allied to the wild ancestors, the stripes being, however, to a 
great extent due to the European wild cat. In one direction 
the tabby shows a tendency to melanism which culminates in 
complete blackness, while in the other direction there is an 
equally marked tendency to albinism; grey cats, which may 
be regarded as tabbies whose stripes have disappeared, forming 
the connecting link between the tabby and the white cat. A 
mixture of the melanistic with the albinistic type will of course 
give rise to parti-coloured cats. A third colour-phase, the 
" erythristic " or red, is represented by the sandy cat, the 
female of which takes the form of the " tortoise-shell," char- 
acterized, curiously enough, by the colour being a blend of black, 
white, and sandy. The so-called orange tabby is one phase of 
the erythristic type. 

As to long-haired cats, there appear originally to have been 
two closely-allied strains, the Angora and the Persian, of which 
the former has been altogether replaced in western Europe by 
the latter. That these long-haired cats have an ancestry, to 
some extent at any rate distinct from the ordinary short-haired 
breeds, is practically certain, and it has been suggested that 
they/ are derived from the " manul " cat, or Pallas's cat (Felis 
manul), of the deserts of central Asia, which is a long-haired 
and bushy-tailed species with comparatively slight striping. 
The fact that in tabby Persians the body-markings are never 
so strong as in the short-haired breeds is in some degree con- 
firmatory of this, as suggesting descent from a nearly whole- 
coloured type. At the present day, however, Persians exhibit 
nearly all the colour and pattern types of the short-haired 
breeds, the " orange Persian " representing the erythristic 
phase. 

Turning to the tailless or so-called Manx cats, in which the tail 
should be represented merely by a tuft of hair without any 
remnant of bone, it seems that the strain is to be met with in 
many parts of Russia, and there is a very general opinion that 
it originally came from Japan or some other far eastern country. 
Throughout Japan, China, Siam, and the Malay countries, normal 
long-tailed cats are indeed seldom seen. Instead of these are 
cats with more or less abbreviated tails, showing in greater or 
less degree a decided kink or bend near the tip. In other cases 
the tail is of the short curling type of that of a bulldog; some- 
times it starts quite straight, but divides in a fork-like manner 
near the tip; and in yet other instances it is altogether wanting, 
as in the typical Manx cats. These kink-tailed or tailless cats 
are moreover smaller in size than the ordinary short-tailed breeds, 
with rather longer hair, whose texture approaches that of rabbit- 
fur, and a cry said to be like that of the jungle-cat (F. chaus) 
of India and Africa, and more dog-like habits. Unless the jungle- 
cat, which is a nearly whole-coloured species, can claim the 
position, the ancestry of these Manx-Malay cats is still unknown. 
Kink-tailed cats, it should be added, are also known from 
Madagascar. 

Among the domesticated cats of India a spotted type of 
colouring, with a more or less decided tendency for the spots 
to coalesce into stripes, is very noticeable; and it is probable 
that these cats are derived from the spotted Indian desert-cat 
(F. ornata), with a certain amount of crossing from other species. 
The so-called F. torquata of India is probably based on cats of 



this type which have reverted to the wild state. Other Indian 
cats with a tawny or fulvous type of colouring are probably the 
more or less modified descendants of the jungle-cat. From the 
same stock may be derived the Abyssinian breed, in which the 
ears are relatively large and occasionally tipped with long hairs 
(thus recalling the tufted ears of the jungle-cat). The colour is 
typically reddish-brown, each individual hair being " ticked " 
like that of a wild rabbit, whence the popular name of " bunny 
cat." Another African breed is the Mombasa cat, in which 
the hair is reported to be unusually short and stiff. 

By far the most remarkable of all the Old World domesticated 
breeds is, however, the royal Siamese cat, which almost certainly 
has an origin quite distinct from that of the ordinary European 
breeds; this being rendered evident not only by the peculiar 
type of colouring, but likewise by the cry, which is quite un- 
mistakable. Siamese cats may have the tail either straight 
or kinked, but whether the latter feature belongs of right to 
the breed, or has been acquired by crossing with the ordinary 
black and tabby kink-tailed cats of the country, is not known. 
In the royal Siamese breed the head is rather long and pointed, 
the body also elongated with relatively slender limbs, the coat 
glossy and close, the eyes blue, and the general colour some 
shade of cream or pink, with the face, ears, feet, under-parts, and 
tail chocolate or seal-brown. There is however a wholly 
chocolate-coloured strain in which the eyes are yellow. The 
most remarkable feature about the breed is that the young are 
white. " The kittens," observes a lady writer, " are born 
absolutely white, and in about a week a faint pencilling comes 
round the ears, and gradually all the points come. At four or 
five months they are lovely, as generally they retain their baby 
whiteness, which contrasts well with their almost black ears, 
deep-brown markings, and blue eyes." In constitution these 
cats are extremely delicate. The blue eyes and the white coat 
of the kitten indicate that the Siamese breed is a semi-albino, 
which when adult tends towards melanism, such a combination 
of characters being apparently unknown in any other animal. 
If the frequent presence of a kink in. the tail be an inherent 
feature, the breed is evidently related to the other kink-tailed 
Malay cats which, as already stated, have a cry differing from 
that of European cats. Should this be so, then if the ordinary 
Malay cats are the descendants of the jungle-cat, we shall have 
to assign the same ancestry to the Siamese breed. 

Although definite information on this point is required, it 
seems probable that the southern part of North America and 
South America possessed certain native domesticated breeds of 
cats previous to the European conquest of the country; and 
if this be so, it will be obvious that these breeds must be derived 
from indigenous wild species. One of these breeds is the Para- 
guay cat, which when adult weighs only about three pounds, 
and is not more than a quarter the size of an ordinary cat. 
The body is elongated, and the hair, especially on the tail, short, 
shiny and close. This small size and elongated form suggest 
origin from the jaguarondi (F. jaguar ondi), a chestnut-coloured 
wild species; but information appears to be lacking with 
regard to the colouring of the domesticated breed. Another 
South American breed is said to be free from the hideous " cater- 
wauling " of the ordinary cat. In old days New Mexico was the 
home of a breed of hairless cats, said to have been kept by the 
ancient Aztecs, but now well-nigh if not completely extinct. 
Although entirely naked in summer, these cats developed in 
winter a slight growth of hair on the back and the ridge of the 
tail. 

Literature. — St George Mivart, The Cat (London, 1881); R. 
Lydekker, "Cats," in Allen's Naturalists' Library (1888); F. 
Hamilton, The Wild Cat of Europe (London. 1896) ; Frances Simpson, 
The Book of the Cat (London, 1903). (R. L.*) 

CATABOLISM, or Katabolism (Gr. Kara, down, /SoX^, a 
throw), the biological term for the reverse of anabolism, namely 
the breaking down of complex into simpler substances, destructive 
metabolism (see Physiology). 

CATACLYSM (Gr. kotcucXuctjuos, a deluge), a great flood or 
deluge (q.v.). The term is used in geology to denote an 



49° 



CATACOMB 



overwhelming catastrophe which has produced sudden changes 
in the earth's surface; and also, figuratively, of any great and 
violent change which sweeps away the existing social or political 
order. 

CATACOMB, a subterranean excavation for the interment 
of the dead or burial-vault. In this sense the word " catacomb " 
has gained universal acceptance, and has found a place in most 
modern languages. The original term, catacumbae, however, 
had no connexion with sepulture, but was simply the name of a 
particular locality in the environs of Rome. It was derived from 
the Greek Kara and Kvufiri, " a hollow," and had reference to the 
natural configuration of the ground. In the district that bore 
this designation, lying close to the Appian Way, the basilica of 
San Sebastiano was erected, and the extensive burial-vaults 
beneath that church — in which, according to tradition, the 
bodies of the apostles St Peter and St Paul rested for a year and 
seven months previous to their removal to the basilicas which 
bear their names — were, in very early times, called from it 
coemeterium ad catacumbas, or calacumbas alone. From the 
celebrity of this cemetery as an object of pilgrimage its name 
became extensively known, and in entire forgetfulness of the 
origin of the word, catacumbae came to be regarded as a generic 
appellation for all burial-places of the same kind. This extension 
of the term to Christian burial-vaults generally dates from the 
9th century, and obtained gradual currency through the Christian 
world. The original designation of these places of sepulture is 
crypta or coemeterium. 

The largest number of Christian catacombs belong to the 3rd 
and the early part of the 4th centuries. The custom of sub- 
terranean interment gradually died out, and entirely ceased with 
the sack of Rome by Alaric, a.d. 410. " The end of the catacomb 
graves," writes Mommsen (Cont. Rev., May 187 1), " is intimately 
connected with the end of the powerful city itself. . . . Poverty 
took the place of wealth, . . . the traditions of the Christian 
tomb-architects sank into utter insignificance, and the. expanse 
of the wasted Campagna now offered room enough to bury the 
few bodies, without having to descend as once far down below the 
surface of the earth." The earliest account of the catacombs, 
that of St Jerome narrating his visits to them when a schoolboy 
at Rome, about a.d. 354, shows that interment in them was even 
then rare if it had not been altogether discontinued; and the 
poet Prudentius's description of the tomb of the Christian 
martyr Hippolytus, and the cemetery in which it stood, leads us 
to the same conclusion. With the latter part of the 4th century 
a new epoch in the history of the catacombs arose — that of 
religious reverence. In the time of Pope Damasus, a.d. 366-384, 
the catacombs had begun to be regarded with special devotion, 
and had become the resort of large bands of pilgrims, for whose 
guidance catalogues of the chief burial-places and the holy men 
buried in them were drawn up. Some of these lists are still 
extant. 1 Pope Damasus himself displayed great zeal in adapting 
thecatacombs to their new purpose, restoring the works of art 
on the walls, and renewing the epitaphs over the graves of the 
martyrs. In this latter work he employed an engraver named 
Furius Philocalus, the exquisite beauty of whose characters 
enables the smallest fragment of his work to be recognized at a 
glance. This gave rise to extensive alterations in their con- 
struction and decoration, which has much lessened their value 
as authentic memorials of the religious art of the 2nd and 3rd 
centuries. Subsequent popes manifested equal ardour, with the 
same damaging results, in the repair and adornment of the 
catacombs, and many of the paintings covering their walls, 
which have been assigned to the period of their original construc- 
tion, are really the work of these later times. The catacombs 

1 The most importan t of these lists are the two Itineraries belonging 
to the first half of the 7th century, in the Salzburg library. One 
still earlier, but less complete, appears in the Notitia Urbis Romae, 
under the title Index Coemeteriorum. Another Itinerary, preserved at 
Einsiedeln, printed by Mabillon, dates from the latter half of the 
same century. That found in the works of William of Malmesbury 
(Hardy's ed. vol. ii. pp. 539-544) appears to be copied from it, or 
both may be from the* same source. De Rossi gives a comparative 
table of these Itineraries and other similar lists. 



shared in the devastation of Rome by the Goths under Vitiges 
in the 6th century and by the Lombards at a later period; and 
partly through the spoliation of these barbarian invaders, partly 
through the neglect of those who should have been their guardians, 
they sank into such a state of decay and pollution that, as the 
only means of preserving the holy remains they enshrined from 
further desecration, Pope Paul I., in the latter part of the 8th 
century, and Pope Paschal, at the beginning of the 9th, entered 
upon the work of the translation of the relics, which was 
vigorously carried on by successive pontiffs until the crypts were 
almost entirely despoiled of their dead. The relics having been 
removed, the visits of pilgrims naturally ceased, and by degrees 
the very existence of those wonderful subterranean cemeteries 
was forgotten. Six centuries elapsed before the accidental 
discovery of a sepulchral chamber by some labourers digging 
for pozzolana earth (May 31, 1578) revealed to the amazed 
inhabitants of Rome " the existence," to quote a contemporary 
record, " of other cities concealed beneath their own suburbs." 
Baronius, the ecclesiastical historian, was one of the first to visit 
the new discovery, and his Annals in more than one place 
evidence his just appreciation of its importance. The true 
" Columbus of this subterranean world," as he has been aptly 
designated, was the indefatigable Antonio Bosio (d. 1629), who 
devoted his life to the personal investigation of the catacombs, 
the results of which were given to the world in 1632 in a huge 
folio, entitled Roma sotterranea, profusely illustrated with rude 
but faithful plans and engravings. This was republishe'd in a 
Latin translation with considerable alterations and omissions by 
Paolo Aringhi in 1631; and a century after its first appearance 
the plates were reproduced by Giovanni Bottari in 1737, and 
illustrated with great care and learning. Some additional 
discoveries were described by Marc Antonio Boldetti in his 
Osservazioni, published in 1720; but, writing in the interests of 
the Roman Church with an apologetic, not a scientific object, 
truth was made to bend to polemics, and little addition to our 
knowledge of the catacombs is to be gained from his other- 
wise important work. The French historian of art, Seroux 
d'Agincourt, 1825, by his copious illustrations, greatly facilitated 
the study of the architecture of the catacombs and the works of 
art contained in them. The works of Raoul Rochette display a 
comprehensive knowledge of the whole subject, extensive 
reading, and a thorough acquaintance with early Christian art 
so far as it could be gathered from books, but he was not an 
original investigator. The great pioneer in the path of inde- 
pendent research, which, with the intelligent use of documentary 
and historical evidence, has led to so vast an increase in our 
acquaintance with the Roman Catacombs, was Padre Marchi 
of the Society of Jesus. His work, Monumenti delle arti christiane 
primitive, is the first in which the strange misconception, 
received with unquestioning faith by earlier writers, that the 
catacombs were exhausted sand-pits adapted by the Christians 
to the purpose of interment, was dispelled, and the true history 
of their formation demonstrated. Marchi's line of investigation 
was followed by the Commendatore De Rossi, and his brother 
Michele, the former of whom was Marchi's fellow-labourer 
during the latter part of his explorations; and it is to them that 
we owe the most exhaustive scientific examination of the whole 
subject. The Catacombs of Rome are the most extensive with 
which we are acquainted, and, as might be expected in the centre 
of the Christian world, are in many respects the most remarkable. 
No others have been so thoroughly examined and illustrated. 
These may, therefore, be most appropriately selected for descrip- 
tion as typical examples. 

Our description of the Roman Catacombs cannot be more 
appropriately introduced than by St Jerome's account of his 
visits to them in his youth, already referred to, which, 
after the lapse of above fifteen centuries, presents a o /p 0nJe . 
most accurate picture of these wonderful subterranean . 
labyrinths. " When I was a boy," he writes, " receiving my 
education in Rome, I and my schoolfellows used, on Sundays, 
to make the circuit of the sepulchres of the apostles and martyrs. 
Many a time did we go down into the catacombs. These are 



CATACOMB 



49 * 



excavated deep in the earth, and contain, on either hand as you 
enter, the bodies of the dead buried in the wall. It is all so dark 
there that the language of the prophet (Ps. lv. 15). seems to be 
fulfilled, ' Let them go down quick into hell.' Only occasionally 
is light let in to mitigate the horror of the gloom, and then not 
so much through a window as through a hole. You take each 
step with caution, as, surrounded by deep night, you recall the 
words of Virgil — • 

"Horror ubique animos, simul ipsa silentia terrent." 1 

In complete agreement with Jerome's vivid picture the visitor 
to the Roman Catacombs finds himself in a vast labyrinth of 
narrow galleries, usually from 3 to 4 ft. in width, interspersed 
with small chambers, all excavated at successive levels, in the 




they reach seven storeys), and communicate with one another 
by stairs cut out of the living rock. Light and air are introduced 
by means of vertical shafts (luminaria) running up to the outer 
air, and often serving for several storeys. The drawing (fig. 3) 
from Northcote gives a very correct idea of these galleries, with 
the tiers of graves pierced in the walls. The doorways which 
are seen interrupting the lines of graves are those of the family 
sepulchral chambers, or cubicula, of which we shall speak more 
particularly hereafter. 

The graves, or loculi, as they are commonly designated, were, 
in the Christian cemeteries, with only a few exceptions (Padre 
Marchi produces some from the cemetery of St Ciriaca, Monam. 
•rimitiv. tav. xiv. xliii. xliv.), parallel with the length of the 







mmam 






'&■£>. 






' A. 
1, 2, 



Entrance from the Basilica of St Agnes. 
Ancient staircases leading to the first 
storey. 

3. Corridors from the staircases. 

4. Two ruined staircases leading to the 

lower storey. 

5. Steps of the rock. 



Fig. 1. — Plan of part of the Cemetery of Sant' Agnese. (From Martigny.) 



6. 


Air-shafts, or luminaria. 


13- 


7- 


Ruined vault. 




8. 


Blind ways. 


14-17. 


9- 


Passages built up or ruined. 


18-32. 


10. 


Passages obstructed by landslips. 


33- 


11. 


Unfinished passage. 


34- 


12. 


Passages destitute of tombs. 


35- 



strata of volcanic rock subjacent to the city and its environs, 
and constructed originally for the interment of the Christian 
dead. The galleries are not the way of access to the cemeteries, 
but are themselves the cemeteries, the dead being buried in long 
low horizontal recesses, excavated in the vertical walls of the 
passages, rising tier above tier like the berths in a ship, from 
a few inches above the floor to the springing of the arched ceiling, 
to the number of five, six or even sometimes twelve ranges. 
These galleries are not arranged on any definite plan, but, as 
will be seen from the plan (fig. 1), they intersect one another 
at different angles, producing an intricate network which it is 
almost impossible to reduce to any system. They generally run 
in straight lines, and as a rule preserve the same level. The 
different storeys of galleries lie one below the other (fig. 2) to the 
number of four or five (in one part of the cemetery of St Calixtus 

1 Hieron., Comment, in Ezech. lib. xx. c. 40. The translation is 
Dean Burgon's. 



Narrow apertures between adjoining 

galleries. 
Arcosolia. 

Cubicula. [two chairs. 

Chapel with vestibule and apse, and 
Double chapel with three chairs. 
Large chapel in five divisions. 

gallery. In the pagan cemeteries, on the other hand, the 
sepulchral recess as a rule entered the rock like an oven at right 
angles to the corridor, the body being introduced endways. 
The plan adopted by the Christians saved labour, economized 
space, and consulted reverence in the deposition of the corpse. 
These loculi were usually constructed for a single body only. 
Some, however, were formed to contain two, three, or four, or 
even more corpses. Such recesses were known respectively 
as bisomi, trisomi, quadrisomi, &c, terms which often appear 
in the sepulchral inscriptions. After the introduction of the body 
the loculi were closed with the greatest care, either with slabs of 
marble the whole length of the aperture, or with huge tiles, three 
being generally employed, cemented together with great exactness 
so as to prevent the escape of the products of decomposition 
(fig. 4). Where any epitaph was set up — an immense number 
are destitute of any inscription at all — it is always painted or 
engraved on these slabs or tiles. In the earlier interments the 



492 



CATACOMB 



epitaph is usually daubed on the slab in red or black paint. In 
later examples it is incised in the marbles, the letters being 
rendered clearer by being coloured with vermilion. The enclosing 
slab very often bears one or more Christian symbols, such as the 




Fig. 2. — Section of Galleries at different levels. (From Seroux 
d'Agincourt.) 

dove, the anchor, the olive-branch, or the monogram of Christ 
(figs, s, 6). The palm branch, which is also of frequent occurrence, 
is not an indisputable mark of the last resting-place of a martyr, 
being found in connexion with epitaphs of persons dying natural 
deaths, or those prepared by persons in their lifetime, as well 
as in those of little children, and even of pagans. Another 
frequent concomitant of these catacomb interments, a small 
glass vessel containing traces of the sediment of a red fluid, 
embedded in the cement of the loculus (fig. 7), has no better 
claim. The red matter proves to be the remains of wine, not of 
blood; and the conclusion of the ablest archaeologists is that 




Fig. 3. — View of a Gallery. 

the vessels were placed where they are found, after the euchar- 
istic celebration or agape on the day of the funeral or its 
anniversary, and contained remains of the consecrated elements 
as a kind of religious charm. Not a few of the slabs, it is dis- 
covered, have done double duty, bearing a pagan inscription 
on one side and a Christian one on the other. These are known 
as opisthographs. The bodies were interred wrapped in linen 



cloths, or swathed in bands, and were frequently preserved 
by embalming. In the case of poorer interments the destruction 
of the body was, on the contrary, often accelerated by the use 
of quicklime. 

Interment in the wall-recess or loculus, though infinitely the 
most common, was not the only mode employed in the catacombs. 



ssSaiES 





Fig. 4. — Loculi. (From de Rossi.) 

Other forms of very frequent recurrence are the table-tomb and 
arched tomb, or arcosolium. From the annexed woodcuts it will 
be seen that these only differ in the form of the surmounting 
recess. In each case the arched tomb was formed by an oblong 
chest, either hollowed out of the rock, or built of masonry, and 
closed with a horizontal slab. But in the table-tomb (fig. 8) the 
recess above, essential for the introduction of the corpse, is 
square, while in the arcosolium (fig. 9), a form of later date, it is 
semicircular. Sarcophagi are also found in the catacombs, but are 




Figs. 5 and 6. — Loculi. (From de Rossi.) 

of rare occurrence. They chiefly occur in the earlier cemeteries, 
and the costliness of their construction confined their use to the 
wealthiest classes — e.g. in the cemetery of St Domitilla, herself 
a member of the imperial house. Another unfrequent mode of 
interment was in graves like those of modern times, dug in the 
floor of the galleries (Marchi, u.s., tav. xxi. xxvi.). Table-tombs 
and arcosolia are by no means rare in the corridors of the cata- 
combs, but they belong more generally to the cubicula, or family 
vaults, of which we now proceed to speak. 

These cubicula are small apartments, seldom more than 12 ft. 
square, usually rectangular, though sometimes circular or 




Fig. 7. — Glass Bottles. (From Bosio.) 

polygonal, opening out of the main corridors. They are not 
unfrequently ranged regularly along the sides of the galleries, the 
doors of entrance, as may be seen in a previous illustration (fig. 3), 
following one another in as orderly succession as the bedchamber 
doors in the passage of a modern house. The roof is sometimes 



CATACOMB 



493 



flat, but is more usually vaulted, and sometimes rises into a 
cupola. Both the roof and the walls are almost universally 
coated with stucco and covered with fresco paintings — in the 
earlier works merely decorative, in the later always symbolical 
or historical. Each side of the cubiculum, except that of the 
entrance, usually contains a recessed tomb, either a table-tomb 
or an arcosolium. That facing the entrance was the place of 
greatest honour, where in many instances the remains of a 
martyr were deposited, whose tomb, according to primitive 
usage, served as an altar for the celebration of the eucharist. 
This was sometimes, as in the Papal crypt of St Calixtus 

(fig. 10), protected 
Stem; :." _ ...^ - >' from irreverence by 
lattice work (tran- 
sennae) of marble. 
The cubiculum was 
originally designed 
for the reception 
of a very limited 
number of dead. 
But the natural de- 
sire to be buried 
near one's relatives 
caused new tombs 
to be cut in the 
walls, above and 
around and behind 
the original tombs, 
the walls being thus completely honeycombed with loculi, 
sometimes as many as seventy, utterly regardless of the paint- 
ings originally depicted on the walls. Another motive for 
multiplying the number of graves operated when the cubiculum 
contained the remains of any noted saint or martyr. The 
Christian antiquary has cause continually to lament the de- 
struction of works of art due to this craving. One of the most 
perfect examples of early Christian pictorial decoration, the so- 
called "Dispute with the Doctors," in the catacomb of Calixtus, 
the " antique style of beauty " of which is noticed by Kugler, 
has thus suffered irreparable mutilation, the whole of the lower 
part of the picture having been destroyed by the excavation 
of a fresh grave-recess (Bottari, vol. ii. tav. 15). The plates of 
De Rossi, Perret, and, indeed, all illustrations of the catacombs, 
exhibit frequent examples of the same destructive superstition. 
The illustrations (figs. 11 and 12), taken from De Rossi's great 
work, representing two of the cubicula in the cemetery of St 
Calixtus, show the general arrangement of the loculi and the 




Fig. 8.— Table-tomb. 




Fig. 9. — Arcosolia. (From Bosio.) 

character of the frescoes which ornament the walls and roof. 
These paintings, it will be seen, are simply decorative, of the 
same style as the wall-paintings of the baths, and those of 
Pompeii. 

Each cubiculum was usually the burying-place of some one 
family, all the members of which were interred in it, just as in 
the chantry-chapels connected with medieval churches. In them 



was celebrated the funeral-feast on the day of burial and on its 
anniversary, as well as the eucharist, which was the invariable 
accompaniment of funerals in the primitive church (Bingham, 




Fig. 10. — Restoration of the Papal Crypt, Cemetery of St Calixtus. 
(From de Rossi.) 

Orig. Eccl. bk. xxiii. c. iii. 12). The funeral-banquet descended 
to the Christian church from pagan times, and was too often 
profaned by heathen licence. St Augustine, in several passages, 
inveighs against those who thus by " gluttony and insobriety 
buried themselves over the buried," and " made themselves 




Fig. 1 1 . — Cubiculum in Cemetery of St Calixtus. (From de Rossi.) 

drunk in the chapels of the martyrs, placing their excesses to the 
score of religious reverence for the dead " (August., De Mar. 
Eccl. Cathol. c. 34; Contr. Faust, lib. xx. c. 21; Confess, lib. vi. 
c. 2). Some curious frescoes representing these funeral-feasts, 
found in the cubicula which were the scene of them, are 



494 



CATACOMB 



reproduced by Bosio (pp. 355, 391) and others. A romantic air 
has been thrown over these burial chapels by the notion that they 
were the places of worship used by the Christians in times of 




Fig. 12. — Cubiculum in the Cemetery of St Calixtus. 
(From de Rossi.) 

persecution. This to a certain extent is doubtless true, as in the 
case of the chapel of Santa Priscilla, where the altar or stone 
coffin of a martyr remains, with a small platform behind it for 
the priest or bishop to stand upon. But that they can have been 
so used to any large extent is rendered impossible by their limited 
dimensions, as none of them could hold more than fifty or sixty 
persons. In some of the catacombs, however, there are larger 
halls and connected suites of chapels which may possibly have 
been constructed for the purpose of congregational worship 
during the dark periods when the public exercise of the Christian 
religion was made penal. The most remarkable of these is in 
the cemetery of Sant' Agnese (see plan, fig. 13). It consists of 
five rectangular compartments, three on one side of the corridor 




Fig. 13. — Plan of a supposed Church, Catacomb of Sant' Agnese. 
(From Marchi.) 

and two on the other, connected by a passage intersecting the 
gallery at right angles. Two of the five compartments are 
supposed to have been assigned to male, and two to female wor- 
shippers, the fifth, at the extremity of the whole, being reserved 
for the altar and its ministers. In the centre of the end-wall 
stands a stone chair (fig. 14), considered to have been the 
episcopal cathedra, with a bench for the clergy on each side. 
There is no trace of an altar, which may, Marchi thinks, have 
been portable. The walls of the compartments are occupied by 
arched sepulchral recesses, above and below which are tiers of 
ordinary graves or loculi. The arrangements are certainly such 
as indicate a congregational purpose, but the extreme narrowness 




of the suite, and still more of the passage which connects the two 
divisions, must have rendered it difficult for any but a small 
number to take any intelligent part in the services at the same 
time. Although the idea of the use of the catacombs for religious 
worship may have been pressed too far, there can be no doubt 
that the sacred rites of the church 
were celebrated within them. We have 
already spoken of the eucharistic cele- 
brations of which the cubicula were the 
scene; and still existing baptisteries 
prove that the other sacrament was also 
administered there. The most remark- 
able of these baptisteries is that in the 
catacomb of San Pontianus (fig. 15). 
Ten steps lead down to a basin of 
sufficient depth for immersion, supplied 
by a spring. Some of the subterranean Fig. 14. — Bishop's 
chambers contain armed seats and Chair. Catacomb of 
benches cut out of the tufa rock. These Sant ' Agnese. 
are supposed by Marchi and others to indicate schoolrooms, 
where the catechumens were instructed by the bishop or 
presbyters. But this theory wants verification. It is impossible 
not to : be struck with the remarkable analogy between these 
rock-hewn chairs and those discovered in the Etruscan tombs, of 
the purpose of which no satisfactory explanation has been given. 
Very exaggerated statements have been made as to the 
: employment of the catacombs as dwelling-places by the Christians 
in times of persecution. We have, however, sufficient Theories oi 
evidence that they were used as places of refuge from the use of 
the fury of the heathen, in which the believers — thecata- 
especially the bishops and clergy, who would naturally 
be the first objects of attack — might secrete themselves until the 
storm had blown over. This was a purpose for which they were 




Baptistery of San Pontianus. (From Perret.)' 



admirably adapted both by the intricacy of their labyrinthine 
passages, in which any one not possessing the clue would be 
inevitably lost, and the numerous small chambers and hiding- 
places at different levels which might be passed unperceived in 
the dark by the pursuers. As a rule also the catacombs had 



CATACOMB 



495 



more than one entrance, and frequently communicated with an 
arenariaor sand-quarry; so that while one entrance was carefully 
watched, the pursued might escape in a totally different direction 
by another. But, to quote J. H. Parker, " the catacombs were 
never intended, nor fit for, dwelling-places, and the stories of 
persons living in them for months are probably fabulous. Accord- 
ing to modern physicians it is impossible to live many days in 
the caves of pozzolana in which many of the catacombs are 
excavated." Equally exaggerated are the statements as to the 
linear and lateral extent of the catacombs, and their inter- 
communication with one another. Without resorting to this 
exaggeration, Mommsen can speak with perfect truth of the 
" enormous space occupied by the burial vaults of Christian 
Rome, not surpassed even by the cloacae or sewers of Republican 
Rome," but the data are too vague to warrant any attempt to 
define their dimensions. Marchi has estimated the united length 
of the galleries at from 800 to ooo m., and the number of inter- 
ments at between 6,000,000 and 7,000,000; Martigny's estimate 
is 587 m.; and Northcote's, lower still, at " not less than 350 m." 
The idea of general intercommunication is negatived by the 
fact that the chief cemeteries are separated by low ground or 
valleys, where any subterranean galleries would be at once 
filled with water. 

It now remains to speak of the history of these subterranean 
burial-places, together with the reasons for, and mode of, their 
construction. From the period of the rediscovery of the cata- 
combs in the 16th century till comparatively recent times a 
gigantic fallacy prevailed, repeated by writer after writer, 
identifying the Christian burial-places with disused sand-pits. 
It was accepted as an unquestionable fact by every one who 
undertook to describe the catacombs, that the Christians of 
Rome, finding in the labyrinthine mazes of the exhausted 
arenariae, which abounded in the environs of the city, whence 
the sand used in building had been extracted, a suitable place 
for the interment of their martyred brethren, where also the 
sacred rites accompanying the interment might be celebrated 
without fear of interruption, took possession of them and used 
them as cemeteries. It only needed a comparison of the theory 
with the visible facts to refute it at once, but nearly three 
centuries elapsed before the independence of the arenariae and 
the catacombs was established. The discovery of this inde- 
pendence is due to Marchi. Starting with the firmest belief in 
the old traditional view, his own researches by degrees opened 
his eyes to the truth, now universally recognized, that the cata- 
combs were exclusively the work of the Christians, and were 
constructed for the interment of the dead. It is true that a 
catacomb is often connected with the earlier sand-quarry, and 
starts from it as a commencement, but the two are excavated 
in different strata, suitable to their respective purposes, and 
their plan and construction are so completely unlike as to 
render any confusion between them impossible. 

The igneous formation of which the greater part of the Roman 
Campagna is, in its superior portion, composed, contains three 
strata known under the common name of tufa, — the " stony," 
" granular," and " sandy " tufa, — the last being commonly 
known as pozzolana. 1 The pozzolana is the material required 
for building purposes, for admixture with mortar; and the 
sandpits are naturally excavated in the stratum which supplies 
it. The stony tufa (tufa litoide) is quarried as building-stone. 
The granular tufa is useless for either purpose, containing too 
much earth to be employed in making mortar, and being far 
too soft to be used as stone for building. Yet it is in this stratum, 
and in this alone, that the catacombs are constructed; their 
engineers avoiding with equal care the solid stone of the tufa 
litoide and the friable pozzolana, and selecting the stratum of 
medium hardness, which enabled them to form the vertical walls 
of their galleries, and to excavate the loculi and cubicula without 
severe labour and also without fear of their falling in. The 
annexed illustration (fig. 16) from Marchi's work, when compared 
with that of the catacomb of Sant' Agnese already given, presents 

1 In Rome the three strata are known to geologists as tufa litoide, 
tufa granolare and pozz r 'ZT r ' 



to the eye the contrast between the wide winding Inegulai 
passages of the sand-pit, calculated for the admission of a hone 
and cart, and the narrow rectilinear accurately-defined galleries 
of the catacomb. The distinction between the two is also 
plainly exhibited when for some local or private reasons an 
ancient arenaria has been transformed into a cemetery. The 
modifications required to strengthen the crumbling walls to 
support the roof and to facilitate the excavation of loculi-, 
involved so much labour that, as a rule, after a few attempts, 
the idea of utilizing an old quarry for burial purposes was 
abandoned. 

Another equally erroneous idea was that these vast buri;l- 
places of the early Christians remained entirely concealed from 
the eyes of their pagan neighbours, and were constructed not 
only without the permission of the municipal authorities but 
without their cognizance. Nothing can be farther from the truth. 
Such an idea is justly stigmatized by Mommsen as ridiculous, and 
reflecting a discredit as unfounded as it is unjust on the imperial 
police of the capital. That such vast excavations should have, 
been made without attracting attention, and that such an im- 
mense number of corpses could have been carried to burial in 
perfect secrecy is utterly impossible. Nor was there any reason; 
why secrecy should have been desired. The decent burial of the 
dead was a matter especially provided for by the Roman laws. 
No particular mode was prescribed. Interment was just as legal 
as cremation,and 
had, in fact, been 
universally prac- 
tised by the 
Romans until the 
later days of the 
republic. 2 The 
bodies, of the 
ScipiosandNasos 
were buried in 
still existing cata- 
combs; and if the 
Christians pre- 
ferred to adopt 
that which Minu- 
cius Felix calls 
"the better, and more ancient custom of inhumation" 
(Octavius, c. 2), there was absolutely nothing, to quote the words 
of Northcote (Roma sotterran. pp. 56, 61), " either in their social 
or religious position to interfere with their freedom of action. 
The law left them entire liberty, . . . and the faithful did but 
use their liberty in the way that suited them best, burying their 
dead according to a fashion to which many of them had been long 
accustomed, and which enabled them at the same time to follow 
in death the example of him who was also their model in life." 
Interment in rock-hewn tombs, " as the manner of the Jews is to 
bury," had been practised in Rome by the Jewish settlers for a 
considerable period anterior to the. rise of the Christian Church. 
A Jewish catacomb, now lost, was discovered and described by 
Bosio (Rom. sott. p. 141), and others are still accessible. They 
are to be distinguished from Christian catacombs only by the 
character of their decorations, the absence of Christian symbols 
and the language of their inscriptions. There would, therefore, 
be nothing extraordinary in the fact that a community, always 
identified in the popular heathen mind with the Jewish faith, 
should adopt the mode of interment belonging to that religion. 
Nor have we the slightest trace of any official interference with 
Christian burials, such as would render secrecy necessary or 
desirable. Their funerals were as much under the protection of 
the law, which not only invested the tomb itself with a sacred 
character, but included in its protection the area in which it 
stood, and the cella memoriae or chapel connected with it, as those 
of their heathen fellow-citizens, while the same shield would be 
thrown over the burial-clubs, which, as we learn from Tertullian 

* Cicero is our authority for the burial of Marius, and for Sulla's 
being the first member of the Gens Cornelia whose dead body was 
burnt (De Legg. ii. 22). 




Fig. 16. — Arenaria beneath the Cemetery of 
Calixtus. 



49 6 



CATACOMB 



(Apolog. c. 39), were common among the early Christians, as over 
those existing among the heathen population of Rome. 

We may then completely dismiss the notion of there being any 
studied secrecy in connexion with the early Christian cemeteries, 
and proceed to inquire into the mode of their formation. 
formation. Almost without exception, they had their origin in 
small burial areas, the property of private persons or 
of families, gradually ramifying and receiving additions of one 
subterranean storey after another as each was required for inter- 
ments. The first step would be the acquisition of a plot of ground 
either by gift or purchase for the formation of a tomb. Christians 
were not beyond the pale of the law, and their faith presented no 
hindrance to the property being secured to them in perpetuity. 
To adapt the ground for its purpose as a cemetery, a gallery was 
run all round the area in the tufa rock at a convenient depth 
below the surface, reached by staircases at the corners. In the 
upright walls of these galleries loculi were cut as needed to receive 
the dead. When these first four galleries were full others were 
mined on the same level at right angles to them, thus gradually 
converting the whole area into a net-work of corridors. If a 
family vault was required, or a burial chapel for a martyr or 
person of distinction, a small square room was excavated by the 
side of the gallery and communicating with it. When the 
original area had been mined in this way as far as was consistent 
with stability, a second storey of galleries was begun at a lower 
level, reached by a new staircase. This was succeeded by a third, 
or a fourth, and sometimes even by a fifth. When adjacent burial 
areas belonged to members of the same Christian confraternity, 
or by gift or purchase fell into the same hands, communications 
were opened between the respective cemeteries, which thus spread 
laterally, and gradually acquired that enormous extent which, 
" even when their fabulous dimensions are reduced to their right 
measure, form an immense work." 1 This could only be executed 
by a large and powerful Christian community unimpeded by 
legal enactments or police regulations, " a living witness of its 
immense development corresponding to the importance of the 
capital." But although, as we have said, in ordinary times 
there was no necessity for secrecy, yet when the peace of the 
Church was broken by the fierce and often protracted persecutions 
of the heathen emperors, it became essential to adopt precautions 
to conceal the entrance to the cemeteries, which became the 
temporary hiding-places of the Christian fugitives, and to baffle 
the search of their pursuers. To these stormy periods we may 
safely assign the alterations which may be traced in the staircases, 
which are sometimes abruptly cut off, leaving a gap requiring 
a ladder, and the formation of secret passages communicating 
with the arenariae, and through them with the open country. 

When the storms of persecution ceased and Christianity had 
become the imperial faith, the evil fruits of prosperity were not 
slow to appear. Cemetery interment became a regular trade 
in the hands of the fossores, or grave-diggers, who appear to have 
established a kind of property in the catacombs, and whose 
greed of gain led to that destruction of the religious paintings with 
which the walls were decorated, for the quarrying of fresh loculi, 
to which we have already alluded. Monumental epitaphs record 
the purchase of a grave from the fossores, in many cases during 
the lifetime of the individual, not unfrequently stating the price. 
A very curious fresco, found in the cemetery of Calixtus, preserved 
by the engravings of the earlier investigators (Bottari, torn. ii. p. 
126, tav. 99), represents a " fossor " with his lamp in his hand 
and his pick over his shoulder, and his tools lying about him. 
Above is the inscription, " Diogenes Fossor in Pace depositus." 

It is unnecessary to enter on any detailed description of the 
frescoes which cover the walls and ceilings of the burial-chapels in 
the richest abundance. It must suffice to say that the earliest 
examples are only, to be distinguished from the mural decorations 
employed by their pagan contemporaries (as seen at Pompeii and 

1 Mommsen's chosen example of an ancient burial-chamber, ex- 
tending itself into a catacomb, or gathering subterranean additions 
round it till a catacomb was established, is that of the cemetery 
of St Domitilla, traditionally identified with a granddaughter of 
Vespasian, and the catacomb of Santi Nereo ed Achilleo on the 
Appian and Ardeatine way. 



elsewhere) by the absence of all that was immoral or idolatrous, 
and that it was only very slowly and timidly that any distinctly 
religious representations were introduced. These were 
at first purely symbolical, meaningless to any but a %j£"' 
Christian eye, such as the Vine, the Good Shepherd, the 
Sheep, the Fisherman, the Fish, &c. Even the personages of ancient 
mythology were pressed into the service of early Christian art, 
and Orpheus, taming the wild beasts with his lyre, symbolized 
the peaceful sway of Christ; and Ulysses, deaf to the Siren's 
song, represented the Believer triumphing over the allurements 
of sensual pleasure. The person of Christ appeared but rarely, 
and then commonly simply as the chief personage in an historical 
picture. The events depicted from the fife of Christ are but 
few, and always conform rigidly to the same traditional type. 
The most frequent are the miracle at Cana, the multiplication 
of the loaves and fishes, the paralytic carrying his bed, the healing 
of the woman with the issue of blood, the raising of Lazarus, 




Fig. 17. — Fresco Ceiling. (From Bosio.) 
The subjects, beginning at the top and going to the right, are — 
(1) The paralytic carrying his (5) Jonah swallowed by the fish. 

(6) Jonah vomited forth. 

(7) Moses striking the rock. 

(8) Noah and the dove. 
In the centre, the Good 

Shepherd. 



bed. 

(2) The seven baskets full of 

fragments. 

(3) Raising of Lazarus. 

(4) Daniel in the lions' den. 



Zacchaeus, and the triumphal entry into Jerusalem. The 
Crucifixion, and subjects from the Passion, are never represented. 
The cycle of Old Testament subjects is equally limited. The 
most common are the history of Jonah as a type of the Resurrec- 
tion, the Fall, Noah receiving the dove with the olive branch, 
Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac, Moses taking off his shoes, David 
with the sling, Daniel in the lions' den, and the Three Children 
in the fiery furnace. The mode of representation is always con- 
ventional, the treatment of the subject no less than its choice 
being dictated by an authority to which the artist was compelled 
to bow. All the more valuable of these paintings have beiin 
produced in J. H. Parker's series of photographs taken in the 
catacombs by the magnesium light. 2 Wilpert's great work, in 
which these frescoes are reproduced in colours, now enables 
the student even better to distinguish the styles of different 
centuries and follow the course of artistic development or decay. 
Beyond Rome and its suburbs the most remarkable Christian 
catacombs are those in the vicinity of Naples, described by 
Pelliccia (De Christ. Eccl. Polit. vol. iv. Dissert. 5), and in separate 
treatises by Bellerman and Schultze. Plans of them are also 
given by Agincourt in his great work on Christian art. These 

2 Parker's invaluable series of Roman photographs may be seen 
at the library of the Victoria and Albert museum, at the Ashmolean 
museum and the Bodleian library, Oxford. 



CATACOMB 



497 



catacombs differ materially from those of Rome. They were 
certainly originally stone-quarries, and the hardness of the rock 

has made the construction practicable of wide, lofty 
combs of corr idors and spacious halls, very unlike the narrow 
Naples. galleries and contracted chambers in the Roman 

cemeteries. The mode of interment, however, is the 
same as that practised in Rome, and the loculi and arcosolia 
differ by little in the two. The walls and ceilings are covered 




Fig. 18. — Fresco Ceiling. (From Bosio.) 
The subjects, beginning at the bottom and going to the right, are — 
(i) Moses striking the rock. (4) Abraham's sacrifice. 

(2) Noah and the dove. (5) The miracle of the loaves. 

(3) The three children in the furnace. 

with fresco paintings of different dates, in some cases lying 
one over the other. This catacomb contains an unquestionable 
example of a church, divided into a nave and chancel, with a 
rude stone altar and bishop's seat behind it. 

At Syracuse also there are very extensive catacombs known 
as " the Grottos of St John." They are also figured by Agincourt, 
S racuse anc ^ described by Denon ( Voyage en Sicile et Malte) 
and Fiihrer. There is an entire underground city with 
several storeys of larger and smaller streets, squares and cross 
ways, cut out of the rock; at the intersection of the cross ways 




Catacombs of St John, Syracuse. 



are immense circular halls of a bottle shape, like a glass-house 
furnace, lighted by air shafts. The galleries are generally very 
narrow, furnished on each side with arched tombs, and com- 
municating with family sepulchral-chambers closed originally 



by locked doors, the marks of the hinges and staples being still 
visible. The walls are in many places coated with stucco adorned 
with frescoes, including palms, doves, labara and other Christian 
symbols. The ground-plans (figs. 
19, 20), from Agincourt, of the 
catacomb and of one of the cir- 
cular halls, show how widely this 
cemetery differs in arrangement from 
the Roman catacombs. The fre- 
quency of blind passages and of 
circular chambers will be noticed, as 
well as the very large number of 
bodies in the cruciform recesses, 
apparently amounting in one in- 
stance to nineteen. Agincourt re- 
marks that this cemetery " gives an 
idea of a work executed with design 
and leisure, and with means very 




Fig. 20. — Plan of Circular 
Hall, Catacombs of St John, 
Syracuse. (From Agincourt.) 



Malta. 



Egypt 



different from those at 
command in producing the catacombs of Rome." 

Denon also describes catacombs at Malta near the ancient 
capital of the island. The passages were all cut in a close- 
grained stone, and are very narrow, with arched ceilings, 
running very irregularly, and ramifying in all direc- 
tions. The greater part of the tombs stand on either side of 
the galleries in square recesses (like the table-tombs of the Roman 
catacombs), and are rudely fashioned to imitate sarcophagi. 
The interments are not nearly so numerous as in other catacombs, 
nor are there any vestiges of painting, sculpture or inscriptions. 

At Taormina in Sicily is a Saracenic catacomb, also T ,„„„,„„ 
n j i_ a • m . . Taormina. 

figured by Agincourt. The mam corridor is 12 ft. 

wide, having three or more ranges of loculi on either side, running 

longitudinally into the rock, each originally closed by a stone 

bearing an inscription. 

Passing to Egypt, a 
small Christian catacomb 
at Alexandria is 
described and 
figured by de Rossi. 1 The 
loculi here also are set end- 
ways to the passage. The 
walls are abundantly deco- 
rated with paintings, one 
of a liturgical character. 
But the most extensive 
catacombs at Alexandria 
are those of Egypto-Greek 
origin, from the largest of 
which, according to Strabo 
(lib. xvii. p. 79 5), the 
quarter where it is placed 
had the name of the 
Necropolis. The plan, it 
will be seen, is remarkable 
for its regularity (figs. 21, 
22). Here, too, the graves 
run endways into the rock. 
Other catacombs in the 
vicinity of the same city are described by Pocock and other 
travellers, and are figured by Agincourt. 

Subterranean cemeteries of the general character of those 
described are very frequent in all southern and eastern countries. 
A vast necropolis in the 
environs of Saida, 
ancient Sidon, 
is described in 
Renan's Mission en Phi- 
nicie, and figured in Tho- 
bois's plates. It consists 
of a series of apartments 
approached by staircases, 

1 Bulletino di archaeologia cristiana, 
1865. See also Authorities, below. 




Fig. 21. — Plan of Catacomb at 
Alexandria. (From Agincourt.) 



Sidon 




Fig. 22. — Section of a Gallery in Cata- 
comb at Alexandria. (From Agincourt.) 



November 1864, August 



498 



CATACOMB 



the sides pierced with sepulchral recesses running lengthwise 
into the rock. 

The rock-hewn tombs of Etruria scarcely come under the 
category of catacombs, in the usual sense, being rather in- 
dependent family burial-places, grouped together in 
a necropolis. They are, however, far too remarkable 
to be altogether passed over. These sepulchres are 
usually hollowed out of the face of low cliffs on the 
side of a hill. They often rise tier above tier, and are some- 
times all on the same level " facing each other as in streets, 
vnd branching off laterally into smaller lanes or alleys "; and 



Rock- 
tombs of 
Etruria. 




Fig. 23. — Plan of a Tomb at Cervetri. (From Dennis.) 

occasionally forming " a spacious square or piazza surrounded 
by tombs instead of houses " (Dennis, Cities and Cemeteries of 
Etruria, ii. 31). The construction of the tombs commonly 
keeps up the same analogy between the cities of the living and 
those of the dead. Their plan is for the most part that of a 
house, with a door of entrance and passage leading into a central 
chamber or atrium, with others of smaller size opening from it, 
each having a stone-hewn bench or triclinium on three of its 
sides, on which the dead, frequently a pair of corpses side by 
side, were laid as if at a banquet. These benches are often 
hewn in the form of couches with pillows at one end, and the 
legs carved in relief. The ceilings have the representation of 
beams and rafters cut in the rock. In some instances arm-chairs, 
carved out of the living rock, stand between the doors of the 
chambers, and the walls above are decorated with the semblance 
of suspended shields. The walls are often covered with paintings 
in a very simple archaic style, in red and black. As a typical 
example of the Etruscan tombs we give the plan and section 
(figs. 23, 24) of the Grotta delta Sedia at Cervetri from Dennis 
(pp. 32,135). The tombs in some instances form subterranean 
groups more analogous to the general idea of a catacomb. Of 
this nature is the very remarkable cemetery at Poggio Gaiella, 
near Chiusi, the ancient Clusium, of a portion of the principal 
storey of which the woodcut (fig. 25) is a plan. The most re- 
markable of these sepulchral chambers is a large circular hall 
about 25 ft. in diameter, supported by a huge cylindrical pillar 




Fig. 24.- 



-Section of the Tomb of the Seats and Shields, Cervetri. 
(From Dennis.) 



hewn from the rock. Opening out of this and the other chambers, 
and connecting them together, are a series of low winding passages 
or cuniculi, just large enough for a man to creep through on all 
fours. No plausible suggestion has been offered as to the purpose 
of these mysterious burrows, which cannot fail to remind us of 
the labyrinth which, according to Varro's description as quoted 
by Pliny {Hist. Nat. lib. xxxvi. c. 19, § 4), was the distinguishing 
mark of Porsena's tomb, and which have led some adventurous 
archaeologists to identify this sepulchre with that of the great 
king of Etruria (Dennis, u.s., pp. 393 ff.). (E. V.; O. M. D.) 



Modern Discoveries. — In 1873 was discovered, near the ceme- 
tery of St Domitilla, the semi-subterranean basilica of Santi 
Nereo ed Achilleo, 100 ft. by 60 ft. This is now covered with a 
roof, and the fallen columns have been raised up. The lower 



FlG. 25.— Plan of a portion of the principal storey in the Poggio 
Gajella. (From Dennis.) 

part of a pillar, which once supported a baldachino over the altar, 
still preserves the name Acilleus, and beneath it a bas-relief 
of the martyr, with his hands bound, receiving his death-blow 
from the executioner. The base of a similar column has only 
feet in the same attitude, and probably bore the name Neretjs. 
In a grave in the apse was found a large fragment of an inscrip- 
tion, composed by Pope Damasus, but set up by his successor 
Siricius, which, from the note-book of a Salzburg pilgrim of the 
8th century, can be completed thus: — 



Militiae nomen dederant saevum 
Officium pariter spectantes juss 
Praeceptis pulsante metu servi 
Mira fides rerum subito posue 
Conversi f ugiunt ducis impia castr 
Projiciunt clypeos faleras tel 
Confessi gaudent Christi portar 
Credite per Damasum possit quid 



^<^v ue gerebant 
ATYR>^anni 
RE par^V ati 

RE FVRORIiV^m 
A BELIXQVVNi 
AQ. CI1VESTA 
E TRIVMFOS 
GLORIA CHRISTI 



Nereus (see Rom. xvi. 15) and Achilleus, said to have been 
baptized by St Peter, refused to do the bidding of Domitian as 
praetorians, and entering the service of Flavia Domitilla, suffered 
martyrdom with their mistress Petronilla, of the Aurelian family 
closely connected with the Flavii, and the spiritual daughter of 
St Peter, who was buried in a sarcophagus with the inscription: — 

AVRELIAE • PETRONILLAE • FIL • DVLCISSIMAE 

This is now in St Peter's, but was probably originally behind the 
apse of this basilica, for there is a fresco of her in an arccsolium, 
with a matron named Veneranda. The original entrance to the 
cemetery leads directly into a spacious corridor with no loculi, 
but recesses for sarcophagi, and decorations of the classical style 
of the 2nd century. From this a wide staircase leads directly 
down to a chamber, discovered in March 1881, of a very early 
date. Within an arcosolium is a tablet set up by " Aurelius 
Ampliatus and his son Gordian, to Aurelia Bonifatia, his in- 
comparable, wife, a woman of true chastity, who lived 25 years, 
2 months, 4 days, and 2 hours." The letters are of the 2nd 
century; but above the arcosolium was found a stone with 
great letters, 5 or 6 in. high: "Ampliati, the tomb of Ampli- 
atus." Now Ampliatus is a servile name: how comes it to be 
set up with such distinction in the sepulchre of the Flavii ? 
Romans xvi. 8 supplies the answer: " Salute Ampliatus, most 



CATACOMB 



499 



beloved to me in the Lord." De Rossi thinks the identification 
well grounded (Bulleitino, 1881, p. 74). Epitaphs of members 
of the Flavian family have been found here, and others stating 
that they are put up "Ex indulgentia flaviae domitillae 
vespasiani neptis." So that De Rossi did not hesitate to com- 
plete an inscription on a broken stone thus: — 




De Rossi began his excavations in the cemetery of Santa 
Priscilla in 1851, but for thirty years nothing but what had been 
described by Bosic came to light. In 1880 he unearthed a portion 
near the Cappella Greca, and found galleries that had not been 
touched since they were filled in during the Diocletian perse- 
cution. The loculi were intact and the epitaphs still in their 
places, so that " they form a kind of museum, in which the 
development, the formulae, and the symbolic figures of Christian 
epigraphy, from its origin to the end of the 3rd or 4th century, 
can be notified and contemplated, not in artificial specimens 
as in the Lateran, but in the genuine and living reality of their 
original condition." (Bullelt., 1884, p. 68). Many of the names 
mentioned in St Paul's Epistles are found here: Phoebe, Prisca, 
Aquilius, Felix Ampliatus, Epenetus, Olympias, Onesimus, 
Philemon, Asyncritus, Lucius, Julia, Caius, Timotheus, Tychicus, 
Crescens, Urbanus, Hermogenes, Tryphaena and Trypho(sa) 
on the same stone. Petrus, a very rare name in the catacombs, 
is found here several times, both in Greek and in Latin. The 
neighbouring Coemeterium Ostrianum was anciently known as 
" Fons S. Petri," " ubi Petrus baptizavit," " ubi Petrus prius 
sedit." This cemetery derives its name from Priscilla, mother 
of Pudens, who is said to have given hospitality to St Peter the 
Apostle. We are reminded of St Paul, and of his friends Aquila 
and Prisca, by a monument erected by an imperial freedman 
who was praepositvs tabernacvlorvm — chief tentmaker. 
In 1888 a corridor was discovered which had at one time been 
isolated from the rest of the cemetery. It had no loculi, but 
recesses in the wall to receive sarcophagi. At the end of the 
corridor there was a large chamber, 23 ft. by 13 ft., once lined 
with marble and the ceiling covered with mosaic, a few fragments 
of which still remain. The only tomb here was a sarcophagus, 
of which the broken front bears the letters which show it to have 
been the epitaph of one of the Acilian family: — 
acilio glabrioni filio 

In the vicinity are fragments of the epitaphs of Manius Acilius 
and Priscilla, of Quintus Acilius and Caia Acilia in Greek, 
another Greek inscription " Acilius Rufinus mayest thou live 
in God." After careful examination of the nine Acillii, who were 
consuls, De Rossi concludes that this was the resting-place of 
that Acilius Glabrio, consul with Trajan, a.d. 91, who in the 
year of his consulate was compelled by Domitian to fight with 
beasts in the arena, and then banished and put to death in 95. 
The question of his Christianity seems settled by the discovery 
of the sepulchre of these Christian Acilii. From this crypt a 
staircase led up to the basilica in which Pope Silvester was 
buried, and the whole plan of which was laid bare by De Rossi. 
The tomb of St Silvester could be identified, and that of Pope 
Siricius " at his feet," as the pilgrim noted (Bullett., 1890, 
pp. 106-119). 

Just before De Rossi's death, Mgr. Wilpert discovered in the 
Cappella Greca a painting of the " Fractio Panis " or eucharistic 
feast, which he cleansed from the dust with which it had been 
covered. The picture of the Blessed Virgin and Child, which De 
Rossi ascribed to the 2nd, if not to the 1st century, has received 
an unexpected proof of its antiquity. In 1890 the floor of the 
gallery in which it stands was excavated, and another floor was 
found to be 6 ft. below its supposed level. The loculi in this lower 
portion were intact, with inscriptions of the 2nd century still in 
their places, proving that the niche in which that picture was 
painted must have been considerably older than the lpwering of 



the floor. A flight of iron steps enables the visitor now to examine 
this venerable specimen of early Christian art. 

After the death of De Rossi, one of his pupils, H. Stevenson, 
since dead, discovered in 1896 a small subterranean basilica in 
the catacomb of Santi Pietro e Marcellino on the Via Labicana, 
with pious acclamations on the plaster similar to those in the 
Papal crypt in St Calixtus. Near the well-known subterranean 
chapel in the Coemeterium Ostrianum was discovered by Mgr. 
Crostarosa, in 1877, another chapel, in which Signor Armellini 
found traces of St Emerentiana, foster-sister of St Agnes. Near 
this a whole region of galleries has been brought to light with 
loculi intact. 

Explorations conducted in the cemetery of Domitilla in 1897- 
1898 brought to light a fine double crypt with frescoes represent- 
ing Christ seated between six male and female saints; also an 
inscription relating to a new saint (Eulalius) in a cubiculum of 
the 3rd century. In 1899-1900 were discovered two opposite 
cubicula in the catacomb of Santi Pietro e Marcellino. These 
were unknown to Bosio, and are both covered with frescoes, the 
vault being in one case decorated with the scene which represents 
Christ seated among the apostles and pronouncing sentence upon 
the defunct. An inscription discovered in 1900 on the site of the 
ancient cemetery of St Ciriaca, and dating from a.d. 405, states 
that one Euryalus bought a site ad mensam beati marlyris 
Laurentii from a certain fossor whose name has been erased. 
This is interesting as an example of what was known as memoriae 
damnatio or the blotting out of a name on account of some 
dishonourable action. From the end of the 4th to the first half 
of the 5th century, the fossores had the privilege of selling sites, 
which frequently led to grave abuses. In 1901-1902 excavations 
in the cemetery of Santa Priscilla, near the Cappella Greca, 
revealed a polygonal chamber. This may have originally been 
the nymphaeum of the great villa of the Acilii Glabriones, the 
hypogaeum of which was discovered by De Rossi near this spot in 
1888. It may have been used as a burial-place for martyrs, and 
Professor Marucchi is inclined to see in it the sepulchral chapel 
of Pope Marcellinus, who died in a.d. 304 during the persecutions 
of Diocletian. In 1902, in that part of the Via Ardeatina which 
passes between the cemeteries of Calixtus and Domitilla, was 
discovered a crypt with frescoes and the sanctuary of a martyr: 
it is thought that this, rather than a neighbouring crypt brought 
to light in 1897, may prove to be the sepulchral crypt of SS. 
Marcus and Marcellianus. In a cubiculum leading out of a 
gallery in the vicinity there was also discovered an interesting 
impression in plaster of an inscription of the mother of Pope 
Damasus, beginning: 

hic damasi mater posvit lavren[tia membra]. 

In the same year building queries in the Via di Sant' Onofrio
revealed the presence of catacombs beneath the foundations: 
examination of the loculi showed that no martyrs or illustrious 
persons were buried here. 

In 1903 a new cemetery with frescoes came to light on the Via 
Latina, considered by Marucchi to have belonged to a heretical 
sect. In the same year the Jewish cemetery on the Via Portuense, 
known to Bosio but since forgotten, was rediscovered. The 
subterranean basilica of SS. Felix and Adauctus, discovered by 
Boldetti and afterwards choked up with ruins, was cleared again: 
the crypt, begun by Damasus and enlarged by Siricius, contains 
frescoes of the 6th- 7 th centuries. 

A good plan of the catacombs at Albano (at the 1 5th milestone 
of the Appian way), discovered by Boldetti and described by De 
Rossi, has been published by Marucchi (Nuovo Bulletino di 
archeologia cristiana, 1902, pp. 89 ff.). In 1904 a small sub- 
terranean cemetery was discovered at Anagnia. Catacombs 
have also been recently discovered on the site of Hadrumetum 
near Sousse in Tunisia. (* W. R. B.; O. M. D.) 

Authorities. — The classical work on the catacombs of Rome is 
G. B. De Rossi's Roma sotterranea, on which most of the accounts 
in other languages than Italian have been based. The fine volume 
by Mgr. Wilpert, Le Pitture delle catacombe romane (Rome, 1903), 
in which all the important frescoes are reproduced in colours, is to 
be regarded as an addition to the Roma sotterranea. All new 



5°° 



CATAFALQUE— CATALONIA 



discoveries made by the active Commissione di archeologia sacra are 
chronicled with as little delay as possible in the Nuovo Bulletino de 
archeologia cristiana published in Rome. 

The most recent accounts of the catacombs are to be found in the 
following books: — Armellini, Gli Antichi Cimiteri cristiani di Roma'e 
d' Italia (Rome, 1893); O. Marucchi, Le Catacombe romane (Rome, 
1903; also translated into French), Manuale di epigrafia cristiana 
(Milan, 1904) ; M. Besnier, Les Catacombes de Rome (Paris, 1909). 

Among the older works are: Bosio, Roma sotterranea, Severano's 
edition (1632), and Aringhi's edition (1651) ; Boldetti, Osservazioni 
sopra i cimiteri dei santi martiri (Rome, 1720); Bottari, Sculture e 
pitture sagre, &c. (Rome, 1737-1754); Seroux d'Agincourt, Histoire 
de Vart par les monuments (Paris, 1823; German ed., 1840); G. 
Marchi, Monumenti delle arti cristiane primitive (Rome, 1844) ; Raoul 
Rochette, Tableau des catacombes de Rome (2nd ed., Paris, 1853); 
Perret, Les Catacombes de Rome (Paris, 1855)— a sumptuous folio 
work, but not always accurate , Roller, Les Catacombes de Rome 
(Paris, 1881); V. Schultze, Die Katakomben (Leipzig, 1882). 

Works written in English are: Northcote and Brownlow, Roma 
sotterranea (London, 1869; based upon De Rossi); Wharton 
Marriott, The Testimony of the Catacombs (London, 1870); J. H. 
Parker, The Archaeology of Rome: the Catacombs; Smith and 
Cheetham, Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, s.v. " Catacombs "; 
R. Lanciani, Pagan and Christian Rome (London, 1892); W. Lowry, 
Christian Art and Archaeology, ch. ii. (London, 1901 ; a useful 
introduction to the subject) ; H. Gee, " The Church in the Cata- 
combs," in W. Lefroy's Lectures in Ecclesiastical History (1896); 
Th. Mommsen, in the Contemporary Review, May 1871. 

Accounts of the catacombs will also be found in the encyclopaedias 
and manuals published under the following names: Martigny, 
Perate, F. X. Kraus (Realencyklopddie and Geschichte der christlichen 
Kunst), Reusens, V. Schultze and C. M. Kauffmann, and in the large 
new Dictionnaire d'archeologie chretienne et liturgie, published at 
Paris under the editorship of Dom F. Cabrol. 

The catacombs at Naples are described in C. F. Bellermann, Vber 
die dltesten christlichen Begrdbnisstdtten und besonders die Kata- 
komben zu Neapel (Hamburg, 1839) ; Armellini, as above, and 
V. Schultze, Die Katakomben von San Gennaro dei Pvveri in Neapel 
(Jena, 1877). 

For the catacombs in Malta, A. A. Caruana, Ancient Pagan Tombs 
and Christian Cemeteries in the Islands of Malta (Malta, 1898), and 
A. Mayr, " Die altchristlichen Begrabnisstatten auf Malta," in 
Rbmische Quartalschrift, vol. xv. pp. 216 and 352 (Rome, 1901), 
may be consulted. 

The fullest account of the Sicilian catacombs is given by J. Ftihrer, 
Forschungen zur Sicilia sotterranea (Munich, 1897) ; and D. C. 
Barrecca, Le Catacombe di San Giovanni in Siracusa (Syracuse, 1906). 

A catacomb of the 5th century, discovered at Kertch in South 
Russia, is described by J. Kulakovsky in Materials for Russian 
Archaeology (St Petersburg, 1896; a publication of the Russian 
Imperial Archaeological Commission), but it is written in Russian, 
as also is the account by V. Latyshev, in Vizantieski Vremennik, 
vol. vi. pp. 337 ff. (St Petersburg, 1899). 

The catacombs at Hadrumetum (Sousse) are described by A. F. 
Leynard, Les Catacombes d'Hadrumete, deuxieme campagne de fouilles 
(1904-1905). See also Revue Tunisienne (1905), p. 250. 

For the catacombs of Alexandria, Neroutsos Bey, L'Ancienne 
Alexandrie, may be consulted in addition to De Rossi's article 
mentioned in the text. (O. M. D.) 

CATAFALQUE (a word of unknown origin, occurring in various 
forms in many European languages, meaning a funeral scaffold 
or temporary stage), a movable structure of wood sometimes 
richly decorated, erected temporarily at funeral ceremonies 
in a church to receive the coffin or effigy of the deceased; also 
an open hearse or funeral car. 

CATALANI, ANGELICA (1780-1849), Italian opera-singer, 
daughter of a tradesman at Sinigaglia, was educated at the 
convent of Santa Lucia at Gubbio, where her magnificerit 
soprano voice, of extraordinary compass and purity, soon 
became famous. In 1795 she made her debut on the stage at 
Venice, and from that moment every impresario in Europe was 
anxious to engage her. For nearly thirty years she sang at all 
the great houses, receiving very large fees; her first appearance 
in London being at the King's theatre in 1806. She remained 
in England, a prima donna without a serious rival, for seven 
years. Then she was given the management of the opera in 
Paris, but this resulted in financial failure, owing to the incapacity 
and extravagance of her husband, Captain Valabregue, whom 
she married in 1806. But her continental tours continued to 
be enormously successful, until she retired in 1828. She settled 
at Florence in 1830, where she founded a free singing school for 
girls; and her charity and kindness were unbounded. She died 
of cholera in Paris on the 12 th of June 1849. 



CATALEPSY (from Gr. KaraXTj^ts, a seizure), a term applied 
to a nervous affection characterized by the sudden suspension 
of sensation and volition, accompanied with a peculiar rigidity 
of the whole or of certain muscles of the body. The subjects 
of catalepsy are in most instances females of highly nervous 
temperament. The exciting cause of an attack is usually mental 
emotion operating either suddenly, as in the case of a fright, or 
more gradually in the way of prolonged depression. The symp- 
toms presented vary in different cases, and even in the same indi- 
vidual in different attacks. Sometimes the typical features of the 
disease are exhibited in a state of complete insensibility, together 
with a statue-like appearance of the body which -will retain 
any attitude it may be made to assume during the continuance 
of the attack. In this condition the whole organic and vital 
functions appear to be reduced to the lowest possible limit 
consistent with life, and to such a degree as to simulate actual 
death. At other times considerable mental excitement will 
accompany the cataleptic symptoms, and the patient will sing 
or utter passionate exclamations during the fit, being all the 
while quite unconscious. The attack may be of short duration, 
passing off within a few minutes. It may, however, last for many 
hours, and in some rare instances persist for several days; and 
it is conceivable that in such cases the appearances presented 
might be mistaken for real death, as is alleged to have occasion- 
ally happened. Catalepsy belongs to the class of functional 
nervous disorders (see Muscle and Nerve: Pathology) in which 
morbid physical and psychical conditions are mixed up. Al- 
though it is said to occur in persons in perfect health, careful 
inquiry will usually reveal some departure from the normal state, 
as is shown by the greater number of the recorded cases. More 
particularly is this true of females, in whom some form of 
menstrual derangement is generally found to have preceded 
; the cataleptic affection. Catalepsy is sometimes associated with 
epilepsy and with grave forms of mental disease. In ordinary 
cases, however, the mental phenomena bear close resemblance 
to those witnessed in hysteria. In many of the subjects of 
catalepsy there appears to be a remarkable weakness of the will, 
whereby the tendency to lapse into the cataleptic state is not 
resisted but rather in some measure encouraged, and attacks 
may thus be induced by the most trivial circumstances. 

CATALOGUE (a Fr. adaptation of the Gr. KaraXoyos, a register, 
from naraKeyeiv, to enrol or pick out), a list or enumeration, 
generally in alphabetical order, of persons, things, &c, and 
particularly of the contents of a museum or library. A catalogue 
raisonnee is such a list classified according to subjects or on some 
other basis, with short explanations and notes. (See also articles 
Bibliography and Bibliology, and Libraries.) 

CATALONIA (Cataluna), a captaincy -general, and formerly 
a province of Spain, formerly also a principality of the crown 
of Aragon; bounded on the N. by the Pyrenees, W. by Aragon, 
S. by Valencia, and E. by the Mediterranean Sea. Pop. (1900) 
1,966,382; area, 12,427 sq. m. . The triangular territory of 
Catalonia forms the north-eastern corner of the Iberian Peninsula. 
A full account of the physical features, and of the modern 
development of commerce, communications, &c, in this area 
is given in the articles on the four provinces Barcelona, Gerona, 
Lerida and Tarragona, into which Catalonia was divided in 1833. 

The coast, which is partly sandy, partly rocky, extends about 
240 m.; its chief harbours are those of the capital, Barcelona, 
of Matar6, of Rosas and of Tarragona. The surface is much 
broken by spurs of the Pyrenees, the direction of which is 
generally south. Running south-west to north-east, and united 
on the north with one of the offsets of the Pyrenees, is the range 
of the Sierra Llena, which bisects Catalonia, and forms its 
central watershed. The principal rivers are the Ter, the Llobre- 
gat, and the Ebro (q.v.), which all run into the Mediterranean. 
None of them is navigable. The climate, in spite of frequent 
mists and rains, sudden changes of temperature, and occasional 
great mid-day heat, is healthy and favourable to vegetation. 
The dwarf-palm, orange, lime, and olive grow in the warmer 
tracts; and on the higher grounds the thorn-apple, pomegranate, 
myrtle, esparto and heaths flourish. These is much woodland. 



GATALPA— CATALYSIS 



501 



but meadows and pastures are rare. Maize, millet, rye, flax, 
liquorice and fruits of all sorts — especially nuts, almonds, 
oranges, figs, walnuts and chestnuts — are produced. Wheat 
sufficient for one-fourth of the population is grown, and the vine 
is extensively cultivated. Few cattle, but numbers, of sheep, 
goats and swine are reared. Game is plentiful, and the fisheries 
on the coast are excellent. The wines are for the most part 
rough and strong, though some are very good, especially when 
matured. They are much used to adulterate those of Oporto, 
or, after undergoing the blending operation termed compage, 
are passed off as Bordeaux wines in France. The best of them, 
priorato, is chiefly known in England, under the disguise of 
second or third-rate port; it was much used in the military 
hospitals of America during the Civil War. 

The Catalonians are a frugal, sharp-witted, and industrious 
' people, having much national pride, and a strong revolutionary 
spirit. They are distinct in origin from the other inhabitants of 
Spain, from whom they differ in their dialect and costume. In 
their great energy and their love of enterprise they resemble the 
Basques. Irrigation, careful husbandry and railroad communica- 
tions have much developed the resources of their country, in 
themselves excellent; and there are many manufacturing towns 
and industrial establishments. 

Catalonia was one of the first of the Roman possessions in 
Spain, and formed the north-eastern portion of Hispania 
Tarraconensis. About 470 it was occupied by the Alans and 
Goths. It was conquered by the Moors in 7 1 2, but these invaders 
were in turn dispossessed by the Spaniards and the troops of 
Charlemagne in 788. Catalonia was subsequently ruled by 
French counts, who soon, however, made themselves independent 
of France. By the marriage of Count Raymond Berenger IV. 
of Barcelona with Petronilla of Aragon, Catalonia became 
annexed to Aragon; but this union was frequently severed. 
In 1640, when Philip IV. attempted to deprive Catalonia of its 
rights and privileges, it gave itself up to Louis XIII. of France. 
It was restored to Spain in 1659, and was once more occupied by 
the French from 1694 to 1697. Under Philip V. Catalonia, in 
1714, was deprived of its cortes and liberties. From 1808 to 
1813 it was held by France. It was the scene of civil war in 1823, 
and of important revolutionary queries in the Carlist wars.

The history and literature of Catalonia have been closely studied, 
and in many cases the results of research are published in the Catalan 
language. See Cataluna, sus monumentos y artes, su naturaleza e 
historia (2 vols, of the illustrated series Espana), by P. Pifferrer, 
F. Pi Margall, and A. A. Pijoan (Barcelona, 1884) ; Historia de 
Cataluna, by V. Balaguer (11 vols., Madrid, 1886, &c); Historia 
de Cataluna, by A. Bori y Fontesta (Barcelona, 1898) ; Origines 
historicos de Cataluna, by J. Balari y Jovany (Barcelona, 1899) ; 
Coleccio dels monografias de Catalunya, by J. Reig y Vilardell (Barce- 
lona, 1890); Historia del derecho en Catalonia, Mallorca y Valencia, 
by B. Oliver (Madrid, I876-1880); and Antigua marina catalana, 
by F. de Bofarull y Sans (Barcelona, 1898). The Revista catalana 
(Catalan Review), published at Barcelona from 1889, contains many 
valuable papers on local affairs. See also Spain : sections Language, 
Literature and History, and Barcelona. 

CATALPA, in botany, a genus belonging to the family Bignoni- 
aceae and containing about ten species in America and eastern 
Asia. The best known is Catalpa bignonioides, a native of the 
eastern United States which is often cultivated in parks and 
gardens. It is a stately tree with large heart-shaped pointed 
leaves and panicles of white bell-shaped flowers streaked with 
yellow and brown purple. 

CATALYSIS (from the Gr. /card, down, and \bttv, to loosen), 
in chemistry, the name given to chemical actions brought about 
by a substance, termed the " catalyst," which is recovered 
unchanged after the action. The term was introduced by 
Berzelius, who first studied such reactions. It is convenient to 
divide catalytic actions into two groups: — (1) when the catalyst 
first combines with one of the reaction components to form a 
compound which immediately reacts with the other components, 
the catalyst being simultaneously liberated, and free to react 
with more of the undecomposed firet component; and (2), when 
the catalyst apparently reacts by mere contact. The theory of 
catalysis is treated under Chemical Action; in this article 
mention will be made of some of the more interesting examples. 



A familiar instance of a catalytic action is witnessed when a 
mixture of potassium chlorate and manganese dioxide is heated 
to 3S°°> oxygen being steadily liberated, and the manganese 
dioxide being unchanged at the end of the reaction. The action 
may be explained as follows: — part of the chlorate reacts with 
the manganese dioxide to form potassium permanganate, 
chlorine and oxygen, the chlorine subsequently reacting with 
the permanganate to produce manganese dioxide, potassium 
chloride and oxygen, thus 

2KC10 3 -i-2Mn0 2 = 2KMn0 4 +Cl 2 +02 = 2KCl-r-2Mn0 2 +30 3 . 

This explanation is supported by the facts that traces of chlorine 
are present in the gas, and the pink permanganate can be 
recognized when little dioxide is used. Other oxides bring about 
the same decomposition at temperatures below that at which 
the chlorate yields oxygen when heated alone; but since such 
substances as kaolin, platinum black and some other finely 
powdered compounds exercise the same effect, it follows that the 
explanation given above is not quite general. Another example 
is Deacon's process for the manufacture of chlorine by passing 
hydrochloric acid gas mixed with air over heated bricks which 
had been previously impregnated with a copper sulphate solution. 
The nitrous gases employed in the ordinary chamber process of 
manufacturing sulphuric acid also act catalytically. Mention 
may be made of the part played by water vapour in conditioning 
many chemical reactions. Thus sodium will not react with dry 
chlorine or dry oxygen; carbon, sulphur and phosphorus will 
not burn in perfectly dry oxygen, neither does nitric oxide give 
red fumes of the peroxide. In organic chemistry many catalytic 
actions are met with. In the class of reaction known as " con- 
densations," it may be found that the course of the reaction is 
largely dependent upon the nature of some substance which 
acts catalytically. One of the most important is the Friedel 
and Craft's reaction, in which an aromatic compound combines 
with an alkyl haloid in the presence of aluminium, zinc or 
ferric chloride. It seems in this, as in other cases, that addition 
compounds are first formed which subsequently react with the 
re-formation of the catalyst. The formation of benzoin from 
benzaldehyde in the presence of potassium cyanide is another 
example; this action has been investigated by G. Bredig and 
Stern (Zeit. Elektrochem., 1904, 10, p. 582). 

The second class of catalytic actions, viz. those occasioned 
by the presence of a metal or some other substance which under- 
goes no change, is of especial interest, and has received much 
attention. The accelerating influence of a clean platinum plate 
on the rate of combination of hydrogen and oxygen was studied 
by Faraday. He found that with the pure gases the velocity 
of reaction increased until the mixture exploded. The presence 
of minute quantities of carbon monoxide, carbon disulphide, 
sulphuretted hydrogen and hydrochloric acid inhibited the 
action; in the case of the first two gases, there is no alteration 
of the platinum surface, since the plate brings about combination 
when removed to an atmosphere of pure hydrogen and oxygen; 
with the last two gases, however, the surface is altered, since 
the plate will not occasion the combination when placed in the 
pure gases. M. Bodenstein (Zeit. phys. Chem., 1904, 46, p. 725) 
showed that combination occurs with measurable velocity at 
ordinary temperatures in the presence of compact platinum. 
More energetic combination is observed if the metal be finely 
divided, as, for instance, by immersing asbestos fibres in a 
solution of platinum chloride and strongly heating. The 
" spongy " platinum so formed brings about the combination 
of ammonia and oxygen to form water and nitric acid, of nitric 
oxide and hydrogen to form ammonia (see German Patent, 1905, 
157,287), and of sulphur dioxide and oxygen to form sulphur 
trioxide. The last reaction, which receives commercial applica- 
tion in the contact process of sulphuric acid manufacture, was 
studied by M. Bodenstein and W. Pohl (Zeit. Elektrochem., 
1905, n, p. 373), who found that the equilibrium followed the 
law of mass-action (see also F. W. Kiister, Zeit. anorg. Chem., 
1904, 42, p. 4S3, R. Lucas, Zeit. Elektrochem., 1905, n, p. 457). 
Other metals, such as nickel, iron, &c, can also react as catalysts. 



5°2 



CATAMARAN— CATANIA 



The use of finely divided nickel (obtained by reducing the oxide 
in a current of pure hydrogen at a temperature of 350°) has been 
carefully studied by P. Sabatier and J. B. Senderens; a summary 
of their results is given in the Ann. Chim. Phys., 1905 (viii.) 4, 
PP- 3 19-488. Of special interest is the condensation of acetylene. 
If this gas mixed with hydrogen be passed over the reduced 
nickel in the cold, the temperature may rise to as high as 1 50°, 
the acetylene disappearing and becoming replaced by a substance 
like petroleum. If the nickel be maintained at 200 , and the 
gases circulated for twenty-eight hours, a product, condensible 
to a yellow liquid having a beautiful fluorescence and boiling 
at 45°, is obtained. This substance closely resembles ordinary 
Pennsylvanian petroleum. If acetylene be passed alone over 
nickel heated to 20o°-3oo°, a mixture, boiling at 6o°-7o° and 
having a green colour by diffused and a red by transmitted light, 
was obtained. This substance closely resembles Caucasian 
petroleum. The decomposition of carbon monoxide according 
to the reaction 2CO^C+C02 is purely catalytic in the presence 
of nickel and cobalt, and also in the presence of iron, so long 
as the amount of carbon dioxide present does not exceed a certain 
amount (R. Schenck and W. Heller, Ber., 1905, 38, pp. 2132, 
2139). It is of interest that finely divided aluminium and 
magnesium decompose methane, ethane, and ethylene into 
carbon and hydrogen in the same way as nickel. Charcoal at 3 50° 
also reacts catalytically; for example, Senderens found that 
ethyl alcohol was decomposed by animal charcoal into methane, 
ethylene, hydrogen, carbon monoxide and a little carbon dioxide, 
and propyl alcohol gave propylene, ethane, carbon monoxide 
and hydrogen, while G. Lemoine obtained from ethyl alcohol 
and wood charcoal a mixture of acetaldehyde and hydrogen. 

CATAMARAN (a Tamil word, from catla, to tie, and maram 
wood) , a surf -boat or raft used by the natives of Madras and along 
the Coromandel Coast in India. It is usually made of three tree 
trunks lashed together, the centre trunk being the largest and 
longest, and having one end bent upward to form a kind of prow. 
Catamarans of a larger size are in use in the West Indies and 
South America. The name is also given to two boats lashed 
together. Apparently through an erroneous connexion with cat, 
the name has been applied to a noisy scolding woman. 

CATAMARCA, an Andean province of the Argentine Republic, 
lying W. of Santiago del Estero and Tucuman and extending to 
the Chilean frontier, with Los Andes andSaltaontheN., Cordoba 
on the S.E., and Rioja on the S. Pop. (189s) 90,161; (1904, 
estimate) 103,082; area, 47,531 sq. m. The surface of the 
province is extremely broken, the Andes forming its western 
boundary, and the Aconquija, Ancaste, Ambato, Gulampaja 
and other ranges traversing it from north to south. It is com- 
posed very largely of high plateaus with a general slope southward 
broken by a few fertile valleys. The greater part of the province 
is arid and barren, being sheltered from the moist, eastern winds 
by the high mountain barriers of Aconquija and Ancaste. The 
rivers are small, and some of them are lost in the barren, sandy 
wastes. Others, especially in the foothills of the high sierras, 
are utilized to irrigate the fertile valleys. The climate of some 
of the low, sheltered valleys is extremely hot and unhealthy, 
but on the open plateaus it is peculiarly dry and bracing and 
is probably beneficial in the treatment of pulmonary diseases. 
The mineral resources of the province include gold, silver, copper, 
lead, nickel, iron, coal and malachite, but of these only copper 
and silver are mined, and these chiefly in the Andalgala district. 
Salt deposits also exist, but are worked only to a limited extent. 
Cereals, alfalfa and fruit are grown. Large numbers of cattle, 
fattened in the alfalfa fields of Pucara, Tinogasta and Copaca- 
bana, are driven into northern Chile across the San Francisco 
pass (13,124 ft. above sea level) and mules are bred for the 
Bolivian market. Wine of an excellent quality is produced 
and exported. Tanning leather is another industry of the 
province, some of the trees growing in the Catamarca forests being 
rich in tannin. Catamarca is traversed by the Northern Central 
railway between Cordoba and the city of Catamarca, its capital, 
which passes around the southern extremity of the Sierra de 
Ancaste and makes a long detour to Chumbicha, near the Rioja 



frontier. The more important towns, after Catamarca, the 
capital, are Andalgala and Tinogasta with populations (esti- 
mated, 1904) of 5000 to 6000 each. Belen is the oldest Spanish 
settlement in the province and was founded in 155°, being called 
Barco at first. The population is largely mixed with Indian 
blood. 

CATAMARCA (San Fernando de Catamarca), capital of the 
above province on the Rio del Valle de Catamarca, 230 m. (318 
m. by rail) N.N.W. of Cordoba. Pop. (1895) 7397; (1905, 
estimate) 8000, with a large percentage of mestizos. Catamarca 
is connected by railways with Rioja and Patquia and with 
Cordoba. The city stands in a narrow, picturesque valley at the 
foot of the Sierra de Ambato, 1772 ft. above sea level. The 
valley is highly fertile, partially wooded, and produces fruit in 
abundance, wine and some cereals. In the city are flour mills 
and tanneries, and among its exports are leather, fruit, wine, 
flour, and a curious embroidery for which the women of Cata- 
marca have long been famous. There is a fine church, 220 by 90 
ft., and a national college occupies the old Merced convent. The 
alameda is one of the prettiest in the Argentine Republic, having 
a reservoir of two acres surrounded by shrubbery and walks. 
Catamarca was founded in 1685 by Fernando de Mendoza 
because the town of Chacra, the former provincial capital, a few 
miles north of Catamarca, had been found unhealthy and subject 
to inundations. Previous to the selection of Chacra as the 
provincial capital, the seat of government was at San Juan de 
Londres, founded in 1558 and named after the capital of England 
by order of Philip II. in honour of his marriage with Queen Mary. 
The arid surroundings of Londres led to its partial abandonment 
and it is now a mere village. Cholla, a suburb of Catamarca, is 
inhabited wholly by Calchaqui Indians, a remnant of the original 
inhabitants of this region. 

CATANIA (Gr. Katane, Rom. Catina 1 ), a city and episcopal 
see of Sicily, the chief town of the province of Catania, on the 
east coast, 59 m. by rail S. of Messina, and 151 m. by rail S.E. of 
Palermo (102 m. direct). Pop. (1881) 100,417; (1905) 157,722. 
The principal buildings are handsome, and the main streets, 
meeting in the Piazzo del Duomo, are fine. The cathedral of 
S. Agatha, containing the relics of the saint, retains its three 
original Norman apses (1091), but is otherwise a large baroque 
edifice. The monument of Don Ferrando d'Acunea, a Spanish 
viceroy of Sicily, is a fine early Renaissance work (1494). In the 
west portion of the town is the huge Benedictine abbey of S. 
Nicola (now suppressed), the buildings of which occupy an area 
of about 2 1 acres and contain the museum, a library, observatory, 
&c. The church, dating, like the rest of the buildings, from 
1693-1735, is the largest in Sicily, and the organ, built in 1760 
by Donato del Piano, with 72 stops and 2916 pipes, is very fine. 
The university, founded in 1444, has regained some of its former 
importance. To the south near the harbour is the massive 
Castell' Ursino, erected in 1232 by Frederick II. Remains of 
several ancient buildings exist, belonging in the main to the 
Roman period. The theatre, covered by a stream of lava, and 
built partly of small rectangular blocks of the same material, 
though in the main of concrete, has been superimposed upon the 
Greek building, some foundations of which, in calcareous stone, 
of which the seats are also made, still exist. It is 106 yds. in 
diameter, and is estimated to have accommodated 7000 spectators. 
Close to it are the remains of the so-called Odeum, of similar plan 
to the theatre but without a stage, and to the north is the church 
of S. Maria Rotonda, originally a Roman domed structure, 
perhaps part of a bath. To the north, in the Piazza Stesicoro, 
is the amphitheatre, a considerable portion of which has been 
uncovered, including the two corridors which ran round the 
whole building and gave access to the seats, while a part of the 
arcades of the exterior has been excavated and left open; the 
pillars are made of blocks of lava, and the arches of brick. The 
external diameters of the amphitheatre are 410 and 348 ft., while 
the corresponding diameters jof the arena are 233 and 167 ft. It 
is thus the third largest Roman amphitheatre known, being 
surpassed only by that at Verona and the Colosseum. Remains 
1 This is the form vouched for by the inscriptions. 



CAT ANZARO— CATAPULT 



503 



of many other Roman buildings also exist beneath the modern 
town, among the best preserved of which may be noted the 
public baths {Thermae Achilleae) under the cathedral, and those 
under the church of S. Maria dell' Indirizzo. The number of baths 
is remarkable, and gives some idea of the luxury of the place in 
Roman times. Their excellent preservation is accounted for by 
their burial under the lava. The majority were excavated by 
Prince Ignazio Biscari (1719-1786), who formed an important 
private collection of antiquities. Of the ancient city walls no 
authenticated remains exist. 

Catania has a considerable export trade in sulphur, pumice 
stone, asphalt, oranges and lemons, almonds, filberts, cereals, 
wine (the total production of wine in the province amounted 
to 28,600,000 gallons in 1905) and oil. The total value of exports 
in 1905 was £1,647,075, and of imports £1,326,055, the latter in- 
cluding notably coal, almost entirely from the United Kingdom, 
and wheat, from Russian ports. The harbour is a good one, and 
has been considerably enlarged since 1872; £128,000 was voted 
in 1905 towards the completion of the harbour works by the 
Italian government. Sulphide of carbon is produced here; and 
there are large dyeworks, and a factory for making bed-stuffing 
from seaweed. 

The ancient Catina was founded in 729 B.C. by colonists from 
Naxos, perhaps on the site of an earlier Sicel settlement — the 
name is entirely un-Greek, and may be derived from k&tivov, 
which in the Sicel language, as catinum in Latin, meant a basin, 
and would thus be descriptive of the situation of the town. 
Charondas, a citizen of Catina, is famous as its lawgiver, but 
his date and his birthplace are alike uncertain; the fragments 
preserved of his laws show that they belong to a somewhat 
primitive period. The poet Stesichorus of Himera died here. 
Very little is heard of Catina in history until 476 B.C., when 
Hiero I. removed its inhabitants to Leontini, repeopled it with 
5000 Syracusans and 5000 Peloponnesians, and changed its name 
to Aetna. In 461 B.C., however, with the help of Ducetius and 
the Syracusans, the former inhabitants recovered possession of 
their city and revived the old name. Catina was, however, an 
ally of Athens during the Syracusan expedition (415-413 B.C.), 
and served as the Athenian base of queries in the early part
of the war. In 403 b.c. it was taken by Dionysius of Syracuse, 
who plundered the city, sold the inhabitants into slavery and 
replaced them with Campanian mercenaries. In the First Punic 
War it was one of the first cities of Sicily to be taken by the 
Romans (263 B.C.). Marcellus constructed a gymnasium here 
out of the booty of Syracuse. In 123 B.C. there was an eruption 
of Etna so violent that the tithe on the territory of Catina payable 
to Rome was remitted for ten years. It appears to have been a 
flourishing city in the 1st century B.C., but to have suffered from 
the ravages of Sextus Pompeius. It became a Roman colonia 
under Augustus, and it is from this period that the fertile plain, 
hitherto called the plain of Leontini, begins to be called the plain 
of Catina. It seems to have been at this time the most important 
city in the island, to judge from the language of Strabo and the 
number of inscriptions found there. In a.d. 251 a lava stream 
threatened the town and entered the amphitheatre, which in the 
time of Theodoric had fallen into ruins, as is clear from the fact 
that he permitted the use of its fallen stones to build the city 
wall. It was recovered by Belisarius in 535, sacked by the 
Saracens in 902 and taken by the Normans. The latter founded 
the cathedral; but the town was almost entirely destroyed by 
earthquake in n 70, and devastated by Henry VI. in 11 97. It 
became the usual residence of the Aragonese viceroys of the 13 th 
and 14th centuries. In 1669 an eruption of Etna partly filled up 
the harbour, but spared the town, which was, however, almost 
entirely destroyed by the earthquake of 1693. Since that 
catastrophe it has been rebuilt, and has not further suffered from 
its proximity to Etna. 

See A. Holm, Das alte Catania (Liibeck, 1873). (T. As.) 

CATANZARO, a town and episcopal see of Calabria, Italy, 
capital of the province of Catanzaro, n 25 ft. above sea-level. 
Pop. (1901) 22,799 (town); 32,005 (commune). The station for 
the town (Catanzaro Sala) is situated on a branch line connecting 



the two main lines along the east and west coasts of Calabria, 6 rri. 
N. by W. of Catanzaro Marina on the east coast, and 20 m. E. 
of S. Eufemia Biforcazione, on the west coast line. The town 
enjoys a comparatively cool climate in summer, and commands 
fine views. Numerous wealthy families reside here, and the 
town has a trade in olive-oil, silk and velvet. The castle, built 
by Robert Guiscard, has been modernized, and so has the cathe- 
dral. The see was founded in n 21. The provincial museum 
contains antiquities and especially coins from the ancient cities 
of Magna Graecia, and a few pictures. 

CATAPHYLL (Gr. Kara, down, <f>vX\ov, leaf), a botanical 
term for the early leaf-forms produced in the lower part of a 
shoot, such as bud-scales, or scales on underground stems. 

CATAPULT (Lat. catapulta, Gr. KaTaire\ri]s) , a generic name 
for warlike engines of the cross-bow type used by the ancients. 
Although engines of war appear on Assyrian remains, and are 
mentioned in 2 Chronicles xxvi. 15, it appears that Greek armies, 
even of the 5th century, did not possess them, and the first 
record of a large siege train in classical literature is of the year 
399 B.C., when Dionysius I. of Syracuse, contemplating an 
expedition against Carthage, provided himself with engines. 
From Sicily siege engines found their way some years later into 
Greece; they were used by Philip of Macedon at the siege of 
Byzantium in 340, and thereafter, as a natural consequence 
of the regularizing or professionalizing of armies, artillery, as 
we may call it, came into prominence and called into existence 
technical corps to work it. 

The war engines of the Romans, during the republic and early 
principate, are of the same type as those of Alexander's successors 
in Greece. They are usually classed as (a) catapults and (b) 
ballistae (Xt0oj36Xoi) . The former were smaller and were 
used with arrows for what is now called direct fire (i.e. at low 
angles of elevation) ; the latter were large siege engines discharg- 
ing heavy bolts or stones at a high angle of elevation, like the 
modern howitzer. They were, of 
course, principally siege engines, 
but the smaller natures of cata- 
pult appear in field warfare from 
time to time, and eventually, 
during the early principate, they 
are found as part of the regula- 
tion equipment of infantry units. 
Both were constructed on the 
same principle. 

The essential parts of the cata- 
pult (see illustration) were the 
frame, the propelling gear, the __^~ 
trough (corresponding to the _.- 
modern barrel) and the pedestal. 
The frame consisted of two hori- 
zontal beams forming top and 
bottom sills, and four strong 
upright bars mortised into them. 

compartments, resembling narrow windows, between these 
four uprights carried the propelling and laying gear. The pro- 
pelling gear occupied the two outer " windows." In each a 
thick skein of cord or sinews was fastened to the top and bottom 
sills and tightly twisted. Two stiff wooden arms were inserted 
in the two skeins, and a specially strong bowstring joined the 
tips of these arms. In the middle compartment was the hinged 
fore-end of the trough, which was at right angles to the frame 
and at the back of it. The trough could be laid for elevation 
by a movable prop, the upper end of which was hinged to the 
trough, while the lower ran up and down a sort of trail fastened 
to the pedestal. The whole equipment was laid for " line " 
by turning the frame, and with it the trough, prop and trail 
by a pivot in the head of the pedestal. Sliding up and down 
in the trough was a block, fitted with a trigger mechanism, 
through which passed the middle of the bowstring. The pedestal 
was a strong and solid upright resting upon, and strutted to, 
a framework on the ground; its upper end, as mentioned 
above, took the pivot of the frame and the head of the trail. 




The three open spaces or 



5°4 



CATARACT— CATASTROPHE 



On coming into action the machine was laid for direction and 
elevation. The block and with it the bowstring was next forced 
back against the resistance of the twisted skeins to the rear end 
of the trough, this being effected by a windlass attachment. 
The trigger being then pressed or struck with a hammer, the 
bowstring was released from the block, the stiff arms were 
violently brought back to the frame by the untwisting of the 
skeins, and the arrow was propelled through the centre " window " 
with great velocity. A small machine of the type described 
weighed about 85 lb, and sent a " three-span " (26-in.) arrow 
weighing \ lb at an effective man-killing velocity somewhat 
over 400 yds. 

The ballista was considerably larger and more expensive than 
this. In Scipio's siege train, at the attack of New Carthage 
(Livy xxvi. 47. 5), the number of the ballistae was only one-sixth 
that of the catapults. In the ballista the rear end of the trough 
(which projected in front of the frame) always rested upon the 
ground, or rather was fixed to the framework of the pedestal — 
which was a heavy trestle construction — and the trough was 
thus restricted to the angle of elevation, giving the maximum 
range (45°). Even so the range was not appreciably greater than 
that of a catapult, and in the case of the largest ballistae (ninety- 
pounder) it was much less. These enormous engines, which, once 
in position, could not be laid on any fresh target, were used 
for propelling beams and stones rather than for shooting arrows, 
that is, more for the destruction of material than for man-killing 
effect. The skeins that supplied the motive force of all these 
engines were made of the sinews of animals, twisted rawhide, 
horsehair rope, and, in at least one celebrated case, of women's 
hair. In 146 B.C., the authorities of Carthage having surrendered 
their engines to the Romans in the vain hope of staying their 
advance, new ones were hurriedly constructed, and the women 
and virgins of the city cut off their hair to supply the needed skeins. 

The modern implement known as a " catapult " is formed by 
a forked stick, to the forks of which are attached the ends of a 
piece of elastic. To the middle of this elastic a pocket is fitted 
to contain a bullet or small stone. In use the forked stick is 
held in the left hand and the pocket drawn back with the right. 
Aim is taken and, the pocket being released, the missile flies 
through the fork of the stick. Though classed as a toy, this 
weapon can do considerable execution among birds, &c, when 
skilfully used. The name of " catapult " has also been given to 
a bowling machine which is used for cricket practice. 

CATARACT (from the Lat. form cataracta of the Gr. Karapplumrs, 
a floodgate, or waterfall, properly something which rushes down), 
a downpour of water, a waterfall. The earliest use in English 
is of a floodgate or portcullis, and this survives in the name of a 
disease of the eye (see Eye: Eye Diseases), in which the crystalline 
lens becomes opaque, and forms an apparent grating over the 
eye. The term is also used of a device to regulate the strokes in 
certain types of steam-engine. 

CATARGIU (or Catargi), LASCAR (1823-1859), Rumanian 
statesman, was born in Moldavia in November 1823. He 
belonged to an ancient Walachian family, one of whose members 
had been banished in the 17 th century by Prince Matthew 
Bassaraba, and had settled in Moldavia. Under Prince Gregory 
Ghica (1849-1856), Catargiu rose to be prefect of police at Jassy. 
In 1857 he became a member of the Divan ad hoc of Moldavia, 
a commission elected in accordance with the treaty of Paris 
(1856) to vote on the proposed union of Moldavia and Walachia. 
His strongly conservative views, especially on agrarian reform, 
induced the Conservatives to support him as a candidate for 
the throne in 1859. During the reign of Prince Cuza (1850- 
1866), Catargiu was one of the Opposition leaders, and received 
much assistance from his kinsman, Barbu Catargiu (b. 1807), 
a noted journalist and politician, who was assassinated at 
Bucharest on the 20th of June 1862. On the accession of Prince 
Charles in May 1866, Lascar Catargiu became president of the 
council, or prime minister; but, finding himself unable to co- 
operate with his Liberal colleagues, I. C. Bratianu and C. A. 
Rosetti, he resigned in July. After eight more ministerial 
changes, culminating in the anti-dynastic agitation of 1870- 



187 1, Catargiu formed, for the first time in Rumanian history, 
a stable Conservative cabinet, which lasted until 1876. , His 
policy, which averted revolution and revived the popularity 
of the crown, was regarded as unpatriotic and reactionary by 
the Liberals, who resumed office in 1876; and a proposal to 
impeach the whole Catargiu cabinet was only withdrawn in 1878. 
Catargiu remained in opposition until 1889, when he formed 
another cabinet, taking the portfolio of the Interior; but this 
administration fell after seven months. In the Florescu ministry 
of March 1891 he occupied the same position, and in December 
he again became president of the council, retaining office until 
1895. During this period he was responsible for several useful 
reforms, chiefly financial and commercial; He died suddenly 
at Bucharest on the nth of April 1899. 

CATARRH (from the Gr. naTapptiv, to flow down), a term 
principally employed to describe a state of irritation of the 
mucous membrane of, the respiratory passages, or what is called 
in popular language a " cold." It is the result of infection by 
a micro-organism in one or more of various predisposing con- 
ditions, damp, chill, fatigue, &c. The complaint usually begins 
as a nasal catarrh or coryza (Gr. icdpvs, head), with a feeling of 
weight about the forehead and some degree of difficulty in 
breathing through the nose, increased on lying down. Fits of 
sneezing accompanied with a profuse watery discharge from the 
nostrils and eyes soon follow, while the sense of smell and to some 
extent that of taste become considerably impaired. There is 
usually present some amount of sore throat and of bronchial 
irritation, causing hoarseness and cough. Sometimes the vocal 
apparatus becomes so much inflamed (laryngeal catarrh) that 
temporary loss of voice results. There is always more or less 
feverishness and discomfort, and frequently an extreme sensitive- 
ness to cold; After two or three days the symptoms begin to 
abate, the discharge from the nostrils and chest becoming thicker 
and of purulent character, and producing when dislodged 
considerable relief to the breathing. On the other hand the 
catarrh may assume a more severe aspect and pass into some 
form of pulmonary inflammation (see Bronchitis) or influenza 
(q.v.). 

When the symptoms are first felt it is well to take a good 
purge, and to encourage free perspiration by a hot bath, some 
diaphoretic drug, as spirits Of nitrous ether, being taken before 
retiring to bed. Some of the older school of physicians still pin 
their faith to a dose of Dover's powder. When the cold mani- 
fests itself by aches and pains in back and limbs, aspirin 
taken three or four times in the first twenty-four hours will 
often act like magic. Locally a snuff made of menthol 1 part, 
ammonium chloride 3 parts and boracic acid 2 parts will relieve 
the discomfort of the nose. Also, remembering the microbic 
origin of the disease, gargling and nasal syringing should be re- 
peated at intervals. As soon as the attack shows signs of Sub- 
siding, a good tonic and, still better, a change of air are very 
helpful. 

The term catarrh is used in medical nomenclature in a wider 
sense to describe a state of irritation of any mucous surface in 
the body, which is accompanied with an abnormal discharge 
of its natural secretion, hence the terms gastric catarrh, intes- 
tinal catarrh, &c. 

See also Respiratory System : Pathology, and Digestive 
Organs, Pathology of. 

CATARRHINE APE, the term used to describe those apes 
which have the nostrils approximated, the aperture pointing 
downward, and the intervening septum narrow; distinguishing 
features of both the lower " doglike " apes (Cynomorpha) and 
the higher " manlike " apes (AnthropOmorpha). The Catarrhini 
are restricted entirely to the Old World, arid include the gorilla, 
the chimpanzee and orang-utan. 

CATASTROPHE (Gr. KaraaTpcxpri, from KaraorpefaLv, to over- 
turn), a term of the ancient Greek drama for the change in the 
plbt which leads up to the conclusion. The word is thus used 
of any sudden change, particularly of a violent or disastrous 
nature, and in geology of a cataclysm or great convulsion of 
the earth's surface. 



CATAUXI— CATECHISM 



5o5 



CATAUXI, a numerous cannibal tribe of South American 
Indians of the Purus river district, Brazil. They are a fine war- 
like race, with remarkably clear complexions and handsome 
features; round wrists and ankles they wear rings of twisted 
hair. They cultivate mandioc, and make pottery and bark 
canoes. 

CATAWBAS (from the Choctaw for "divided"), a tribe of 
North American Indians of Siouan stock; formerly the dominant 
people of South Carolina. Some of their divisions extended 
into North Carolina. They are now almost extinct, but were 
at one time able to send nearly 2000 "braves" into battle. 
In the American War of Independence they furnished a valuable 
contingent to the South Carolina troops. They then occupied 
a number of small towns on the Catawba river, but they after- 
wards leased their land and ' removed to the territory of the 
Cherokees, with whom they had been formerly at war. There, 
however, they did not long remain, but returned to a reservation 
in their original district. Their affinities have not been Very 
clearly made out, and by Albert Gallatin they were grouped 
with the Cherokees, Choctaws, Muskogees and Natchez. A 
vocabulary of sixty of their words was published by Horatio 
Hale in vol. ii. of the Transactions of the American Ethnological 
Society in 1848; and a much fuller list — about 300 — collected 
by Oscar M. Lieber, the geologist, in 1856, made its appearance 
in vol. ii. of Collections of the South Carolina Historical Society, 
1858. Of the one hundred Catawbas still said to be surviving, 
few, if any, can claim to be full-blooded. They are in the 
Catawba Reservation in York county, South Carolina. The 
name is familiar in connexion with the white American wine, 
the praises of which have been sung by Longfellow. The grape 
from which the wine is obtained was first discovered about 1801, 
near the banks of the Catawba river, and named by Major Adlum 
in 1828, but it is now cultivated extensively in Illinois, Ohio 
and New York, and especially on the shores of Lake Erie. 
See also Handbook of American Indians (Washington, 1907). 

CATCH THE TEN, sometimes Called Scotch Whist, a game 
played with a pack of 36 cards, from ace, king, queen to six in 
each suit, the ace being highest both in play and cutting. In 
trumps, however, the knave ranks highest. Any number from 
two to eight may play. If an even number, partners are cut for; 
if odd, each plays for himself. An odd number of players sit as 
they like; four players sit as at whist; six playing in two sides 
sit so that no two partners shall be next each other; six playing 
three sides sit so that two opponents shall divide each pair; 
eight are arranged in alternate pairs. After cutting, the cards 
are dealt according to the number of players. The last card 
is turned up for the trump. When five or seven play, the six 
of spades is usually omitted; when eight play, the four sixes are 
thrown out. The eldest hand leads any card he chooses and 
all must follow suit if able, the penalty for a revoke being the 
loss of the game. The tricks are not kept separate but gathered 
in by one player for his side. At the end of the deal there are 
six hands of six cards on the table. The players first play out 
the first two hands, next the second two and finally the last two, 
the trump card remaining on the table until the first four hands 
are played out. The game is 41 points, the object of the play 
being to win the cards which have a special value. These are, 
with their values: knave of trumps n, ace of trumps 4, king 
bf trumps 3, queen of trumps 2, ten of trumps 10. All other 
cards have no counting value. As the ten can be taken by any 
other honour the object is to " catch the ten." 

CATECHISM (from Gr. Karnxt 1v, teach by word of mouth) , a 
compendium of instruction (particularly of religious instruction) ' 
arranged in the form of questions and answers. The custom : 
of catechizing, common to all civilized antiquity, was followed i 
in the schools of Judaism and in the Early Church, where it helped 
to preserve the Gospel narrative (see Catechumen) . 

The catechism as we know it is intended primarily for children 
and uneducated persons. Its aim is to instruct, and it differs 
from a creed or confession in not being in the first instance an 
act of worship or a public profession of belief. The first regular 
catechisms seem to have grown out of the usual oral teaching 



of catechumens; and to have been compiled in the 8th and 9th 
centuries. Among them the work of Notker Labeo and of Kero, 
both monks of St Gall, and that of Ottfried of Weissenburg in 
Alsace deserve mention. But it is not until the first stirrings of 
revolt against the hierarchy, which preceded the Reformation, 
that they became at all widespread or numerous. The Waldenses 
of Savoy and France, the Brethren (small communities of evan- 
gelical dissenters from the medieval faith) of Germany, and the 
Unitas Fratrum of Bohemia all used the same catechism (one 
that was first printed in 1498, and which continued to be pub- 
lished till 1530) for the instruction of their children. It was 
based on St Augustine's Enchiridion, and considers (a) Faith, 
i.e. the Creed, (b) Hope, i.e. the Lord's Prayer, and (c) Love, 
i.e. the Decalogue. 

The age of the Reformation gave a great stimulus to the 
production of catechisms. This was but natural at a time 
when the invention of printing had thrown the Bible open to 
all, and carried the war of religious opinion from the schools 
into the streets. The adherents of the " old " and the " new " 
religions alike had to ' justify their views to the unlearned as 
well as to the learned, and to give in simple formulas their 
reasons for the faith that was in them. Moreover, in the uni- 
versal unrest and oversetting of all authority, Christianity itself 
was in danger of perishing, not only as the result of the: cultured 
paganism of the Renaissance, but also through the brutish 
ignorance of the common folk, deprived now of their traditional 
religious restraints. To the urgency of this peril the reformers 
were fully alive; and they sought its remedy in education. 
"Let the people be taught," said Luther, "let schools be opened 
for the poor, let the truth reach them in simple words in their 
own mother tongue, and they will believe." 

Catechisms of the Chief Religious Communions. — (a) Evangelical 
(Lutheran and Reformed) .—It was the ignorance of the peasantry, 
as revealed by the horrors of the Peasants' War of 1524-25, and 
his pastoral visitation of the electorate of Saxony 1 525-1 527, 
that drew the above exclamation from Luther, and impelled him 
to produce his two famous catechisms (1520). In 1520 he 
had brought out a primer of religion dealing briefly with the 
Decalogue, the Creed and the Lord's Prayer; and Justus Jonas, 
Johannes Agricola and other leaders had done something of the 
same kind. Now all these efforts were superseded by Luther's 
Smaller Catechism meant for the people themselves and especially 
for children, and by his Larger Catechism intended for clergy 
and schoolmasters. These works, which did much to mould the 
character of the German people, were set among the doctrinal 
standards of the Lutheran Church and powerfully influenced 
other compilations. The Smaller Catechism, with the Augsburg 
Confession, was made the Rule of Faith in Denmark in 1537. 

In this same year (1537) John Calvin at Geneva published 
his catechism for children. It was called Instruction and 
Confession of Faith for the Use of the Church of Geneva (a reprint 
edited by A. Rilliet and T. Dufour Was published in 1878), and 
explained the Decalogue, the Apostles' Creed, the Lord's Prayer 
and the Sacraments. Though it was meant, as he said, to give 
expression to a simple piety rather than to exhibit a profound 
knowledge of religious truth, it was the work of a man who 
knew little of the child mind, and, though it served as an admir- 
able and transparent epitome of his famous Institutes, it was too 
long and too minute for the instruction of children. Calvin came 
to see this, and in 1542, after his experience in Strassburg, 
drafted a new one which was much more suitable for teaching 
purposes, though, judged by modern standards, still far beyond 
the theological range of childhood. It was used at the Sunday 
noon instruction of children, on which Calvin laid much stress, 
and was adopted and similarly used by the Reformed Church of 
Scotland. The Reformed churches of the Palatinate, on the 
other hand, used the Heidelberg Catechism (1562-1563), "sweet- 
spirited, experiential, clear, moderate and happily-phrased," 
mainly the work of two of Calvin's younger disciples, Kaspar 
Olevianus and Zacharias Ursinus. The Heidelberg Catechism, 
set forth by order of the elector, is perhaps the most widely 
accepted symbol of the Calvinistic faith, and is noteworthy for its 



506 



CATECHISM 



emphasis on the less controversial aspects of the Genevan theo- 
logy. As revised by the synod of Dort in 1619, this catechism 
became the standard of most of the Reformed churches of 
central Europe, and in time of the Dutch and German Reformed 
churches of America. Other compilations were those of Oecolam- 
padius (Basel, 1526), Leo Juda (Zurich, 1534), and Bullinger 
(Zurich, 1555). In France, after Calvin's day, the Reformed 
church used besides Calvin's book the catechisms of Louis 
Capell (1610), and Charles Drelincourt (1642), and at the present 
time Bonnefon's Nouveau Catechisme iUmentaire (14th ed., 1900) 
seems most in favour. In Scotland both Calvin's Geneva 
Catechism and then the Heidelberg Catechism were translated 
by order of the General Assembly and annotated. In 1592 these 
were superseded by that of John Craig, for a time the colleague 
of John Knox at the High Church, Edinburgh. 

Since 1648 the standard Presbyterian catechisms have been 
those compiled by the Westminster Assembly, presented 
to parliament in 1647, and then authorized by the General 
Assembly of the Church of Scotland (July 1648) and by the 
Scottish parliament (January 1649). The Larger Catechism is 
" for such as have made some proficiency in the knowledge of 
the Christian religion," but is too detailed and minute for 
memorizing, and has never received anything like the reception 
accorded to the Shorter Catechism, which is " for such as are of 
weaker capacity." The work was done by a committee presided 
over first by Herbert Palmer, master of Queens', Cambridge, 
and then by Anthony Tuckney, master of Emmanuel. The 
scriptural proof texts were added at the request of the English 
parliament. In his negotiations with the parliament in 1648 
Charles I. offered to license the printing of the catechism, but, 
as the negotiations were broken off, this was not done. The 
Shorter Catechism, after a brief introduction on the end, rule and 
essence of religion, is divided into two parts: — I. The doctrines 
we are to believe (1) concerning the nature of God, (2) concerning 
the decrees of God and their execution — (a) in creation and 
providence, (b) in the covenant of works, (c) in the covenant of 
grace; II. The duties we are to perform (1) in regard to the moral 
law, (2) in regard to the gospel — (a) inward duties, i.e. faith and 
repentance, (b) outward duties as to the Word, the sacraments 
and prayer. It has 107 questions and answers, while that of the 
Anglican Church has but 24, grouping as it does the ten com- 
mandments and also the petitions of the Lord's Prayer, instead 
of dealing with them singly. Though the Shorter Catechism, 
closely associated as this has been from the first with Scottish 
public elementary education, has had very great influence in 
forming and training the character of Presbyterians in Scotland, 
America and the British colonies, it is, like most other catechisms 
drawn up by dogmatic theologians, more admirable as an epitome 
of a particular body of divinity than as an instruction for the 
young and the unlearned. Its use is now generally preceded by 
something more adapted to the child-mind, and this is true also 
in other communions and in the case of other catechisms. 

(b) Roman Catholic. — There was no universal catechism 
published by the Latin Church before the council of Trent, but 
several provincial councils, e.g. in Germany and Scotland 
(where Archbishop Hamilton's catechism appeared in 1552 and 
was ordered to be read in church by the parish priest), moved in 
self-defence along the lines already adopted by the reformers. 
The council of Trent in 1563 resolved on an authoritative work 
which was finally carried through by two small papal commis- 
sions, and issued in 1566 by Pius V. (Eng. trans, by Donovan, 
Dublin, 1829). Being uncatechetical in form and addressed to 
the clergy rather than to the people, it missed its intention, and 
was superseded by others of less exalted origin, especially by those 
of the Jesuit Peter Canisius, whose Summa Doctrinae et Institu- 
tion's Christianae (1554) and its shorter form (1556) were already 
in the field. The catechisms of Bellarmine (1603) and Bossuet 
(1687) had considerable vogue, and a summary of the former 
known as Schema de Parvo was sanctioned by the Vatican 
council of 1870. But the Roman Catholic Church as a whole 
has never had any one official catechism, each bishop being 
allowed to settle the matter for his own diocese. In England 



the Roman Catholic bishops have agreed on the use of what is 
known as "The Penny Catechism," which is very lucid and well 
constructed. 

(c) Orthodox Eastern Church. — Peter Mogilas, metropolitan 
of Kiev, drew up in 1643 the Orthodox Confession of the Catholic 
and Apostolic Eastern Church. This bulwark against the en- 
croachments of the Jesuits and the Reformed Church was 
standardized by the synod of Jerusalem in 1672. A smaller 
catechism was drawn up by order of Peter the Great in 1723. 
The catechisms of Levshin Platon (1762) and V. D. Philaret 
(1839), each in his day metropolitan of Moscow, are bulky 
compilations which cannot be memorized, though there is a 
short introductory catechism prefaced to Philaret's volume 
(Eng. trans, in Blackmore's Doctrine of the Russian Church, 
1845). These works are not to any extent in the hands of the 
people, but are used by the Russian clergy and schoolmasters 
as guides in giving instruction. The Coptic and Armenian 
churches also have what H. Bonar describes as " mere pretences 
at catechisms." 

(d) Anglican.— The catechism of the Church of England is 
included in the Book of Common Prayer between the Orders 
for Baptism and Confirmation. It has two parts: (i.) the bap- 
tismal covenant, the Creed, the Decalogue and the Lord's 
Prayer, drawn up probably by Cranmer 1 and Ridley in the time 
of Edward VI., and variously modified between then (1549) and 
1 661; (ii.) the meaning of the two sacraments, written on the 
suggestion of James I. at the Hampton Court Conference in 1604 
by John Overall, then dean of St Paul's, and afterwards bishop 
successively of Coventry and Lichfield and of Norwich. This 
supplement to what had become known as the Shorter Catechism 
established its use as against the longer one, King Edward 
Vlth's Catechisme,. which had been drawn up in 1553 by John 
Ponet or Poynet, bishop of Winchester, and then revised and 
enlarged in 1570 by Alexander Nowell, Overall's predecessor as 
dean of St Paul's. The Anglican catechism with occasional 
modification, especially in the sacramental section, is used not 
only in the Church of England but in the Episcopal churches of 
Ireland, Scotland, the British dominions and the United States 
of America. By the rubric of the Prayer Book and by the 59th 
canon of 1603 the clergy are enjoined to teach the catechism 
in church on Sundays and holidays after the second lesson at 
Evening Prayer. This custom, long fallen into disuse, has 
largely been revived during recent years, the children going to 
church for a special afternoon service of which catechizing 
is the chief feature. Compared with the thoroughness of most 
other catechisms this one seems very scanty, but it has a better 
chance of being memorized, and its very simplicity has given it 
a firm hold on the inner life and conscience of devout members 
of the Anglican communion throughout the world. 

(e) Other Communions. — Almost every section of the church, 
e.g. the Wesleyan Methodist, has its catechism or catechisms, 
but in addition to those already enumerated only a few need be 
mentioned. The Socinians embodied their tenets in the larger 
and smaller works drawn up by Fausto Sozzini and Schmalz, 
and published at Rakow in Poland in 1605 ; 2 modern Unitarians 
have modern catechisms. The Quakers or Friends possess a 
kind of catechism said to have been written by George Fox in 
1660, in which father and son are respectively questioner and 
answerer, and an interesting work by Robert Barclay, in which 
texts of Scripture form the replies. Congregationalists for some 
time used Isaac Watts's Catechisms for Children and Youth 
(1730), since superseded by the manuals of J. H. Stowell, J. H. 
Riddette and others. In 1898 the National Council of the 
Evangelical Free Churches in England and Wales published 

1 Cranmer had published a separate and larger catechism on the 
basis of the work of Justus Jonas in 1548; note also Allen's Cate- 
chisme, A Christen Jnstruccion of the Principall Poinles of Christes 
Religion (1551). 

2 A Latin edition in 1609 was dedicated to James I. of England. 
The British Houses of Parliament passed a resolution ordering all 
copies of it to be publicly burned, and again in 1652 when another 
edition appeared. An English translation, probably by John Bidle, 
was printed in Amsterdam and widely circulated. 



CATECHU— CATECHUMEN 



507 



an Evangelical Free Church Catechism, the work of a committee 
(convened by Rev. Hugh Price Hughes) comprising Congregation- 
alists, Baptists, Methodists (Wesleyan, Primitive and others), 
and Presbyterians, and thus representing directly or indirectly the 
beliefs of sixty or seventy millions of avowed Christians in all parts 
of the world, a striking example of inter-denominational unity. 
More remarkable still in some respects is The School Catechism, 
issued in 1907 by a conference of members of the Reformed 
churches in Scotland, which met on the invitation of the Church 
of Scotland. In its compilation representatives of the Episcopal 
Church in Scotland co-operated, and the book though " not 
designed to supersede the distinctive catechisms officially recog- 
nized by the several churches for the instruction of their own 
children," certainly " commends itself as suitable for use in 
schools where children of various churches are taught together." 

Catechisms have a strong family likeness. In the main they are 
expositions of the Creed, the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue, and 
thus follow a tradition that has come down from the days when 
Cyril of Jerusalem delivered his catechetical Lectures. Even when 
(as in the Shorter Westminster Catechism and the School Catechism) 
the Creed is simply printed as an appendix, or where (as in the Free 
Church Catechism) it is not mentioned at all, its substance is dealt 
with. The order in which these three main themes are treated is by 
no means constant. The Heidelberg and Westminster Catechisms 
are of a more logical and independent character. The former is 
based on the Epistle to the Romans, and deals with the religious 
life as (1) Repentance, (2) Faith, (3) Love. Under these heads it 
discusses respectively the sin and misery of men, the redemption 
wrought by Christ (here are included the Creed and the Sacraments), 
and the grateful service of the new life (the Decalogue). 

It may be noted that Sir Oliver Lodge has adopted the 
catechetical form in his book, The Substance of Faith Allied with 
Science (1907), which is described as " a catechism for parents and 
teachers." 

See Ehrenfeuchter, Geschichte des Katechismus (1857); P. Schaff, 
History of the Creeds of Christendom (3 vols., 1876-1877); Mitchell, 
Catechisms of the Second Reformation (1887); C. Achelis, Lehrbuch 
der prakt. Theologie (2 vols., 1898); L. Pullan, History of the Book 
of Common Prayer, pp. 207-208 ; E. A. Knox, Pastors and Teachers 
(1902), chs. iii. and iv. ; W. Beveridge, A Short History of the West- 
minster Assembly (1904), ch. x. (A. J. G.) 

CATECHU, or Cutch (Malay, kachu), an extract obtained 
from several plants, its chief sources being the wood of two 
species of acacia (A catechu and A. sumo), both natives of India. 
This extract is known as black catechu. A similar extract, 
known in pharmacy as pale catechu (Catechu pallidum), and 
in general commerce as gambir, or terra japonica, is produced 
from the leaves of Uncaria gambir and U. acida, cinchonaceous 
plants growing in the East Indian Archipelago. A third product 
to which the name catechu is also applied, is obtained from 
the fruits of the areca or betel palm, Areca catechu. 

Ordinary black catechu is usually imported in three different 
forms. The first and best quality, known as Pegu catechu, 
is obtained in blocks externally covered with large leaves; the 
second and less pure variety is in masses, which have been 
moulded in sand; and the third consists of large cubes packed 
in coarse bags. The wood of the two species of Acacia yielding 
catechu is taken for the manufacture when the trees have attained 
a diameter of about 1 ft. The bark is stripped off and used for 
tanning, and the trunk is split up into small fragments, which 
are covered with water and boiled. When the extract has be- 
come sufficiently thick it is cast into the forms in which the 
catechu is found in commerce. Catechu so prepared is a dark 
brown, or, in mass, almost black, substance, brittle, and having 
generally a shining lustre. It is astringent, with a sweetish 
taste. In cold water it disintegrates, and in boiling water, 
alcohol, acetic acid and strong caustic alkali it is completely dis- 
solved. Chemically it consists of a mixture of a peculiar variety 
of tannin termed catechu-tannic acid with catechin or catechuic 
acid, and a brown substance due to the alteration of both these 
principles. Catechu-tannic acid is an amorphous body soluble 
in cold water, while catechin occurs in minute, white, silky, 
needle-shaped crystals, which do not dissolve in cold water. 
A very minute proportion of quercetin, a principle yielded by 
quercitron bark, has been obtained from catechu. 

Gambir, which is similar in chemical composition to ordinary 



catechu, occurs in commerce in the form of cubes of about an 
inch in size, with a pale brown or yellow colour, and an even 
earthy fracture. For the preparation of this extract the plants 
above mentioned are stripped of their leaves and young twigs, 
and these are boiled down in shallow pans. The juice is strained 
off, evaporated, and when sufficiently concentrated is cast into 
shallow boxes, where, as it hardens and dries, it is cut into small 
cubes. 

Gambir and catechu are extensively employed in dyeing and 
tanning. For dyeing they have been in use in India from the 
most remote period, but it was only during the 19th century 
that they were placed on the list of European dyeing substances. 
Catechu is fixed by oxidation of the colouring principle, catechin, 
on the cloth after dyeing or printing; and treated thus it yields 
a variety of durable tints of drabs, browns and olives with 
different mordants (see Dyeing). The principal consumption 
of catechu occurs in the preparation of fibrous substances exposed 
to water, such as fishing-lines and nets, and for colouring stout 
canvas used for covermg boxes and portmanteaus under the name 
of tanned canvas. Black catechu is official in most pharma- 
copoeias except that of Great Britain, in which pale catechu is 
the official drug. The actions and uses of the two are similar, 
but black catechu is the more powerful. The dose is from five 
to twenty grains. The pulvis catechu compositus contains catechu 
and kino, and may be given in doses twice as large as those 
named. The drug has the actions and uses of tannic acid, but 
owing to the relative insolubility of catechu-tannic acid, it is 
more valuable than ordinary tannic acid in diarrhoea, dysentery 
and intestinal haemorrhage. 

CATECHUMEN (Lat. catechumenus, Gr. narrixov pews, 
instructed, from Karrixtiv, to teach orally), an ecclesiastical 
term applied to those receiving instruction in the principles of 
the Christian religion with a view to baptism. As soon as 
Christianity became a missionary religion, it was found necessary 
to make arrangements for giving instruction to new converts. 
At the beginning the Apostles themselves seem to have under- 
taken this duty, and the instruction was apparently given after 
baptism, for in Acts ii. 41, 42, we are told that " they that 
gladly received the word were baptized . . . and they continued 
stedfastly in the Apostles' teaching." There are two instances 
in the New Testament where reference is made to individual 
instruction in this technical sense. Luke (i. 4) in dedicating the 
third Gospel to Theophilus tells him that his aim in writing the 
book was " that thou mightest have certainty in the things in 
which thou has been instructed" (Karr\xn<h]s) , and we are told 
that Apollos was instructed (narrixrifiivos) " in the way of the 
Lord" (Acts xviii. 25). 

With the development of Christianity the instruction became 
more definite and formal. It is probable that the duty of 
instructing converts was assigned to " the teachers," who are 
ranked by Paul immediately after the Apostles and prophets 
(1 Cor. xii. 28), and occupied an important position in the 
Christian ministry. In the Didache, or Teaching of the Apostles, 
we have an excellent illustration of the teaching which was 
given to candidates for baptism in early times. There can be 
little doubt that the Didache was used as a manual for cate- 
chumens for several centuries. Athanasius (Festal Epistles, 39), 
for instance, says that " it was appointed by the Fathers to be 
read by those who are just recently coming to us, and wish to be 
instructed in the word of godliness " (jcarr;xe?(X0ai top rfjs 
tixrefitias \6yov). The instruction prescribed by the Didache 
is very largely ethical, and stands in striking contrast to the 
more elaborate doctrinal teaching which came into vogue in 
later days. The Shepherd of Hermas too is another book which 
seems to have been used for the purpose of catechesis, for 
Eusebius says that it " was deemed most necessary for those 
who have need of elementary instruction " (Eccles. Hist. iii. 3-6). 

With the rise of theological controversy and the growth of 
heresy catechetical instruction became of vital importance to 
the Church, and much greater importance was attached to it. 
After the middle of the 4th century it was regarded as essential 
that the candidate for baptism should not only be acquainted 



5 o8 



CATEGORY 



with the spiritual truths and ethical demands which form the 
basis of practical Christianity, but should also be trained in 
theology and the interpretation of the creeds. Two books have 
been preserved which throw a striking light upon the trans- 
formation which had taken place in the conception of catechesis; 
(i) the Catechetical Lectures of Cyril of Jerusalem; (2) the 
De rudibus Catechizandis of Augustine. Cyril's Lectures may be 
termed the Pearson on the Creed of the 4th century. He takes 
each article separately, discusses it clause by clause, explains 
the meaning of each word, and justifies each statement from 
Scripture. Augustine's treatise was written at the request of a 
catechist, named Deogratias, who had asked him for advice. 
After replying to the question of Deogratias, and giving sundry 
counsels as to the best method of interesting catechumens, 
Augustine concludes by giving a model catechetical lecture, 
in which he covers the whole of biblical history, beginning from 
the opening chapters of Genesis, and laying particular stress on 
the doctrinal parts of Scripture. Cyril and Augustine differ, as 
we should expect, in the doctrines which thfcy select for emphasis, 
but they both agree in requiring a knowledge of sound doctrine 
on the part of the candidates. 

In spite of the numerous references to catechumens in Patristic 
literature, our knowledge of the details of the system is often 
very deficient, and upon some points there is considerable 
diversity of opinion amongst experts. The following are the 
most important questions which come under consideration. 

1. The Classification of Catechumens. — Bingham and many of the 
older writers held that there were four classes of catechumens, 
representing different stages in the process of instruction: (a) " The 
inquirers " whose interest in Christianity had been sufficiently aroused 
to make them desire further information, and who received private 
and individual instruction from the teachers before they were 
admitted into the second class, (b) " The hearers " (audientes) , 
who were admitted into the Church for the purpose of listening to 
sermons and exhortations, (c) The prostrati or genu flectentes, who 
were allowed also to take part in the prayers, (d) The electi or 
competentes, who had completed the period of probation and were 
deemed ready to receive baptism. Modern scholars, however, for 
the most part, deny that there is sufficient basis to justify this 
elaborate classification, and think that its advocates have confused 
the catechumenate with the system of penance. The evidence does 
not seem to warrant more than two classes, (a) the audientes, who 
were in the initial stages of their training, (6) the competentes, who 
were qualified for baptism. 

2. The Relation of Catechumens to the Church. — Catechumens were 
allowed of course to attend church services, but at a certain point 
were dismissed with the words " Ite catechumeni, missa est." The 
moment at which the dismissal took place cannot be exactly deter- 
mined, and it is not clear whether the catechumens were allowed to 
remain for a portion of the Communion service, and if so, whether as 
spectators or as partial participants. A passage in Augustine seems 
to imply that in some way they shared in the Sacrament, " that 
which they (the catechumens) receive, though it be not the Body of 
Christ, is yet an holy thing and. more holy than the common food 
which sustains us, because it is a Sacrament " (De peccatorum meritis, 
ii. 42). The explanation of these words has occasioned considerable 
controversy. Many scholars hold (and this certainly seems the 
most natural interpretation) that consecrated bread was taken from 
the Eucharist and given to the catechumens. Bingham, however, 
maintains that the reference is not to the consecrated bread, but to 
salt, which was given to them as a symbol " that they might learn 
to purge and cleanse their souls from sin." 

3. The Duration of the Training.- — Various statements with regard 
to the duration of the catechumenical training are found in ecclesi- 
astical authorities. The Apostolical Constitutions, for instance, fix 
it at three years ; 1 the synod of Elvira at two. 2 The references in 
the Fathers, however, imply that for practical purposes it was 
limited to the forty days of Lent. Very probably, however, the 
forty days of actual instruction were preceded by a period of 
probation. 

4. The Relation between the Catechumenate and Baptism. — Cate- 
chetical instruction was designed as a preliminary to baptism. 
There were two directions, however, in which this purpose was 
enlarged : (a) We have no reason to suppose that when infant 
baptism was introduced, those who had been baptized in infancy 
were excluded from the catechetical training, or that instruction 
was deemed unnecessary in their case, though as a matter of fact 
we have no definite reference to their admission. The custom of 
postponing baptism, which was very general in the 4th and 5th 
centuries, probably made such cases more rare than is generally 
supposed, and so accounts for the absence of any allusion to them 



1 Apost. Constit. viii. 2. 



: Canon 42. 



in connexion with the catechumenate, (6) We have no reason to 

suppose that the instruction given in the famous catechetical schools 
of Alexandria and Carthage was restricted to candidates for baptism. 
There is no doubt that '■ catechetical " is used in a much wider sense 
when applied to the lectures of Origen than when used of the 
addresses of Cyril of Jerusalem. The " instruction " of Origen was 
given to all classes of Christians, and not merely to those who were 
in the initial stages. 

5. Characteristics of the Catechumenical Training.— Besides in- 
struction there were some other important features connected 
with the catechumenate. (a) The duty of confession was impressed 
on the candidates, (b) The ceremony of exorcism was often per- 
formed in order to free the catechumen from evil spirits, (c) At a 
certain point in the training the creed and the doctrine of the Sacra- 
ments were delivered to the candidates by the bishop with much 
impressive ceremonial.; This teaching constituted the " holysecret " 
or " mystery " (disciplina arcani) of Christianity, and could only be 
imparted to those who were qualified to receive it. The acquisition 
of this arcanum was regarded as the most essential element in the 
catechetical discipline, and marked off its possessors from the rest 
of the world. There can be little doubt that this conception of the 
" Holy Secret " came into the Church originally from the Greek 
mysteries, and that much of the ceremonial connected with the 
catechumenate and baptism was derived from the same source. 

Authorities. — Cyril, Catecheses; Gregory of Nyssa, Oratio 
Catechetica; Chrysostom, Catecheses ad iuuminandos ; Augustine, 
De rudibus Catechizandis ; Mayer, Geschichte des Katechumenats . . . 
in den ersten sechs Jahrhunderten (1868) ; S. Cheetham, The Mysteries, 
Pagan and Christian. (H. T. A.) 

CATEGORY (Gr. Ka-nryopia, " accusation "), a term used 
both in ordinary language and, in philosophy with the general 
significance of "class" or "group." In popular language it 
is used for any large group of similar things, and still more 
generally as a mere synonym for the word " class." The word 
was introduced into philosophy as a technical term by Aristotle, 
who, however, several times used it in its original sense of 
"accusation." He also used the verb KarriyoptZv, to accuse, 
in the specific logical sense, to predicate; id Karnyopovnevov 
becomes the predicate; and K<mj70piKi) irporacni may be 
translated as affirmative proposition. But though the word thus 
received a new signification from Aristotle, it is not on that 
account certain that the thing it was taken to signify was equally 
a novelty in philosophy. In fact we find in the records of 
Oriental and early Greek thought something corresponding to 
the Aristotelian classification. 

Our knowledge of Hindu philosophy, and of the relations in 
which it may have stood to Greek speculation, scarcely enables us 
to give decisive answers to various questions that natur- Hlada 
ally arise on observation of their many resemblances (see „/,;^ c „„ fc 
an article by Richard Garbe in Monist, iv. 176-193). Yet pa " osn '"'y- 
the similarity between the two is so striking that, if not historically 
connected, they must at least be regarded as expressions of similar 
philosophic needs. The Hindu classification to which we specially 
refer is that of Kanada, who lays down six categories, or classes of 
existence, a seventh being generally added by the commentators. 
The term employed is Padartha, meaning " signification of a word." 
This is in entire harmony with the Aristotelian doctrine, the cate- 
gories of which may with truth be described as significations of 
simple terms, to (card urtStplav o-utjttXoktjp X^opeca. The six 
categories of Kanada are Substance, Quality, Action, Genus, In- 
dividuality, and Concretion or Co-inherence. To these is added 
Non-Existence, Privation or Negation. Substance is the permanent 
substance in which Qualities exist. Action, belonging to or inhering 
in substances, is that which produces change, Genus belongs to 
substance, qualitiesand actions; there are higher and lower genera. 
Individuality, found only in substance, is that by which a thing is 
self -existent and marked off from others. Concretion or Co-inherence 
denotes inseparable or necessary connection, such as that between 
substance and quality. Under these six classes, ykvq toD ovtos, 
Kanada then proceeds to range the facts of the universe. 3 
■: Within Greek philosophy itself there were foreshadowings of the 
Aristotelian doctrine, but nothing so important as to warrant the 
conclusion that Aristotle was directly influenced by it. areek 
Doubtless the One and Many, Beingand Non-Being, of the phiiosoohv 
Eleatic dialectic, with their subordinate oppositions, may 
be called categories, but they are not so in the Aristotelian sense 
and have little or nothing in common with the later system. Their 



3 For details of this and other Hindu systems see H. T. Colebrooke, 
Miscellaneous Essays (1837; new ed., E. B. Cowell, 1873); H. H. 
Wilson, Essays and Lectures on the Religions of the Hindus (1861- 
1862); Monier Williams, Indian Wisdom (4th ed., 1893); A. E. 
Gough's Vaiseshika-Sutras (Benares, 1873), and Philosophy of the 
Upanishads (London, 1882,' 1891) ; Max Muller, Sanskrit Literature, 
and particularly his appendix to Thomson's Laws of Thought. 



CATEGORY 



5°9 



starting-point and results are wholly diverse. Nor does it appear 
necessary to do more than ' mention the Pythagorean' table of 
principles, the number of which is supposed to. have given rise to the 
decuple arrangement adopted by Aristotle. The two classifications 
have nothing in common; no term in the one list appears in. the 
other; and there is absolutely nothing in the Pythagorean principles 
which could have led to the theory of the categories. 1 

One naturally turns to Plato when endeavouring to discover the 
genesis of any Aristotelian doctrine, and undoubtedly there are in 
Plata. tne Platonic writings many detached discussions in which 

the matter of the categories is touched upon. Special 
terms also are anticipated at various times, e.g. miAriit in the 
Theaetetus, roietv and vao-xav in the Gorgias, and vp6s ti in the 
Sophist. 2 But there does, not seem to be anything in Plato which 
one could say gave occasion directly and of itself to the Aristotelian 
doctrine ; and even when we take a more comprehensive view of the 
Platonic system and inquire what in it corresponds to the widest 
definition of categories, say as ultimate elements of thought and 
existence, we receive no very definite answer. The Platonic dialectic 
never worked out into system, and only in two dialogues do we get 
anything like a list of ultimate or root-notions. In the Sophist, 
Being, Rest and Motion (rb 6v abrb nal oTaois kb.1 Wcijois are 
laid down as piyiara rav ya>Siv. % To these are presently added 
the Same and the Other (rabrbv Kai darepov), and out of the con- 
sideration of all five some light is cast upon the obscure notion of 
Non-Being (to /h) 6v). In the same dialogue (262 seq.) is found the 
important distinction of ivo/jia and pfjp.a, noun and verb. The 
Philebus presents us with a totally distinct classification into four 
elements — the Infinite, the Finite, the Mixture or Unity of both 
and the Cause of this unity (rd itrupov, to -nipas, ij o-bwufa, 1) atria) . 
It is at once apparent that, however these classifications are related 
to one another and to the Platonic system, they lie in a different 
field from that occupied by the Aristotelian categories, and can 
hardly be' said to have anything in common with them. 

The Aristotelian doctrine is most distinctly formulated in the 
short treatise Karrtyoplat, which generally occupies the first place 
Aristotle, among the books of the Organon. The authenticity of 
the treatise was doubted in early times by some of the 
commentators, and the doubts have been revived by such scholars 
as L. Spengel and Carl Prantl. On the other hand, C. A. Brandis, 
H. Bonitz, and Ed. Zeller are of opinion that the tract is substantially 
Aristotle's. The matter is hardly one that can be decided either 
pro or con with anything like certainty; but this is of little moment, 
for the doctrine of the categories, even of the ten categories, does not 
stand or fall with only one portion of Aristotle's works. 

It is surprising that there should yet be so much uncertainty as 
to the real significance of the categories, and that we should be in 
nearly complete ignorance as to the process of thought by which, 
Aristotle was led to the doctrine. On both points it is difficult to 
extract from the matter before us anything approaching a satis- 
factory solution. The terms employed to denote the categories 
have been scrutinized with the utmost care, but they give little help. 
The most important — k. rod 6yros or-nJ! obirlas, yivij rod ovtos or rcoc 
ovrwv, yivq simply, Td Trp&ra or ra koivc. irpwra, ai vrCiatis, or at 
Siiupiaeis — only indicate that the categories are general classes 
into which Being as such may be divided, that they are summa 
genera. The expressions yivq rS>v Karriyoplwv and o-x^p-ara f&v k. , 
which are used frequently, seem to lead to another and somewhat 
different view. Karqyopla being taken to mean that which is predi- 
cated, y'arri t&v k. would signify the most general classes of predicates) 
the framework into the divisions of which all predicates must Come. 
To this interpretation there are objections. The categories rriust be 
carefully distinguished from predicables; in the scholastic phrase- 
ology the former refer to first intentions, the latter to second intentions, 
i.e. the one denote real, the other logical connexion. Further, the 
categories cannot without careful explanation be defined as predi- 
cates; they are this and something more. The most important 
category, obala, in one of its aspects cannot be predicate at all. 

In the KaTiryoplai Aristotle prefixes to his enumeration a gram- 
matico-logical disquisition on homonyms and synonyms, and on the 
elements of the proposition, i.e. subject and predicate. He draws 
attention to the fact that things are spoken of either in the connexion 
known as the proposition, e.g. " a man runs," or apart from such 
connexion, e.g. " man " and " runs." He then proceeds, " Of 
things spoken of apart from their connexion in a proposition (rap 
Kara p.r/Seplav trvp.Tr\oKi)v Xeyopivav) , each signifies either Substance 
(obala), or Quantity (iroabv), or Quality (iroibv), or Relation (rpbs ti), 
or Where (i.e. Place, ttov), or When (i.e. Time, trori), or Position 
(ic«ff0cu) , or Possession (?x«' / ) . or Action (woitiv) , or Passion (irdaxa-v) • 
obala, the first category, is subdivided into rpwrrj obala or primary 
substance, which is denned to be rbSe ti, the singular thing in which 
properties inhere, and to which predicates are attached, and Stbrepai 

1 The supposed origin of that theory in the treatise trtpl tov ravrbs, 
ascribed to Archytas (q.i.), has been proved to be an error. The 
treatise itself dates in all probability from the Neo-Pythagorean 
schools of the 2nd century a.d. 

* Prantl, Ges. der Logik, i. 74-75; F. A. Trendelenburg, Kate- 
gorienlehre, 209. n. 

' Soph. 254 d. 



obalai, genera or species which can be predicated of primary 
substances, and are therefore obala only in a secondary sense. 
Nevertheless, they too, after a certain fashion, signify the singular 
thing, robe n (K. p. 3 b 12, 13). It is this doctrine of irpiirri obala 
that has raised doubts with regard to the authenticity of the Kort^ 
yoplai. But the tenfold classification, which has also been captiously 
objected to, is given in an acknowledged writing of Aristotle's (see 
Topica, i. 9, p. 103 b 20). 1 At the same time it is at least remarkable 
that in two places where the enumeration seems intended to be 
complete (Met. p- 1017 a 25; An. Pos. i. 22, p. 83 a 21), only eight 
are mentioned, Ix^-v and KeiaBai being omitted. In other passages 6 
six, five, four, and three are given, frequently with some addition, 
suGh as Kai <u SXXcu k. It is also to be observed that, despite of 
this wavering, distinct intimations are given by Aristotle that he 
regarded his list as complete, and he uses phrases which would seem 
to indicate that the division had been exhaustively carried out. 
He admits certainly that some predicates which come under one 
category might be referred to another, but he declines to deduce all 
from one highest class, or to recognize any relation of subordination 
among the several classes. 

The full import of the categories will never be adequately reached 
from the point of view taken up in the Kar^yopiai, which bears all 
the marks of an early and preliminary study. For true understand- 
ing we must turn to the Metaphysics, where the doctrine is handled at 
large. The discussion of Being in that work starts with a distinction 
that at once gives us a clue, rd lv is spoken of in many ways ; of 
these four are classified — to 6v Kara avp.Pef3riKbs, t6 bv us dX»j0es, ri> 
&v bvvapa fcai tv(pyela, and tA iv Kara ra axhp.aTa t&v KaTrryoplav. 
It is evident from this that the categories can be regarded 
neither as purely logical nor as purely metaphysical elements. 
They indicate the general forms or ways in which Being can be 
predicated ; they are determinations of Being regarded as an object 
of thought, and consequently as matter of speech. It becomes 
apparent also why the analysis of the categories starts from the 
singular thing, for it is the primary form under which all that is 
becomes object of knowledge, and the other categories modify or 
qualify this real individual. II<Wa Si rd yiyvbjxtva bvb rk twos 
ylyvtrax Kai \k tlvos ko! tI. Td Si rl \kyta Ka$' iKaartiv Kartiyoplav* tj yap 
rbSt ij iroabv t\ roibv % fov (Met. p. 1032 a 13-15)-. . . . The 
categories, therefore, are not logical forms, but real predicates; 
they are the general modes in which Being may be expressed. The 
definite thing, that which comes forward in the process from poten- 
tiality to full actuality, can only appear and be spoken of under forms 
of individuality, quality, quantity and so on. The nine later 
categories all denote entity in a certain imperfect fashion. 

The categories then are not to be regarded as heads of predicates, 
the framework into which predicates can be thrown. They are real 
determinations of Being— allgemeine Bestimmtheiten, as Hegel calls 
them. They are not summa genera of existences, still less are they 
to be explained as a classification of namable things in general. 
The objections Mill has taken to the list are entirely irrelevant, 
and would only have significance if the categories were really— what 
they are not— an exhaustive division of concrete existences. Grote's 
view (Aristotle, i. 108) that Aristotle drew up his list by examining 
Various popular propositions, and throwing the different predicates 
into genera, " according as they stood in different logical relation 
to the subject," has no foundation. The relation of the predicate 
category to the subject is not entirely a logical one ; it is a relation 
of real existence, and wants the essential marks of the propositional 
form. The logical relations of to 6v are provided for otherwise than 
by the categories. 

Aristotle has given no intimation of the course of thought by which 
he was led to his tenfold arrangement, and it seems hopeless to dis- 
cover it. Trendelenburg in various essays has worked out the idea 
that the root of the matter is to be found in grammatical considera- 
tions, that the categories originated from investigations into gram- 
matical functions, and that a correspondence will be found to obtain 
between categories and parts of speech. Thus, Substance corre- 
sponds to noun substantive, Quantity and Quality to the adjective, 
Relation partly to the comparative degree and perhaps to the pre- 
position, When and Where to the adverbs of time and place. Action 
to the active, Passion to the passive of the verb, Position (icei<70eu) 
to the intransitive verb, ix*iv to the peculiar Greek perfect. That 
there should be a very close correspondence between the categories 
and grammatical elements is by no means surprising; that the one 
were deduced from the other is both philosophically and historically 
improbable. Reference to the detailed criticisms of Trendelenburg 
by Ritter, Bonitz, and Zeller will be sufficient. 

Aristotle has also left us in doubt on another point. Why should 
there be only ten categories? and why should these be the ten? 
Kant and Hegel, it is well known, signalize as the great defect in the 
Aristotelian categories the want of a principle, and yet some of 
Aristotle's expressions would warrant the inference that he had a 
principle, and that he thought his arrangement exhaustive. The 
leading idea of all later attempts at reduction to unity of principle, 



4 Against this passage even Prantl can raise no objection of any 
moment; see Ges. der Logik, i, 206. n. 

'See Bonitz, Iridex Aristotilicus, s.v., and Prantl, Ges. der Logik, 
i. 207. 



5i° 



CATEGORY 



the division into substance and accident, was undoubtedly not 
overlooked by Aristotle, and Fr. Brentano * has collected with great 
diligence passages which indicate how the complete list might 
have been deduced from this primary distinction. His tabular 
arrangements (pp. 175, 177) are particularly deserving of attention. 
The results, however, are hardly beyond the reach of doubt. 

There was no fundamental change in the doctrine of the categories 
from the time of Aristotle to that of Kant, and only two proposed 
Later reclassifications are of such importance as to require 



Qreek. 



notice. The Stoics adopted a fivefold arrangement of 



highest classes, ytvLKurara. to ov or ri, Being, or some 
what in general, was subdivided into iiroK.dii.eva or subjects, iroid or 
qualities in general, which give definiteness to the blank subject, iriit 
Ixovto., modes which further determine the subject, and trpbs n x<is 
Ixovra, definite relative modes. These categories are so related that 
each involves the existence of one higher than itself, thus there 
cannot be a xpos n iras ex " which does not rest upon or imply a irws 
ixov, but jtojs ixov is impossible without roibv, which only exists 
in inroKdixtvov, a form or phase of to 0V. 2 

Plotinus, after a lengthy critique of Aristotle's categories, sets 
out a twofold list, to iv, idvi)ais, vrcura, rairdrris, ^TepoTijj 
are the primitive categories (tp&to. yevij) of the intelligible sphere. 
viala, irpos n, irota, -Koabv, Kiv-qcns are the categories of the sensible 
world. The return to the Platonic classification will not escape 
notice. 

Modern philosophy, neglecting altogether the dry and tasteless 
treatment of the Aristotelian doctrine by scholastic writers, gave a 
Modern new > a wider and deeper meaning to the categories. 

... . They now appear as ultimate or root notions, the meta- 
P sop y. ph vs ; ca [ or thought elements, which give coherence and 
consistency to the material of knowledge, the necessary and universal 
relations which obtain among the particulars of experience. There 
was thus to some extent a return to Platonism, but in reality, as 
might easily be shown, the new interpretation was, with due allow- 
ance for difference in point of view, in strict harmony with the true 
doctrine of Aristotle. The modern theory dates in particular from 
the time of Kant, who may be said to have reintroduced the term 
into philosophy. Naturally there are some anticipations in earlier 
thinkers. The Substance, Attribute and Mode of Cartesianism can 
hardly be classed among the categories ; nor does Leibnitz's chance 
suggestion of a fivefold arrangement into Substance, Quantity, 
Quality, Action and Passion, and Relations, demand any particular 
notice. Locke, too, has a classification into Substances, Modes 
and Relations, but in it he has manifestly no intention of drawing up 
a table of categories. What in his system corresponds most nearly 
to the modern view of these elements is the division of kinds of real 
predication. In all judgments of knowledge we predicate either 
(1) Identity or Diversity, (2) Relation, (3) Co-existence, or necessary 
connexion, or (4) Real existence. From this the transition was easy 
to Hume's important classification of philosophical relations into 
those of Resemblance, Identity, Time and Place, Quantity or 
Number, Quality, Contrariety, Cause and Effect. 

These attempts at an exhaustive distribution of the necessary 
relations of all objects of knowledge indicate the direction taken by 
modern thought, before it received its complete expression from 
Kant. 

The doctrine of the categories is the very kernel of the Kantian 
system, and, through it, of later German philosophy. To explain 
it fully would be to write the history of that philosophy. 
Kant. -p ne ca t e g or ies are called by Kant Root-notions of the 

Understanding (Stammbegriffe des Verstandes), and are briefly the 
specific forms of the a priori or formal element in rational cognition. 
It is this distinction of matter and form in knowledge that marks 
off the Kantian from the Aristotelian doctrine. To Kant knowledge 
was only possible as the synthesis of the material or a posteriori 
with the formal or a priori. The material to which a priori forms of 
the understanding were applied was the sensuous content of the 
pure intuitions, Time and Space. This content could not be known 
by sense, but only by intellectual function. But the understanding 
in the process of knowledge makes use of the universal form of 
synthesis, the judgment; intellectual function is essentially of the 
nature of judgment or the reduction of a manifold to unity through 
a conception. The specific or type forms of such function will, 
therefore, be expressed in judgments; and a complete classification 
of the forms of judgments is the key by which one may hope to 
discover the system of categories. Such a list of judgments Kant 
thought he found in ordinary logic, and from it he drew up his well- 
known scheme of the twelve categories. These forms are the deter- 
minations of all objects of experience, for it is only through them 
that the manifold of sense can be reduced to the unity of conscious- 
ness, and thereby constituted experience. They are a priori con- 
ditions, subjective in one sense, but objective as being universal, 
necessary and constitutive of experience. 

The table of logical judgments with corresponding categories is as 
follows : — 

1 Brentano, Bedeutung des Seienden nach A., pp. 148-178. 

* For detailed examination of the Stoic categories, see Prantl, Ges. 
d. Logik, i. 428 sqq.; Zeller, Ph. d. Griech. iii. 1, 82, sqq.; Tren- 
delenburg, Kateg. p. 217. 



I r Unity. 

Of Quantity (P'-alg. 



II. 
Of Quality 



III. 
Of Relation 



IV. 
Of Modality " 



Reality. 

Negation. 

Limitation. 

Inherence and Subsistence 

(Substance and Accident). 
Causality and Dependence 

(Cause and Effect). 
Community (Reciprocity). 
Possibility and Impossibility. 
Existence and Non-Existence. 
Necessity and Contingency. 



Judgments. Categories. 

Universal . 
Particular . 
Singular. 
Affirmative 
Negative 
Infinite . 
Categorical 

Hypothetical 

Disjunctive 
Problematical 
Assertoric . 
Apodictic . 

Kant, it is well known, criticizes Aristotle severely for having 
drawn up his categories without a principle, and claims to have 
disclosed the only possible method by which an exhaustive 
classification might be obtained. What he criticized in Aristotle 
is brought against his own procedure by the later German thinkers, 
particularly Fichte and Hegel. And in point of fact it cannot 
be denied that Kant has allowed too much completeness to 
the ordinary logical distribution of propositions; he has given no 
proof that in these forms are contained all species of synthesis, and 
in consequence he has failed to show that in the categories, or pure 
conceptions, are contained all the modes of a priori synthesis. 
Further, his principle has so far the unity he claimed for it, the unity 
of a single function, but the specific forms in which such unity 
manifests itself are not themselves accounted for by this principle. 
Kant himself hints more than once at the possibility of a completely 
rational system of the categories, at an evolution from one single 
movement of thought, and in his Remarks on the Table of the Cate- 
gories gave a pregnant hint as to the method to be employed. From 
any complete realization of this suggestion Kant, however, was 
precluded by one portion of his theory. The categories, although 
the necessary conditions under which alone an object of experience 
can be thrown, are merely forms of the mind's own activity; they 
apply only to sensuous and consequently subjective material. 
Outside of and beyond them lies the thing-in-itself, which to Kant 
represented the ultimately real. This subjectivism was a distinct 
hiatus in the Kantian system, and against it principally Fichte and 
Hegel directed criticism. It was manifest that at the root of the whole 
system of categories there lay the synthetizing unity of self- _. .. 
consciousness, and it was upon this unity that Fichte fixed c 

as giving the possibility of a more complete and rigorous deduction of 
the pure notions of the understanding. Without the act of the Ego, 
whereby it is self-conscious, there could be no knowledge, and this 
'primitive act or function must be, he saw, the position or affirmation 
of itself by the Ego. The first principle then must be that the Ego 
posits itself as the Ego, that Ego = Ego, a principle which is un- 
conditioned both in form and matter, and therefore capable of 
standing absolutely first, of being the prius in a system. Meta- 
physically regarded this act of self-position yields the categories 
of Reality. But, so far as matter is concerned, there cannot be 
affirmation without negation, omnis determinatio est negatio. The 
determination of the Ego presupposes or involves the Non-Ego. 
The form of the proposition in which this second act takes to itself 
expression, the Ego is not = Not-Ego, is unconditioned, not derivable 
from the first. It is the absolute antithesis to the primitive thesis. 
The category of Negation is the result of this second act. From 
these two propositions, involving absolutely opposed and mutually 
destructive elements, there results a third which reconciles both in a 
higher synthesis. The notion in this third is determination or limita- 
tion ; the Ego and Non-Ego limit, and are opposed to one another. 
From these three positions Fichte proceeds to evolve the categories 
by a series of thesis, antithesis and synthesis. 

In thus seizing upon the unity of self-consciousness as the origin 
for systematic development, Fichte has clearly taken a step in 
advance of, and yet in strict harmony with, the Kantian 
doctrine. For, after all that can be said as to the demon- 
strated character of formal logic, Kant's procedure was empirical, 
and only after the list of categories had been drawn out, did he 
bring forward into prominence what gave them coherence and 
reality. The peculiar method of Fichte, also, was nothing but a 
consistent application of Kant's own Remark on the Table of the 
Categories. Fichte's doctrine, however, is open to some of the objec- 
tions advanced against Kant. His method is too abstract and 
external, and wants the unity of a single principle. The first two of 
his fundamental propositions stand isolated from one another, 
not to be resolved into a primitive unity. With him, too, the whole 
stands yet on the plane of subjectivity. He speaks, indeed, of the 
universal Ego as distinct from the empirical self-consciousness ; but 
the universal does not rise with him to concrete spirit. Nevertheless 
the Wissenschaftslehre contains the only real advance in the treatment 
of the categories from the time of Kant to that of Hegel. 3 This, of 

* It does not seem necessary to do more than refer to the slight 
alterations made on Kant's Table of Categories by J. G. von Herder 
(in the Metakritik), by Solomon Malmon (in the Propadeutik zu einer 



CATENARY 



5 11 



course, does not imply that there were not certain elements in 
Schelling, particularly in the Transcendental Idealism, that are of 
value in the transition to the later system; but on the whole it is 
only in Hegel that the whole matter of the Kantian categories has 
been assimilated and carried to a higher stage. The Hegelian philo- 
sophy, in brief, is a system of the categories ; and, as it is not intended 
here to expound that philosophy, it is impossible to give more than a 
few general and quite external observations as to the Hegelian mode 
of viewing these elements of thought. With Kant, as has been seen, 
the categories were still subjective, not as being forms of the indi- 
vidual subject, but as having over against them the world of noumena 
to which they were inapplicable. Self-consciousness, which was, 
even with Kant, the nodus or kernel whence the categories sprang, 
was nothing but a logical centre, — the reality was concealed. There 
was thus a dualism, to overcome which is the first step in the Hegelian 
system. The principle, if there is to be one, must be universally 
applicable, all-comprehensive. Self-consciousness is precisely the 
principle wanted ; it is a unity, an identity, containing in itself a 
multiplicity. The universal in absolute self-consciousness is just 
pure thinking, which in systematic evolution is the categories; the 
particular is the natural or multiform, the external as such; the 
concrete of both is spirit, or self-consciousness come to itself. The 
same law that obtains among the categories is found adequate to an 
explanation of the external thing which had so sadly troubled Kant. 
The categories themselves are moments of the universal of thought, 
type forms, or definite aspects which thought assumes; determina- 
tions, Bestimmungen, as Hegel most frequently calls them. They 
evolve by the same law that was found to be the essence of ultimate 
reality — i.e. of self-consciousness. The complete system is pure 
thought, the Universal par excellence. 

After the Hegelian there can hardly be said to have been a philo- 
sophical treatment of the categories in Germany which is not more 
or less a criticism of that system. It does not seem necessary to 
mention the unimportant modifications introduced by Kuno Fischer, 
J. E. Erdmann, or others belonging to the school. In the strongly- 
opposed philosophy of J. F. Herbart the categories can hardly be 
said to hold a prominent place. They are, with him, the most 
general notions which are psychologically formed, and he classifies 
them as follows: — (i) Thing, either as product of thought or as 
given in experience; (2) Property, either qualitative or quantitative; 

(3) Relation; (4) The Negated. Along with these he posits as 
categories of inner process — (1) Sensation, (2) Cognition, (3) Will, 

(4) Action. Joh. Fr. L. George (1 81 1-1 873), ' who in the main follows 
Schleiermacher, draws out a table of categories which shows, in 
some points, traces of Herbartian influence. His arrangement by 
enneads, or series of nine, is fanciful, and wanting in inner 
principle. 

The most imposing of more recent attempts at a reconstruction 
of the categories is that of F. A. Trendelenburg. To him the first 
_ . . principle, or primitive reality, is Motion, which is both 
. " real as external movement, and ideal as inner construction. 

" The necessary conditions of Motion are Time and Space, 

which are both subjective and objective. From this point onwards 
are developed the mathematical (point, line, &c.) and real (causality, 
substance, quantity, quality, &c.) categories which appear as 
involved in the notion of motion. Matter cannot be regarded as a 
product of motion; it is the condition of motion, we must think 
something moved. All these categories, " under the presupposition 
of motion as the first energy of thought, are ideal and subjective 
relations; as also, under the presupposition of motion as the first 
energy of Being, real and objective relations." 2 A serious difficulty 
presents itself in the next category, that of End (Zweck), which can 
easily be thought for inner activity, but can hardly be reconciled 
with real motion. Trendelenburg solves the difficulty only empiric- 
ally, by pointing to the insufficiency of the merely mechanical to 
account for the organic. The consideration of Modality effects the 
transition to the forms of logical thought. On the whole, Trendelen- 
burg's unique fact of motion seems rather a blunder. There is 
much more involved than he is willing to allow, and motion per se 
is by no means adequate to self-consciousness. His theory has found 
little favour. 

Hermann Ulrici works out a system of the categories from a 
psychological or logical point of view. To him the fundamental 
Ulrlcl ^ act °^ philosophy is the distinguishing activity (unter- 

scheidende Tdtigkeit) of thought. Thought is only possible 
by distinction, difference. The fixed points in the relations of objects 
upon which this activity turns are the categories, which may be 
called the forms or laws of thought. They are the aspects of things, 
notions under which things must be brought, in order to become 

neuen Theorie des Denkens), by J. F. Fries (in the Neue Kritik der 
Vernunft), or by Schopenhauer, who desired to reduce all the cate- 
gories to one — that of Causality. We should require a new philo- 
sophical vocabulary even to translate the extraordinary compounds 
in which K. C. F. Krause expounds his theory of the categories. 
Notices of the changes introduced by Antonio Rosmini-Serbati, 
and of Vincenzo Gioberti's remarkable theory, will be found in 
Ragnisco's work referred to below. 

J System der Metaphysik (1844). 

! Logiscks Untersuchungen, i. 376-377. 



objects of thought. They are thus the most general predicates or 
heads of predicates. The categories cannot be completely gathered 
from experience, nor can they be evolved a priori; but, by attending 
to the general relations of thought and its purely indefinite matter, 
and examining what we must predicate in order to know Being, we 
may attain to a satisfactory list. Such a list is given in great detail 
in the System der Logik (1852), and in briefer, preciser form in the 
Compendium der Logik (2nd ed., 1872); it is in many points well 
deserving of attention. 

The definition of the categories by the able French logician Charles 
Bernard Renouvier in some respects resembles that of Ulrici. To 
him the primitive fact is Relation, of which all the cate- . 

gories are but forms. ' ' The categories, ' ' he says, ' ' are the Kenouv er, 
primary and irreducible laws of knowledge, the funda- Hamttton 
mental relations which determine its form and regulate its MU[ ' 
movements." His table and his criticism of the Kantian 
theory are both of interest. 3 The criticism of Kant's categories by 
Cousin and his own attempted classification are of no importance. 
Of little more value is the elaborate table drawn out by Sir W. 
Hamilton. 4 The generalized category of the Conditioned has but little 
meaning, and the subordinate categories evolve themselves by no 
principle, but are arranged after a formal and quite arbitrary manner. 
They are never brought into connexion with thought itself, nor 
could they be shown to spring from its nature and relations. J. S 
Mill presented, "as a substitute for the abortive classification of 
Existences, termed the categories of Aristotle," the following as an 
enumeration of all nameable things: — (1) Feelings, or states of 
consciousness; (2) The minds which experience these feelings; 

(3) Bodies, or external objects which excite certain of those feelings; 

(4) Successions and co-existences, likenesses and unlikenesses, 
between feelings or states of consciousness. 5 This classification 
proceeds on a quite peculiar view of the categories, and is here 
presented only for the sake of completeness. 

By modern psychologists the subject has been closely investigated. 
Professor G. F. Stout {Manual of Psychology, vol. ii. pp. 312 foil.) 
defines categories as " forms of cognitive consciousness, Modern 
universal principles or relations presupposed either in all os ycholo- 
cognition or in all cognition of a certain kind." He then Vrf_ <s 
treats External (or Physical) Reality, Space, Time, 
Causality and " Thinghood " from the standpoint of the perceptual 
consciousness; showing in what sense the categories of causality, 
substance and the rest exist in the sphere of perception. As con- 
trasted with the ideational, the perceptual consciousness is concerned 
with practice. Perception tells the child of things as separate 
entities, not in their ultimate relations as parts of a coherent whole. 
G. T. Ladd (Psychology Descriptive and Explanatory, ch. xxi., on 
" Space, Time and Causality ") defines the categories from the psy- 
chological standpoint as " those highly abstract conceptions which 
the mind frames by reflection upon its own most general modes of 
behaviour. They are our own notions resulting from co-operation 
of imagination and judgment, concerning the ultimate and un- 
analyzable forms of our own existence and development." In other 
words, the categories are highly abstract, have no content, and are 
realized as a kind of thinking which has for its object all the other 
mental processes. 

Authorities. — Besides those quoted above, see Eduard v. Hart- 
mann, Kategorienlehre (Leipzig, 1896), and " Begriff der Kate- 
gorialfunktion," in Zeitschr. f. Philos. und phil. Krit. cxv. (1899), 
pp. 9-19; E. Konig in the same periodical cxiii. (1889), pp. 232-279, 
and cxiv. (1899), pp. 78-105; F. A. Trendelenburg, Geschichte der 
Kategorienlehre (1846); P. Ragnisco Storia critica delle categorie 
(2 vols., Florence, 1871); W. Winaeloand Vom System der Kate- 
gorien (Tubingen, 1900) ; R. Eisler, Worterbuch der philosophischen 
Begriffe (Berlin, 1899), pp. 400-409; S. Joda, Studio critico su le 
categorie (Naples, 1881); H. Vaihinger, Die transcendentale Deduktion 
der Kategorien (Halle, 1902) ; H. W. B. Joseph, Introduction to Logic 
(Oxford, 1906), ch. iii. ; F. H. Bradley, Principles of Logic (1883); 
B. Bosanquet's Knowledge and Reality (1885, 2nd ed. 1892) ; histories 
of philosophy. For further authorities see works quoted under 
Aristotle and Kant, and in J. M. Baldwin's Diet. Philos. Psych. 
vol. iii. pt. 2, p. 685. (R. Ad.; X.) 

CATENARY (from Lat. catena, a chain), in mathematics, 
the curve assumed by a uniform chain or string hanging freely 
between two supports. It was investigated by Galileo, who 
erroneously determined it to be a parabola; Jungius detected 
Galileo's error, but the true form was not discovered until 1691, 
when James Bernoulli published it as a problem in the Ada 
Erudilorum. Bernoulli also considered the cases when (1) the 
chain was of variable density, (2) extensible, (3) acted upon at 
each point by a force directed to a fixed centre. These curves 
attracted much attention and were discussed by John Bernoulli, 
Leibnitz, Huygens, David Gregory and others. 

3 Essais de critique generate (2nd ed.), La Logique, i. pp. 184, 190, 
207-225. 

* Discussions, p. 577. 

s Logic, i. 83; cf. Bain, Ded. Log., App. C. 



S 1 ^ 



CATERAN— CAT-FISH 




The mechanical properties of the curves are treated in the article 
MECHANlcs.where various forms are illustrated. The simple catenary 
is shown in the figure. The cartesian equation referred to the axis 

and directrix is y — c cosh (x/c) or 
y = %c{e* : / cj re~ x / c ) ; other forms are 
s = c sinh (x/c) and y 1 = c i -\-s i , s 
being the arc measured from the 
vertex; the intrinsic equation is 
s = c tan ii. The radius of curva- 
ture and normal are each equal to 
c sec 2 <!'■ 

The surface formed by revolving 
the catenary about its directrix 
is named the alysseide. It is a 
minimal surface, i.e. the catenary 
solves the problem : to find a 
curve joining two given points, 
which when revolved about a line 
co-planar with the points traces 
a surface of minimum area (see 
Variations, Calculus of). 
T- The involute of the catenary 
is called the tractory, tractrix or 
antifriction curve ; it has a cusp at the vertex of the catenary, and 
is asymptotic to the directrix. The cartesian equation is 

*= V (c 2 -3' 2 )+Jclog[jc- V (c*-?)\l\c+yl (c*+f)}], 
and the curve has the geometrical property that the length of its 
tangent is constant. It is named the tractory, since a weight placed 
on the ground and drawn along by means of a flexible string by a 

f>erson travelling in a straight line, the weight not being in this 
ine, describes the curve in question. It is named the antifriction 
curve, since a pivot and step having the form of the surface generated 
by revolving the curve about its vertical axis wear away equally (see 
Mechanics: Applied). 

CATERAN (from the Gaelic ceathairne, a collective word 
meaning " peasantry "), the band of fighting men of a Highland 
clan; hence the term is applied to the Highland, and later to any, 
marauders or cattle-lifters. 

CATERHAM, an urban district in the Wimbledon parlia- 
mentary division of Surrey, England, 20 m. S. of London by the 
South-Eastern & Chatham railway. Pop. (1901) 9486. It lies 
in a healthy, hilly district, and has grown in modern times from 
a village into a large residential town. There are large barracks' 
in the neighbourhood, and the Metropolitan lunatic asylum is 
close to the town. 

CATERPILLAR, the popular name of the larva of various 
insects, particularly of butterflies and moths (see Lepidoptera, 
Hexapoda, Metamorphosis). The word appears first in the 
form cater pyl (Promptorium Parvulorum, about the middle of 
the 15th century). This may be the original form, with the 
addition of -ar or -er; if so, it represents the O. Fr. chate- 
pelose or chatepeleuse, i.e. "hairy-cat " (chat, cat, and pelouse, 
hairy, Lat. pilosus), a name applied to the hairy caterpillar, and 
also according to Cotgrave to a weevil. The use of " cat " in 
this connexion is paralleled by the Swiss name for a caterpillar, 
teufelskatz, and the popular English name for the blossom of 
the willow, " catkin," somewhat resembling a caterpillar (cf. 
" palmer ") ; the modern French is chenille, Latin canicula, a 
little dog. The termination of the word seems to have been early 
connected with " piller," a robber, plunderer from the de- 
structive habits of the larva, cf. Joel i. 4 — " That which the 
palmer-worm hath left, hath the locust eaten." The spelling 
" caterpillar," a 17th century corruption, has been the usual 
form since Johnson. 

CATESBY, ROBERT (1573-1605), English conspirator, son of 
Sir William Catesby of Lapworth in Warwickshire, a prominent 
recusant who was a descendant of Sir William Catesby, speaker 
of the House of Commons in 1484, executed by Henry VII. after 
the battle of Bosworth, was born in 1573, and entered Gloucester 
Hall (now Worcester College), Oxford, in 1586. He possessed 
a considerable estate, and was said to be wild and extravagant in 
his youth. In 1596 he was one of those arrested on suspicion 
during an illness of Queen Elizabeth. In 1601 he took part in 
the rebellion of Essex, was wounded in the fight and imprisoned, 
but finally pardoned on the payment of an enormous fine, to 
obtain which he was forced to sell a portion of his property. 
In 1602 he despatched Thomas Winter and the Jesuit Tesimond 
alias Greenway to Spain to induce Philip III. to organize an 



invasion of England, and in 1603, after James's accession, he was 
named as an accomplice in the "Bye Plot." Catesby was a 
man of great beauty of person, " above 2 yards high," says 
Father Gerard, "and though slender, yet as well-proportioned 
to his height as any man one should see." He possessed a clear 
head and unflinching courage, and with a strong determination 
and fascinating manner mastered the minds of his associates 
and overpowered all opposition. He was, however, headstrong, 
wilful and imprudent, fit for action, but incapable of due delibera- 
tion, and entirely wanting in foresight. Exasperated by his 
personal misfortunes and at the repressive measures under which 
his co-religionists were suffering, and blinded by a religious zeal 
which amounted to fanaticism, he was now to be the chief in- 
stigator of the famous Gunpowder Plot, which must in any event 
have brought disaster upon the Roman Catholic cause. The idea 
of some great stroke seems to have first entered his mind in 
May 1603. About the middle of January 1604 he imparted his 
scheme of blowing up the Parliament House to his cousin 
Thomas Winter, subsequently taking in Guy Fawkes and several 
other conspirators and overcoming all fears and scruples. But 
it was his determination, from which he would not be shaken, 
not to allow warning to be given to the Roman Catholic peers 
that was the actual cause of the failure of the plot. A fatal 
mistake had been made in imparting the secret to Francis 
Tresham (q.v.), in order to secure his financial assistance; and 
there is scarcely any doubt that he was the author of the cele- 
brated letter to his brother-in-law, Lord Monteagle, which 
betrayed the conspiracy to the government, on the 26th of 
October. On receiving the news of the letter on the 28th, 
Catesby exhibited extraordinary coolness and fortitude, and 
refused to abandon the attempt, hoping that the government 
might despise the warning and still neglect precautions; and 
his confidence was strengthened by Fawkes's report that nothing 
in the cellar had been touched or tampered with. On the 2nd 
of November his resolution was shaken by Tresham's renewed 
entreaties that he would flee, and his positive assurance that 
Salisbury knew everything. On the evening of the 3rd, however, 
he was again, through Percy's insistence, persuaded to stand 
firm and hazard the great stroke. The rest of the story is told 
in the article Gunpowder Plot. Here it need only be said that 
Catesby, after the discovery of the conspiracy, fled with his 
fellow-plotters, taking refuge ultimately at Holbeche in Stafford- 
shire, where on the night of the 8th of November he was over- 
taken and killed. He had married Catherine, daughter of 
Thomas Leigh of Stoneleigh, Warwickshire, and left one son, 
Robert, who inherited that part of the family estate which had 
been settled on Catesby's mother and was untouched by the 
attainder, and who is said to have married a daughter of 
Thomas Percy. 

CAT-FISH, the name usually applied to the fishes of the 
family Siluridae, in allusion to the long barbels or feelers about 
the mouth, which have been compared to the whiskers of a cat. 
The Siluridae are a large and varied group, mostly inhabitants 
of fresh waters; some of them by their singular form and 
armature are suggestive of the Devonian mailed fishes, and were 
placed at one time in their vicinity by L. Agassiz. Even such 
authorities as T. H. Huxley and E. D. Cope were inclined to 
ascribe ganoid affinities to the Siluridae; but this view has 
gradually lost ground, and most modern ichthyologists, if not all, 
have adopted the conclusions of M. Sagemehl, who has placed the 
Siluridae near the carps' and Characinids in the group Ostariophysi. 
The Silurids and Cyprinids may be regarded as two parallel 
series derived from some common stock which cannot have been 
very different from the existing Characinids. In spite of the 
archaic appearance of some of its members, the family Siluridae 
does not appear to extend far back in time, its oldest known 
representative being the Bucklandium diluvii of the Lower 
Eocene (London Clay) of Sheppey. A great number of forms 
were placed by Cuvier and his successors in the family Siluridae, 
which has since been broken up by T. Gill and other American 
authors into several families, united under the name of Nemato- 
gnathi. A middle course appears the more reasonable to the 



GAT-FISH 



5i3 



present writer, who has divided the Silwidae of Cuvier into 
three families, with the following definitions: — 

Silwidae — ribs attached to strong parapophyses; operculum 
well developed. 

Loricariidae— ribs, sessile; parapophyses absent; operculum 
more or less developed. 

Aspredinidae — ribs sessile; strong parapophyses; operculum 
absent. 

These three families may be denned among the Ostariophysi 
by having the parietal bones fused with the supraoccipital, no 
symplectic, the body naked or with bony scutes, the mouth 
usually toothed, with barbels, and usually an adipose dorsal fin. 

The Siluridae embrace more than one thousand species, spread 
over the fresh waters of all parts of the world, but mostly from 
between the tropics. They are absent from western Europe and 
north-west Africa,, and from North America west of the Rocky 
Mountains, but this deficiency has been made good by now, the 
introduction of Amiurus nebulosus and allied species in various 
parts of continental Europe and California having proved 
a success. Only a few forms are marine {Plotosus, Arius, 
Galeichthys) . 

The species which has given the name to the whole family is 
the " Wels " of the Germans, Silurus glanis, the largest European 
fresh-water fish, inhabiting the greater part of Europe from the 
Rhine eastwards and north of the Alps. Its head is large and 
broad, its mouth wide, furnished with six barbels, of which those 




Fig. 1. — The " Wels " {Silurus glanis). 

of the upper jaw are very long. Both jaws and the palate are 
armed with broad bands of small closely-set teeth, which give the 
bones a rasp-like appearance. The eyes are exceedingly small. 
The short body terminates in a long, compressed, muscular tail, 
and the whole fish is covered with a smooth, scaleless, slippery 
skin. Specimens of 4 and 5 ft. in length, and of 50 to 80 lb in 
weight, are of common occurrence, and the fish grows to 10 ft., 
with a weight of 400 lb, in the Danube. Its food consists 
chiefly of other bottom-feeding fishes, and in inland countries 
it is considered one of the better class of food fishes. Stories 
about children having been found in the stomach of very 
large individuals are probably inventions. An allied species 
(S. aristotelis) is found in Greece. 

The Clarias and Heterobranchus of Africa and south-eastern 
Asia have an elongate, more or less eel-shaped body, with long 
dorsal and anal fins, and are known to be able to live a long time 
out of water, being provided with an accessory dendritic breath- 
ing organ situated above the gills. Some species live in burrows 
during the dry season, crawling about at night in search of food. 
The common Nile species, the " Harmoot" (Clarias lazera), occurs 
abundantly in the Lake of Galilee and was included in, if not 
chiefly aimed at, by the Mosaic law which forbade the Jews to 
eat scaleless fishes, a prohibition which has been extended to 
eels in spite of the obvious presence of minute scales in the 
latter. 

The Saccobranchus of India and Ceylon, a genus more nearly 
related to Silurus, have also an accessory organ for breathing 
atmospheric air. It consists of a long sac behind the gill-cavity, 
extending far back on each side of the body under the muscles. 

In the majority of the Siluridae, called by A. Giinther the 
Proteropterae, a section extremely numerous in species, and 
represented throughout the tropics, the dorsal fin consists of a 
v. 17 



short-rayed and an adipose portion, the former belonging to the 
abdominal vertebral column; the anal is always much shorter 
than the tail. The gill-membranes are not confluent with the 
skin of the isthmus; they have a free posterior margin. When a 
nasal barbel is present, it belongs to the posterior nostril. This 
section includes among many others the genus Bagrus, of which 
the bayad (B. bayad) and docmac {B. docmac) frequently come 
under the notice of travellers on the Nile; they grow to a length 
of s ft. and are eaten. 

Of the " cat-fishes " of North America {Amiurus), locally called 
" bull-heads " or " horned-pouts," with eight barbels, some 
twenty species are known. Some of them are valued as food, 
especially one which is abundant in the ponds of New England, 
and capable of easy introduction into " other localities {A . 
nebulosus). Others which inhabit the great lakes (^4. nigricans) 
and the Mississippi (A. ponderosus) often exceed the weight of 
100 lb. Platystoma and Pimelodus people the rivers and lakes 
of tropical America, and many of them are conspicuous in this 
fauna by the ornamentation of their body, by long spatulate 
snouts, and by their great size. 

The genus Arius is composed of a great number of species and 
has the widest distribution of all Silurids, being represented in 
almost all tropical countries which are drained by large rivers. 
Most of the species live in salt water. They possess six barbels, 
and their head is extensively osseous on its upper surface; their 
dorsal and pectoral spines are generally developed into powerful 
weapons. Bagarius,- one of the largest Silurids of the rivers 
of India and Java, exceeding a length of 6 ft., differs from 
Arius in having eight barbels and the head covered with skin. 

R. Semon has made observations in Queensland on the habits 
of Arius australis, which builds nests in the sandy bed of the 
Burnett river. These nests consist of circular basin-like ex- 
cavations about 20 in. in diameter, at the bottom of which the 
eggs are laid and covered over by several layers of large stones. 
In the marine and estuarine species of Arius, Galeichthys and 
Osteogeniosus, the male, more rarely the female, carries the eggs 
in the mouth and pharynx; these eggs, few in number, are 
remarkably large, measuring as much as 17 or 18 millimetres in 
diameter in Arius commusonii, a fish 3 or 4 ft. in length. 

The common North American Amiurus nebulosus also takes 
care of its eggs, which are deposited beneath protecting objects 
at the bottom of the water, failing which both parents join in 
excavating a sort of nest in the mud. The male watches over 
the eggs, and later leads the young in great schools near the shore, 
seemingly caring for them as the hen for her chickens. 

In the Siluridae Stenobranchiae of Giinther the dorsal fin con- 
sists of an adipose portion and a short-rayed fin which belongs to 
the abdominal vertebral column, and, like the adipose fin, may 
be sometimes absent. The gill-membranes are confluent with 
the skin of the isthmus. The Silurids belonging to this section are 
either South American or African. Among the former we notice 
specially the genus Doras, which is distinguished by having a 
series of bony scutes along the middle of the side. The narrow- 




Fig. 2. — Synodontis xiphias. 

ness of their gill-openings appears to have developed in them 
a habit which has excited the attention of all naturalists who 
have visited the countries bordering upon the Atlantic rivers 
of tropical America, viz. the habit of travelling during seasons 
of drought from a piece of water about to dry up to ponds of 
greater capacity. These journeys are occasionally of such a 
length that the fish have to travel all night; they are so numerous 



5M- 



CAT-FISH 



that the Indians fill many baskets of them. J. Hancock supposes 
that the fish carry a small supply of water with them in their 
gill-cavity, which they can easily retain by closing their branchial 
apertures. The same naturalist adds that they make regular 
nests, in which they cover up their eggs with care and defend 
them — male and female uniting in this parental duty until the 
eggs are hatched. Synodontis is an African genus and common 
in the Nile, where the various species are known by the name 
of " Shal." They frequently occur among the representations 
of animals left by the ancient Egyptians. The upper part of their 




accuse them of entering and ascending the urethra of persons while 
bathing, causing inflammation and sometimes death. Some 
certainly live parasitically in the gill-cavity of large Silurids, 
and F. Silvestri has observed Stegophilus insidiosus to suck the 
blood in the gills of Plalystoma coruscans, a Silurid growing to 
a length of 6 ft. 
The mailed cat-fish of the South American genus Callichlhys 



Fig. 3. — -Malopterurus eleclricus. 

head is protected by strong osseous scutes, and both the dorsal 
and pectoral fins are armed with powerful spines. Their mouth 
is small, surrounded by six barbels, which are more or less 
fringed with a membrane or with branched tentacles. 

The curious fact of some species of Synodontis having the 
lower parts darker than the upper, some being whitish above 
and blackish beneath, appears to be connected with their habit 
of swimming in a reversed position, the Belly turned upwards. 
This habit, known to the ancient Egyptians, who have frequently 
represented them in that attitude, has been described by 
E. Geoff roy, who says they nearly constantly swim on their 
back, moving quite freely forwards and sidewards; but if 
alarmed, they revert to the normal position to escape more 
rapidly. 

The electric cat- or sheath-fishes {Malopterurus) have been 
referred to the same section. Externally they are at once 
recognized by the absence of a rayed dorsal fin, of which only a 
rudiment remains as a small interneural spine concealed below 
the skin. The entire fish is covered with soft, villose skin, 
an osseous defensive armour having become unnecessary 
in consequence of the development of a powerful electric 
apparatus, the strength of which, however, is exceeded 
by that of the electric eel and the large species of 
Torpedo. 

The electric organ of Malopterurus differs essentially 
from that of other fishes provided with such batteries, 
being part of the tegumentary system instead of being 
derived from the muscles. It consists of rhomboidal cells 
of a fine gelatinous substance immediately under the 
skin. It is put into action by a single ganglionic cell at 
the anterior extremity of the spinal cord. Contrary to 
what takes place in other electric fishes, the current 
proceeds from the head to the tail. 

The electric cat-fish, which grows to a length of 3 ft. 
in the Congo, has a wide distribution in Africa, extend- 
ing from the Nile to the Zambezi and from the Senegal 
to the Congo. It was well known to the ancient 
Egyptians, who have depicted it in their mural paintings 
and elsewhere, and ah account of its electric properties 
was given by an Arab physician of the 12th century; 
then as now the fish was known under the suggestive 
name of Raad or Raash, which means " thunder." 

Giinther's Siluridae Branchicolae comprise the smallest 
and least developed members of the family; they are 
referred to two genera only from South America, Stego- 
philus and Vandellia, the smallest of which does not exceed 
the length of 2 in. Their body is soft, narrow, cylindrical 
and elongate; the dorsal and anal fins short; the vent 
far behind the middle of the length of the body; gill- 
membranes confluent with the skin of the isthmus. Each 
maxillary is provided with a small barbel; and the gill-covers 
are armed with short stiff spines. Their small size notwith- 
standing, these Silurids are well known to the Brazilians, who 




Fig. 4. — Callichthys armatus, from the upper Amazons. 



builds regular nests of grass on leaves, sometimes placed in a 
hole scooped out in the bank, in which they cover their e&gs 
and defend them, male and female sharing in this parental 
duty. In the allied Corydoras a lengthy courtship takes place, 
followed by an embrace, during which the female receives the 
seminal fluid in a sort of pouch formed by the folded membranes 
of her ventral fins; immediately after, five or six eggs are 
produced and received in the pouch, to be afterwards carefully 
placed in a secluded spot. This operation is repeated many 
times, until the total number of eggs, about 250, have been 
deposited. In accordance with these pairing habits, the pectoral 
spines of the male, which are used in amplexation, are larger 
and stronger than those of the female. These fish are mono- 
gamous, and both parents remain 
by the side of the nest, furiously 
attacking any assailant. 

The allied family Loricariidae 




Fig. 5. — Loricaria lanceolata, from the upper Amazpns. 
is entirely confined to the fresh waters of Central and South 
America. C. T. Regan, who has recently published an 
elaborate monograph of them, recognizes 189 species, referred 
to 17 genera. Many of them are completely mailed; but 
all have in common a short-rayed dorsal fin, with the 



CATGUT— CATHARS 



5i5 



ventrals below or rarely in front of it. Their gill-openings 
are reduced to a short slit. The first group of this section 
comprises alpine forms of the Andes, without any armature, 
and with a very broad and pendent lower lip. They have been 
referred to several genera (Stygogenes, Arges, Brontes, Astro- 
blepus), but are collectively called " prenadillas " by the natives, 
who state that they live in subterranean craters within the 
bowels of the volcanoes of the Andes, and are ejected with 
streams of mud and water during eruptions. These fishes may, 
however, be found in surface waters at all times, and their 
appearance in great quantities in the low country during volcanic 




Fig. 6. — Abdomen of Aspredo batrachus, with the ova attached; 
at a the ova are removed, to show the spongy structure of the skin, 
and the processes filling the interspaces between the ova. 

eruptions can be accounted for by numbers being killed by the 
sulphuretted gases which escape during an eruption and by their 
being swept down with the torrents of water issuing from the 
volcano. The lowland forms have their body encased in large 
scutes, either rough, scale-like, and arranged in four or five series 
{Chaetostomus) , or polished, forming broad rings round the 
slender and depressed tail (Loricaria, fig. 5). They are mostly 
of small size. 

In certain of the mailed genera the secondary sexual differences 
may be very pronounced, and have given rise to many nominal 
species. The shape of the snout may differ according to the sex, 
and its margin may be beset with tentacles in the male, whilst 
it frequently happens that the head of the latter is margined 
with spines or bristles which are either absent or considerably 
shorter in the female. 

The Aspredinidae, which are also closely related to the Siluridae, 



are represented by four genera and eighteen species from South 
America. Aspredo batrachus (fig. 6), of the Guianas, the largest 
form, reaching to about a foot in length, deserves notice from 
the manner in which the female carries her eggs attached to the 
belly and paired fins, in a single layer, each egg being connected 
with the skin by a cup-shaped pedunculate base supplied with 
blood-vessels and coated with a layer of epithelium, the forma- 
tion of which is still unexplained. (G. A. B.) 

CATGUT, the name applied to cord of great toughness and 
tenacity prepared from the intestines of sheep, or occasionally 
from those of the horse, mule and ass. Those of the cat are not 
employed, and therefore it is supposed that the word is properly 
kitgut, kit meaning " fiddle," and that the present form has arisen 
through confusion with kit —cat. The substance is used for the 
strings of harps and violins, as well as other stringed musical 
instruments, for hanging the weights of clocks, for bow-strings, 
and for suturing wounds in surgery. To prepare it the intestines 
are cleaned, freed from fat, and steeped for some time in water, 
after which their external membrane is scraped off with a blunt 
knife. They are then steeped for some time in an alkaline ley, 
smoothed and equalized by drawing out, subjected to the 
antiseptic action of the fumes of burning sulphur, if necessary 
dyed, sorted into sizes, and twisted together into cords of 
various numbers of strands according to their uses. The best 
strings for musical instruments are imported from Italy (" Roman 
strings ") ; and it is found that lean and ill-fed animals yield 
the toughest gut. 

CATHA, the khat of the Arabs, a shrub widely distributed 
and much cultivated in Arabia and tropical Africa from, Abyssinia 
to the Cape. The dried leaves are used for the preparation of a 
kind of tea and also as tobacco. The plant is a member of the 
natural order Celastraceae, a family of shrubs and trees found 
in temperate and tropical climates and represented in Britain by 
the spindle-tree (Euonymus europaem). 

CATHARS (Cathari or Cathakists), a widespread heretical 
sect of the middle ages. They were the debris of an early 
Christianity, scattered in the 10th to 14th centuries over East 
and West, having their analogues in the Mahommedan world 
as well. In the East they were called Bogomils (q.v.) and 
Paulicians; in the West, Patarenes, Tixerands (i.e. Weavers), 
Bulgars, Concorricii, Albanenses, Albigeois, &c; in both, 
Cathars and Manicheans. This article relates to the Western 
Cathars, as they appear (1) in the Cathar Ritual written in 
Provencal and preserved in a 13th-century MS. in :Lyons, 
published by Cledat, Paris, 1888; (2) in Bernard Gui's Practica 
inquisitionis haereticae pravitatis, edited by Canon C. Douais, 
Paris, 1886; and (3) in the prods verbal of the inquisitors' 
reports. Some were downright dualists, and believed that there 
are two gods or principles, one. of good and the other of evil, 
both eternal; but as a rule they subordinated the evil to the 
good. All were universalists in so far as they believed in the 
ultimate salvation of all men. 1 

Their tenets were as follows: — The evil god, Satan, who inspired 
the malevolent parts of the Old Testament, is god and lord of 
this world, of the things that are seen and are temporal, and 
especially of the outward man which is decaying, of the earthen 
vessel, of the body of death, of the flesh which takes us captive 
under the law of sin and desire. This world is the only true 
purgatory and hell, being the antithesis of the world eternal, 
of the inward man renewed day by day, of Christ's peace and 
kingdom which are not of this world. Men are the result of a 
primal war in heaven, when hosts of angels incited by Satan 
or Lucifer to revolt were driven out, and were imprisoned in 
terrestrial bodies created for them by the adversary. But 
there are also celestial bodies, bodies spiritual and not natural. 
These the angel souls left behind in heaven, and they are 
buildings from God, houses not made with hands, tunics eternal. 

1 Acertain Peter (Doc. Doat., 22, p. 98) declared that could he but get 
hold of the false and perfidious God of the Catholics who created a 
thousand men in order to save a single one and damn all the rest, he 
would break him to pieces and tear him asunder with his nails and 
spit in his face. 



5 i6 



CATHARS 



Imprisoned in the garment of flesh, burdened with its sin, souls 
long to be clothed upon with the habitations they left in heaven. 
So long as they are at home in the body, they are absent from 
the Lord. They would fain be at home with the Lord, and 
absent from the body, for which there is no place in heaven 
since flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor 
corruption inherit incorruption. There is no resurrection of the 
flesh. The true resurrection is the spiritual baptism bequeathed 
by Christ to the boni homines. How shall man escape from 
his prison-house of flesh, and undo the effects of his fall? For 
mere death brings no liberation, unless a man is become a new 
creation, a new Adam, as Christ was; unless he has received the 
gift of the spirit and become a vehicle of the Paraclete. If a 
man dies unreconciled to God through Christ, he must pass 
through another cycle of imprisonment in flesh; perhaps in 
a human, but with equal likelihood in an animal's body. For 
when after death the powers of the air throng around and 
persecute, the soul flees into the first lodging of clay that it 
finds. 1 Christ was a life-giving spirit, and the boni homines, the 
" good men," as the Cathars called themselves, are his ambas- 
sadors. They alone have kept the spiritual baptism with fire 
which Christ instituted, and which has no connexion with the 
water baptism of John; for the latter was an unregenerate 
soul, who failed to recognize the Christ, a Jew whose mode of 
baptism with water belongs to the fleeting outward world and 
is opposed to the kingdom of God. It would be interesting to 
trace Bardesanes and the Syriac Hymn of the Soul in all 
this. 

The Catbars fell into two classes, corresponding to the Baptized 
and the Catechumens of the early church, namely, the Perfect, 
who had been "consoled," i.e. had received the gift of the 
Paraclete; and the credentes or Believers. The Perfect formed 
the ordained priesthood, were women no less than men, and 
controlled the church; they received from the Believers un- 
questioning obedience, and as vessels of election in whom the 
Holy Spirit already dwelt, they were adored by the faithful, 
who were taught to prostrate themselves before them whenever 
they asked for their prayers. For none but the Consoled had 
received into their hearts the spirit of God's Son, which cries 
" Abba, Father." They alone were become adopted sons, and 
so able to use the Lord's Prayer, which begins, " Our Father, 
which art in heaven." The Perfect alone knew God and could 
address him in this prayer, the only one they used in their 
ceremonies. The mere credens could at best invoke the living 
saint, and ask him to pray for him. 

All adherents of the sect seem to have kept three Lents in 
the year, as also to have fasted Mondays, Wednesdays and 
Fridays of each week; in these fasts a diet of bread and water 
was usual. But a credens under probation for initiation, which 
lasted at least one and often several years, fasted always. The 
rlife of a Perfect was so hard, and, thanks to the inquisitors, so 
fraught with danger, that most Believers deferred the rite until 
the death-bed, as in the early centuries many believers deferred 
baptism. The rule imposed complete chastity." A husband 
at initiation left his wife, committing her " to God and the 
gospel" ; a wife her husband. A male Perfect could not lay his 
hand on a woman without incurring penance of a three-days' 
fast. All begetting of children is evil, for Adam's chambering 
with Eve was the forbidden fruit. It is good for a man not to 
touch a woman; a man's relations with his own wife are merely 
a means of fornication, and marriage and concubinage are 
indistinguishable as against the kingdom of God, in which 
there is no marrying or giving in marriage. Those only have 
been redeemed from earth who were virgins, undefiled with 
women. The passages of the New Testament which seem to 
connive at the married relation were interpreted by the Cathars 
as spoken in regard of Christ and the church. The Perfect must 
also leave his father and mother, and his children, for a man's 
foes are they of his own household. The family must be sacri- 

1 Here we have a doctrine of metempsychosis which seems of 
Indian origin (see Asceticism). But Julius Caesar {de B.C. vi. 13) 
attests this belief among the ancient Druids of Gaul. 



ficed to the divine kinship. He that loveth father or mother 
more than Christ is not worthy of him, nor he that loveth more 
his son or daughter. The Perfect takes up his cross and follows 
after Christ. 

Next he must abstain from all flesh diet except fish. He may 
not even eat cheese or eggs or milk, for they, like meat, are pro- 
duced per viam generatianis seu coitus. Everything that is 
sexually begotten is impure. Fish were supposed to be born 
in the water without sexual connexion, and on the basis of this 
old physiological fallacy the Cathars equally with the Catholic 
framed their rule of fasting. And there was yet another reason 
why the Perfect should not eat animals, for a human soul might 
be doing time in its body. Nor might a Perfect or one in course 
of probation kill anything, for the Mosaic commandment applies 
to all life. He might riot lie nor take an oath, for the precept 
" Swear not at all " was, like the rest of the gospel, taken seriously. 
This was the chief of their " anarchist doctrines." 2 

The Cathar rites, which remain to us in a manual of the sect, 
"recall," says the Abbe Guiraud, no too favourable a witness, 
"those of the primitive church with a truth and precision the 
more striking the nearer we go back to the apostolic age." The 
medieval inquisitor saw in them an aping of the rites of the 
Catholic church as he knew them; but they were really, says the 
same authority, " archaeological vestiges (i.e. survivals) of the 
primitive Christian liturgy. In the bosom of medieval society 
they were the last witness to a state of things that the regular 
development of Catholic cult had amplified and modified. 
They resemble the erratic blocks which lost amid alien soils 
recall, where we find them, the geological conditions of earlier 
ages. This being so, it is of the deepest interest to study the 
Cathar cult, since through its rites we can get a glimpse of those 
of the primitive church, about which want of documents leaves 
us too often in the dark." 

The central Cathar rite was consolamentum, or baptism with 
spirit and fire. The spirit received Was the Paraclete derived 
from God and sent by Christ, who said, " The Father is greater 
than I." Of a consubstantial Trinity the Cathars naturally had 
never heard. Infant baptism they rejected because it was un- 
scriptural, and because all baptism with water was an appanage 
of the Jewish demiurge Jehovah, and as such expressly rejected 
by Christ. 

The consolamentum removes original sin, undoes the sad effects 
of the primal fall, clothes upon us our habitation which is from 
heaven, restores to us the lost tunic of immortality. A Consoled 
is an angel walking in the flesh, whom the thin screen of death 
alone separates from Christ and the beatific vision. The rite was 
appointed by Christ, and has been handed down from generation 
to generation by the boni homines. 

The long probation called " abstinence " which led up to it 
is a survival of the primitive catechumenate with its scrutinies. 
The prostrations of the credens before the Perfect were in their 
manner and import identical with the prostrations of the cate- 
chumen before the exorcist. We find the same custom in the 
Celtic church of St Columba. Just as at the third scrutiny 
the early catechumen passed a last examination in the Gospels, 
Creed and Lord's Prayer, so after their year of abstinence the 
credens receives creed and prayer; the allocution with which 
the elder " handed on " this prayer is preserved, and of it the 
Abb6 Guiraud remarks that, if it were not in a Cathar ritual, 
one might believe it to be of Catholic origin. It is so Christian 
in tone, he quaintly remarks elsewhere, that an inquisitor might 
have used it quite as well as a heretic. In it the Perfect addresses 
the postulant, as in the corresponding Armenian rite, by the name 
of Peter; and explains to him from Scripture the indwelling 
of the spirit in the Perfect, and his adoption as a son by God. 
The Lord's Prayer is then repeated by the postulant after 
the elder, who explains it clause by clause; the words panis 

2 The Abbe Guiraud remarks that in refusing to take oaths the 
Cathars " contraried the social principles on which the constitutions 
of all states repose," and congratulates himself that society is not 
yet so thoroughly " laicized " as to have given up oaths in the most 
important acts of social life. 



CATHAY— CATHGART, SIR G. 



517 



superstantialis being interpreted not of the material but of the 
spiritual bread, which consists of the Words of Life. ' 

There followed the Renunciation, primitive enough in form, 
but the postulant solemnly renounced, not Satan and his works 
and pomp, but the harlot church of the persecutors, whose 
prayers were more deadly than desirable. He renounced the 
cross which its priests had signed on him with their chrism, 
their sham baptisms and other magical rites. Next followed the 
spiritual baptism itself, consisting of imposition of hands, and 
holding of the Gospel on the postulant's head. The elder begins a 
fresh allocution by citing Matt, xxviii. 19, Mark xvi. 15, 16, John 
iii. 3 (where the Cathars' text must originally have omitted in 
v. 5 the words " of water and," since their presence contradicts 
their argument). Acts ix. 17, 18, viii. 14-17, ar e then cited; also 
John xx. 21-23, Matt. xvi. 18,19, Matt, xviii. 18-20, for the Perfect 
one receives in this rite power to bind and loose. The Perfect's 
vocation is then defined: he must not commit adultery nor 
homicide, nor lie, nor swear any oath, nor pick and steal, nor do 
unto another that which he would not have dene unto himself. 
He shall pardon his wrongdoers, love his enemies, pray for them 
that calumniate and accuse him, offer the other cheek to the 
smiter, give up his mantle to him that takes his tunic, neither 
judge nor condemn. Asked if he will fulfil each of these, the 
postulant answers: " I have this will and determination. Pray 
God for me that he give me his strength." 

The next episode of the rite exactly reproduces the Roman 
(onfiteor as it stood in the 2nd century; " the postulant 'says: 
1 Partite nobis. For all the sins I have committed, in word or 
thought or deed, I come for pardon to God and to the church 
and to you all.' And the Christians shall say: ' By God and by 
us and by the church may they be pardoned thee, and we pray 
God that he pardon you them.' " 

Theie follows the act of " consoling." The elder takes the 
Gospel off the white cloth, where it has lain all through the 
ceremony, and places it on the postulant's head, and the other 
good men present place their right hands on his head; they 
shall say the parcias (spare), and thrice the " Let us adore the 
Father and Son and Holy Spirit," and then pray thus: " Holy 
Father, welcome thy servant in thy justice and send upon 
him thy grace and thy holy spirit." Then they repeat the 
" Let us adore," the Lord's Prayer, and read the Gospel 
(John i. 1-17). 

This was the vital part of the whole rite. The credens is now a 
Perfect one. He is girt with the sacred thread round his naked 
body under the breasts. Where the fear of the persecutor was 
absent he was also clad in a black gown. The Perfect ones 
present give him the kiss of peace, and the rite is over. This 
part of the rite answers partly to the Catholic confirmation of 
a baptized person, partly to the ordination of a pope of Rome or, 
Alexandria. The latter in being ordained had the Gospel laid on 
their heads, and the same feature occurs in old Gallican and 
Coptic rites of ordaining a bishop. 

Thus the Cathar ritual, like that of the Armenian dissenters 
(see Paulicians), reflects an age when priestly ordination was 
pot yet differentiated from confirmation. " Is it not curious," 
says the Abbe Guiraud, " to remark that the essential rite of the 
consolamentum is in effect nothing but the most ancient form of 
Christian ordination?" 

The Cathar Eucharist was equally primitive, and is thus 
described by a contemporary writer in a 13th-century MS. of the 
Milan Library: — " The Benediction of bread is thus performed 
by the Cathars. They all, men and women, go up to a table, and 
standing up say the ' Our Father.' 1 And he who is prior among 
them, at the close of the Lord's Prayer, shall take hold of the 
bread and say: ' Thanks be to the God of our Jesus Christ. 
May the Spirit be with us all.' And after that he breaks and 
distributes to all. And such bread is called bread blessed, al- 
though no one believes that out of it is made the body of Christ. 

1 Cf. S. Gregorii Ep. ix. 12 (26) : " Mos apostolorum fuit ut ad 
ipsam solummodo orationem oblationis hostiam consecrarent. " 
(" The custom of the apostles was to use no other prayer but the 
Lord's in consecrating the host of the offering.") 



The Albanenses, however, deny that it can be blessed or sanctified, 
because it is corporeal " (i.e. material). 

As Tertullian relates of his contemporaries in the 2nd century, 
so the Cathars would reserve part of their bread of blessing and 
keep it for years, eating of it occasionally though only after 
saying the Benedicite. The Perfect kept it wrapped up in a bag 
of pure white cloth, tied round the neck, 2 and sent it long distances 
to regions which through persecution they could not enter. On 
the death-bed it could even, like the Catholic Viaticum, take the 
place of the rite of Consolamentum, if this could not be performed. 
Once a month this solemn rite of breaking bread was held, the 
credentes assisting. The service was called apparettamentum, 
because a table was covered with a white cloth and the Gospel 
laid on it. The Perfect were adored, and the kiss of peace was 
passed round. 

The influence of Catharism on the Catholic church was 
enormous. To counteract it celibacy was finally imposed on 
the clergy, and the great mendicant orders evolved; while the 
constant polemic of the Cathar teachers against the cruelty, 
rapacity and irascibility of the Jewish tribal god led the church 
to prohibit the circulation of the Old Testament among laymen. 
The sacrament of " extreme unction " was also evolved by way 
of competing with the death-bed consolamentum.- 

Authorities — J. J. I. Dollinger, Beitrage zur SektengescMchte 
Miinehen, 1890); Jean Guiraud, Questions d'histoire (Paris, 1906); 
F. C. Conybeare, The Key of Truth (Oxford, 1898); Henry C. Lea, 
History of the Inquisition (New York, 1888) ; C. Douais, L' Inquisition 
(Paris, 1906), and his Les Heretiques du midi au XIII" siecle (Paris, 
1891); Les Albigeois (Paris, 1879); also Practica Inquisitionis (of 
Bernard Gui or Guidon), (Paris, 1886) ; L. Cledat, Le Nouveau Testa- 
ment, traduit au XIII" siecle en langue provencale, suivi d'un rituel 
cathare (Paris, 1887) ; E. Cunitz in Beitrage zu den theol. Wissensch. 
(1852), vol. iv. ; P. van Limborch, Liber Sententiarum Inquis. 
Tholos. 1307-1323 (Amsterdam, 1692) ; Hahn, Gesch. der Kelzer im 
M. A. (Stuttgart, 1845) ; Ch. Schmidt, Histoirert doctrine de la secte 
des Cathares (Paris, 1849); A. Lombard, Pauliciens bulgares et 
Bons-Hbmmes (Geneva, 1879); Fredericq, Corpus documentorum 
haer. pravitatis Neerlandicae (Gent, 1 889-1 896); Felix Tocco, 
" Nuovi documenti " in Archiv. di studi ital. (1901), and bis L'Eresia 
nel medio evo (Florence, 1881) ; P. Flade, Das romische Inqtiisitions- 
verfahren in Deutschland (Leipzig, 1902); Ch. Molinier, " Rapport 
sur une mission en Italie," in Archives scientifiques de Paris, torn. 14 
(1888) ; C. H. Haskins, " Robert le Bougre," in American Hist. Rev. 
(1902). (F. C. CO 

CATHAY, the name by which China (q.v.) was known to medi- 
eval Europe and is still occasionally referred to in poetry, as in 
Tennyson's " Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay." 
It is derived from Khita'i, or Khitat, the name which was properly 
that of the kingdom established by the Khitan conquerors in the 
northern provinces of China about a.d. 907, which after the fall 
of this dynasty in 11 25 remained attached to their former 
territory, and was subsequently applied by the nations of Central 
Asia to the whole of China. Thus " Kitai " is still the Russian 
name for China. The name penetrated to Europe in the 13th 
century with the fame of the conquests of Jenghiz Khan. After 
the discovery of southern China by European navigators Cathay 
was erroneously believed to be a country to the north of China, 
and it was the desire to reach it that sent the English adventurers 
of the 16th century in search of the north-east passage. 

CATHCART, SIR GEORGE (1794-1854), English soldier, third 
son of the 1st Earl Cathcart, was born in London on the 12 th of 
May 1 794. He was educated at Eton and Edinburgh University. 
In 1810 he entered the army, and two years later accompanied 
his father to Russia as aide-de-camp. With him he joined the 
Russian headquarters in March 18 13; and he was present at all 
the great battles of that year in Germany, and of the following 
year in France, and also at the taking of Paris. The fruits of his 
careful observation and critical study of these queries
appeared in the Commentaries on the war in Russia and Germany 
1812-1813, a plain soldier-like history, which he published in 
1850. After the peace of 1814 he accompanied his father to the 
congress of Vienna. He was present at Quatre Bras and at 
Waterloo, as an aide-de-camp to the duke of Wellington, and 
remained on the staff till the army of occupation quitted France. 
2 Cf. Duchesne, Origines, ed. 1898, p. 177. 



5 i8 



CATHCART, LORD— CATHEDRAL 



Reappointed almost immediately, he accompanied the duke to 
the congresses of Aix-la-Chapelle and Verona, and in 1826 to 
Prussia. Promoted lieutenant-colonel in 1826, he was placed on 
half-pay in 1834. He was recalled to active service in 1838, and 
sent as commander of the King's Dragoon Guards to Canada, 
where he played an important part in suppressing the rebellion 
and pacifying the country. In 1844 he returned to England, 
and two years later was appointed deputy-lieutenant of the 
Tower, a post which he held up to the time of his promotion to 
major-general in 1851. In March 1852 he succeeded Sir Harry 
Smith as governor and commander-in-chief at the Cape, and 
brought the Kaffir war, then in progress, to a successful conclu- 
sion. He promulgated the first constitution of Cape Colony, and 
conducted queries against the Basuto. Cathcart was made a
K.C.B. and received the thanks of both Houses for his services 
(1853). In December 1853 he was made adjutant-general of the 
army, but never entered upon his duties, being sent out to the 
Crimean War as soon as he arrived in England. He was even 
given a dormant commission entitling him to the chief command 
in case of accident to Lord Raglan, and the highest hopes were 
fixed on him as a scientific and experienced soldier. But these 
hopes were not to be fulfilled; for he fell at the battle of Inkerman 
(November 5, 1854). His remains, with those of other officers, 
were buried on Cathcart's Hill. Sir George Cathcart married in 
1824 Lady Georgiana Greville, who survived him, and by whom 
he had a family. 

See Colburn's United Service Magazine, January 1855; Corre- 
spondence of the Hon. Sir George Cathcart relative to Kaffraria (1856) ; 
A. W. Kinglake's Invasion of the Crimea, vol. v. 

CATHCART, WILLIAM SCHAW CATHCART, ist Earl 
(1755-1843), English soldier and diplomatist, was born at Peter- 
sham on the 17th of September 1755, and educated at Eton. 
In 1 771 he went to St Petersburg, where his father, Charles, 
9th Baron Cathcart (1721-1776), a general in the army, was 
ambassador. From 1773 to 1777 he studied law, but after 
succeeding to the barony in 1776 he obtained a commission in 
the cavalry. Proceeding to America in 1777, he had before the 
close of his first campaign twice won promotion on the field of 
battle. In 1778 he further distinguished himself in outpost 
work, and at the battle of Monmouth he commanded an irregular 
corps, the " British Legion," with conspicuous success; for a 
time also he acted as quartermaster-general to the forces in 
America. He returned home in 1780, and in February 1781 was 
made captain and lieutenant-colonel in the Coldstream Guards, 
He was elected a representative peer for Scotland in 1788, and 
in 1792 he became colonel of the 29th foot. He served with 
distinction in the campaigns in the Low Countries, 1793-1795, 
in the course of which he was promoted major-general; and in 
1 80 1 he was made a lieutenant-general, having in the meanwhile 
received the appointments of vice-admiral of Scotland (1795), 
privy councillor (1798), and colonel of the 2nd Life Guards 
(1797). From 1803 to 1805 Lord Cathcart was commander-in- 
chief in Ireland, and in the latter year he was sent by Pitt in 
command of the British expedition to Hanover (see Napoleonic 
Campaigns). After the recall of this expedition Cathcart 
commanded the forces in Scotland until 1807, when he was 
placed in charge of the expedition to Copenhagen, which sur- 
rendered to him on the 6th of September. Four weeks later 
he was created Viscount Cathcart of Cathcart and Baron 
Greenock of Greenock in the peerage of the United Kingdom, 
resuming the Scottish command on his return from the front. 
On the ist of January 181 2 he was promoted to the full rank of 
general, and a few months later he proceeded to Russia as am- 
bassador and military commissioner. In the latter capacity he 
served with the headquarters of the allies throughout the War 
of Liberation (1812-1814); his success in the delicate and difficult 
task of maintaining harmony and devotion to the common cause 
amongst the generals of many nationalities was recognized after 
the war by his elevation to the earldom (July 1814). He then 
went to St Petersburg, and continued to hold the post of am- 
bassador until 1820, when he returned to England. He died at 
his estate near Glasgow on the 16th of June 1843. 



His son, Charles Murray Cathcart, 2nd earl (1783-1859), 
succeeded to the title in 1843. He entered the 2nd Life Guards 
in 1800, and saw active service under Sir James Craig in the 
Mediterranean, 1805-1806. In 1807 he became by courtesy 
Lord Greenock. He took part in the Walcheren expedition 
of 1809 as a major, and as a lieutenant-colonel served at Barossa, 
Salamanca and Vittoria. He had already gained staff experience, 
and he now served under Graham in Holland, 18 14, as quarter- 
master-general. He was present at Waterloo, and for his ser- 
vices received the C.B. and several foreign orders. During the 
peace he became deeply interested in scientific pursuits, and a 
new mineral discovered by him in 1841 was named Greenockite. 
His later military services included the chief command in Canada 
during a period of grave unrest (1846-1849). He retired from 
active service in 1859, becoming a full general just before his 
death. The title passed to his son and grandson as 3rd and 
4th earls. 

CATHCART, a parish situated partly in Renfrewshire and 
partly in Lanarkshire, Scotland. The Renfrewshire portion 
has the larger area (2387 acres), but the smaller population (737s), 
the area of the Lanarkshire portion being 745 acres and the 
population (1901) 20,983. The industries include paper-making, 
dyeing and sandstone quarrying, but limestone and coal have 
also been worked. The parish includes the town of Cathcart 
(pop. 4808), and the villages of Old and New Cathcart, but much 
of it, though outside the city boundaries, is practically continu- 
ous with some of the southern suburbs of Glasgow, with which 
there is conimunication by electric tram and the Caledonian 
railway's circular line. The White Cart flows through the 
parish. In the 12th century Cathcart became a barony of the 
Cathcarts, who derived the title of their lordship (1460) and 
earldom (1814) from it. On the Queen's Knowe, a hillock near 
the ruins of Cathcart Castle, a memorial marks the spot where 
Queen Mary watched the progress of the battle of Langside 
(1568), the site of which lies within the parish. 

CATHEDRAL, more correctly " cathedral church " {ecclesia 
cathedralis), the church which contains the official " seat " or 
throne of a bishop — cathedra, one of the Latin names for this, 
giving us the adjective " cathedral." The adjective has gradu- 
ally, for briefness of speech, assumed the character of a sub- 
stantive, but though an instance of this (strictly incorrect) use 
of the word as a substantive has been found as far back as 1587, 
it became common only at the end of the 18th, or first half of 
the 19th, century. One of the earliest instances of the term 
ecclesia cathedralis is said to occur in the acts of the council of 
Tarragona in 516. Another name for a cathedral church is 
ecclesia mater, indicating that it is the mother church. As being 
the one important church, it was also known as ecclesia major. 
This is the formal expression used by Archbishop Walter Gray 
of York (1216-1255), anditis preserved in modern times by the 
name of " La Majeure," by which the old cathedral church of 
Marseilles is popularly known. Again, as the chief house of 
God, the cathedral church was the Domus Dei, and from this 
name the German Domkirche, or Dom, is derived, as also the 
Swedish Domkyrka, and the Italian Duomo. 

History and Organization. — It was early decreed that the 
cathedra of a bishop was not to be placed in the church of a 
village, but only in that of a city. There was no difficulty as 
to this on the continent of Europe, where towns were numerous, 
and where the cities were the natural centres from which Chris- 
tianity was diffused among the people who inhabited the sur- 
rounding districts. In the British islands, however, the case 
was different; towns were few, and owing to other causes, 
instead of exercising jurisdiction over definite areas or districts, 
many of the bishops were bishops of tribes or peoples, as the 
bishops of the south Saxons, the west Saxons, the Somersaetas 
and others. The cathedra of such a bishop was often migratory, 
and was at times placed in one church, and then another, and 
sometimes in the church of a village. In 1075 a council was held 
in London, under the presidency of Archbishop Lanfranc, 
which, reciting the decrees of the council of Sardica held in 347 
and that of Laodicea held in 360 on this matter, ordered the 



CATHEDRAL 



5i9 



bishop of the south Saxons to remove his see from Selsey to 
Chichester; the Wilts and Dorset bishop to remove his cathedra 
from Sherborne to Old Sarum, and the Mercian bishop, whose 
cathedra was then at Lichfield, to transfer it to Chester. Traces 
of the tribal and migratory system may still be noted in the 
designations of the Irish see of Meath (where the result has been 
that there is now no cathedral church) and Ossory, the cathedral 
church of which is at Kilkenny. Some of the Scottish sees were 
also migratory. 

By the canon law the bishop is regarded as the pastor of the 
cathedral church, the parochia of which is his diocese. In view 
of this, canonists speak of the cathedral church as the one 
church of the diocese, and all others are deemed chapels in their 
relation to it. 

Occasionally two churches jointly share the distinction of 
containing the bishop's cathedra. In such case they are said 
to be con-cathedral in relation to each other. Instances of this 
occurred in England before the Reformation in the dioceses of 
Bath and Wells, and of Coventry and Lichfield. Hence the double 
titles of those dioceses. In Ireland an example occurs at Dublin, 
where Christ Church and St Patrick's are jointly the cathedral 
churches of that diocese. In France the bishop of Couserans 
(a see suppressed at the Revolution) had two con-cathedral 
churches at St Lizier, and the bishop of Sisteron (a see also 
suppressed) had a second throne in the church of Forcalquier 
which is still called "La Con-cathedrale." Other instances 
might be named. In the case of York the collegiate churches 
of Beverley, Ripon and Southwell were almost in the same 
position, but although the archbishop had a stall in each he had 
no diocesan cathedra in them, and the chapters were not united 
with that of the metropolitical church in the direct government 
of the diocese, or the election of the archbishop, nor had they 
those other rights which were held to denote the cathedral 
character of a church. 

Cathedral churches are reckoned as of different degrees of 
dignity: (1) the simple cathedral church of a diocesan bishop, 
(2) the metropolitical church to which the other diocesan cathedral 
churches of a province are suffragan, (3) the primatial church 
under which are ranged metropolitical churches and their 
provinces, (4) patriarchal churches to which primatial, metro- 
political, and simple cathedral churches alike owe allegiance. 
The title of " primate " was occasionally conferred on metro- 
politans of sees of great dignity or importance, such as Canterbury, 
York, Rouen, &c, whose cathedral churches remained simply 
metropolitical. Lyons, where the cathedral church is still 
known as " La Primatiale," and Lund in Sweden, may be cited 
as instances of churches which were really primatial. Lyons 
had the archbishops of Sens and Paris and their provincial 
dioceses subject to it till the Revolution, and Lund had the 
archbishop of Upsala and his province subject to it. As with 
the title of primate, so also that of " patriarch " has been 
conferred on sees such as Venice and Lisbon, the cathedral 
churches of which are patriarchal in name alone. The cathedral 
church of St John Lateran, the cathedral church of the pope as 
bishop of Rome and patriarch of the West, alone in western 
Europe possesses potentially a patriarchal character. Its 
formal designation is " Patriarchate Basilica, Sacrosancta 
Romana Cathcdralis Ecclesia Lateranensis." 

The removal of a bishop's cathedra from a church deprives 
that church of its cathedral dignity, although often the name 
clings in common speech, as for example at Antwerp, which was 
deprived of its bishop at the French Revolution. 

The history of the body of clergy attached to the cathedral 
church is obscure, and as in each case local considerations 
affected its development, all that can be attempted is to give 
a general outline of the main features which were more or less 
common to all. Originally the bishop and cathedral clergy 
formed a kind of religious community, which, in no true sense a 
monastery, was nevertheless often called a monasterium. The 
word had not the restricted meaning which it afterwards acquired. 
Hence the apparent anomaly that churches like York and 
Lincoln, which never had any monks attached to them,, have 



inherited the name of minster or monastery. In these early 
communities the clergy often lived apart in their own dwellings, 
and were not infrequently married. In the 8th century, however, 
Chrodegang, bishop of Metz (743-766), compiled a code of rules 
for the clergy of the cathedral churches, which, though widely 
accepted in Germany and other parts of the continent, gained 
little acceptance in England. According to Chrodegang's rule 
the cathedral clergy were to live under a common roof, occupy 
a common dormitory and submit to the authority of a special 
officer. The rule of Chrodegang was, in fact, a modification of 
the Benedictine rule. Gisa, a native of Lorraine, who was 
bishop of Wells from 1061 to 1088, introduced it into England, 
and imposed its observance on the clergy of his cathedral church, 
but it was not followed for long there, or elsewhere in England. 

During the two centuries, roughly bounded by the years 900 
and 1 100, the cathedral clergy became more definitely organized, 
and were also divided into two classes. One was that of a 
monastic establishment of some recognized order of monks, 
very often that of the Benedictines, while the other class was 
that of a college of clergy, living in the world, and bound by no 
vows, except those of their ordination, but governed by a code 
of statutes or canons. Hence the name of " canon " given to 
them. In this way arose the distinction between the monastic 
and secular cathedral churches. In England the monastic 
cathedral churches were Bath, Canterbury, Carlisle, Coventry, 
Durham, Ely, Norwich, Rochester, Winchester and Worcester, 
all of them Benedictine except Carlisle, which was a church of 
Aug'ustinians, The secular churches were Chichester, Exeter, 
Hereford, Lichfield, Lincoln, St Paul's (London), Salisbury, 
Wells, York, and the four Welsh cathedral churches. In Ireland 
all were secular except Christ Church, Dublin (Augustinian), 
and Down (Benedictine), and none, even in their earliest days, 
were ever, it is believed, churches of recognized orders of monks, 
except the two named. In Scotland St Andrew's was Augus- 
tinian, Elgin (or Moray), Glasgow and Aberdeen were always 
secular, and ordered on the models of Lincoln and Salisbury. 
Brechin had a community of Culdees till 1372, when a secular 
chapter was constituted. The cathedral church of Galloway, 
at Whithorn, of English foundation, was a church of Praemon- 
stratensians. In Germany, as in England, many of the cathedral 
churches were monastic. In Denmark all seem to have been 
Benedictine at first, except Borglum, which was Praemon- 
stratensian till the Reformation. The others were changed to 
churches of secular canons. In Sweden, Upsala was originally 
Benedictine, but was secularized about 1250, and it was ordered 
that each of the cathedral churches of Sweden should have a 
chapter of at least fifteen secular canons. In France monastic 
chapters were very common, but nearly all the monastic cathedral 
churches there had been changed to churches of secular canons 
before the 1 7th century. One of the latest to be so changed was 
that of Seez, in Normandy, which was Augustinian till 1547, 
when Pope Paul III. dispensed the members from their vows, 
and constituted them a chapter of secular canons. The chapter 
of Senez was monastic till 1647, and others perhaps even 
later, but the majority were secularized about the time of the 
Reformation. 

In the case of monastic cathedral churches there were no 
dignitaries, the internal government was that of the order to 
which the chapter belonged, and all the members kept perpetual 
residence. The reverse of this was the case with the secular 
chapters; the dignities of provost, dean, precentor, chancellor, 
treasurer, &c, soon came into being, for the regulation and good 
order of the church and its services, while the non-residence of 
the canons, rather than their perpetual residence, became the 
rule, and led to their duties being performed by a body of 
" vicars," who officiated for them at the services of the church. 

Abroad, the earliest head of a secular church seems to have 
been the provost (praepositus, Probst, &c), who was charged, not 
only with the internal regulation of the church, and oversight 
of the members of the chapter and control of the services, but 
was also the steward or seneschal of the lands and possessions 
of the church. The latter often mainly engaged his attention, 



52o 



CATHEDRAL 



to the neglect of his domestic and ecclesiastical duties, and 
complaints were soon raised that the provost was too much 
mixed in worldly affairs, and was too frequently absent from his 
spiritual duties. This led, in many cases, to the institution of a 
new officer called the " dean," who had charge of that portion 
of the provost's duties which related to ths internal discipline of 
the chapter and the services of the church. In some cases the 
office of provost was abolished, but in others it was continued, the 
provost, who was also occasionally archdeacon as well, remaining 
head of the chapter. This arrangement was most commonly 
followed in Germany. In England the provost was almost un- 
known. Bishop Gisa introduced a provost as head of the chapter 
of Wells, but the office was afterwards subordinated to the other 
dignities, and the provost became simply the steward of certain 
of the prebendal lands. The provost of the collegiate church of 
Beverley was the most notable instance of such an officer in 
England, but at Beverley he was an external officer with no 
authority in the government of the church, no stall in the choir 
and no vote in chapter. The provost of Eton, introduced by 
Henry VI., occupied a position most nearly approaching that 
of a foreign cathedral provost. In Germany and in Scandinavia, 
and in a few of the cathedral churches in the south of France, 
the provost was the ordinary head of the cathedral chapter^ but 
the office was not common elsewhere. As regards France, of 
one hundred and thirty-six cathedral churches existing at the 
Revolution, thirty-eight only, and those either on the borders 
of Germany or in the extreme south, had a provost as the head 
of the chapter. In others the provost existed as a subordinate 
officer. There were two provosts at Autun, and Lyons and 
Chartres had four each, all as subordinate officers. 

The normal constitution of the chapter of a secular cathedral 
church comprised four dignitaries (there might be more), in 
addition to the canons. The dean (decanus) seems to have derived 
his designation from the Benedictine dean who had ten monks 
under his charge. The dean, as already noted, came into 
existence to supply the place of the provost in the internal manage- 
ment of the church and chapter. In England the dean was the 
head of all the secular cathedral churches, and was originally 
elected by the chapter and confirmed in office by the bishop. 
He is president of the chapter, and in church has charge of the 
due performance of the services, taking specified portions of them 
by statute on the principal festivals. He sits in the chief stall 
in the choir, which is usually the first on the right hand on enter- 
ing the choir at the west. Next to the dean (as a rule) is the 
precentor {primicerius, cantor, &c), whose special duty is that of 
regulating the musical portion of the services He presides in 
the dean's absence, and occupies the corresponding stall on the 
left side, although there are exceptions to this rule, where, as at 
St Paul's, the archdeacon of the cathedral city ranks second 
and occupies what is usually the precentor's stall. The third 
dignitary is the chancellor (scholasticus, icoldtre, capiscol, 
magistral, &c), who must not be confounded with the chancellor 
of the diocese. The chancellor of the cathedral church is 
charged with the oversight of its schools, ought to read divinity 
lectures, and superintend the lections in the choir and correct 
slovenly readers. He is often the secretary and librarian of the 
chapter. In the absence of the dean and precentor he is president 
of the chapter. The easternmost stall, on the dean's side of the 
choir, is usually assigned to him. The fourth dignitary is the 
treasurer (custos, sacrista, cheficier). He is guardian of the fabric, 
and of all the furniture and ornaments of the church, and his 
duty was to provide bread and wine for the eucharist, and 
candles and incense, and he regulated such matters as the 
ringing of the bells. The treasurer's stall is opposite to that of 
the chancellor. These four dignitaries, occupying the four 
corner stalls in the choir, are called in many of the statutes the 
" quatuor majores personae " of the church. In many cathedral 
churches there were additional dignitaries, as the praelector, 
subdean, vice-chancellor, succentor-canonicorum, and others, 
who came into existence to supply the places of the other absent 
dignitaries, for non-residence was the fatal blot of the secular 
churches, and in this they contrasted very badly with the 



monastic churches, where all the members were in continuous 
residence. Besides the dignitaries there were the ordinary 
canons, each of whom, as a rule, held a separate prebend or 
endowment, besides receiving his share of the common funds 
of the church. For the most part the canons also speedily 
became non-resident, and this led to the distinction of resi- 
dentiary and non-residentiary canons, till in most churches the 
number of resident canons became definitely limited in number, 
and the non-residentiary canons, who no longer shared in the 
common funds, became generally known as prebendaries only, 
although by their non-residence they did not forfeit their position 
as canons, and retained their votes in chapter like the others. 
This system of non-residence led also to the institution of vicars 
choral, each canon having his own vicar, who sat in his stall 
in his absence, and when the canon was present, in the stall 
immediately below, on the second form. The vicars had no 
place or vote in chapter, and, though irremovable except for 
offences, were the servants of their absent canons whose stalls 
they occupied, and whose duties they performed. Abroad they 
were often called demi-prebendaries, and they formed the has 
chceur of the French churches. As time went on the vicars 
Were themselves often incorporated as a kind of lesser chapter, 
or college, under the supervision of the dean and chapter. 

There was no distinction between the monastic cathedral 
chapters and those of the secular canons, in their relation to the 
bishop or diocese. In both cases the chapter was the bishop's 
consilium which he was bound to consult on all important matters 
and without doing so he could not act. Thus, a judicial decision 
of a bishop needed the confirmation of the chapter before it could 
be enforced. He could not change the service books, or " use " 
of the church or diocese, without capitular consent, and there are 
many episcopal acts, such as the appointment of a diocesan 
chancellor, or vicar general, which still need confirmation by 
the chapter, but the older theory of the chapter as the bishop's 
council in ruling the diocese has become a thing of the past, not 
in England only, but on the continent also. In its corporate capa- 
city the chapter takes charge sede vacante of a diocese. In Eng- 
land, however (except as regards Salisbury and Durham), this 
custom has never obtained, the two archbishops having, from time 
immemorial, taken charge of the Vacant dioceses in their respec- 
tive provinces. When, however, either of the sees of Canterbury 
or York is vacant;' the chapters of those churches take charge, not 
only of the diocese, but of the province as well, and incidentally, 
therefore, of any of the dioceses of the province which may be 
vacant at the same time. 

All the English monastic cathedral chapters were dissolved by 
Henry VIII., and, except Bath and Coventry, were refounded by 
him as churches of secular chapters, with a dean as the head, and 
a certain number of canons ranging from twelve at Canterbury 
and Durham to four at Carlisle, and with certain subordinate 
officers as minor canons, gospellers, epistolers, &c. The precentor- 
ship in these churches of the "New Foundation," as they are 
called, is not, as in the secular churches of the " Old Foundation," 
a dignity, but is merely an office held by one of the minor canons. 

English cathedral churches, at the present day, may be 
classed under four heads: (i) the old secular cathedral churches 
of the " Old Foundation," enumerated in the earlier part of this 
article; (2) the churches of the " New Foundation " of Henry 
VIII. , which are the monastic churches already specified, with 
the exception of Bath and Coventry; (3) the cathedral churches 
of bishoprics founded by Henry VIII., viz. Bristol, Chester, 
Gloucester, Oxford and Peterborough (the constitution of the 
chapters of which corresponds to those of the New Foundation) ; 
(4) modern cathedral churches of sees founded since 1836, viz. 
(a) Manchester, Ripon and Southwell, formerly collegiate churches 
of secular canons; (b) St Albans and South wark, originally 
monastic churches; (c) Truro, Newcastle and Wakefield, 
formerly parish churches, (d) Birmingham and Liverpool, 
originally district churches. The ruined cathedral church of 
the diocese of Sodor (i.e. the Southern Isles) and Man, at Peel 
in the latter island, appears never to have had a chapter of clergy 
attached to it. 



CATHEDRAL 



521 




AUTHORiTlES.-*-Frances, De ecdesiis cathedraUbus (Venice, 1698) ; 
Bordenave. L'Estat des eglises cathedrales (Paris, 1643) ; Van Espen, 
Supplement III., cap. 5 ; Hericourt, Les Loix ecclesiastiques de France 
(Paris, 1756); La France ecclesiastique (Paris, 1790); Daugaard, 
OmdeDanskeKlostre i Middelalderen (Copenhagen, 1830) ; Hinschius, 
Das Kirchenrecht der Katholiken u. Protestanten in Deutschland, u. 
(Berlin, 1878); Walcott, Cathedralia (London, 1865); Freeman, 
Cathedral Church of Wells (London, 1870); Benson, The Cathedral 
(London, 1878); Bradshaw and Wordsworth, Lincoln Cathedral 
Statutes (Camb., 1894). (T. M. F.) 

Architecture— From the architectural point of view there is 
no special treatment as regards dimensionsrbr style for a cathedral 
other than that required for a church or abbey, as there are cases 
when the former are comparatively small buildings (like the old 
cathedral at Athens), and some parish churches and abbeys are 
larger than many cathedrals. In recent times, indeed, some 
English abbeys or minsters, such as those of Ripon, Manchester, 

St Albans and 

Southwell, partly 
on account of 
their dimensions, 
have been raised 
to the rank of 
cathedrals, in 
consequence of 
the demand for 
additional sees ; 
others, such as 
those of Bristol, 
Gloucester, Ox- 
ford, Chester and 
Peterborough, be- 
came cathedrals 
only on the dis- 
solution of the 
monasteries by 
Henry VIII. 

Underthe head- 
ings Nave, Aisle, 
Choir, Apse, 
Chevet, and 
Lady-Chapel, the 
principal arrange- 
ments of the plan 
of a cathedral are 
dealt with, and 
its architectural 
features-, such as 
TowERandSpiRE, 
Porch, Trifor- 
ium, Clerestory 
and Vault, are 
separately de- 
fined; while in the 
article Architec- 
ture the evolution of the various styles in England, France, 
Germany, Italy and Spain, is set forth. It is only necessary 
here to deal with the development of the eastern end of English 
and foreign cathedrals, as it was in those that the greatest 
changes from the middle of the nth century to the close of the 
1 6th century took place. 

The earliest extended development of the eastern end of the 
cathedral is that which was first set out in Edward the Confessor's 
church at Westminster, probably borrowed from the ancient 
church of St Martin at Tours; in this church, dating probably 
from the 10th century, two new elements are found, (1) the carry- 
ing of the choir aisle round a circular apse so as to provide a 
processional aisle round the eastern end of the church, and (2) five 
apsidal chapels, constituting the germ of the chevet, which 
transformed the eastern terminations of the French cathedrals 
in the 12th and 13th centuries. It is only within recent times 
that the foundations of the early church at Tours with its choir 
aisle and chapels have been traced under the existing church. 



Fig. 1. — Plan of Canterbury Cathedral. 



In Edward the Confessor's church (1050) there were probably 
only three chapels and a processional aisle; in the next example 
at Gloucester (1089) were also three chapels, two of which, on the 
north and south sides of the aisle, still remain; the same is found 
in Canterbury (1096-1107) and Norwich (1089-1119), the 
eastern chapel in all three cases having been taken down to 
make way for the Lady-chapel in Gloucester and Norwich, and 
for the Trinity chapel in Canterbury cathedral (fig. 1). The 
semicircular aisle is said to have existed in the Anglo-Norman 
cathedral of Winchester, but the eastern end being square, two 
chapels were arranged filling the north and south ends, and an 
apsidal chapel projecting beyond the east wall. This semi- 
circular processional aisle with chevet chapels was the favourite 
type of plan in the Anglo-Norman cathedrals, and was followed 
up to about the middle of the 12th century, when the English 
builders in some cases returned to the square east end instead of 
the semicircular apsidal termination. The earliest example of 
this exists in Romgey Abbey (c. 1 130), where the processional 




mm 

Fig. 2. — Plan of Salisbury Cathedral. 

path crosses behind the presbytery, there being eastern apsidal 
chapels in the axis of the presbytery aisle and a central rectangular 
chapel beyond. A similar arrangement is found in Hereford 
cathedral, and exists in Winchester, Salisbury (fig. 2), Durham, 
St Albans, Exeter, Ely, Wells and Peterborough, except that in 
all those cases (except Wells) the eastern chapels are square 
ended; in Wells cathedral the most eastern chapel (the Lady- 
chapel) has a polygonal termination; in Durham (fig. 3), the 
eastern chapels are all in one line, constituting the chapel of the 
nine altars, which was probably borrowed from the eastern end of 
Fountains Abbey. It should be noted that in some of the above 
the original design has been transformed in rebuilding; thus in 
St Albans, Durham, York and Exeter cathedrals, there was no 
eastern ambulatory but three parallel apses, in some cases 
rectangular externally. In Southwell, Rochester, Ely and 
Chester, there was no processional path or ambulatory round the 
east end; in Carlisle no eastern chapels; and in Oxford only one 
central apse. In Ely cathedral (fig. 4) the great central tower 
built by the first Norman abbot (108 2- 1094) fell down in 132 1, 
carrying with it portions of the adjoining bays of the nave, 
transept and choir; instead of attempting to rebuild the tower. 



522 



CATHEDRAL 



Alan of Walsingham conceived the idea of obtaining a much 
larger area in the centre of the cathedral, and instead of rebuild- 
ing the piers of the tower he took as the base of his design a central 
octagonal space, the width of which was equal to that of nave 
and aisles, with wide arches to nave, transepts and choir, and 
smaller arches across the octagonal sides; from shafts in the 
eight pier angles, ribs in wood project forward and carry a smaller 
octagon on which the lantern rests. Internally the effect of this 
central octagon is of great beauty and originality, and it is the 
only instance of such a feature in English Gothic architecture. 
(See Architecture, Plate VIII., fig. 82.) 

The earliest example of the chevet is probably to be found 
in the church of St Martin at Tours; this was followed by others 




From Rickman's Styles oj Architecture. 

Fig. 3. — Plan of Durham Cathedral. 

at Tournus, Clermont-Ferrand, Auxerre, Chartres, Le Mans 
and other churches built during the great church-building 
period of the nth century. In the still greater movement in 
the 1 2th century, when the episcopacy, supported by the eman- 
cipated communes, undertook the erection of cathedrals of 
greater dimensions and the reconstruction of others, in some 
cases they utilized the old foundations, as in Chartres (fig. 5), 
Coutances and -Auxerre cathedrals, while in others (as at Le 
Mans) they extended the eastern termination, much in the 
same way as in many of the early examples in England, with 
this important difference, that when the apsidal east end was 
given up (about the middle of the 1 2th century) in favour of the 
square east end in England, the French, on the other hand, 
developed it by doubling the choir aisles and adding to the 
number of extra chapels; thus in Canterbury, Norwich and 
Gloucester, there were only three apsidal chapels in the chevet, 
whereas in Noyon (1150), Soissons (noo), Reims (1212), Tours, 
Seez, Bayeux (1230), Clermont (1275), Senlis, Limoges, Albi 
and Narbonne cathedrals there were five; in Amiens, Le Mans 
and Beauvais, there were seven apsidal chapels, and in Chartres 
cathedral nine. Double aisles round the choir, of which there 



are no examples in England, are found in the cathedrals of 
Paris, Bourges arid 
Le Mans; the 
cathedral of Sens 
(fig. 6) (1144-1168) 
possesses one feat- 
ure which is almost 
unique, viz. the 
coupled columns of 
the alternate bays 
of nave and choir 
and of the apse; 
and these were 
introduced into 
the chapel of the 
Trinity in Canter- 
bury cathedral, 
probably from the 
designs of William 
of Sens, by his suc- 
cessor William the * 
Englishman. The 
square east end 
found no favour in 
Fra nee — Laon, 
Poiters and Dol be- 
ing the only cathe- 
dral examples; and 
of the triapsal 
arrangement, viz. 
with apses in the 
axes of the choir 
aisle and a central 
apse, the only ex- 
ample is that of the 
cathedral of Autun. 
The immense de- 
velopment given to 

the eastern limb _ „, ,.„.„. 

of the French Fig. 4 .-Plan of Ely Cathedral. 

cathedrals was some- 
times obtained at the 
expense of the nave, so 
that, notwithstanding 
the much greater 
dimensions compared 
with English examples, 
in the latter the naves 
are much longer and 
consist of more bays 
than those in France. 

In one of the French 
cathedrals, Bourges, 
there is no transept; 
on the other hand there 
are many examples in 
which this part of the 
church is emphasized 
by having aisles on 
each side, as at Laon, 
Soissons, Chartres, 
Reims, Amiens, Rouen 
and Clermont cathe- 
drals. Transept aisles 
in England are found 
in Ely, York, Wells 
and Winchester cathe- 
drals, in the last being 
carried round the south 
and north ends of the 
transept; aisles on the 
east side of the transept only, in some cases probably for 





Fig. 5. — Plan of Chartres Cathedral. 



CATHELINEAU 



523 



additional altars, exist in Durham, Salisbury, Lichfield, Peter- 
borough and Ripon cathedrals; and on the north side only in 
Hereford cathedral. In Rouen cathedral, east of the transept 
aisles, there are apsidal chapels, which with the three chapels in 
the chevet make up the usual number. The cathedral of Poitiers 
has been referred to as an example of a square east end, but a 
sort of compromise has been made by the provision of three 
segmental apses, and there are no windows in the east front; 
the most remarkable divergence from the usual design is found 
here in the absence of any triforium or clerestory, owing to the 
fact that the vault of the aisles is nearly as high as that of the 
nave, so that it constitutes an example of what in Germany 
(where there are many) are called H alien Kirchen; the light 
being obtained through the aisle windows only gives a gloomy 
effect to the nave. Another departure from the usual plan is 
that found in Albi cathedral (1350), in which there are no aisles, 
their place being taken by chapels between the buttresses which 
were required to resist the thrust of the nave vault, the widest 
in France. The cathedral is built in brick and externally has 
the appearance of a fortress. In the cathedrals of the south- 
west of France, where the naves are covered with a series of 
domes — as at Cahors, Angouleme and St Front de Perigueux — 





Fig. 6. — Plan of Sens Cathedral. 



FlG. 7. — Plan of Angouleme 
Cathedral. 



the immense piers required to carry them made it necessary to 
dispense with aisles. The cathedral of Angouleme (fig. 7) 
consists of a nave covered with three domes, a transept of great 
length with lofty towers over the north and south ends, and an 
apsidal choir with four chevet chapels. In St Front de Perigueux 
(1150), based on St Mark's at Venice, the plan consists of nave, 
transept and choir, all of equal dimensions, each of them, as 
well as the crossing, vaulted over with a dome, while qriginally 
there was a simple apsidal choir. 

Returning now to the great cathedrals in the north of France, 
we give an illustration (fig. 8) of Amiens cathedral (from Viollet 
le Due's Dictionnaire raisonne) which shows the disposition of a 
cathedral, with its nave-arches, triforium, clerestory windows 
and vault, the flying buttresses which were required to carry the 
thrust of the vault to the outer buttresses which flanked the 
aisle walls, and the lofty pinnacles which surmounted them. 
In this case there was no triforium gallery, owing to the greater 
height given to the aisles. In Notre Dame at Paris the triforium 
was nearly as high as the aisles; in large towns this feature gave 
increased accommodation for the congregation, especially on the 
occasion of great fetes, and it is found in Noyon, Laon, Senlis 
and Soissons cathedrals, built in the latter part of the 12th 
century; later it was omitted, and a narrow passage in the 
thickness of the wall only represented the triforium; at a 
still later period the aisles were covered with a stone 



pavement of slight fall so as to allow of loftier clerestory 
windows. 

The cathedrals in Spain follow on the same lines as those in 
France. The cathedral of Santiago de Compostela is virtually a 
copy of St Sernin 

at Toulouse, con- \J\ ^f? 

sistfng of nave 
and aisles, tran- 
septs and aisles, 
and a choir with 
chevet of five 
chapels; at Leon 
there is a chevet 
with five apsidal 
chapels, and at 
Toledo an east end 
with double aisles 
round the apse 
with originally 
seven small apsi- 
dal chapels, two 
of them rebuilt at 
a very late period. 
At Leon, Barce- 
lona and Toledo 
the processional 
passage round the 
apse with apsidal 
chapels recalls the 
French disposi- 
tion, there being 
a double aisle 
around the latter, 
but in Leon and 
Toledo cathedrals 
the east end is 
masked externally 
by other buildings, 
so that the beauty 
of the chevet is entirely lost. At Avila and Salamanca (old 
cathedral) the triapsal arrangement is adopted, and the same 
is found in the German cathedrals, with one important excep- 
tion, the cathedral of Cologne, which was based on that of 
Amiens, the comparative height of the former, however, being 
so exaggerated that scale has been lost, and externally it has 
the appearance of an overgrown monster. 

Under the headings Vault, Flying Buttress, Pinnacle, 
Clerestory and Triforium, definitions are given of these chief 
components of a cathedral or church; but as their design varies 
materially in almost every example, without a very large number 
of drawings it would be impossible to treat them more in detail. 
The perspective view, taken from Viollet le Due's dictionary, of the 
interior of the nave of Amiens cathedral illustrates the principal 
features, viz. the vault (in this case quadripartite, with flying 
buttresses and pinnacle), the triforium (in this case limited to a 
narrow passage in the thickness of the wall), and the nave-arches,, 
with the side aisles, beneath the windows of which is the decorative 
arcade. (R. P. S.) 

CATHELINEAU, JACQUES (1759-1793), French Vendean 
chieftain during the Revolution, was born at Tin-en-Manges, in 
the country now forming the department of Maine-et-Loire. 
He became well known in the country of Anjou, over which he 
travelled as a pedlar and dealer in contraband goods. His 
physical strength and his great piety gave him considerable 
ascendancy over the peasants, who surnamed him " the saint of 
Anjou." In the first years of the Revolution, Cathelineau 
listened to the exhortations of Catholic priests and royalist 
emigres, and joined the insurrection provoked by them against 
the revolutionary government. Collecting a band of peasants 
and smugglers, he took the chateau of Gallais, where he cap- 
tured a cannon, christened by the Vendeans the " Missionary "; 
he then took the towns of Chemille, Cholet, Vihicrs and 
Chalonnes (March 1793). His companions committed atrocities 
which brought upon them terrible reprisals on the part of the 




Fig. 8. — Perspective of Amiens Cathedral. 



5'*4 



CATHERINE, SAINT 



Republicans. Meanwhile Cathelineau's troops increased, and he 
combined with the other Vendean chiefs, such as N. Stofflet and 
Gigot d'Elbee, taking the towns of Beaupreau, Fontenay and 
Saumur. The first successes of the Vendeans were due to the fact 
that the Republicans had not expected an insurrection. When 
the resistance to the insurgents became more serious, differences 
arose among their leaders. To avoid these rivalries, it is thought 
that Cathelineau was named generalissimo of the rebels, though 
his authority over the undisciplined troops was not increased by 
the new office. In 1793 all the Royalist forces tried to capture 
Nantes. Cathelineau entered the town in spite of the resistance of 
General J. B. C. Canclaux, but he was killed, and the Vendean 
army broke up. Numerous relatives of Cathelineau also perished 
in the war of La Vendee. His grandson, Henri de Cathelineau, 
figured in the war of 1870 between France and Germany (see 
also Vendee; Chouans). 

See C Port, Vie'deJ. Cathelineau (1882) ; " La Legende de Cathe- 
lineau " in the review La Revolution francaise, vol. xxiv. ; Les 
Origines de la' Vendee (Paris, 1888, 2 vols.); Dictionnaire historique 
de Maine-et- Loire; Cretineau-Joly, Histoire de la Vendee militaire; 
Th. Muret, Vie populaire de Cathelineau (1845). (R. A.*) 

CATHERINE, SAINT. The Roman hagiology contains the 
record of six saints of this name. 1. St Catherine of Alex- 
andria, Virgin and Martyr, whose day of commemoration 
recurs on the 25th of November, and in some places on the 5th of 
March. 2. St Catherine or Sweden, a daughter of St Bridget, 
who died abbess of Watzen in March 138 1, and is commemorated 
on the 22nd of that month. 3. St Catherine or Siena, 1347- 
1380, whose festal day is observed on the 30th of April. 4. St 
Catherine op Bologna, 1413-1463, a visionary, abbess of 
the convent of the Poor Clares in Bologna, canonized by Pope 
Benedict XIII. , and commemorated throughout the Franciscan 
order on the 9th of March. 5. St Catherine or Genoa, 1 who 
belonged to the noble family of Fieschi, was born about 1447 , spent 
her life and her means in succouring and attending on the sick, 
especially in the time of the plague which ravaged Genoa in 1497 
and 1 501, died in that city in 1510, was beatified by Clement V. 
in 1675 and canonized by Clement XII. in 1737; her name was 
placed in the calendar on the 22 nd of July by Benedict XIV. 
6. St Catherine de' Ricci, of Florence, daughter of a wealthy 
merchant prince, was born in 1522, became a nun in the convent 
of the Dominicans at Prato in 1536, and died in 1589. She was 
famous during her life-time for the weekly ecstasy of the Passion, 
during which in a trance she experienced the sufferings of the 
Holy Virgin contemplating the Passion of her Son. She was 
canonized in 1746 by Benedict XIV., who fixed her festal day on 
the 13 th of February. In Celtic and English martyrologies 
(November 2 5) there is also commemorated St Catherine Audley 
(c. 1400), a recluse of Ledbury, Hereford, who was reputed for 
piety and clairvoyance. 

Of two of these saints, St Catherine of Alexandria, the St 
Catherine par excellence, and St Catherine of Siena, something 
st more must be said. Of the former history has little or 

Catherine, nothing to tell. The Maronite scholar, Joseph Simon 
virgin and Assemani (1687-1768), first identified her with the 
™ yr ' royal and wealthy lady of Alexandria (Eusebius, 
Hist. Eccl. viii. 14) who, for refusing the solicitations of the 
emperor Maximinus, was deprived of her property and banished. 
But Rufinus {Hist. Eccl. viii. 17) called this lady Dorothea, and 
the old Catherine legend, as recorded in the Roman martyrology 
and by Simeon Metaphrastes, has quite other features. Accord- 
ing to it Catherine was the daughter of King Konetos, eighteen 
years old, beautiful and wise. During the persecution under 
Maximinus she sought an interview with the emperor, upbraided 
him for his cruelties, and adjured him to give up the worship of 
false gods. The angry tyrant, unable to refute her arguments 
himself, sent for pagan scholars to argue with her, but they were 
discomfited. Catherine was then scourged and cast into 
prison, and the empress was sent to reason with her; but the 
dauntless virgin converted not only the empress but the Roman 

1 See the study in Baron Fr. von Hugel's Mystical Element in 
Religion (1909). 



general and his soldiers who had accompanied her. Maximinus 
now ordered her to be broken on the wheel; but the wheel was 
shattered by her touch. The headsman's axe proved more fatal, 
and the martyr's body was borne by angels to Mount Sinai, 
where Justinian I. built the famous monastery in her honour. 
Another development of the legend is that in which, having 
rejected many offers of marriage, she was taken to heaven in 
vision and betrothed to Christ by the Virgin Mary. 

Of all these marvellous incidents very little, by the universal 
admission of Catholic scholars, has survived the test of modern 
criticism. That St Catherine actually existed there is, indeed, 
no evidence to disprove; and it is possible that some of the 
elements in her legend are due to confusion with the story of 
Hypatia (?.!>.), the neo-pla tonic philosopher of Alexandria, who 
was done to death by a Christian mob. To the men of the middle 
ages, in any case, St Catherine was very real; she was ranked with 
the fourteen most helpful saints in heaven, and was the constant 
theme of preachers and of poets. Her festival was celebrated in 
many places with the utmost splendour, and in certain dioceses in 
France was a holy day of obligation as late as the beginning of the 
17 th century. Numberless chapels were dedicated to her, and in 
nearly all churches her statue was set up, the saint being repre- 
sented with a wheel, her instrument of torture, and sometimes 
with a crown and a book. The wheel being her symbol she 
was the patron saint of wheelwrights and mechanics; as the 
confounder of heathen sophistry she was invoked by theologians, 
apologists, preachers and philosophers, and was chosen as the 
patron saint of the university of Paris; as the most holy and 
illustrious of Christian virgins she became the tutelary saint of 
nuns and virgins generally. So late as the 16th century, Bossuet 
delivered,a panegyric upon her, and it was the action of Dom 
Deforis, the Benedictine editor of his works, in criticizing the 
accuracy of the data on which this was based, that first dis- 
credited the legend. The saint's feast was removed from the 
Breviary at Paris about this time, and the devotion to St Catherine 
has since lost its earlier popularity. See Leon Clugnet's article 
in the Catholic Encyclopaedia, vol. iii. (London, 1908). 

St Catherine of Siena was the youngest of the twenty-five 
children of Giacomo di Benincasa, a dyer, and was born, with a 
twin-sister who did not survive her birth, on the st 
25th of Sfarch 1347. A highly sensitive and imagin- Catherine 
ative child, she very early began to practise asceticism o/sle '"- 
and see visions, and at the age of seven solemnly dedicated her 
virginity to Christ. She was attracted by what she had heard of 
the desert anchorites, and in 1363-1364, after much struggle, 
persuaded her parents to allow her to take the habit of the 
Dominican tertiaries. For a while she led at home the life of a 
recluse, speaking only to her confessor, and spending all her time 
in devotion and spiritual ecstasy. Her innate humanity and 
sound sense, however, led her gradually to return to her place in 
the family circle, and she began also to seek out and help the 
poor and the sick. In 1368 her father died, and she assumed the 
care of her mother Lapa. During the following years she became 
known to an increasingly wide circle, especially as a peacemaker, 
and entered into correspondence with many friends. Her 
peculiarities excited suspicion, and charges seem to have been 
brought against her by some of the Dominicans to answer 
which she went to Florence in 1374, soon returning to Siena to 
tend the plague-stricken. Here first she met the Dominican 
friar, Raimondo of Capua, her confessor and biographer. 

The year 1375 found Catherine entering on a wider stage. At 
the invitation of Piero Gambacorti, the ruler of the republic of 
Pisa, she visited that city and there endeavoured to arouse 
enthusiasm for the proposed crusade, urging princes and presi- 
dents, commanders and private citizens alike to join in " the 
holy passage." To this task was added that of trying to keep 
Pisa and Lucca from joining the Tuscan League against the 
pope. It was at Pisa, in the church of Santa Cristina, on the 
fourth Sunday in Lent (April 1), while rapt in ecstasy after the 
communion, that Catherine's greatest traditional glory befell 
her, viz. the stigmata or impression on her hands, feet and heart, 
of the wounds corresponding with those received by Christ at his 



CATHERINE 1; 



52S 



crucifixion. The marks, however, were at her prayer not made 
visible. There is no need to doubt the reality of Catherine's 
exaltation, but it should be remembered that she and her circle 
were Dominicans, and that the stigmata of St Francis of Assisi 
were considered the crowning glory of the saint, and hitherto the 
exclusive boast of the Franciscans. The tendency observable in 
many of the austerities and miracles attributed to St Catherine to 
outstrip those of other saints, particularly Francis, is especially 
remarkable in this marvel of the stigmata, and so acute became 
the rivalry between the two orders that Pope Sixtus IV., himself 
a Franciscan, issued a decree asserting that St Francis had an 
exclusive monopoly of this particular wonder, and making it 
a censurable offence to represent St Catherine receiving the 
stigmata. 

In the year 1376, the 29th of Catherine's life, Gregory XI. was 
living and holding the papal court at Avignon. He was the last 
of seven French popes in succession who had done so, and had 
perpetuated for seventy-three years what ecclesiastical writers 
are fond of terming "the Babylonian captivity of the church." 
To put an end to this absenteeism, and to bring back the papacy 
to Italy was the cherished and anxious wish of all good Italians, 
and especially of all Italian churchmen. Petrarch had urgently 
pressed Urban V., Gregory's immediate predecessor, to accom- 
plish the desired change; and Dante had at an earlier date 
laboured to bring about the same object. But these and all the 
other influences which Italy had striven to bring to bear on the 
popes had hitherto failed to induce them to return. In these 
circumstances Catherine determined to try her powers of per- 
suasion and argument, attempting first by correspondence to 
reconcile Gregory and the Florentines, who had been placed under 
an interdict, and then going in person as the representative of 
the latter to Avignon, where she arrived on the 18th of June. 
Gregory empowered her to treat for peace, but: the Florentine 
ambassadors were first tardy and then faithless. Nothing 
daunted, Catherine herself besought Gregory, who, indeed, 
was himself so minded, to return, and he did so, in September 
(taking the sea route from Marseilles to Genoa), though perhaps 
intending only to make a temporary stay in Italy. Catherine 
went home by land and stayed for a month in Genoa with 
Madonna Orietta Scotti, a noble lady of that city, at whose house 
Gregory had a long colloquy with her, which encouraged him to 
push on to Rome. To this year, 1376, belongs the admission to 
Catherine's circle of disciples of Stefano di Corrado Maconi, a 
Sienese noble distinguished by a character full of charm and 
purity, and her healing of the bitter feud between his family 
and the Tolomei. Another family quarrel, that of the Salimbeni 
at Rocca D'Orcia, was ended by her intervention in 1377. This 
year also she turned the castle of Belcaro, which had been given 
to her, into a monastery. 

Meanwhile the returned pope was not having an easy time. 
Besides perpetuating the strife with his enemies he was alienating 
his friends, and finding it increasingly difficult to pay his mer- 
cenaries. He vented his anger upon Catherine, who reproved 
him for minding temporal rather than spiritual things, but in 
the beginning of 1378 sent her on an embassy to Florence and 
especially to the Guelph party. While she was urging the 
citizens to make peace with the pope there came the news of 
his death. During the troubles that ensued in Florence Catherine 
nearly lost her life in a popular tumult, and sorely regretted not 
winning her heart's desire, " the red rose of martyrdom." Peace 
was signed with the new pope, Urban VI., and Catherine, having 
thus accomplished her second great political task, went home 
again to Siena. Thence on the outbreak of the schism Urban 
summoned her to Rome, whither, somewhat reluctantly, she 
journeyed with her now large spiritual family in November. 
Once arrived she gave herself heartily to Urban's cause, and 
wore her slender powers out in restraining his impatient temper, 
quieting the revolt of the people of Rome, and trying to win for 
Urban the support of Europe. After prolonged and continual 
suffering she died on the 29th of April 1380. 

Catherine of Siena lived on not only in her writings but in her dis- 
ciples. During her short course she gathered round her a devoted 



company of menand women trained to labour for the reformation of 
the individual, the church and the state. , Her death naturally broke 
up the fellowship, but its members did not cease their activity and 
kept up what mutual correspondence was possible. Among them 
were.Fra Raimondo, who became master-general of the Dominicans, 
William Flete, an ascetically-minded Englishman from Cambridge, 
Stefano Maconi, who joined the Carthusians and ultimately became 
prior-general, and the two secretaries, Neri di Landoccio and Fran- 
cesco Malavolti. The last of her band, Tommaso Caffarini, died in 
1434, but the work Was taken up, though in other shape, by Savon- 
arola, between Francis of Assisi and whom Catherine forms the 
connecting link. 

Catherine's works consist of (1) a treatise occupying a closely- 
printed quarto volume, which Fra Raimondo describes as "a 
dialogue between a soul, which asked four questions of the Lord, and 
the same Lord, who made answer and gave instruction in many 
most useful truths," (2) letters, and (3) prayers. The dialogue is 
entitled, The Book of Divine Doctrine, given in person by God the 
Father, speaking to the mind of the most glorious and holy virgin 
Catherine of Siena, and written down as she dictated it in the vulgar 
tongue, she being- the while entranced, and actually hearing what God 
spoke in her. The work is declared to have been dictated by the 
saint in her father's house in Siena, a little before she went to Rome, 
and to have been completed on the 13th of October 1378. The book 
opens with a passage on the essence of mysticism, the union of the 
soul with God in love, and the bulk of it is a compendium of the 
spiritual teachings scattered throughout her letters. There is more 
monologue than dialogue. The book has a significant place in the 
history of Italian literature. " In a language which is singularly 
poor in mystical works it stands with the Divina Commedia as one of 
the two supreme attempts to express the eternal in the symbolism 
of a day, to paint the union of the soul with the supra-sensible while 
stiHimprisoned in the flesh." The prayers (twenty-six in all) are 
mostly mystical outpourings repeating the aspirations found in her 
other writings. Of more interest are the letters, nearly four hundred 
in number, and addressed to kings, popes, cardinals, bishops, con- 
ventual bodies, political corporations and private individuals. 
Their historical importance, their spiritual fragrance and their 
literary value combine to put their author almost on a level with 
Petrarch as a 14th century letter-writer. Her language is the purest 
Tuscan of the golden age of the Italian vernacular, and with sponr 
taneous eloquence she passes to and fro between spiritual counsel, 
domestic advice and political guidance. 

Authorities.— The sources for the personal life of Catherine of 
Siena are (1) the Vita or Legenda, Fra Raimondo's biography written 
1384-1395, first published in Latin at Cologne, 1553, and widely 
translated; (2) the Processus, a collection of testimonies and letters 
by those of her followers who survived in 141 1, and had to justify 
the reverence paid to the memory of one yet uncanonized; (3) the 
Supplementum to Raimondo's Vita, compiled by Tommaso Caffarini 
in 1414; (4) the Legenda abbreviata, Caffarini's summary of the Vita, 
translated into beautiful Italian by Stefano Maconi; (5) the Letters, 
of which the standard edition is that of Girolamo Gigli (2 vols., 
Siena, 1713, Lucca, 172 1). A selection of these has been published 
in English by V. D. Scudder (London, 1905). A complete biblio- 
graphy is given in E. G. Gardner's Saint Catherine of Siena (London, 
1907), a monumental study dealing with the religion, history and 
literature of the 14th century in Italy as they centre " in the work 
and personality of one of the most wonderful women that have ever 
lived." 

CATHERINE I. (1683-1727), empress of Russia. The true 
character and origin of this enigmatical woman were, until 
quite recently, among the most obscure problems of Russian 
history. It now appears that she came of a Lithuanian stock, 
and was one of the four children of a small Catholic yeoman, 
Samuel Skovronsky; but her father died of the plague while 
she was still a babe, the family scattered, and little Martha was 
adopted by Pastor Gliick, the Protestant superintendent of the 
Marienburg district. Frau Gluck finally rid herself of the girl 
by marrying her to a Swedish dragoon called Johan. A few 
months later, the Swedes were compelled by the Russians to 
evacuate Marienburg, and Martha became one of the prisoners 
of war of Marshal Sheremetev, who sold her to Prince Menshikov, 
at whose house, in the German suburb of Moscow, Peter the 
Great first beheld and made love to her in his own peculiar 
fashion. After the birth of their first daughter Catherine, 
Peter made no secret of their relations. He had found, at last, 
the woman he wanted, and she soon became so indispensable 
to him that it was a torment to be without her. The situation 
was regulated by the reception of Martha into the Orthodox 
Church, when she was rechristened under the name of Catherine 
Alekseyevna, the tsarevich Alexius being her godfather, by the 
bestowal upon her of the title Gosudaruinya or sovereign (17 10), 



526 



CATHERINE II. 



and, finally (1711), by her public marriage to the tsar, who 
divorced the tsaritsa Eudoxia to make room for her. Henceforth 
the new tsaritsa was her husband's inseparable companion. She 
was with him during the campaign of the Pruth, and Peter 
always attributed the successful issue of that disastrous war to 
the courage and sang-froid of his consort. She was with him, too, 
during his earlier Caspian campaigns, and was obliged on this 
occasion to shear off her beautiful hair and wear a close-fitting 
fur cap to protect her from the rays of the sun. 

By the ukaz of 1722 Catherine was proclaimed Peter's suc- 
cessor, to the exclusion of the grand-duke Peter, the only son of 
the tsarevich Alexius, and on the 7th of May 1724 was solemnly 
crowned empress-consort in the Uspensky cathedral at Moscow, 
on which occasion she wore a crown studded with no fewer than 
2564 precious stones, surmounted by a ruby, as large as a pigeon's 
egg, supporting a cross of brilliants. Within a few months of 
this culminating triumph, she was threatened with utter ruin by 
the discovery of a supposed liaison with her gentleman of the 
bedchamber, William Mons, a handsome and unscrupulous 
upstart, and the brother of a former mistress of Peter. A danger- 
ously familiar but perfectly innocent flirtation is, however, the 
worst that can fairly be alleged against Catherine on this occasion. 
So Peter also seemed to have thought, for though Mons was 
decapitated and his severed head, preserved in spirits, was 
placed in the apartments of the empress, she did not lose Peter's 
favour, attended him during his last illness, and closed his eyes 
when he expired (January 28, 1725). She was at once raised 
to the throne by the party of progress, as represented by Prince 
Menshikov and Count Tolstoy, whose interests and perils were 
identical with those of the empress, before the reactionary party 
had time to organize opposition, her great popularity with the 
army powerfully contributing to her success. The arch-prelates 
of the Russian church, Theodosius, archbishop of Novgorod, and 
Theophanes, archbishop of Pskov, were also oil her side for very 
much the same reason, both of them being unpopular innovators 
who felt that, at this crisis, they must stand or fall with Tolstoy 
and Menshikov. 

The great administrative innovation of Catherine's reign was 
the establishment of the Verkhomy Tainy Sovyet, or supreme 
privy council, by way of strengthening the executive, by con- 
centrating affairs in the hands of a few persons, mainly of the 
party of Reform (Ukazoi February 26, 1726). As to the foreign 
policy of Catherine I. (principally directed by the astute Andrei 
Osterman) , if purely pacific and extremely cautious, it was, never- 
theless, dignified, consistent and independent. Russia, by the 
mere force of circumstances, now found herself opposed to Eng- 
land, chiefly because Catherine protected Charles Frederick, duke 
of Holstein, and George I. found that the Schleswig-Holstein 
question might be reopened to the detriment of his Hanoverian 
possessions. Things came to such a pass that, in the spring of 
1726, an English squadron was sent to the Baltic and cast anchor 
before Reval. The empress vigorously protested, and the fleet 
was withdrawn, but on the 6th of August Catherine acceded to 
the anti-English Austro-Spanish league. Catherine died on the 
16th of May 1727. Though quite illiterate, she was an un- 
commonly shrewd and sensible woman, and her imperturbable 
good nature under exceptionally difficult circumstances, testifies 
equally to the soundness of her head and the goodness of her 
heart. 

See Robert Nisbet Bain, The Pupils of Peter the Great, chs. ii.-iii. 
(London, 1807): The First Romanovs, ch. xiv. (London, 1905). 
v (R. N. B.) 

CATHERINE II. (1720-1796), empress of Russia, was the 
daughter of Christian Augustus, prince of Anhalt-Zerbst, and 
his wife, Johanna Elizabeth of Holstein-Gottorp. The exact 
date and place of her birth have been disputed, but there appears 
to be no reason to doubt that she was right in saying that 
she was born at Stettin on the 2nd of May 1729. Her father, 
who succeeded to the principality of Anhalt-Zerbst in 1746 and 
died in 1747, was a general in th* Prussian service, and, at the 
time of her birth, was military command? nv at Stettin. Her 
baptismal name was Scphia Augusta Frederic?.. In accordance 



with the custom then prevailing in German princely families, 
she was educated chiefly by French governesses and tutors. 
In 1744 she was taken to Russia, to be affianced to the grand- 
duke Peter, the nephew of the empress Elizabeth (q.v.) , and her 
recognized heir. The princess of Anhalt-Zerbst was the daughter 
of Christian Albert, bishop of Liibeck, younger brother of 
Frederick IV., duke of Holstein-Gottorp, Peter's paternal grand- 
father. The choice of her daughter as wife of the future tsar 
was the result of not a little diplomatic management in which 
Frederick the Great took an active part, the object being to 
strengthen the friendship between Prussia and Russia, to weaken 
the influence of Austria and to ruin the chancellor Bestuzhev, 
on whom Elizabeth relied, and who was a known partisan 
of the Austrian alliance. The diplomatic intrigue failed, largely 
through the flighty intervention of the princess of Anhalt- 
Zerbst, a clever but very injudicious woman. But Elizabeth 
took a strong liking to the daughter, and the marriage was finally 
decided on. The girl bad spared no effort to ingratiate herself, 
not only with the empress, but with the grand-duke and the 
Russian people. She applied herself to learning the language 
with such zeal that she rose at night and walked about her 
bedroom barefoot repeating her lessons. The result was a severe 
attack of congestion of the lungs in March 1744. During the 
worst period of her illness she completed her conquest of the 
good-will of the Russians by declining the religious services of a 
Protestant pastor, and sending for Simon Todorskiy, the orthodox 
priest who had been appointed to instruct her in the Greek form 
of Christianity. When she wrote her memoirs she represented 
herself as having made up her mind when she came to Russia 
to do whatever had to be done, and to profess to believe whatever 
she was required to believe, in order to be qualified to wear the 
crown. The consistency of her character throughout life makes 
it highly probable that even at the age of fifteen she was mature 
enough to adopt this worldly-wise line of conduct. Her father, 
who was a convinced Lutheran, was strongly opposed to his 
daughter's conversion, and supplied her with books of controversy 
to protect her Protestantism. She read them, and she listened 
to Todorskiy, and to other advisers who told her that the Russian 
crown was well Worth a mass, or that the differences between 
the Greek and Lutheran churches were mere matters of form. 
On the 28th of June 1744 she was received into the Orthodox 
Church at Moscow, and was renamed Catherine Alexeyevna. 
On the following day she was formally betrothed, and was 
married to the archduke on the 21st of August 1745 at St 
Petersburg. 

At that time Catherine was essentially what she was to remain 
till her death fifty-one years later. It was her boast that she 
was as " frank and original as any Englishman." If she meant 
that she had a compact character, she was right. She had decided 
on her line in life and she followed it whole-heartedly. It was 
her determination to become a Russian in order that she might 
the better rule in Russia, and she succeeded. She acquired a 
full command of all the resources of the language, and a no less 
complete understanding of the nature of the Russian people. 
It is true that she remained quite impervious to religious in- 
fluences. The circumstances of her conversion may have helped 
to render her indifferent to religion, but their influence need not 
be exaggerated. Her irreligion was shared by multitudes of 
contemporaries who had never been called upon to renounce one 
form of Christianity and profess belief in another in order to 
gain a crown. Her mere actions were, like those of other and 
humbler people, dictated by the conditions in which she lived. 
The first and the most important of them was beyond all question 
the misery of her married fife. Her husband was a wretched 
creature. Nature had made him mean, the smallpox had made 
him hideous, and his degraded habits made him loathsome. 
And Peter had all the sentiments of the worst kind of small 
German prince of the time. He had the conviction that his 
princeship entitled him to disregard decency and the feelings of 
others. He planned brutal practical jokes, in which blows 
had always a share. His most manly taste did not rise above the 
kind of military interest which has been defined as " corporal's 



CATHERINE II. 



52? 



mania," the passion for uniforms, pipeclay, buttons, the " tricks 
of parade and the froth of discipline." He detested the Russians, 
and surrounded himself with Holsteiners. For ten years the 
marriage was barren, and the only reason for supposing that the 
future tsar Paul (g.v.), who was born on the 2nd of October 1754, 
was the son of Peter, is the strong similarity of their characters. 
Living in the grossly animal court of the empress Elizabeth, 
bound to a husband whom she could not but despise and detest, 
surrounded by suitors, and entirely uninfluenced by religion, 
Catherine became and remained perfectly immoral in her sexual 
relations to men. The scandalous chronicle of her life was the 
commonplace of all Europe. Her male favourites were as openly 
paraded as the female favourites of King Louis XV. It may be 
said once and for all that her most trusted agents while she was 
still grand-duchess, and her chief ministers when she became 
empress, were also her lovers, and were known to be so. 

For some time after the marriage, the young couple were 
controlled by the empress Elizabeth, who appointed court 
officials to keep a watch on their conduct; but before long these 
custodians themselves had become the agents of Catherine's 
pleasures and ambition. After the birth of Paul she began to 
take an active part in political intrigues. Her abilities forced 
even her husband to rely on her judgment. When in difficulty 
he ran to her and flattered her with the name of Madame La 
Ressource — Madame Quick Wit — which did not prevent him from 
insulting and even kicking her when the immediate need of her help 
was over. In 1 7 58 he endeavoured to turn the empress Elizabeth 
against her, and for a time Catherine was in danger. She faced 
the peril boldly, and reconquered her influence over the sovereign, 
but from this time she must have realized that when the empress 
was dead she would have to defend herself against her husband. 
That Peter both hated and dreaded her was notorious. The 
empress Elizabeth died on the 5th of January 1762. The grand 
duke succeeded without opposition as Peter III. His behaviour 
to his wife continued to be brutal and menacing, and he went on 
as before offending the national sentiment of the Russian people. 
In July he committed the insane error of retiring with his Hol- 
steiners to Oranienbaum, leaving his wife at St Petersburg. 
On the 13th and 14th of that month a " pronunciamiento " 
•of the regiments of the guard removed him from the throne and 
made Catherine empress. The history of this revolt is still 
obscure. It has naturally been said that she organized the 
mutiny from the first, and some plausibility is conferred on this 
belief by the fact that the guards were manipulated by the four 
Orlov brothers. The eldest, Gregory, was her recognized chief 
lover, and he was associated with his brother Alexis in the office 
of favourite. On the other hand, there does not appear to 
have been any need for organization. The hatred felt for Peter 
III. was spontaneous, and Catherine had no need to do more 
than let it be known that she was prepared to profit by her 
husband's downfall. Peter, who behaved with abject cowardice, 
was sent to a country house at Ropcha, where he died on the 15 th 
or 18th of July of official " apoplexy." The truth is not known, 
and Frederick the Great at least professed long afterwards 
to believe that Catherine had no immediate share in the murder. 
She had no need to speak. Common-sense must have shown the 
leaders of the revolt that they would never be safe while Peter 
lived, and they had insults to avenge. 

The mere fact that Catherine II., a small German princess 
without hereditary claim to the throne, ruled Russia from 1762 
to 1796 amid the loyalty of the great mass of the people, and the 
respect and admiration of her neighbours, is sufficient proof of 
the force of her character. Her title to be considered a great 
reforming ruler is by no means equally clear. Voltaire and the 
encyclopaedists with whom she corresponded, and on whom she 
conferred gifts and pensions, repaid her by the grossest flattery, 
while doing their best to profit by her generosity. They made her 
a reputation for " philosophy," and showed the sincerity of their 
own love of freedom by finding excuses for the partition of 
Poland. There is a very great difference between Catherine II. 
as she appears in the panegyrics of the encyclopaedists and 
Catherine as she appears in her correspondence and in her acts. 



Her foreign admirers amused her, and were useful in spreading her 
reputation. The money they cost her was a small sum in com- 
parison to the £12,000,000 she lavished on her long series of 
lovers, who began with Soltykov and Stanislaus Poniatowski 
(q.v.) before she came to the throne, and ended with the youthful 
Platon Zubov, who was tenant of the post at her death. She 
spent money freely on purchasing works of art and curios. 
Yet she confessed with her usual candour that she had no taste 
for painting, sculpture or music. Her supposed love of literature 
does not appear to have amounted to more than a lively curiosity, 
which could be satisfied by clipping into a great number of books. 
She had a passion for writing, and produced not only a mass of 
letters written in French, but pamphlets and plays, comic and 
serious, in French and Russian. One on the history of Oleg, 
the more or less legendary Varangian, who was guardian to the 
son of Rurik, was described by her as an " imitation of Shake- 
speare." The scheme is not unlike that of a " chronicle play." 
Her letters are full of vivacity, of colour, and at times of insight 
and wit, but she never learnt to write either French or German 
correctly. The letters to Voltaire attributed to her are not hers, 
and were probably composed for her by Andrei Shuvalov. The 
philosophers and encyclopaedists who, by the mouth of Diderot, 
complimented Catherine on being superior to such female 
affectations as modesty and chastity, flattered her to some 
extent even here. She enforced outward decency in her house- 
hold, was herself temperate in eating and drinking, and was by 
no means tolerant of disorderly behaviour on the part of the ladies 
of her court. They flattered her much more when they dwelt 
on her philanthropy and her large share of the enlightenment of 
the age. She was kind to her servants, and was very fond of 
young children. She was rarely angry with people who merely 
contradicted her or failed to perform their service in her household. 
But she could order the use of the knout and of mutilation as 
freely as the most barbarous of her predecessors when she 
thought the authority of the state was at stake, and she did employ 
them readily to suppress all opinions of a heterodox kind, whether 
in matters of religion or of politics, after the beginning of the 
French Revolution. Her renowned toleration stopped short of 
allowing the dissenters to build chapels, and her passion for 
legislative reform grew cold when she found that she must begin 
by the emancipation of the serfs. There were exceptions even 
to her personal kindness to those about her. She dropped her 
German relations. She kept a son born to her shortly before the 
palace revolution of 1762, whose paternity could not be attributed 
to Peter, at a distance, though she provided for him. He was 
brought up in a private station under the name of Bobrinski. 
She was a harsh mother to her son Paul. It seems highly probable 
that she intended to exclude him from the succession, and to 
leave the crown to her eldest grandson Alexander, afterwards 
the emperor Alexander I. Her harshness to Paul was probably 
as much due to political distrust as to what she saw of his 
character. Whatever else Catherine may have been she was 
emphatically a sovereign and a politician who was in the last 
resort guided by the reason of state. She was resolved not to 
allow her authority to be disputed by her son, or shared by him. 
As a ruler, Catherine professed a great contempt for system, 
which she said she had been taught to despise by her master 
Voltaire. She declared that in politics a capable ruler must be 
guided by " circumstances, conjectures and conjunctions." 
Her conduct was on the surface very unstable. In a moment 
of candour she confessed that she was a great commenceuse — 
that she had a mania for beginning innumerable enterprises 
which she never pursued. This, however, is chiefly true of her 
internal administration, and even there it should be qualified. 
Many of her beginnings were carried on by others and were not 
barren. Her foreign policy was as consistent as it could be 
considering the forces she had to contend against. It was 
steadily aimed to secure the greatness and the safety of Russia. 
There can be no question that she loved her adopted country 
sincerely, and had an affection for her people, and an opinion of 
their great qualities which she did not hesitate to express in 
hyperbolical terms. Her zeal for the reputation of the Russians 



5 28 



CATHERINE BE' MEDICI 



was almost comically shown by the immense trouble she took 
to compile an answer to the Voyage en Sibirie of the French 
astronomer Chappe d'Auteroche. The book is in three big 
quartos, and Catherine's answer — which was never finished — is 
still larger. Chappe d'Auteroche had discovered that Siberia 
was not a paradise, and had observed that the Russians were 
dirty in their habits, and that masters whipped their servants, 
male and female. Her patriotism was less innocently shown by 
her conquests. Yet it may be doubted whether any capable 
ruler of Russia could have abstained from aggressions at the 
expense of the rights of the Saxon family in Courland, of Poland, 
and of Turkey (see Russia: History). It does seem now to 
be clearly proved that the partition of Poland was not suggested 
by her, as has been frequently asserted. Catherine would have 
preferred to control the country through a vassal sovereign of 
the type of Stanislaus Poniatowski, the old lover whose election 
she secured in 1763. Poland was incapable of maintaining its 
independence at the time of the first partition (1772), and the 
division of the unhappy country was forced on by Austria and 
Prussia. In the case of the second partition in 1793, she did 
show herself to be very unscrupulous. Her opposition to the 
reform of the Polish government was plainly due to a wish to 
preserve an excuse for further spoliation, but her conduct was 
less cruel and base than that of Prussia. 

Catherine had adhered to her husband's policy of a Prussian 
alliance. While Frederick the Great lived she was impressed 
by his ability. But the Prussian alliance became hateful to 
her, and her later correspondence with Grimm overflows with 
contempt of his successor Frederick William II., who is always 
spoken of by her as " Brother Gu." Her exasperation with the 
affectations of the Prussian king was unquestionably increased 
by her discovery that he would not be induced to apply himself 
to a crusade against the French Revolution, which by employing 
all his forces would have left Russia free to annex the whole of 
what remained of Poland. But at least she did not enter into 
a solemn engagement to defend the Poles who were engaged in 
reforming their constitution, and then throw them over in order 
to share in the plunder of their country. 

Catherine's Turkish policy was at first marked by a certain 
grandiosity. When the Turks declared war in 1768 in order to 
support Poland, which they looked upon as a necessary buffer 
state, she retaliated by the great Greek scheme. For a time it 
was a pet idea with her to revive the Greek empire, and to plant 
the cross,with the double-headed Russian eagle, at Constantinople. 
She formed a corps of Greek cadets, caused her younger grandson 
to be christened Constantine, and began the policy of presenting 
Russia to the Christian subjects of the Porte as their deliverer. 
In pursuit of this heroic enterprise, which excited the loud 
admiration of Voltaire, she sent a fleet under Alexis Orlov into 
the Mediterranean in 1770. Orlov tempted the Greeks of the 
Morea to take up arms, and then left them in the lurch. When 
Catherine found herself opposed by the policy of France and 
England, and threatened by the jealousy of Prussia and Austria, 
she dropped the Greek design, observing to Voltaire that the 
descendants of the Spartans were much degenerated. The 
introduction into the treaty of Kuchuk-Kainarji of 1774 of a 
clause by which the Porte guaranteed the rights of its Christian 
subjects, 'and of another giving Russia the right to interfere on 
behalf of a new Russian church in Constantinople, advertised 
the claim of the tsars to be the natural protectors of the Orthodox 
in the Ottoman dominions; but when she took up arms again in 
1788 in alliance with Joseph II. (q.v.), it was to make a mere war 
of conquest and partition. The Turkish wars show the weak 
side of Catherine as a ruler. Though she had mounted the 
throne by a military revolt and entered on great schemes of 
conquest, she never took an intelligent interest in her army. 
She neglected it in peace, allowed it to be shamefully administered 
in war, and could never be made to understand that it was not in 
her power to improvise generals out of her favourites. It is 
to her credit that she saw the capacity of Suvarov, yet she never 
had as much confidence in him as she had in Potemkin, who may 
have been a man of genius, but was certainly no general. She 



took care never to have to deal with a disciplined opponent) 
except the Swedes, who beat her, but who were very few. 

It was the misfortune of Catherine that she lived too long. 
She disgraced herself by living with her last lover, Zubov, when 
she was a woman of sixty-seven, trusting him with power and 
lavishing public money on him. The outbreak of the French 
Revolution stripped off the varnish of philosophy and philanthropy 
which she had assumed in earlier years. She had always enter* 
tained aquiet contempt for the French writers whom she flattered 
and pensioned, and who served her as an advertising agency in 
the west. When the result of their teaching was seen in Paris, 
good-natured contempt was turned to hatred. She then became 
a persecutor in her own dominions of the very ideas she had 
encouraged in former years. She scolded and preached a crusade, 
without, however, departing from the steady pursuit of her own 
interests in Poland, While endeavouring with transparent 
cunning to push Austria and Prussia into an invasion of France 
with all their forces. Her health began to break down, and it 
appears to be nearly certain that towards the end she suffered 
from hysteria of a shameful kind. It is plain that her intellect 
had begun to: fail just before her death, for she allowed the 
reigning favourite, Platon Zubov, to persuade her to despatch 
his brother Valerian, with the rank of field marshal and an army 
of 20,000 men, on a crack-brained scheme to invade India by way 
of Persia and Tibet. The refusal of the king of Sweden to marry 
into her family unless- the bride would become a Lutheran is 
said to have thrown her iaito a convulsion of rage which hastened 
her death. On the 9th of November 1796, she was seized by 
a fit of apoplexy, and died on the evening of the 10th. 

All other accounts of Catherine II. have been superseded by 
Waliszewski's two volumes, Le Roman d'uneimperatrice (Paris, 1893) 
and Autour d'un Trone: Catherine II., ses collaborateurs, ses amis, ses 
favoris (Paris, 1894). The original sources for the history of her 
policy and her character are to be found in the publications of the 
Imperial Russian Historical Society, vols, i.-cix. (St Petersburg), 
begun in 1867; her private and official correspondence will be 
found in vols, i., ii., iv., v., vi., vii., viii., ix., x., xiii., xiv., xv., xvii., 
xx., xxiii., xxxii., xxxiii., xxxvi., xlii., xliii., xlvii., xlviii., Ii., 
lvii., lxvii., lxviii., lxxxvii., xcvii., xcviii., cvii., cxv., cxviii. 

CATHERINE DE' MEDICI (1510-1589), queen of France, 
the wife of one French king and the mother of three, was born at 
Florence in 1519. She was a daughter of Lorenzo II. de' Medici 
and a French princess/Madeleine de la Tour d'Auvergne. Having 
lost both her parents at an early age, Catherine was sent to a 
convent to be educated; and she was only fourteen when she 
was married (1533) at Marseilles to the duke of Orleans, after- 
wards Henry II. It was her uncle, Pope Clement VII., who 
arranged the marriage with Francis I. Francis, still engaged 
in his lifelong task of making head against Charles V., was only 
too glad of the opportunity to strengthen his influence in the 
Italian peninsula, while Clement, ever needful of help against 
his too powerful protector, was equally ready to hold out a 
bait. During the reign of Francis, Catherine exercised no in- 
fluence in France. She was young, a foreigner, a member of 
a state that had almost no weight in the great world of politics, 
had not given any proof of great ability, and was thrown into 
the shade by more important persons. For ten years after her 
marriage she had no children. In consequence, a divorce 
began to be talked of at court; and it seemed not impossible 
that Francis, alarmed at the possible extinction of the royal 
house, might listen to such a proposal. But Catherine had the 
happiness of bringing him grandchildren ere he died. During 
the reign of her husband, too (1547-1559), Catherine lived a 
quiet and passive, but observant life. Henry being completely 
under the influence of his mistress, Diane de Poitiers, she had 
little authority. In 1552, when the king left the kingdom for the 
campaign of Metz, she was nominated regent, but with very 
limited powers. This continued even after the accession of her 
son Francis II. Francis was under the spell of Mary Stuart, 
and she, little disposed to meddle with politics on her own account, 
was managed by her uncles, the cardinal of Lorraine and the 
duke of Guise. The queen-mother, however, soon grew weary 
of the domination of the Guises, and entered upon a course of 
secret opposition. On the 1st of April 1560 she placed in the 



CATHERINE OF ARAGON 



529 



chancellorship Michel de l'Hopital (q.v.), who advocated the policy 
of conciliation. 

On the death of Francis (5th of December 1560), Catherine 
became regent during the minority of her second son, Charles 
IX., and now found before her a career worthy of the most 
soaring ambition. She was then forty-one years old, but, 
although she was the mother of nine children, she was still very 
vigorous and active. She retained her influence for more than 
twenty years in the troubled period of the wars of religion. 
At first she listened to the moderate counsels of l'Hdpital in 
so far as to avoid siding definitely with either party, but 
her character and the habits of policy to which she had been 
accustomed, rendered her incapable of any noble aim. She had 
only one virtue, and that was her zeal for the interests of her 
children, especially of her favourite third son, the duke of Anjou. 
Like so many of the Italians of that time, who were almost 
destitute of a moral sense, she looked upon statesmanship in 
particular as a career in which finesse, lying and assassination 
were the most admirable, because the most effective weapons. 
By habit a Catholic, but above all things fond of power, she 
was determined to prevent the Protestants from getting the 
upper hand, and almost equally resolved not to allow them to 
be utterly crushed, in order to use them as a counterpoise to the 
Guises. This trimming policy met with little success: rage and 
suspicion so possessed men's minds, that she could no longer 
control the opposing parties, and one civil war followed another 
to the end of her life. In 1 567, after the " Enterprise of Meaux," 
she dismissed l'Hopital and joined the Catholic party. But, 
having failed to crush the Piotestant rebellion by arms, she 
resumed in 1570 the policy of peace and negotiation. She con- 
ceived the project of marrying her favourite son, the duke of 
Anjou, to Queen Elizabeth of England, and her daughter Margaret 
to Henry of Navarre. To this end she became reconciled with 
the Protestants, and allowed Coligny to return to court and to 
re-enter the council. Of this step she quickly repented. Charles 
IX. conceived a great affection for the admiral and showed signs 
of taking up an independent attitude. Catherine, thinking her 
influence menaced, sought to regain it, first by the murder of 
Coligny, and, when that had failed, by the massacre of St Bartholo- 
mew (q.v.). The whole of the responsibility for this crime, 
therefore, rests with Catherine; unlike the populace, she had 
not even the excuse of fanaticism. This responsibility, however, 
weighed but lightly on her; while her son was overwhelmed 
with remorse, she calmly enjoyed her short-lived triumph. 
After the death of Charles in 1574, and the succession of Anjou 
under the name of Henry III., Catherine pursued her old policy 
of compromise and concessions; but as her influence is lost in 
that of her son, it is unnecessary to dwell upon it. She died on 
the 5th of January 1589, a short time before the assassination 
of Henry, and the consequent extinction of the House of Valois. 
In her taste for art and her love of magnificence and luxury, 
Catherine was a true Medici; her banquets at Fontainebleau in 
1564 were famous for their sumptuousness. In architecture 
especially she was well versed, and Philibert de l'Orme relates 
that she discussed with him the plan and decoration of her palace 
of the Tuileries. Catherine's policy provoked a crowd of pamph- 
lets, the most celebrated being the Discours merveilleux de la 
vie, actions et deportemens de la reine Catherine de MSdicis, in 
which Henri Estienne undoubtedly collaborated. 

See Lettres de Catherine de Medicis, edited by Hector de la Ferriere 
(Paris, 1880, seq.) , in the Collection de documents inedits sur Vhistoire 
de France; A. von Reumont, Die Jugend Caterinas de' Medici 
(1854; French translation by A. Baschet, 1866); H. Bouchot, 
Catherine de Medicis (Paris, 1899). For a more complete biblio- 
graphy see Ernest Lavisse, Histoire de France (vol. v., by H. Le- 
monnier, and vol. vi., by J. H. Mariejol, 1904-1905). See also Miss 
E. Sichel's books, Catherine de' Medici and the French Reformation 
(1905), and The Later Years of Catherine de' Medici (1908). 

CATHERINE OF ARAGON (1485-1536), queen of Henry VIII. 
of England, daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain, was 
born on the 15th or 16th of December 1485. She left Spain in 
1 501 to marry Arthur, prince of Wales, eldest son of King Henry 
VII., and landed at Plymouth on the 2nd of October. The wed- 



ding took place on the 14th of November in London, and soon 
afterwards Catherine accompanied her youthful husband to 
Wales, where, in his sixteenth year, the prince died on the 2nd 
of April 1502. On the 25 th of June 1503, she was formally 
betrothed to the king's second son, Henry, now prince of Wales, 
and a papal dispensation for the alliance was obtained. The 
marriage, however, did not take place during the lifetime of 
Henry VII. Ferdinand endeavoured to cheat the English king 
of the marriage portion agreed upon, and Henry made use of the 
presence of the unmarried princess in England to extort new 
conditions, and especially to secure the marriage of his daughter 
Mary to the archduke Charles, grandson of Ferdinand, and after- 
wards Charles V. Catherine was thus from the first the unhappy 
victim of state politics. Writing to Ferdinand on the 9th of 
March 1509, she describes the state of poverty to which she was 
reduced, and declares the king's unkindness impossible to be 
borne any longer. 1 On the old king's death, however, a brighter 
prospect opened, for Henry VIII. decided immediately on 
marrying her, the wedding taking place on the nth of June and 
the coronation on the 24th. Catherine now enjoyed a few years 
of married happiness; Henry showed himself an affectionate 
husband, and the alliance with Ferdinand was maintained against 
France. She was not without some influence in state affairs. 
During Henry's invasion of France in 15.13 she was made regent; 
she showed great zeal and ardour in the preparations for the 
Scottish expedition, and was riding towards the north to put 
herself at the head of the troops when the victory of Flodden 
Field ended the campaign. The following year an affectionate 
meeting took place between the king and queen at Richmond 
on the return of the former. Ferdinand's treachery, however, 
in making a treaty with France roused Henry's wrath, and his 
angry reproaches fell upon his unfortunate wife; but she took 
occasion in 1520, during the visit of her nephew Charles V. to 
England, to urge the policy of gaining his alliance rather than 
that of France. Immediately on his departure, on the 31st of 
May 1520, she accompanied the king to France, on the celebrated 
visit to Francis I., called from its splendour the Field of the 
Cloth of Gold; but in 1522 war was declared against France 
and the emperor again welcomed to England. In 1521 she is 
represented by Shakespeare as pleading for the unfortunate 
duke of Buckingham. 

These early years of happiness and of useful influence and 
activity had, however, been gradually giving way to gloom and 
disappointment. Between January 1510 and November 1518 
Catherine gave birth to six children (including two princes), who 
were all stillborn or died in infancy except Mary, born in 15 16, 
and rumour did not fail to ascribe this series of disasters to the 
curse pronounced in Deuteronomy on incestuous unions. In 
1526 the condition of Catherine's health made it highly improb- 
able that she would have more children. No woman had ever 
reigned in England, alone and in her own right, and to avoid 
a fresh dispute concerning the succession, and the revival of the 
civil war, a male heir to the throne was a pressing necessity. 
The act of marriage, which depended for its validity on the decision 
of the ecclesiastical courts, had, on account of the numerous 
dissolutions and dispensations granted, not then attained the 
security since assured to it by the secular law. For obtaining 
dissolutions of royal marriages the facilities were especially 
great. Pope Clement VII. himself permitted such a dissolution 
in the case of Henry's own sister Margaret, in 1528, proposed later 
as a solution of the problem that Henry should be allowed 
two wives, 2 and looked not unfavourably, with the same aim, 
on the project for marrying the. duke of Richmond to Mary, 
a brother to a sister. 3 In Henry's case also the irregularity of 
a union, which is still generally reprobated and forbidden in 
Christendom, and which it was very doubtful that the pope had 
the power to legalize, provided a moral justification for a dissolu- 
tion which in other cases did not exist. It was not therefore the 
immorality of the plea which obstructed the papal decree in 

1 Cal. of State Pap., England and Spain, i. 469. 

2 Letters and Papers, iv. 6627, 6705, and app. 261. 

3 lb. iv. 5072. 



53° 



CATHERINE OF ARAGON 



Henry's favour, but the unlucky imprisonment at this time of 
Clement VII. at the hands of Charles V., Catherine's nephew, 
which obliged the pope, placed thus "between the hammer and 
the anvil," to pursue a policy of delay and hesitation. Nor was 
the immorality of Henry's own character the primary cause of 
the project of divorce. Had this been so, a succession of mis- 
tresses would have served as well as a series of single wives. 
The real occasion was the king's desire for a male heir. But, 
however clear this may be, the injustice done to Catherine was 
no less cruel and real. Rumours, probably then unfounded, 
of an intended divorce had been heard abroad as early as 1524. 
But the creation in 1525 of the king's illegitimate son Henry, 
as duke of Richmond — the title borne by his grandfather Henry 
VII — and the precedence granted to him over all the peers as 
well as the princess Mary, together with the special honour paid 
at this time by the king to his own half-sister Mary, were the 
first real indications of the king's thoughts. In 1526, and 
perhaps earlier, Wolsey had been making tentative inquiries 
at Rome on the subject. In May 1527 a collusive and secret 
suit was begun before the cardinal, who, as legate, summoned 
the king to defend himself from the charge of cohabitation with 
his brother's wife; but these proceedings were dropped. On the 
22nd of June Henry informed Catherine that they had been 
living in mortal sin and must separate. During Wolsey's absence 
in July at Paris, where he had been commissioned to discuss 
vaguely the divorce and Henry's marriage with Renee, daughter 
of Louis XII., Anne Boleyn is first heard of in connexion with the 
king, his affection for her having, however, begun probably as 
early as 1523, and the cardinal on his return found her openly 
installed at the court. In October 1528 the pope issued a 
commission to Cardinal Campeggio and Wolsey to try the 
cause in England, and bound himself not to revoke the case to 
Rome, confirming his promise by a secret decretal commission 
which, however, was destroyed by Campeggio. But the trial 
was a sham. Campeggio was forbidden to pronounce sentence 
without further reference to Rome, and was instructed to create 
delays, the pope assuring Charles V. at the same time that the 
case should be ultimately revoked to Rome. 1 

The object of all parties was now to persuade Catherine to 
enter a nunnery and thus relieve them of further embarrassment. 
While Henry's envoys were encouraged at Rome in believing 
that he might then make another marriage, Henry himself gave 
Catherine assurances that no other union would be contemplated 
in her lifetime. But Catherine with courage and dignity held 
fast to her rights, demanded a proper trial, and appealed not only 
to the bull of dispensation, the validity of which was said to be 
vitiated by certain irregularities, but to a brief granted for the 
alliance by Pope Julius II. Henry declared the latter to be a 
forgery, and endeavoured unsuccessfully to procure a declaration 
of its falsity from the pope. The court of the legates accordingly 
opened on the 31st of May 1529, the queen appearing before 
it on the 18th of June for the purpose of denying its jurisdiction. 
On the 21st both Henry and Catherine presented themselves 
before the tribunal, when the queen threw herself at Henry's 
feet and appealed for the last time to his sense of honour, recalling 
her own virtue and helplessness. Henry replied with kindness, 
showing that her wish for the revocation of the cause to Rome 
was unreasonable in view of the paramount influence then 
exercised by Charles V. on the pope. Catherine nevertheless 
persisted in making appeal to Rome, and then withdrew. After 
her departure Henry, according to Cavendish, Wolsey's bio- 
grapher, praised her virtues to the court. " She is, my lords, 
as true, as obedient, as conformable a wife as I could in my 
phantasy wish or desire. She hath all the virtues and qualities 
that ought to be in a woman of her dignity or in any other of 
baser estate." On her refusal to return, her plea was overruled 
and she was adjudged contumacious, while the sittings of the 
court continued in her absence. Subsequently the legates paid 
her a private visit of advice, but were unable to move her from 
her resolution. Finally, however, in July 1529, the case was, 
according to her wish, and as the result of the treaty of Barcelona 
x Cal. of State Pap., England and Spain, iii. pt. ii. 779. 



and the pope's complete surrender to Charles V., revoked by the 
pope to Rome: a momentous act, which decided Henry's 
future attitude, and occasioned the downfall of the whole papal 
authority in England. On the 7th of March 1530 Pope Clement 
issued a brief forbidding Henry to make a second marriage, 
and ordering the restitution of Catherine to her rights till the 
cause was determined; while at the same time he professed to 
the French ambassador, the bishop of Tarbes, his pleasure 
should the marriage with Anne Boleyn have been already made, 
if only it were not by his authority. 2 The same year Henry 
obtained opinions favourable to the divorce from the English, 
French and most of the Italian universities, but unfavourable 
answers from Germany, while a large number of English peers 
and ecclesiastics, including Wolsey and Archbishop Warham, 
joined in a memorial to the pope in support of Henry's cause. 

Meanwhile, Catherine, while the great question remained 
unsolved, was still treated by Henry as his queen, and accom- 
panied him in his visits in the provinces and in his hunting 
expeditions. On the 31st of May 1531 she was visited by thirty 
privy councillors, who urged the trial of the case in England, but 
they met only with a firm refusal. On the 14th of July Henry 
left his wife at Windsor, removing himself to Woodstock, and 
never saw her again. In August she was ordered to reside at 
the Moor in Hertfordshire, and at the same time separated from 
the princess Mary, who was taken to Richmond. In October 
she again received a deputation of privy councillors, and again 
refused to withdraw the case from Rome. In 1532 she sent the 
king a gold cup as a new year's gift, which the latter returned, 
and she was forbidden to hold any communication with him. 
Alone and helpless in confronting Henry's absolute power, her 
cause found champions and sympathizers among the people, 
among the court preachers, and in the House of Commons, while 
Bishop Fisher had openly taken her part in the legatine trial. 
Subsequently Catherine was removed to Bishops Hatfield, 
while Henry and Anne B oleyn visited Francis I. Their marriage, 
anticipating any sentence of the nullity of the union with 
Catherine, took place after their return about the 25 th of January 
1 533, in consequence of Anne's pregnancy. On the 10th of May 
Cranmer, for whose consecration as archbishop of Canterbury 
Henry had obtained bulls from Rome, opened his court, and 
declared on the 23rd the nullity of Catherine's marriage and the 
validity of Anne's. On the 10th of August the king caused 
proclamation to be made forbidding her the style of queen ; but 
Catherine refused resolutely to yield the title for that of princess- 
doWager. Not long afterwards she was removed to Buckden 
in Huntingdonshire. Here her household was considerably 
reduced, and she found herself hemmed in by spies, and in fact 
a prisoner. In July she had refused Henry the loan of a certain 
rich cloth, which had done service at the baptism of her children, 
for the use of Anne Boleyn's expected infant; and on the birth of 
Elizabeth and the refusal of Mary to give up the title of princess, 
the latter's household was entirely dismissed and she herself 
reduced to the position of attendant in Elizabeth's retinue. A 
project for removing Catherine from Buckden to Somersham, 
an unhealthy solitude in the isle of Ely, with a still narrower 
maintenance, was only prevented by her own determined resist- 
ance. The attempt in November to incriminate the queen in 
connexion with Elizabeth Barton failed. She passed her life 
now in religious devotions, taking strict precautions against the 
possibility of being poisoned. On the 23rd of March 1534 the 
pope pronounced her marriage valid, but by this time England 
had thrown off the papal jurisdiction, the parliament had trans- 
ferred Catherine's jointure to Anne Boleyn, and the decree had 
no effect on Catherine's fortunes. She refused to swear to the 
new act of succession, which declared her marriage null and Anne's 
infant the heir to the throne, and soon afterwards she was re- 
moved to Kimbolton, where she was well treated. On the 21st 
of May she was visited by the archbishop of York and Tunstall, 
bishop of Durham, who threatened her with death if she per- 
sisted in her refusal, but only succeeded in confirming her re- 
solution. She was kept in strict seclusion, separated from Mary 
5 Cal. of State Pap., Foreign and Dom., iv. 6290. 



CATHERINE OF BRAGANZ A— -CATHERINE OF VALOIS 531 



and from all outside communications, and in December 1535 
her health gave way, her death taking place on the 8th of January 
1536, not without suspicions of poison, which, however, may be 
dismissed. She was buried by the king's order in Peterborough 
cathedral. Before her death she dictated a last letter to Henry, 
according to Polydore Vergil, expressing her forgiveness, begging 
his good offices for Mary, and concluding with the astounding 
assurance — " I vow that mine eyes desire you above all things." 
The king himself affected no sorrow at her death, and thanked 
God there was now no fear of war. 

Catherine is described as " rather ugly than otherwise; of 
low stature and rather stout; very good and very religious; 
speaks Spanish, French, Flemish, English; more beloved by 
the islanders than any queen that has ever reigned." She was 
a woman of considerable education and culture, her scholarship 
and knowledge of the Bible being noted by Erasmus, who 
dedicated to her his book on Christian Matrimony in 1526. 
She endured her bitter and undeserved misfortunes with extra- 
ordinary courage and resolution, and at the same time with 
great womanly forbearance, of which a striking instance was 
the compassion shown by her for the fallen Wolsey. 

Bibliography. — See the article in Diet, of Nat. Biog. by J. 
Gairdner, and those on Henry VIII. and Wolsey, where the case 
is summed up very adversely to Henry, and The Divorce of Catherine 
of Aragon, by J. A. Froude (1891), where it is regarded from the 
contrary aspect ; Henry VIII., by A. F. Pollard (1905); Cambridge 
Mod. History (1903), ii. 416 et seq. and bibliographies, p. 789; The 
Wives of Henry VIII., by M. Hume (1905). (P. C. Y.) 

CATHERINE OF BRAGANZA (1638-1705), queen consort of 
Charles II. of England, daughter of John IV. of Portugal, and 
of Louisa de Gusman, daughter of the duke of Medina Sidonia, 
was born on the 15/25 of November 1638 at Villia Vicosa. 
She was early regarded as a useful medium for contracting an 
alliance with England, more necessary than ever to Portugal 
after the treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659 whereby Portugal was 
ostensibly abandoned by France. Negotiations for the marriage 
began during the reign of Charles I., were renewed immediately 
after the Restoration, and on the 23rd of June, in spite of Spanish 
opposition, the marriage contract was signed, England securing 
Tangier and Bombay, with trading privileges in Brazil and the 
East Indies, religious and commercial freedom in Portugal and 
two million Portuguese crowns (about £300,000) ; while Pfjftugal 
obtained military and naval support against Spain and liberty 
of worship for Catherine. She reached England on the 13th of 
May 1662, but was not visited by Charles at Portsmouth till the 
20th. The next day the marriage was solemnized twice, accord- 
ing to the Roman Catholic and Anglican usages. Catherine 
possessed several good qualities, but had been brought up. in a 
conventual seclusion and was scarcely a wife Charles would have 
chosen for himself. Her personal charms were not potent enough 
to wean Charles away from the society of his mistresses, and in 
a few weeks after her arrival she became aware of her painful 
and humiliating position as the wife of the selfish and licentious 
king. On the first presentation to her of Lady Castlemaine, 
Charles's mistress en litre, whom he insisted on making lady of 
her bedchamber, she fainted away. She withdrew from the 
king's society, and in spite of Clarendon's attempts to moderate 
her resentment, declared she would return to Portugal rather 
than consent to a base compliance. To overcome her resistance 
nearly the whole of her Portuguese retinue was dismissed. She 
was helpless, and the violence of her grief and anger soon changed 
to passive resistance, and then to a complete forbearance and 
complaisance which gained the king's regard and favour. In 
the midst of Charles's debauched and licentious court, she lived 
neglected and retired, often deprived of her due allowance, having 
no ambitions and taking no part in English politics, but keeping 
up rather her interest in her native country. 

As the prospect diminished of her bearing children to Charles, 
several schemes were set on foot for procuring a divorce on 
various pretexts. As a Roman Catholic and near to the king's 
person Catherine was the special object of attack by the inventors 
of the Popish Plot. In 1678 the murder of Sir Edmund Berry 
Godfrey was ascribed to her servants, and Titus Oates accused 



her of a design to poison the king. These charges, of which the 
absurdity was soon shown by cross-examination, nevertheless 
placed the queen for some time in great danger. On the 28th 
of November Oates accused her of high treason, and the Commons 
passed an address for her removal and that of all the Roman 
Catholics from Whitehall. A series of fresh depositions were 
sent in against her, and in June 1679 it was decided that she 
must stand her trial; but she was protected by the king, who in 
this instance showed unusual chivalry and earned her gratitude. 
On the 17 th of November Shaftesbury moved in the House of 
Lords for a divorce to enable the king to marry a Protestant 
and have legitimate issue; but he received little support, and 
the bill was opposed by Charles, who continued to show his wife 
"extraordinary affection." During the winter the calumnies 
against the queen were revived by Fitzharris, who, however, before 
his execution in 1681 confessed to their falsity; and after the 
revival of the king's influence subsequent to the Oxford parlia- 
ment, the queen's position was no more assailed. 

During Charles's last illness in 1685 she showed great anxiety 
for his reconciliation with the Romish Church, and it was 
probably effected largely through her influence. She exhibited 
great grief at his death. She afterwards resided at Somerset 
House and at Hammersmith, where she had privately founded a 
convent. She interceded with great generosity, but ineffectu- 
ally, for Monmouth the same year. On the 10th of June 1688 she 
was present at the birth of the prince of Wales and gave evidence 
before the council in favour of the genuineness of the child. She 
was still in England at the Revolution, having delayed her return 
to Portugal to prosecute a lawsuit against the second earl of 
Clarendon, formerly her chamberlain. She maintained at first 
good terms, with William and Mary; but the practice of her 
religion aroused jealousies, while her establishment at Somerset 
House was said to be the home of cabals against the government; 
and in 1691 she settled for a short time at Euston. She left 
England finally with a train of one hundred persons in March 
1692, travelling through France and arriving at Lisbon on the 
20th of January 1693. She took up her residence at the palace of 
Bemposta, built by herself, near Lisbon. In 1703 she supported 
the Methuen Treaty, which cemented still further the alliance 
between Portugal and England, and in 1704 she was appointed 
regent of Portugal during the illness of her brother King 
Pedro II., her administration being distinguished by several 
successes gained over the Spaniards. She died on the 31st of 
December 1705, bequeathing her great wealth, the result of long 
hoarding, after the payment of divers charitable legacies, to 
King Pedro; and was buried with great ceremony and splendour 
at Belem. 

See L. C. Davidson, Catherine of Braganza (1908). 

CATHERINE OF VALOIS (1401-1437), queen of Henry V. of 
England, daughter of Charles VI. of France by his wife Isabel 
of Bavaria, was born in Paris on the 27th of October 1401. 
The lunacy of her father and the depravity of her mother were 
serious drawbacks to Catherine, and her only education was 
obtained in a convent at Poissy. About 1408 a marriage was 
suggested between the princess and Henry, prince of Wales, 
afterwards Henry V., who renewed this proposal after he became 
king in March 1413. In addition to the hand of Catherine, 
however, the English king asked for a large dowry both in 
money and lands, and when these demands were rejected war 
broke out. Once or twice during short intervals of peace the 
marriage project was revived, and was favoured by Queen 
Isabel. When peace was eventually made at Troyes in May 
1420 Henry and Catherine were betrothed, and the marriage took 
place at Troyes on the 2nd of June 1420. Having crossed to 
England with Henry, the queen was crowned in Westminster 
Abbey on the 23rd of February 1421, and in the following 
December gave birth to a son, afterwards King Henry VI. She 
joined Henry in France in May 1422, returning to England 
after his death in the succeeding August. Catherine's name 
soon began to be coupled with that of Owen Tudor, a Welsh 
gentleman, and in 1428 Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, secured 
the passing of an act to prevent her from marrying without the 



532 



CATHETUS^-CATHOLIC 



consent of the king and council. It appears, however, that by 
this time Catherine and Tudor were already married. They 
lived in obscurity till 1436, when Tudor was imprisoned, and 
Catherine retired to Bermondsey Abbey, where she died on 
the 3rd of January 1437. Her body was buried in the Lady 
chapel of Westminster Abbey, and when the chapel was pulled 
down during the reign of Henry VII., was placed in Henry V.'s 
tomb. It lay afterwards under the Villiers monument, and in 
1878 was re-buried in Henry V.'s chantry. By Tudor Catherine 
had three sons and a daughter. Her eldest son by this marriage, 
Edmund, was created earl of Richmond in 1452, and was the 
father of Henry VII. 

See Agnes Strickland, Lives of the Queens of England, vol. iii. 
(London, 1877). 

CATHETUS (Gr. Kadtros, a perpendicular line), in architecture 
the eye of the volute, so termed because its position is determined, 
in an Ionic or voluted capital, by a line let down from the point 
in which the volute generates. 

CATHOLIC (Gr. /cafloXixos, general, universal), a designation 
adopted in the 2nd century by the Christian Church to indicate 
Christendom as a whole, in contrast with individual churches. 
With this idea went the notions that Christianity had been 
diffused throughout the whole earth by the apostles, and that 
only what was found everywhere throughout the church could 
be true. The term thus in time became full of dogmatic and 
political meaning, connoting, when applied to the church, a 
universal authoritative and orthodox society, as opposed to 
Gnostic and other " sects " (cf. the famous canon of Vincent of 
Lerins A.D. 434; quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus 
creditum est). The term " Catholic " does not occur in the old 
Roman symbol; but Professor Loofs includes it in his recon- 
struction, based on typical phrases in common use' at the time 
of the ante-Nicene creeds of the East. In the original form of 
the Nicene creed itself it does not occur; but in the creed of 
Jerusalem (348), an amplification of the Nicene symbol, we find 
" one Holy Catholic Church," and in the revision by Cyril of 
Alexandria (362) " Catholic and Apostolic Church " (see Creeds). 
Thus, though the word " Catholic " was late in finding its way 
into the formal symbols of the church, it is clear that it had long 
been in use in the original sense defined above. It must be 
borne in mind, however, that the designation " Catholic " was 
equally claimed by all the warring parties within the church at 
various times; thus, the followers of Arius and Athanasius 
alike called themselves Catholics, and it was only the ultimate 
victory of the latter that has reserved for them in history the 
name of Catholic, and branded the former as Arian. 

With the gradual development and stereotyping of the creed 
it was inevitable that the term " Catholic " should come to 
imply a more narrowly defined orthodoxy. In the Eastern 
churches, indeed, the conception of the church as the guardian of 
" the faith once delivered to the saints " soon overshadowed 
that of interpretation and development by catholic consent, 
and, though they have throughout claimed the title of Catholic, 
their chief glory is that conveyed in the name of the Holy 
Orthodox Church. In the West, meanwhile, the growth of the 
power of the papacy had tended more and more to the inter- 
pretation of the word " catholic " as implying communion with, 
and obedience to, the see of Rome (see Papacy); the churches 
of the East, no less than the heretical sects of the West, by 
repudiating this allegiance, had ceased to be Catholic. This 
identification of " Catholic " with " Roman " was accentuated 
by the progress of the Reformation. The Reformers themselves, 
indeed, like other dissidents and reformers before them, did not 
necessarily repudiate the name of Catholic; they believed, in 
fact, in Catholicism, i.e. the universal sanction of their beliefs, 
as firmly as did the adherents of " the old religion "; they 
included the Catholic creeds, definitions formulated by the 
universal church, in their service books; they too appealed, as 
the fathers of Basel and Constance had done, from the papal 
monarchy to the great ecclesiastical republic. The Church of 
England at least, emphasizing her own essential catholicity, 
retained in her translations of the ancient symbols the word 



"catholic" instead of replacing it by "universal." But the 
appeal to the verbally inspired Bible was stronger than that to a 
church hopelessly divided; the Bible, and not the consent of 
the universal church, became the touchstone of the reformed 
orthodoxy; in the nomenclature of the time, " evangelical " 
arose in contradistinction to " Catholic," while, in popular 
parlance, the " protest " of the Reformers against the " corrup- 
tions of Rome " led to the invention of the term " Protestant," 
which, though nowhere assumed in the official titles of the older 
reformed churches, was early used as a generic term to include 
them all. 

" Catholic " and " Catholicism " thus again changed and 
narrowed their meaning; they became, by universal usage, 
identified definitely with " Romanist " and the creed and 
obedience of Rome. Even in England, where the church 
retained most strongly the Catholic tradition, this distinction of 
"Protestant" and " Catholic " was clearly maintained, at least 
till the " Catholic revival " in the Church of England of the 19th 
century. On the continent of Europe the equivalent words 
(e.g. Ger. Katholik, Katholizismus; Fr. catholique, catholicisme) 
are even more definitely associated with Rome; they have lost 
the sense which they still convey to a considerable school of 
Anglicans. The dissident " Catholic " churches are forced to 
qualify their titles: they are " Old Catholics " {Alt-Katholiken) 
or " German Catholics "■■ (Deutsch-Katholiken). The Church of 
Rome alone, officially and in popular parlance, is " the Catholic 
Church " (katholische Kirche, Sglise catholique), a title which 
she proudly claims as exclusively her own, by divine right, by 
the sanction of immemorial tradition, and by reason of her 
perpetual protest against the idea of " national " churches, 
consecrated by the Reformation (see Church History, and 
Roman Catholic Church).' The additional qualification of 
"Roman" she tolerates, since it proclaims her doctrine of the 
see of Rome as the keystone of Catholicism; but to herself 
she is "the Catholic Church," and her members are "Catholics." 

Yet to concede this claim and surrender without qualification 
the word " Catholic " to a connotation which is at best only 
universal in theory, is to beg several very weighty questions. 
The doctrine of the Catholic Church, i.e. the essential unity and 
interdependence of " all God's faithful people scattered through- 
out the world," is common to all sections of Christians. The 
creed is one; it is the interpretation that differs. In a somewhat 
narrower sense, too, the Church of England at least has never 
repudiated the conception of the Catholic Church as a divinely 
instituted organization for the safe-guarding and proclamation 
of the Christian revelation. She deliberately retained the 
Catholic creeds, the Catholic ministry and the appeal to 
Catholic antiquity (see England, Church or). A large section 
of her members, accordingly, laying stress on this side of her 
tradition, prefer to call themselves " Catholics." But, though 
the invention of the terms " Roman Catholic " and " Roman 
Catholicism " early implied the retention by the English Church 
of her Catholic claim, her members were never, after the Reforma- 
tion, called Catholics; even the Caroline divines of the 17th 
century, for all their " popish practices," styled themselves 
Protestants, though they would have professed their adherence 
to ■" the Catholic faith " and their belief in " the Holy Catholic 
Church." 

Clearly, then, the exact meaning of the term varies according 
to those who use it and those to whom it is applied. To the 
Romanist " Catholic " means " Roman Catholic "; to the high 
Anglican it means whatever is common to the three " historic " 
branches into which he conceives the church to be divided — 
Roman, Anglican and Orthodox; to the Protestant pure and 
simple it means either what it does to the Romanist, or, in 
expansive moments, simply what is " universal " to all Christians. 
In a yet broader sense it is used adjectivally of mere wideness or 
universality of view, as when we speak of a man as " of catholic 
sympathies " or " catholic in his tastes." 

The name of Catholic Epistles is given to those letters (two of 
Peter, three of John, one of James, one of Jude) incorporated 
in the New Testament which (except 2 and 3 John) are not, like 



CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC CHURCH— CATILINE 



133 



those of St Paul, addressed to particular individuals or churches, 
but to a larger and more indefinite circle of readers, (See 
Bible: New Testament, Canon.) 

The title of Catholicus (mdoXwos) seems to have been used 
under the Roman empire, though rarely, as the Greek equivalent 
of consularis and praefectus. Thus Eusebius (Hist, ecck viii. 23) 
speaks of the catholicus of Africa (ko^oXuov rr)s 'A^purfjs); 
As an ecclesiastical title it was used to imply, not universal 
(ecumenical), but a great and widespread jurisdiction. Thus 
the bishop of the important see of Seleucia (Bagdad), though 
subordinate to the patriarch of Antioch, had the title of 
Catholicus and power to consecrate even archbishops; and on the 
division of the see there were two Catholici under the patriarch 
of Antioch. In Ethiopia, too, there were Catholici with less 
extensive powers, subject to the patriarch of Alexandria. The 
title now survives, however, only as that of the head of the 
Armenian Church (g.v.). A bishop's cathedral church is, how- 
ever, in Greek the Catholicon. 

An isolated use of the word " catholic "as a secular legal 
term survives in Scots law; a catholic creditor is one whose debt 
is secured over several or over all of the subjects belonging to 
the debtor. 

CATHOLIC APOSTOLIC CHURCH, THE, a religious com- 
munity often called " Irvingites," though neither actually 
founded nor anticipated by Edward Irving (q.v.). Irving's 
relation to this community Was, according to its rriernbers, 
somewhat similar to that of John the Baptist to the early 
Christian Church, i.e. he was the forerunner and prophet of the 
coming dispensation, not the founder of a new sect; and indeed 
the only connexion which Irving seems to have had with the 
existing organization of the Catholic Apostolic body was in 
" fostering spiritual persons who had been driven out of other 
congregations for the exercise of their spiritual gifts." Shortly 
after Irving's trial and deposition (1831), certain persons were, 
at some meetings held for prayer, designated as " called to be 
apostles of the Lord" by certain others claiming prophetic 
gifts. In the year 1835, six months after Irving's death, six 
others were similarly designated as " called " to complete the 
number of the " twelve," who were then formally " separated," 
by the pastors of the local congregations to which they belonged, 
to their higher office in the universal church on the 14th of 
July 1835. This separation is understood by the community 
not as "in any sense being a schism or separation from the one 
Catholic Church, but a separation to a special work of blessing 
and intercession on behalf of it." The twelve were afterwards 
guided to ordain others — twelve prophets, twelve evangelists, and 
twelve pastors, " sharing equally with them the one Catholic 
Episcopate," and also seven deacons for administering the tem- 
poral affairs of the church catholic. The apostles were the 
channels of the Holy Ghost and the mysteries of God, and the 
authoritative interpreters of "prophetic utterance"; their 
teaching was brought home to the people by the " evangelists." 
The function of the prophets was to explain scripture and exhort 
to holiness, that of the " pastors " is explained by their title. 
The central episcopacy of forty-eight was regarded as " indicated 
by prophecy," being foreshown in the forty-eight boards of the 
Mosaic tabernacle. For ecclesiastical purposes the church uni- 
versal is under their charge in twelve tribes; for Christendom 
is considered to be divided into twelve portions or tribes, each 
tribe being under the special charge of an apostle and his co- 
ministers, and the seat of the Apostolic College being at Albury, 
near Guildford. This is an ideal outline which has never been 
fulfilled. There has never been a " central episcopacy " of 
forty-eight. The " apostles " alone always held the supreme 
authority, though, as their number dwindled, " coadjutors " 
were appointed to assist the survivors, and to exercise the 
functions of the " apostolate." The last " apostle " died on 
the 3rd of February 1901. 

For the service of the church a comprehensive book of liturgies 
and offices was provided by the " apostles." It dates from 1842 
and is based on the Anglican, Roman and Greek liturgies. 
Lights, incense, vestments, holy water, chrism, and other 



adjuncts of worship are in constant use. The ceremonial inits 
completeness may be seen in the church in Gordon Square, 
London, and elsewhere. The daily worship consists of " matins " 
with " proposition " (or exposition) of the sacrament at 6 a.m., 
prayers at 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., and " vespers " with " proposition " 
at 5 p.m. On all Sundays and holy days there is a " solemn 
celebration of the eucharist " at the high altar; on Sundays 
this is at 10 a.m. On other days ." low celebrations " are held in 
the side-chapels, which with the chancel in all churches correctly 
built after apostolic directions are separated or marked off from 
the nave by open screens with gates. The community has always 
laid great stress on symbolism, and in the eucharist, while reject- 
ing both transubstantiation and consubstantiation, holds strongly 
to a real (mystical) presence. It emphasizes also the " pheno- 
mena " of Christian experience and deems miracle and mystery 
to be of the essence of a spirit-filled church. 

Each congregation is presided over by its " angel " or bishop 
(who ranks as angel-pastor in the Universal Church) ; under him 
are four-and-twenty priests, divided into the four ministries of 
"elders, prophets, evangelists and pastors," and with these are 
the deacons, seven of whom regulate the temporal affairs of the 
church — besides whom there are also " sub-deacons, acolytes, 
singers, and door-keepers." The understanding is that each 
elder, with his co-presbyters and deacons, shall have charge 
of 500 adult communicants in his district; but this has been 
but partially carried into practice. This is the full constitution 
of each particular church or congregation as founded by the 
"restored apostles," each local church thus " reflecting in its 
government the government of the church catholic by the angel 
or high priest Jesus Christ, and His forty-eight presbyters in 
their fourfold ministry (in which apostles and elders always 
rank first), and under these the deacons of the church catholic." 
The priesthood is supported by tithes; it being deemed a duty 
on the part of all members of the church who receive yearly 
incomes to offer a tithe of their increase every week, besides the 
free- will offering for the support of the place of worship, and for 
the relief of distress. Each local church sends " a tithe of its 
tithes " to the " Temple," by which the ministers of the Uni- 
versal Church are supported and its administrative expenses 
defrayed; by these offerings, too, the needs of poorer churches 
are supplied. It claims to have among its clergy many of the 
Roman, Anglican and other churches, the orders of those 
ordained by Greek, Roman and Anglican bishops being recog- 
nized by it with the simple confirmation of an " apostolic act." 
The community has not changed recently in general constitution 
or doctrine. It does not publish statistics, and its growth during 
late years is said to have been more marked in the United States 
and in certain European countries, such as Germany, than in 
Great Britain. There are nine congregations enumerated in 
The Religious Life of London (1904). 

For further details of doctrines, ritual, &c, see R. N. Bosworth, 
Restoration of Apostles and Prophets, Readings on the Liturgy, The 
Church and Tabernacle, and The Purpose of God in Creation and 
Redemption (6th ed., 1888) ; G. Miller, History and Doctrines of 
Irvingism (1878). 

CATILINE [Lucius Sergius Catilina] (c. 108-62 B.C.), a 
member of an ancient but impoverished patrician family of 
Rome, the prime mover in the conspiracy known by his name. 
He appears in history first as a supporter of Sulla, and during 
the proscription he was conspicuous for his greed and cruelty. 
He slew his inoffensive brother-in-law with his own hand, and 
tortured and mutilated the much-loved Marius Gratidianus. 
He was believed to have made away with his wife and his son to 
win the profligate and wealthy Aurelia Orestilla; it was even 
suspected that he had been guilty of an intrigue with the Vestal 
Fabia. In 77 he was quaestor, in 68 praetor, and in 67-66 
governor of Africa. His extortions and subsequent impeachment 
by P. Clodius Pulcher having disqualified him as a candidate 
for the consulship, he formed a conspiracy, in which he was 
joined by young men of all classes, even Crassus and Caesa?, 
according to rumour, being implicated. The new consuls were 
to be murdered on. 'the 1st of January; bi't the plot. — the 



534 



CATINAT— CATLIN 



execution of which was deferred till the 5th of February — failed 
in consequence of the impatience of Catiline, who gave the signal 
too hastily. Soon after, Catiline, having bribed both judges 
and accuser, was acquitted in the trial for extortion. His scheme 
was forthwith immensely widened. The city was to be fired, 
and those who opposed the revolution were to be slain; all debts 
were to be cancelled; and there was to be a proscription of all 
the wealthy citizens. Among the conspirators were many men 
of the first rank and influence. Arms and money were collected, 
soldiers were enlisted, and the assistance of the slaves was sought. 
But Catiline's hopes were again disappointed; once more he 
failed to obtain the consulship (64); and, moreover, it soon 
became apparent that one of the new consuls, Cicero, was myste- 
riously able to thwart all the schemes of the conspirators. He 
was, in fact, informed of every detail, through Fulvia, the mis- 
tress of Curius, one of the plotters,who was himself soon persuaded 
to turn informer. The other consul, C. Antonius, in whom Catiline 
hoped to find a supporter, was won over and got out of the way 
by Cicero, who resigned the province of Macedonia in his favour. 
Before the next comitia consularia assembled, the orator had 
given so impressive a warning of the danger which was impending, 
that Catiline was once more rejected (63), and the consuls were 
invested with absolute authority. Catiline now resolved upon 
open war; preparations were set on foot throughout Italy, 
especially in Etruria, where the standard of revolt was raised 
by the centurion C. Manlius (or Mallius), one of Sulla's veterans. 
A plan to murder Cicero in his own house on the morning of the 
7th of November was frustrated. On the next day Cicero at- 
tacked Catiline so vigorously in the senate (in his first Catilinarian 
oration) that he fled to his army in Etruria. Next day Cicero 
awoke the terror of the people by a second oration delivered in 
the forum, in consequence of which Catiline and Manlius were 
declared public enemies, and the consul Antonius was despatched 
with an army against them. Meanwhile the imprudence of the 
conspirators in Rome brought about their own destruction. 
Some deputies from the Allobroges, who had been sent to Rome 
to obtain redress for certain grievances, were approached by 
P. Lentulus Sura, the chief of the conspirators, who endeavoured 
to induce them to join him. After considerable hesitation, the 
deputies decided to turn informers. The plot was betrayed to 
Cicero, at whose instigation documentary evidence was obtained, 
implicating Lentulus and others. They were arrested, proved 
guilty, and on the 5th of December condemned to death and 
strangled in the underground dungeon on the slope of the Capitol. 
This act, which was opposed by Julius Caesar and advocated by 
Cato Uticensis (and, indirectly, by Cicero), was afterwards 
vigorously attacked as a violation of the constitution, on the 
ground that the senate had no power of life and death over a 
Roman citizen. Thus a heavy blow was dealt to the cause of 
Catiline, who, in the beginning of 62, saw his legions, only 
partially armed and diminished by desertion, shut in between 
those of Metellus Celer and C. Antonius. Near Pistoria he 
hazarded battle with the forces of the latter, but was completely 
defeated in a desperate encounter. He himself, fighting with the 
utmost bravery, rushed into the ranks of the enemy and met his 
death. 

Such was the conspiracy of Catiline and the character of its 
author, as we find them in the speeches of Cicero, and the histories 
of Sallust and Dio Cassius (see also Plutarch, Cicero; Veil. Pat. 
ii. 35; Florus iv. 1; Appian, B.C. ii. 6; Eutropius vi. 15). It 
must not be forgotten, however, that our authorities were all 
members of the aristocratic party. Some of the incidents given 
as facts by Dio Cassius are manifest absurdities; and Cicero 
paid more regard to the effect than to the truthfulness of an 
accusation. We find him at one time admitting that Catiline 
had almost persuaded him of his honesty and merit, and even 
seeking a political union with him; at another, when his alliance 
had been rejected and an election was at hand, declaiming 
against him as a murderer and a profligate. Lastly, though 
Sallust's vivid narrative is consistent throughout, it is obvious 
that he cherished very bitter feelings against the democratic 
party. Nevertheless, we cannot regard Catiline as an honest 



enemy of the oligarchy, or as a disinterested champion of the 
provincials. It is held by some historians that there was at the 
time on the part of many of the Roman nobles a determination to 
raise themselves to power, despite the opposition of the senate: 
others with greater probability maintain that Catiline's object 
was simply the cancelling of the huge debts which he and his 
friends had accumulated. Catiline, by his bravery, his military 
talents, his vigorous resolution, and his wonderful power over 
men, was eminently qualified as a revolutionary leader. He is 
the subject of tragedies by Ben Jonson and P. Crebillon, and of 
the Rome sauvee of Voltaire. 

See P. Merimee, Etudes sur la guerre sociale et la conjuration de 
Catiline (1844); E. Hagen, Catilina (1854), with introductory dis- 
cussion of the authorities; E. S. Beesley, " Catiline as a Party 
Leader" {Fortnightly Review, June 1865), in defence of Catiline; 
C. John, Die Entstehungsgesckichte der catilinarischenVerschworung 
(1876), a critical examination of Sallust's account; E. von Stern, 
Catilina und die Parteikdmpfe in Rom 66-63 ( r 883), with bibliography 
in preface ; C. Thiaucourt, Etude sur la conjuration de Catiline (1887), 
a critical examination of Sallust's account and of his object in 
writing it; J. E. Blondel, Histoire economique de la conjuration de 
Catiline (1893), written from the point of view of a political econo- 
mist; Gaston Boissier, La Conjuration de Catiline (1905), and Cicero 
and his Friends (Eng. trans.) ; Tyrrell and Purser's ed. of Cicero's 
Letters (index vol. s.v. " Sergius Catilina ") ; J. L. Strachan Davidson, 
Cicero (1894), ch. v.; Warde Fowler's Caesar (1892); see also art. 
Rome: History, The Re-public. 

CATINAT, NICOLAS (1637-1712), marshal of France, entered 
the Gardes Franchises at an early age and distinguished himself 
at the siege of Lille in 1667. He became a brigadier ten years 
later, marichal de camp in 1680, and lieutenant-general 1688. He 
served with great credit in the campaigns of 1676-1678 in 
Flanders, was employed against the Vaudois in 1686, and after 
taking part in the siege of Philipsburg at the opening of the War 
of the League of Augsburg, he was appointed to command the 
French troops in the south-eastern theatre of war. In 1690 he 
conquered Savoy, and in 1691 Nice; the battle of Staffarda, 
won by him over the duke of Savoy in 1 690, and tnat of Marsaglia 
in 1693, were amongst the greatest victories of the time. In 
1696 Catinat forced the duke to make an alliance with France. 
He had in 1693 been made a marshal of France. At the be- 
ginning of the war of the Spanish Succession, Catinat was placed 
in charge of queries in Italy, but he was much hampered by
the orders of the French court and the weakness of the forces for 
their task. He suffered a reverse at Carpi (1701) and was soon 
afterwards superseded by Villeroy, to whom he acted as second- 
in-command during the campaign of Chiari. He died at St 
Gratienin 1712. His memoirs were published in 1819. 

See E. de Broglie, Catinat, 1637-1712 (Paris, 1902). 

CATLIN, GEORGE (1796-1872), American ethnologist, was 
born at Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, in 1796. He was educated 
as a lawyer and practised in Philadelphia for two years; but 
art was his favourite pursuit, and forsaking the law he established 
himself at New York as a portrait painter. In 1832, realizing 
that the American Indians were dying out, he resolved to rescue 
their types and customs from oblivion. With this object he 
spent many years among the Indians in North and South 
America. He lived with them, acquired their languages, and 
studied very thoroughly their habits, customs and mode of life, 
making copious notes and many studies for paintings. In 1840 
he came to Europe with his collection of paintings, most of which 
are now in the National Museum, Washington, as the Catlin 
Gallery; and in the following year he published the Manners, 
Customs and Condition of the North American Indians in two 
volumes, illustrated with 300 engravings. This was followed 
in 1844 by The North American Portfolio, containing 25 plates 
of hunting scenes and amusements in the Rocky Mountains and 
the prairies of America, and in 1848 by Eight Years' Travels 
and Residence in Europe. In 1861 he published a curious little 
volume, in " manugraph," entitled The Breath of Life, on the 
advantage of keeping one's mouth habitually closed, especially 
during sleep; and in 1868, Last Rambles amongst the Indians of 
the Rocky Mountains and the Andes. He died in Jersey City, 
New Jersey, on the 22nd of December 1872. 



GATO 



535 



CATO, DIONYSIUS, the supposed author of the Dionysii 
Catonis Disticha de Moribus ad Filium. The name usually given 
is simply Cato, an indication of the wise character of the maxims 
inculcated, but Dionysius is added on the authority of a MS. 
declared by Scaliger to be of great antiquity. This MS. also 
contains Priscian's translation of the Periegesis of the geographer 
Dionysius Periegetes; this has probably led to the Disticha 
also being attributed to him. In the middle ages the author 
on the Disticha was supposed to be Cato the Elder, who wrote a 
Carmen de Moribus, but extracts from this in Aulus Gellius 
show that it was in prose. Nothing is really known of the author 
or date of the Disticha; it can only be assigned to the 3rd or 
4th century a.d. It is a small collection of moral apophthegms, 
each consisting of two hexameters, in four books. They are 
monotheistic in character, not specially Christian. The diction 
and metre are fairly good. The book had a great reputation in 
the middle ages, and was translated into many languages; 
it is frequently referred to by Chaucer, and in 1483 a translation 
was issued from Caxton's press at Westminster. 

Editions by F. Hauthal (1869), with full account of MSS. and 
early editions, and G. Nemethy (1895), with critical notes; see also 
F. Zarncke, Der deutsche Cato (1852), a history of middle age German 
translations; J. Nehab, Der altenglische Cato (1879); E. Bischoff, 
Prolegomena zum sogenannten Dionysius Cato (1893), in which the 
name is discussed; F. Plessis, Poesie latine (1909) , 663; for medieval 
translations and editions see Teuffel, Hist, of Roman Lit. § 398, 3. 

CATO, MARCUS PORCIUS (234-149 B.C.), Roman statesman, 
surnamed " The Censor," Sapiens, Priscus, or Major (the Elder), 
to distinguish him from Cato of Utica, was born at Tusculum. 
He came of an ancient plebeian family, noted for some military 
services, but not ennobled by the discharge of the higher civil 
offices. He was bred, after the manner of his Latin forefathers, 
to agriculture, to which he devoted himself when not engaged 
in military service. But, having attracted the notice of L. 
Valerius Flaccus, he was brought to Rome, and became success- 
ively quaestor (204), aedile (199), praetor (198), and consul (195) 
with his old patron. During his term of office he vainly opposed 
the repeal of the lex Oppia, passed during the Second Punic War 
to restrict luxury and extravagance on the part of women. 
Meanwhile he served in Africa, and took part in the crowning 
campaign of Zama (202) . He held a command in Sardinia, where 
he first showed his strict public morality, and again in Spain, 
which he reduced to subjection with great cruelty, and gained 
thereby the honour of a triumph (194). In the year 191 he acted 
as military tribune in the war against Antiochus III. of Syria, 
and played an important part in the battle of Thermopylae, 
which finally delivered Greece from the encroachments of the 
East. His reputation as a soldier was now established; hence- 
forth he preferred to serve the state at home, scrutinizing the 
conduct of the candidates for public honours and of generals 
in the field. If he was not personally engaged in the prosecution 
of the Scipios (Africanus and Asiaticus) for corruption, it was 
his spirit that animated the attack upon them. Even Africanus, 
who refused to reply to the charge, saying only, " Romans, 
this is the day on which I conquered Hannibal," and was absolved 
by acclamation, found it necessary to retire self-banished to his 
villa at Liternum. Cato's enmity dated from the African 
campaign when he quarrelled with Scipio for his lavish distribu- 
tion of the spoil amongst the troops, and his general luxury and 
extravagance. 

Cato had, however, a more serious task to perform in opposing 
the spread of the new Hellenic culture which threatened to destroy 
the rugged simplicity of the conventional Roman type. He 
conceived it to be his special mission to resist this invasion. 
It was in the discharge of the censorship that this determination 
was most strongly exhibited, and hence that he derived the title 
(the Censor) by which he is most generally distinguished. He 
revised with unsparing severity the lists of senators and knights, 
ejecting from either order the men whom he judged unworthy of it, 
either on moral grounds or from their want of the prescribed 
means. The expulsion of L. Quinctius Flamininus for wanton 
cruelty was an example of his rigid justice. His regulations 
against luxury were very stringent. He imposed a heavy tax 



upon dress and personal adornment, especially of women, and 
upon young slaves purchased as favourites. In 181 he supported 
the lex Orchia (according to others, he first opposed its introduc- 
tion, and subsequently its repeal), which prescribed a limit to the 
number of guests at an entertainment, and in 169 the lex Voconia, 
one of the provisions of which was intended to check the accumu- 
lation of an undue proportion of wealth in the hands of women. 
Amongst other things he repaired the aqueducts, cleansed the 
sewers, prevented private persons drawing off public water for 
their own use, ordered the demolition of houses which encroached 
on the public way, and built the first basilica in the forum near 
the curia. He raised the amount paid by the publican for the 
right of farming the taxes, and at the same time diminished the 
contract prices for the construction of public works. 

From the date of his censorship (184) to his death in 149, 
Cato held no public office, but continued to distinguish himself 
in the senate as the persistent opponent of the new ideas. He was 
struck with horror, along with many other Romans of the graver 
stamp, at the licence of the Bacchanalian mysteries, which he 
attributed to the fatal influence of Greek manners; and he 
vehemently urged the dismissal of the philosophers (Carneades, 
Diogenes and Critolaus), who came as ambassadors from Athens, 
on account of the dangerous nature of the views expressed by 
them. He had a horror of physicians, who were chiefly Greeks. 
He procured the release of Polybius, the historian, and his fellow- 
prisoners, contemptuously asking whether the senate had nothing 
more important to do than discuss whether a few Greeks should 
die at Rome or in their own land. It was not till his eightieth 
year that he made his first acquaintance with Greek literature. 
Almost his last public act was to urge his countrymen to the 
Third Punic War and the destruction of Carthage. In 157 he 
was one of the deputies sent to Carthage to arbitrate between 
the Carthaginians and Massinissa, king of Numidia. The 
mission was unsuccessful and the commissioners returned home. 
But Cato was so struck by the evidences of Carthaginian pros- 
perity that he was convinced that the security of Rome depended 
on the annihilation of Carthage. From this time, in season 
and out of season, he kept repeating the cry: " Delehda est 
Carthago." 

To Cato the individual life was a continual discipline, and 
public life was the discipline of the many. He regarded the 
individual householder as the germ of the family, the family 
as the germ of the state. By strict economy of time he accom- 
plished an immense amount of work; he exacted similar appli- 
cation from his dependents, and proved himself a hard husband, 
a strict father, a severe and cruel master. There was little 
difference apparently, in the esteem in which he held his wife 
and his slaves; his pride alone induced him to take a warmer 
interest in his sons. To the Romans themselves there was little 
in this behaviour which seemed worthy of censure; it was 
respected rather as a traditional example of the old Roman 
manners. In the remarkable passage (xxxix. 40) in which Livy 
describes the character of Cato, there is no word of blame for 
the rigid discipline of his household. 

Cato perhaps deserves even more notice as a literary man than 
as a statesman or a soldier. He was the first Latin prose writer 
of any importance, and the first author of a history of Rome 
in Latin. His treatise on agriculture (De Agricultura or De Re 
Rustica) is the only work by him that has been preserved; it 
is not agreed whether the work we possess is the original or 
a later revision. It contains a miscellaneous collection of rules 
of good husbandry, conveying much curious information on the 
domestic habits of the Romans of his age. His most important 
work, Origines, in seven books, related the history of Rome from 
its earliest foundations to his own day. It was so called from 
the second and third books, which described the rise of the 
different Italian towns. His speeches, of which as many 
as 150 were collected, were principally directed against the 
young free-thinking and loose-principled nobles of the day. 
He also wrote a set of maxims for the use of his son (Praecepta 
ad Filium), and some rules for everyday life in verse (Carmen 
de Moribus). The collection of proverbs in hexameter verse, 



53^ 



CATO 



extant under the name of Cato, probably belongs to the 4th 
century a.d. (See Cato, Dionysius.) 

Authorities. — There are lives of Cato by Cornelius Nepos, 
Plutarch and Aurelius Victor, and many particulars of his career 
and character are to be gathered from Livy and Cicero. See also 
F D. Gerlach, Marcus Porcius Cato der Censor (Basel, 1869) i G. 
Kurth, Caton I'ancien (Bruges, 1872); J. Cortese, De M. Porcii 
Catonis vita, operibus, et lingua (Turin, 1883) ; F. Marcucci, Studio 
critico suite Opere di Catone il Maggiore (1902). The best edition of 
the De Agricultura is by H. Keil (1884-1891), of the fragments of the 
Origines by H. Peter (1883) in Historicorum Romanorum Frag- 
menta, of the fragments generally by H. Jordan (i860); see also 
J. Wordsworth, Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin (1874) ; 
M. Schanz, Geschichte der romischen Litteratur (1898); article in 
Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography; Mommsen, 
Hist, of Rome (Eng. trans.), bk. iii. ch. xi and xiv. ; Warde Fowler, 
Social Life at Rome (1909). 

CATO, MARCUS PORCIUS (95-46 B.C.), Roman philosopher, 
called Uticensis to distinguish him from his great-grandfather, 
" the Censor." On the death of his parents he was brought up 
in the house of his uncle, M. Livius Drusus. After fighting 
with distinction in the ranks against Spartacus (72 B.C.), he 
became a military tribune (67), and served a campaign in Mace- 
donia, but he never had any enthusiasm for the military pro- 
fession. On his return he became quaestor, and showed so much 
zeal and integrity in the management of the public accounts 
that he obtained a provincial appointment in Asia, where he 
strengthened his reputation. Though filled with disgust at the 
corruption of the public men with whom he came in contact, he 
saw much to admire in the discipline which Lucullus had en- 
forced in his own eastern command, and he supported his claims 
to a triumph, while he opposed the inordinate pretensions of 
Pompey. When the favour of the nobles gained him the tribune- 
ship, he exerted himself unsuccessfully to convict L. Licinius 
Murena (2), one of their chief men, of bribery. Cicero, who de- 
fended Murena, was glad to have Cato's aid when he urged the 
execution of the Catilinarian conspirators. Cato's vote on this 
matter drew upon him the bitter resentment of Julius Caesar, 
who did his utmost to save them. 

Cato had now become a great power in the state. Though 
possessed of little wealth and no family influence, his unflinch^ 
ing resolution in the cause of the ancient free state rendered 
him a valuable instrument in the hands of the nobles. He vainly 
opposed Caesar's candidature for the consulship in 59, and his 
attempt, in conjunction with Bibulus, to prevent the passing 
of Caesar's proposed agrarian law for distributing lands 
amongst the Asiatic veterans, proved unsuccessful. Nevertheless, 
although his efforts were ineffectual, he was still an obstacle 
of sufficient importance for the triumvirs to desire to get rid of 
him. At the instigation of Caesar he was sent to Cyprus (58) 
with a mission to depose its king, Ptolemy (brother of Ptolemy 
Auletes), and annex the island. On his return two years later 
he continued to struggle against the combined powers of the 
triumvirs in the city, and became involved in scenes of violence 
and riot. He succeeded in obtaining the praetorship in 54, 
and strenuously exerted himself in the hopeless and thank- 
less task of suppressing bribery, in which all parties were 
equally interested. He failed to attain the consulship, and 
had made up his mind to retire from the arena of civic 
ambition when the civil war broke out in 49. Feeling that the 
sole chance for the free state lay in conceding an actual supremacy 
to Pompey, whom he had formerly vigorously opposed, he 
did not scruple to support the unjust measures of the nobles 
against Caesar. At the outset of the war he was entrusted with 
the defence of Sicily, but finding it impossible to resist the 
superior forces of C. Scribonius Curio, who had landed on the 
island, he joined Pompey at Dyrrhachium. When his chief 
followed Caesar to Thessaly he was left behind in charge of the 
camp, and thus was not present at the battle of Pharsalus. 
After the battle, when Pompey abandoned his party, he separated 
himself from the main body of the republicans, and conducted 
a small remnant of their forces into Africa. After his famous 
march through the Libyan deserts, he shut himself up in Utica, 
and even after the decisive defeat at Thapsus (46), in spite of 



the wishes of his followers, he determined to keep the gates closed 
till he had sent off his adherents by sea. While the embarkation 
was in progress he continued calm and dignified; when the last 
of the transports had left the port he cheerfully dismissed his 
attendants, and soon afterwards stabbed himself. 

He had been reading, we are told, in his last moments Plato's 
dialogue on the immortality of the soul, but his own philosophy 
had taught him to act upon a narrow sense of immediate duty 
without regard to the future. He conceived that he was placed 
in the world to play an active part, and when disabled from 
carrying out his principles, to retire gravely from it. He had 
lived for the free state, and it now seemed his duty to perish 
with it. In politics he was a typical doctrinaire, abhorring 
compromise and obstinately blind to the fact that his national 
ideal was a hopeless anachronism. From the circumstances of 
his life and of his death, he has come to be regarded as one of the 
most distinguished of Roman philosophers, but he composed no 
works, and bequeathed to posterity no other instruction than 
that of his example. The only composition by him which we 
possess is a letter to Cicero {Ad FaiH. xv. 5), a polite refusal of 
the orator's request that he would endeavour to procure him 
the honour of a triumph. The school of the Stoics, which took 
a leading part in the history of Rome under the earlier emperors, 
looked to him as its saint and patron. It continued to wage 
war against the empire, hardly less openly than Cato himself 
had done, for two centuries, till at last it became actually seated 
on the imperial throne in the person of Marcus Aurelius. Im- 
mediately after his death Cato's character became the subject 
of discussion; Cicero's panegyric Cato was answered by Caesar 
in his Anticafo. Brutus, dissatisfied with Cicero's work, pro- 
duced another on the same subject; in Lucan Cato is repre- 
sented as a model of virtue and disinterestedness. 

See Life by Plutarch, and compare Addison's tragedy. Modern 
biographies by H. Wartmann (Zurich, 1859), an d F. D. Gerlach 
(Basel, 1866); I C. W. Oman, Seven Roman Statesmen of the Later 
Republic, Cato ... (1902); Mommsen, Hist, of Rome (Eng. trans.), 
bk. v. ch. v.; article in Smith's Dictionary of Classical Biography; 
Gaston Boissier, Cicero and his Friends (Eng. trans., 1897), esp. 
pp. 277 foil.; Warde Fowler, Social Life at Rome (1909). 

CATO, PUBLIUS VALERIUS, Roman poet and grammarian, 
was born about 100 B.C. He is of importance as the leader 
of the " new " school of poetry (poetae novi, veonepoi, as 
Cicero calls them). Its followers rejected the national epic 
and drama in favour of the artificial mythological epics and 
elegies of the Alexandrian school, and preferred Euphorion of 
Chalcis to Ennius. Learning, that is, a knowledge of Greek 
literature and myths, and strict adherence to metrical rules were 
regarded by them as indispensable to the poet. The veonepoi 
were also determined opponents of Pompey and Caesar. The 
great influence of Cato is attested by the lines: — 
" Cato grammaticus, Latina Siren, 
Qui solus legit ac facit poetas." 1 

Our information regarding his life is derived from Suetonius 
(De Grammaticis, xi). He was a native of Cisalpine Gaul, 
and lost his property during the Sullan disturbances before he 
had attained his majority. He lived to a great age, and during 
the latter part of his life was in very reduced circumstances. 
He was at one time possessed of considerable wealth, and owned 
a villa at Tusculum which he was obliged to hand over to his 
creditors. In addition to grammatical treatises, Cato wrote a 
number of poems, the best-known of which were the Lydia and 
Diana. In the Indignatio (perhaps a short poem) he defended 
himself against the accusation that he was of servile birth. It 
is probable that he is the Cato mentioned as a critic of Lucilius in 
the lines by an unknown author prefixed to Horace, Satires, i. 10. 

Among the minor poems attributed to Virgil is one called Dirae 
(or rather two, Dirae and Lydia). The Dirae consists of impreca- 
tions against the estate of which the writer has been deprived, and 
where he is obliged to leave his beloved Lydia ; in the Lydia, on 
the other hand, the estate is regarded with envy as the possessor of 
his charmer. Joseph Justus Scaliger was the first to attribute the 
poem (divided into two by F. Jacobs) to Valerius Cato, on the ground 

1 " Cato, the grammarian, the Latin siren, who alone reads aloud 
the works and makes the reputation of poets." 



CATS--CATTANEO 



537 



that he had lost an estate and had .written a Lydia. The question 
has been much discussed ; the balance of opinion is in favour of the 
Dirae being assigned to the beginning of the Augustan age, although 
so distinguished a critic as O. Kibbeck supports the claims of Cato 
to the authorship. The best edition of these poems is by A. F. 
Nake (1847), with exhaustive commentary and excursuses; a clear 
account of the question will be found in M. Schanz's Geschichle der 
romischen Litteratur; for the " new " school of poetry see Mommsen, 
Hist, of Rome, bk. v. ch. xii. ; F. Plessis, Poesie latine (1909), 188. 

CATS, JACOB (1577-1660), Dutch poet and humorist, was 
born at Brouwershaven in Zeeland on the 10th of November 
1577. Having lost his mother at an early age, and being adopted 
with his three brothers by an uncle, Cats was sent to school at 
Zierikzee. He then studied law at Leiden and at Orleans, and, 
returning to Holland, he settled at the Hague, where he began 
to practise as an advocate. His pleading in defence of A wretched 
creature accused of witchcraft brought him many clients and 
some reputation. He had a serious love affair about this time, 
which was broken off on the very eve of marriage by his catching 
a tertian fever which defied all attempts at cure for some two 
years. For medical advice and change of air Cats went to 
England, where he consulted the highest authorities in vain. 
He returned to Zeeland to die, but was cured mysteriously by 
a strolling quack. He married in 1602 a lady of some property, 
Elisabeth von Valkenburg, and thenceforward lived at Gryps- 
kerke in Zeeland, where he devoted himself to farming and 
poetry. His best works are: Emblemata or Minnebeelden with 
Maegdenplicht (16 18); Spiegel van den ouden en nieuwen Tijt 
(1632); Houwelijck . . . (1625); Selfstrijt (1620); Ouderdom, 
Buitem leven . . . en Hofgedachten op Sorgvliet (1664); and 
Gedachlen op slapelooze nachten (1661). Ini62i,on the expiration 
of the twelve years' truce with Spain, the breaking of the dykes 
drove him from his farm. He was made pensionary (stipendiary 
magistrate) of Middelburg; and two years afterwards of Dort. 
In 1627 Cats came to England on a mission to Charles I., who 
made him a knight. In 1636 he was made grand pensionary of 
Holland, and in 1648 keeper of the great seal; in 1631 he 
resigned his offices, but in 1657 he was sent a second time to 
England on what proved to be an unsuccessful mission to Crom- 
well. In the seclusion of his villa of Sorgvliet (Fly-from-Care), 
near the Hague, he lived from this time till his death, occupied in 
the composition of his autobiography (Eighty-two Years of My 
Life, first printed at Leiden in 1734) and of his poems. He died 
on the 1 2th of September 1660, and was buried by torchlight, 
and with great ceremony, in the Klooster-Kerk at the Hague. 
He is still spoken of as " Father Cats " by his countrymen. 

Cats was contemporary with Hooft and Vondel and other 
distinguished Dutch writers in the golden age of Dutch literature, 
but his Orangist and Calvinistic opinions separated him from 
the liberal school of Amsterdam poets. He was, however, 
intimate with Constantin Huygens, whose political opinions 
were more nearly in agreement with his own. For an estimate 
of his poetry see Dutch Literature. Hardly known outside 
of Holland, among his own people for nearly two centuries he 
enjoyed an enormous popularity. His diffuseness and the 
antiquated character of his matter and diction, have, however, 
come to be regarded as difficulties in the way of study, and he 
is more renowned than read. A statue to him was erected at 
Brouwershaven in 1829. 

See Jacob Cats, Complete Works (1 790-1 800, 19 vols.), later 
editions by van Vloten (Zwolle, 1858-1866; and at Schiedam, 
1869-1870); Pigott, Moral Emblems, with Aphorisms, &c, from 
Jacob Cats (i860); and P. C. Witsen Gejisbek, Het Leven en de 
Verdienstenivan Jacob Cats (1829). Southey has a very complimentary 
reference to Cats in his " Epistle to Allan Cunningham.' 

CAT'S-EYE, a name given to several distinct minerals, their 
common characteristic being that when cut with a convex surface 
they display a luminous band, like that seen by reflection in the eye 
of a cat. (1) Precious cat's-eye, oriental cat's-eye or chrysoberyl 
cat's-eye. This, the rarest of all, is a chatoyant variety of chryso- 
beryl (q.v.), showing in the finest stones a very sharply defined 
line of light. One of the grandest known specimens was in the 
Hope collection of precious stones, exhibited for many years at 
the Victoria and Albert Museum. (2) Quartz cat's-eye. This 



is the common form of cat's-eye, in which the effect is due to the 
inclusion of parallel fibres of asbestos. Like the chrysoberyl, it 
is obtained chiefly from Ceylon, but though coming from the 
East it is often called "occidental cat's-eye" — a term intended 
simply to distinguish it from the finer or "oriental" stone. It 
is readily distinguished by its inferior density, its specific gravity 
being only 2-65, whilst that of oriental cat's-eye is as high as 3-7. 
A greenish fibrous quartz, cut as cat's-eye, occurs at Hof and some 
other localities ro Bavaria. (3) Crocidolite cat's-eye, a beautiful 
golden brown mineral, with silky fibres, found in Griqualand 
West, and much used in recent years as an ornamental stone, 
sometimes under the name of " South African cat's-eye." 
It consists of fibrous quartz, coloured with oxide of iron, and 
results from the alteration of crocidolite (q.v.). It is often 
distinguished as " tigerVeye " (or more commonly " tiger-eye "), 
whilst a blue variety, less altered, is known as " hawk's-eye." 
By the action of hydrochloric acid the colour of tiger's-eye may 
to a large extent be removed, and a greyish cat's-eye obtained. 
(4) Corundum cat's-eye. In some asteriated corundum (see 
Asteria) the star is imperfect and may be reduced to a luminous 
zone, producing an indistinct cat's-eye effect. According to the 
colour of the corundum the stone is known as sapphire cat's-eye, 
ruby cat's-eye, topaz cat's-eye, &c. (F. W. R.*) 

CATSKILL, a village and the county-seat of Greene county, 
New York, U.S.A., on the W. bank of the Hudson river, 33 m. 
S. of Albany. Pop. (1890) 4920; (1900) 5484; of whom 657 
were foreign-born; (1910) 5:206. It is served by the West 
Shore railway, by several lines of river steamboats, and by 
the Catskill Mountain railway, connecting it with the popular 
summer resorts in the Catskill mountains. A ferry connects 
with Catskill station (Greendale) on the east side of the Hudson. 
The village is in a farming country, and manufactures woollen 
goods and bricks, but it is best known as a summer resort, and 
as the principal gateway to thebeautiful Catskill Mountain region. 
The Recorder, a weekly newspaper, was established here in 1792 
as the Packet. The first settler on the present site of Catskill 
was Derrick Teunis van Vechten, who built a house here in 1680. 
The village was not incorporated until 1806. 

See J. D. Pinckney, Reminiscences of Catskill (Catskill, 1868). 

CATSKILL (formerly Kaatskil) MOUNTAINS, a group of 
moderate elevation pertaining to the Alleghany Plateau, and not 
properly included in the Appalachian system of North America 
because they lack the internal structures and the general parallel- 
ism of topographic features which characterize the Appalachian 
ranges. The group contains many summits above 3000 ft. 
elevation and half a dozen approaching 4000, Slide Mountain 
(4205 ft.), and Hunter Mountain (4025 ft.), being the only ones 
exceeding that figure. The bottom lands along the creeks 
which drain the mountains, together with rolling uplands rising 
to elevations of from 1500 to 2000 ft., are under cultivation, the 
mountain slopes being forested or devoted to grazing. The pure 
and cool atmosphere attracts summer visitors, for whose accom- 
modation many hotels have been built, some of which have 
become celebrated. Stoney Clove and Kaaterskill Clove are pic- 
turesque gorges, the former being traversed by a railway, and the 
latter containing three cascades having a total fall of about 300 ft. 
The growing need of New York City for an increased water- 
supply has driven her engineers to the Catskills, where several 
great reservoirs have been projected to supplement those of the 
Croton watershed. 

CATTANEO, CARLO (1801-1869), Italian philosopher and 
patriot. A republican in his convictions, during his youth he 
had taken part in the Carbonarist movement in Lombardy. 
He devoted himself to the study of philosophy, hoping to re- 
generate the Italian people by withdrawing them from romanticism 
and rhetoric, and turning their attention to the positive sciences. 
He expounded his ideas in a review founded by him at Milan 
in 1837, called // Politecnico. But when the revolution of 1848 
broke out he threw himself heart and soul into the fray, and 
became one of the leading spirits of the insurrection against the 
Austrians, known as the Five Days of Milan (March 18-22, 1848). 
Together with Terzaghi, Cernuschi and Clerici he formed a 



538 



CATTARO— CATTERMOLE 



council of war which, having its headquarters at Casa Taverna, 
directed the queries of the insurgents. He was second to none
in self-sacrificing energy and heroic resolution. When on the 
18th of March Field Marshal Radetzky, feeling that the position 
of the Austrian garrison was untenable, sounded the rebels as 
to their terms, some of the leaders were inclined to agree to an 
armistice which would give time for the Piedmontese troops to 
arrive (Piedmont had just declared war), but Cattaneo insisted 
on the complete evacuation of Lombardy. Again on the 21st, 
Radetzky tried to obtain an armistice, and Durini and Borromeo 
were ready to grant it, for it would have enabled them to re- 
organize the defences and replenish the supplies of food and 
ammunition, which could only last another day. But Cattaneo 
replied: "The enemy having furnished us with munitions thus 
far, will continue to furnish them. Twenty-four hours of 
victuals and twenty-four hours of hunger will be many more 
hours than we shall need. This evening, if the plans we have 
just arranged should succeed, the line of the bastions will be 
broken. At any rate, even though we should lack bread, it is 
better to die of hunger than on the gallows." On the expulsion 
of the Austrians the question arose as to the future government of 
Milan and Italy. Cattaneo was- an uncompromising republican 
and a federalist; so violent was his dislike of the Piedmontese 
monarchy that when he heard that King Charles Albert had been 
defeated by the Austrians, and that Radetzky was marching 
back to reoccupy Milan, he exclaimed: " Good news, the Pied- 
montese have been beaten. Now we shall be our own masters; 
we shall fight a people's war, we shall chase the Austrians out 
of Italy, and set up a Federal Republic." When the Austrians 
returned Cattaneo had to flee, and took refuge at Lugano, where 
he gave lessons, wrote his Storia della Rivoluzione del 1848, the 
Archivio triennale delle cose d' Italia (3 vols., 1850-1855), and 
then early in i860 he started the Politecnico once more. He 
bitterly attacked Cavour for his unitarian views, and for the 
cession of Nice and Savoy. In i860 Garibaldi summoned him 
to Naples to take part in the government of the Neapolitan 
provinces, but he would not agree to the union with Piedmont 
without local autonomy. After the union of Italy he was 
frequently asked to stand for parliament, but always refused 
because he could not conscientiously take the oath of allegiance 
to the monarchy. In 1868 the pressure of friends overcame 
his resistance, and he agreed to stand, but at the last moment 
he drew back, still unable to take .the oath, and returned to 
Lugano, where he died in 1 869. As a writer Cattaneo was learned 
and brilliant, but far too bitter a partisan to be judicious, owing 
to his narrowly republican views; his ideas on local autonomy 
were perhaps wise, but, at a moment when unity was the first 
essential, inopportune. 

Bibliography. — A. and J. Mario, Carlo Cattaneo (Florence, 
1884) ; E. Zanoni, Carlo Cattaneo nella vita e nelle opere (Rome, 
1898); see also his own Opere edite ed inedite (7 vols., Florence, 
1881-1892), Scritti politici ed epistolari (3 vols., Florence, 1892- 
1901), Scritti storici, letterari (Milan, 1898, &c). 

CATTARO (Serbo-Croatian Kotor), the chief town of an 
administrative district in Dalmatia, Austria. Pop. (1900) of 
town, 3021; of commune, 5418. Cattaro occupies a narrow 
ledge between the Montenegrin Mountains and the Bocche di 
Cattaro, a winding and beautiful inlet of the Adriatic Sea. This 
inlet expands into five broad gulfs, united by narrower channels, 
and forms one of the finest natural harbours in Europe. Teodo, 
on the outermost gulf, is a small naval port. Cattaro is strongly 
fortified, and about 3000 troops are stationed in its neighbourhood. 
On the seaward side, the defensive works include Castelnuovo 
(Erceg Novi), which guards the main entrance to the Bocche. 
On the landward side, the long walls running from the town 
to the castle of San Giovanni, far above, form a striking feature 
in the landscape; and the heights of the Krivoscie or Crevoscia 
(Krivosije), a group of barren mountains between Montenegro, 
Herzegovina and the sea, are crowned by small forts. Cattaro 
is divided almost equally between the Roman Catholic and 
Orthodox creeds. It is the seat of a Roman Catholic bishop, 
y.'ith a small cathedral, a collegiate church and several convents. 



The transit trade with Montenegro is impeded by high tariffs 
on both sides of the frontier. Foreign visitors to Montenegro 
usually land at Cattaro, which is connected by steamer with 
Trieste and by road with Cettigne. The railway from Ragusa 
terminates at Zelenika, near Castelnuovo. 

There are many interesting places on the shores of the Bocche. 
Castelnuovo is a picturesque town, with a dismantled 14th- 
century citadel, which has, at various times, been occupied 
by Bosnians, Turks,. Venetians, Spaniards, Russians, French, 
English and Austrians. The orthodox convent of St Sava, 
standing amid beautiful gardens, was founded in the 16th cen- 
tury, and contains many fine specimens of 17th-century silver- 
smiths' work. There is a Benedictine monastery on a small 
island opposite to Perasto (Perast), 8 m. east of Castelnuovo. 
Perasto itself was for a time an independent state in the 14th 
century. Rhizon, the modern hamlet of Risano, close by, was 
a thriving " Illyrian " city as early as 229 B.C., and gave its 
name to the Bocche, then known as Rhizonicus Sinus. Rhizon 
submitted to Rome in 168 B.C., and about the same time 
Ascrivium, or Ascruvium, the modern Cattaro, is first mentioned 
as a neighbouring city., Justinian built a fortress above Ascrivium 
in a.d. 535, after expelling the Goths, and a second town probably 
grew up on the heights round it, for Constantine Porphyro. 
genitus, in the 10th century, alludes to " Lower Cattaro " (rd 
Karw AeKarepa). The city was plundered by the. Saracens in 
840, and by the Bulgarians in 1102. In the next year it was 
ceded to Servia by the Bulgarian tsar Samuel, but revolted, in 
alliance with Ragusa, and only submitted in 1184, as a protected 
state, preserving intact its republican institutions, and its right 
to conclude treaties and engage in war. It was already an epis- 
copal see, and, in the 13th century, Dominican and Franciscan 
monasteries were established to check the spread of Bogomilism. 
In the 14th century the commerce of Cattaro rivalled that of 
Ragusa, and provoked the jealousy of Venice. The downfall of 
Servia in 1389 left the city without a guardian, and, after being 
seized and* abandoned by Venice and Hungary in turn, it passed 
under Venetian rule in 1420. It was besieged by the Turks iD 
1538 and 1657, visited by plague in 1572, and nearly destroyed by 
earthquakes in 1563 and 1667. By the treaty of Campo-Formio 
in 1797 it passed to Austria; but in 1805, by the treaty of 
Pressburg, it was assigned to Italy, and was united in 1810 
with the French empire. In 1814 it was restored to Austria by 
the congress of Vienna. The attempt to enforce compulsory 
military service, made and abandoned in 1869, but finally 
successful in 1881, led to two short-lived revolts among the 
Krivoscians, during which Cattaro was the Austrian head- 
quarters. 

See G. Gelcich (Gelcic), Memorie storiche suite Bocche di Cattaro 
(Zara, 1880). " 

CATTEGAT, or Kattegat (Scand. " cat's-throat "), a strait 
forming part of the connexion between the Baltic and the North 
Seas. It lies north and south between Sweden and Denmark, 
and connects north with the Skagerrack and south through the 
Sound, the Great Belt and the Little Belt with the Baltic Sea. Its 
length is about 150 m. and its extreme breadth about 90 m. 

CATTERMOLE, GEORGE (1800-1868), English painter, 
chiefly in water-colours, was born at Dickleburgh, near Diss, 
Norfolk, in August 1800. At the age of sixteen he began working 
as an architectural and topographical draughtsman; afterwards 
he contributed designs to be engraved in the annuals then so 
popular; thence he progressed into water-colour painting, 
becoming an associate of the Water-Colour Society in 1822, and a 
full member in 1833. In 1850 he withdrew from active connexion 
with this society, and took to painting in oil. His most fertile 
period was between 1833 and 1850. At the Paris exhibition of 
1855 he received one of the five first-class gold medals awarded 
to British painters. He also enjoyed professional honours in 
Amsterdam and in Belgium. He died on the 24th of July 1868. 
Among his leading works are " The Murder of the Bishop of 
Liege " (15th century), " The Armourer relating the Story of 
the Sword," " The Assassination of the Regent Murray by 
Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh," and (in oil) "A Terrible Secret." 



CATTLE 



539 



He was largely employed by publishers, illustrating the Waverley 
Novels and the Historical Annual of his brother the Rev. Richard 
Cattermole (his scenes from the wars of Cavaliers and Roundheads 
in this series are among his best engraved works), and many 
other volumes besides. Cattermole was a painter of no incon- 
siderable gifts, and of great facility in picturesque resource; 
he was defective in solidity of form and texture, and in realism 
or richness of colour. He excelled in rendering scenes of chivalry, 
of medievalism, and generally of the romantic aspects of the past. 

CATTLE (Norman Fr. catel, from Late Lat. capitate, wealth 
or property, a word applied in the feudal system to movable 
property and particularly to live stock, and surviving in its wider 
meaning as " chattel " or " chattle "), a general term for the cows 
and oxen of agricultural use. For the zoological account, see 
Bovidae, and the subordinate articles there referred to; for 
details concerning dairy-farming, see Dairy. 

Oxen appear to have been among the earliest of domesticated 
animals, as they undoubtedly were among the most important 
agents in the growth of early civilization. They are mentioned 
in the oldest written records of the Hebrew and Hindu peoples, 
and are figured on Egyptian monuments raised over 3000 years 
B.C.; while remains of domesticated specimens have been found 
in Swiss lake-dwellings along with the stone implements and other 
relics of Neolithic man. In infant communities a man's wealth 
was measured by the number and size of his herds — Abraham, 
it is said, was rich in cattle — and oxen for a long period formed, 
as they still do among many savage or semi-savage tribes, the 
favourite medium of exchange between individuals and com- 
munities. After the introduction of a metal coinage into ancient 
Greece, this method of exchange was commemorated by stamping 
the image of an ox on the new money; while the connexion be- 
tween cattle and coin as symbols of wealth has left its mark on 
the languages of Europe, as is seen in the Latin word pecunia 
and the English " pecuniary," derived from pecus, cattle. The 
value attached to cattle in ancient times is further shown by 
the Bull figuring among the signs of the zodiac; in its worship 
by the ancient Egyptians under the title of Apis; in the venera- 
tion which has always been paid to it by the Hindus, according 
to whose sacred legends it was the first animal created by the 
three divinities directed by the supreme Deity to furnish the 
earth with animated beings; and in the important part it played 
in Greek and Roman mythology. The Hindus were not allowed 
to shed the blood of the ox, and the Egyptians could only do so 
in sacrificing to their gods. Both Hindus and Jews were for- 
bidden to muzzle it when treading out the corn; to destroy it 
wantonly was a crime among the Romans, punishable with exile. 

Breeds. — There exist in Britain four interesting remnants of 
what were at one time numerous enclosed herds of ancient 
forest cattle, 1 with black or red points, in parks at Chillingham, 
Cadzow, Vaynol (near Bangor, North Wales) and Chartley. 
A few of the last have been removed to Woburn. Other repre- 
sentatives of old stock are — a resuscitated white Welsh breed 
with black points, derived from white specimens born of black 
Welsh cows; several herds of a white polled breed with black 
points; a herd of the ancient Polled Suffolk Dun, an excellent 
milking breed; a White Belted Galloway and a White Belted 
Welsh breed; the old Gloucester breed at Badminton, with a 
white rump, tail and underlinej related to the now extinct 
Glamorgan breed; the Shetland breed; and a few herds of 
Dutch cattle preserved for their superior milking powers. 

The prominent breeds of cattle in the British Isles 2 comprise 
the Shorthorn, Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn, Hereford, Devon, 
South Devon, Sussex, Welsh, Longhorn, Red Polled, Aberdeen- 
Angus, Galloway, West Highland, Ayrshire, Jersey, Guernsey, 
Kerry and Dexter. 

The Shorthorn, Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn, Hereford, Devon, 
South Devon, Sussex, Longhorn and Red Polled breeds are 
native to .England; the Aberdeen- Angus, Galloway, Highland 

1 Rev. J. Storer, The Wild White Cattle of Great Britain (1879). 

2 See Wallace's Farm Live Stock of Great Britain (1907), Low's 
Breeds of the Domestic Animals of the British Isles ( 1 842, illustrated, and 
1845), and E. V. Wilcox's Farm Animals (1907), an American work. 



and Ayrshire breeds to Scotland; and the Kerry and Dexter 
breeds to Ireland. The Jersey and Guernsey breeds — often 
spoken of as Channel Islands cattle — belong to the respective 
islands whose names they bear, and great care is taken to keep 
them isolated from each other. The term Alderney is obsolete, 
the cattle of Alderney being mainly a type of the Guernsey breed. 

Among breeds well known in the United States 2 and not 
mentioned above, the more important are the Holsteins, large 
black and white cattle highly valued for their abundant milk 
production, and the Dutch Belted breed, black with a broad 
white band round the body, also good milkers. 

The Shorthorn 3 is the most widely distributed of all the breeds 
of cattle both at home and abroad. No census of breeds has ever 
been taken in the United Kingdom, but such an enumeration 
would show the Shorthorn far to exceed in numbers any other 
breed, whilst the great majority of cross-bred cattle contain 
Shorthorn blood. During the last quarter of the 18th century 
the brothers Charles Colling (1751-1836) and Robert Colling 
(1749-1820), by careful selection and breeding, improved the 
cattle of the Teeswater district in the county of Durham. If the 
Shorthorn did not originate thus, it is indisputable that the efforts 
of the Collings 4 had a profound influence upon the fortunes of 
the breed. It is still termed the Durham breed in most parts of 
the world except the land of its birth, and the geographical 
name is far preferable, for the term " shorthorn " is applicable 
to a number of other breeds. Other skilled breeders turned their 
attention to the Shorthorns and established famous strains, 
the descendants of which can still be traced. By Thomas Booth, 
of Killerby and Warlaby in Yorkshire (1777), the "Booth", 
strains of Shorthorns were originated; by Thomas Bates, of 
Kirklevington in Yorkshire, the " Bates " families 5 (1800). 

The Shorthorn is sometimes spoken of as the ubiquitous 
breed, its striking characteristic being the ease with which it 
adapts itself to varying conditions of soil, climate and manage- 
ment. It is also called the " red, white and roan." The roan 
colour is very popular, and dark red has its supporters, as in the 
case of the Lincolnshire Red Shorthorns; white is not in favour, 
especially abroad. The Shorthorn breed is more noted for its 
beef-making than for its milk-yielding properties, although 
the non-pedigree milking Shorthorn of the north of England is 
an excellent cow with dual-purpose qualifications of the first 
order. An effort is being made to restore milking qualities to 
certain strains of pedigree blood. 

The culmination of what may be termed the Booth and Bates 
period was in the year 187s, when the sales took place of Lord 
Dunmore's and William Torr's herds, which realized extraordinary 
prices. In that black year of farming, 1879, prices were declining, 
and they continued to do so till within the last few years of the 
close of the 19th century, when there' set in a gradual revival, 
stimulated largely by the commercial prosperity of the country. 
The result of extremely high prices when line-bred animals 
were in fashion was a tendency to breed from all kinds of animals 
that were of the same tribe, without selection. A deterioration set 
in, which was aggravated by the overlooking of the milking prop- 
erties. Shorthorn breeders came to see that change of blood was 
necessary. Meanwhile, for many years breeders in Aberdeenshire 
had been holding annual sales of young bulls and heifers from 
their herds. The late Amos Cruickshank began his annual 
sales in the 'forties, and the late W. T. Talbot-Crosbie had annual 
sales from his Shorthorn herd in the south-west of Ireland for a 
number of years. Many Aberdeen farmers emigrated to Canada, 
and bought Shorthorn calves in their native county to take with 
them. The Cruickshanks held their bull sales at that time, 
and many of their animals were bought by the small breeders 
in Canada. This continued until 1875, when the Cruickshanks 
had so much private demand that they discontinued their public 
sales. Subsequently, when Cruickshank sold his herd privately 

3 Shorthorn Society of Great Britain and Ireland (1822). Sec. 
E. J. Powell, 12 Hanover Square, London, W. 

4 C. J. Bates, " The Brothers Colling," Jour. Roy.Agric. Soc. (1899). 
6 C. J. Bates, Thomas Bates and the Kirklevington Shorthorns: a 

Contribution to the History of Pure Durham Cattle (Newcastle-upon- 
Tyne, 1897). 



54° 



CATTLE 



to James Nelson & Sons for exportation, the animals could not 
all be shipped, and W. Duthie, of Collynie, Aberdeenshire, bought 
some of the older cows, whilst J. Deane Willis, of Baptdn Monar, 
Wilts, bought the yearling heifers. Duthie thereupon resumed 
the sales that the Cruickshanks had relinquished, his averages 
being £30 in 1892, about £50 in 1893-1894, and £80 in 1895. 
These prices advanced through English breeders requiring a 
little change of blood, and also through the increasing tendency 
to exhibit animals of great substance, or rather to feed animals 
for show. The success of this movement strengthened the 
demand, whilst an inquiry for his line of blood arose in the 
United States and Canada. A faithful contemporary history of 
the Shorthorn breed is to be found in Thornton's Circular, 
published quarterly since 1868; see also J. Sinclair, History of 
Shorthorn Cattle (1907); R. Bruce, Fifty Years among Shorthorns 
(1907); A. H. Sanders, Shorthorn Cattle (Chicago, 1901). 

The Lincolnshire Red Shorthorns are the best dual-purpose 
cattle — for milk and meat — that possess a pedigree record, in 
the United Kingdom, and their uniform cherry red colour has 
brought them into high favour in tropical countries for crossing 
with the native breeds. 

The Hereford breed is maintained chiefly in Herefordshire 
and the adjoining counties. Whilst a full red is the general 
colour of the body, the Herefords are distinguished by their 
white face, white chest and abdomen, and white mane. The legs 
up to the knee or hock are also often white. As a protection 
against the sun in a hot climate dark spots on the eyelids or 
round the orbits are valuable. The horns are moderately long. 
Herefords, though they rear their own calves, have acquired but 
little fame as dairy cattle. They are very hardy, and produce 
beef of excellent quality. Being docile, they fatten easily and 
readily, and as graziers' beasts they are in high favour. 

When the Bates' Shorthorn bubble burst in America about 
1877, the Hereford gradually replaced the Shorthorn of the 
western ranches, and it is now the most numerous ranch animal 
in the United States and Canada. The bulls beat the bulls of 
all other breeds in " rustling " capacity. 

In America the ranch-bred Herefords have got too small 
in the bone in recent years, and Shorthorns, chiefly of the Scottish 
type, are being introduced to increase their size by crossing. 
In the " feed lot " a well-bred Hereford steer feeds more quickly 
than either a Shorthorn or an Aberdeen-Angus. 

In Queensland, Hereford cattle bred from the " Lord Wilton " 
strain by Robert Christison of Lammermoor have for years been 
triumphant as beef-producers in competition with the Shorthorn. 
When these are quartered in the ordinary butchers' fashion, the 
hind-quarters outweigh the fore-quarters, which is a reversal 
of the prevailing rule. 

North Devons. — The " Rubies of the West," as they are termed 
from their hue, are reared chiefly in Devon and Somerset. 
The colour is a whole red, its depth or richness varying with the 
individual, and in summer becoming mottled with darker spots. 
The Devons stand somewhat low; they are neat and compact, 
and possess admirable symmetry. Although a smaller breed than 
the Shorthorn or the Hereford, they weigh better than either. 
The horns of the female are somewhat slender, and often curve 
neatly upwards. Being fine-limbed, active animals, they are 
well adapted for grazing the poor pastures of their native hills, 
and they turn their food to the best account, yielding excellent 
beef. They have not yet attained much celebrity as milch kine, 
for, though their milk is of first-class quality, with a few notable 
exceptions, its quantity is small. Latterly, however, the milking 
qualities have received more attention from breeders, whose 
object is to qualify the Devon as a dual-purpose breed. 

The South Devon or South Hams cattle are almost restricted 
to that southern part of the county of Devon known as the Hams, 
whence they are also called " Hammers." With a somewhat 
ungainly head, lemon-yellow hair, yellow skin, and large but 
hardly handsome udder, the South Devon breed more resembles 
the Guernsey, with which it is supposed to be connected, than 
the trim-built cattle of the hills of North Devon. The cows 
are large, heavy milkers, and produce excellent butter. They 



'are rarely seen outside their locality except when they appear 
in the showyards. 

The Sussex breed resembles the North Devon in many respects, 
but it is bigger, less refined in appearance, less graceful in outline, 
and of a deeper brown-chestnut colour than the " dainty Devon," 
as the latter may well be called when compa/ed with them. 
As a hardy race, capable of thriving on pcor rough pastures, 
the Sussex are highly valued in their native districts, where they 
were rapidly improved before the end of the 19th century. They 
are essentially a beef-producing breed, the cows having little 
reputation as milkers. By stall-feeding they can be ripened 
for the butcher at an early age. Sussex cattle are said to " die 
well," that is, to yield a large proportion of meat in the best 
parts of the carcase. 

In the Welsh breed of cattle black is the prevailing colour, 
and the horns are fairly long. They do not mature very rapidly, 
but some of them grow eventually into great ponderous beasts, 
and their beef is of prime quality. The cows often possess 
considerable reputation as milkers. As graziers' beasts Welsh 
cattle are well known in the midland counties of England, where, 
under the name of " Welsh runts," large herds of bullocks are 
fattened on the pastures or " topped up " in the yards in winter. 

All the remaining strains of Welsh cattle were recognized as one 
breed in 1904, when the Welsh Black Cattle Society united into 
one register the Herd Books Of North and South Wales. 

The Longhorn or •" Dishley " breed of cattle is one of the most 
interesting historically. It was with Longhorns that Robert 
Bakewell, of Dishley, Leicestershire (1726-1795), showed his 
remarkable skill as an improver of cattle in the middle of the 
1 8th century. 1 At one period Longhorns spread widely over 
England and Ireland, but, as the Shorthorns extended their 
domain, the Longhorns made way for them. They are big, 
rather clumsy animals, with long drooping horns, which are 
very objectionable in these days of cattle transport by rail and 
sea. They are slow in coming to maturity, but are very hardy. 
The bullocks feed up to heavy weights, and the cows are fair 
milkers. No lover of cattle can view these quaint creatures 
without a feeling of satisfaction that the efforts made to resusci- 
tate a breed which has many useful qualities to commend it 
have been successful, and that the extinction which threatened 
it in the 'eighties of last century is no longer imminent. In 1907 
there were twenty-two Longhorn herds containing about four 
hundred registered cattle located mainly in the English midlands 
and Man. 

The Red Poll breed, though old, has only come into promi- 
nence within recent years. They were known as the East Anglian 
Polls, and later as the Norfolk and Suffolk Polled cattle, being 
confined chiefly to these two counties. They are symmetrically 
built, of medium size, and of uniformly red colour. They have 
a tuft of hair on the poll. As dairy cattle, they are noted for the 
length of the period during which they continue in milk. Not 
less are they valued as beef -producers, and, as they are hardy 
and docile, theyfatten readily and mature fairly early. Hence, 
like the Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn, they may claim to be a 
dual-purpose breed. As beef cattle they are always seen to 
advantage at the Norwich Christmas cattle show, held annually 
in November. 

The Aberdeen^- Angus, a polled, black breed, the cows of which 
are often termed " Doddies," belongs to Aberdeenshire and 
adjacent parts of Scotland, but many herds are maintained in 
England and some in Ireland. The steers and heifers fed for 
the butcher attain great weight, make first-class show beasts, 
and yield beef of excellent quality. The cross between the Short- 
horn and the Aberdeen- Angus is a favourite in the meat markets 
and at fat-stock competitions. 

The Galloways are named from the district, Kirkcudbright and 
Wigtonshire, in the south-west of Scotland,, to which they are 
native. Like the Aberdeen-Angus cattle, they are hornless, and 
normally of a black colour. But, with a thicker hide and shaggy 
hair, suited to a wet climate, they have a coarser appearance thai? 
the Aberdeen-Angus, the product of a less humid region, though 

1 Housman, " Robert Bakewell," Jour. Roy. Agric. Soc. (1894). 



CATTLE 




V. 

c 






Plate H 



CATTLE 



r 




j 
j 







a 
j 



< ■ 







o 

X 

o 
is 

s 




_J 



CATTLE 



Plate III. 




B3 

< 

q 

< 








c 



03 

< 




Plate IV, 



CATTLE 




o 
a 







& 

o 
u 



Pi 



w 
►J 

< 

u 

D 

< 

►J 



W 

< 

E 

u 

D 

< 




f- 
y, 
w 




fa 


rt 


o 


-G 






t/> 


l« 


a 


o 


m 


rfl 


w 
as 


.a 


« 


o 
















2 




ns 


S3 


a 


** 


o 


O 


u 


u 






JS 


> 


H 


w 




t/) 




>5 




a! 




u 




u 




o 





CATTLE 



54i 



it approaches the latter in size* Galloways yield superior beef, 
but mature less rapidly than the Aberdeen-Angus. They make 
admirable beasts for the grazier, and the cross between the Gallo- 
way and the white Shorthorn bull, known as a ■" Blue Grey," 
is much sought after by the grazier and the butcher. 

The West Highland or Kyloe breed are perhaps the most 
hardy and picturesque of British cattle. Their home is amidst 
the wild romantic scenery of the Highlands and the Western 
Isles of Scotland, though Highland bullocks with long, spreading 
curved horns may be seen in English parks. They have not 
made much progress towards early maturity, but their slowly 
ripened beef is of the choicest quality. The colour of their thick 
shaggy hair varies from white and light dun to tawny yellow of 
many shades, and black. 

The Ayr shires are the dairy breed of Scotland, where they have 
considerably overstepped the limits of the humid western county 
whence they take their name. They are usually of a white and 
brown colour, the patches being well defined. The neat, shapely, 
upstanding horns are characteristic. The Ayrshires are under 
medium size and move gracefully, and the females display the 
wedge-shape typical of dairy cows. They are a hardy breed, 
and, even from poor pastures, give good yields of milk, especially 
useful for cheese-making purposes. The milking powers of the 
breed are being improved under a system of milk-testing and 
records supported by the Highland and Agricultural Society. 

The Jerseys are graceful, deer-like cattle, whose home is in the 
island of Jersey, where, by means of stringent regulations 
against the importation of cattle, the breed has been kept pure 
for many generations. As its milk is especially rich in fat (so 
rich that it requires to be diluted with a little water before it 
can be safely fed to calves), the Jersey has attained a wide 
reputation as a butter-producing breed. It is a great favourite 
in England, where many pure-bred herds exist. The colours 
most preferred are " whole " fawns of many shades. The light 
silver-grey, which was in high repute in England in the early 
'seventies of the 19th century, is out of favour. Browns and 
brindles are rarely seen. The grey zone surrounding the black 
muzzle gives the appearance designated " mealy-mouthed." The 
horns are short, and generally artificially curved inwards; the 
bones are fine. The best milch cows have a yellowish circle 
round the eye, and the skin at the extremity of the tail is of a 
deep yellow, almost orange colour. The cows are gentle and 
docile when reared in close contact with human beings, but the 
bulls, despite their small size, are often fierce. 

Guernsey cattle are native to the islands of Guernsey, Alderney, 
Sark and Herm. They are kept pure by importation restrictions. 
Herds of pure-bred Guernseys also exist in the Isle of Wight and 
in various counties of England and Scotland. They have not the 
refined and elegant appearance of the Jerseys, which, however, 
they exceed in size. They are usually of a rich yellowish-brown 
colour, patched with white, in some cases their colour almost 
meriting the appellation of " orange and lemon." The yellow 
colour inside the ears is a point always looked for by judges. 
The cows, large-bellied and narrow in front, are truly wedge- 
shaped, the greatly developed udder adding to the expanse of 
the hinder part of the body. They yield an abundance of milk, 
rich in fat, and are excellent butter-producers. The horns are 
yellow at the base, curved, and not coarse. The nose is flesh- 
coloured and free from black markings. 

The Canadian breed, black with a narrow brown stripe down 
the back and a light ring round the muzzle, are descended from 
old Brittany cattle imported into Canada by French settlers 
three hundred years ago, and are in consequence related to the 
Channel Islands cattle. They are remarkably hardy and good 
milkers, and it is claimed they produce butter fat at 2 c. a lb 
less cost than any other breed. 

The Kerry is a breed of small black cattle belonging to the 
south-west of Ireland, whence they have spread into many parts, 
not only of their native land, but of England as well. Although 
they are able to subsist on the roughest and scantiest of fare, 
and are exceedingly hardy, the cows are, nevertheless, excellent 
milkers, and have acquired celebrity as a dairy breed. The 



colour is black, but the cows sometimes have a little white on the 
udder. The horns are white, with black tips, and are turned 
upwards. The Kerry is active and graceful, long and lithe in 
body, and light-limbed. On the rich pastures of England it has 
increased considerably in size. 

The Dexter breed is reputed to take its name from one Dexter, 
agent of Maude, Lord Hawarden, who is credited with having 
established it by selection and breeding from the best mountain 
types of the Kerry. Until recently it was called the Dexter- 
Kerry. It is smaller and more compact than the Kerry, shorter 
in the leg, and intoed before and behind. Whilst valuable as 
a beef-making animal, it is equally noted for its milk-producing 
capacity. Black is the usual colour, but red is also recognized, 
with, in either case, a little white. When of a red colour, the 
appearance of the animal has been aptly compared to that of 
a grand Shorthorn viewed through the wrong end of a telescope. 
The Kerry and the Dexter are readily distinguishable. The 
Kerry has a gay, light, deer-like head and horn, light limbs and 
thin skin. The Dexter has coarser limbs, a square body, flat 
back, thick shoulder, short neck, and head and horn set on low. 

A herd of Dexter-Shorthorns was founded by Major Barton at 
Straffan, Ireland, in i860, in which prominent characteristics 
of the two breeds have been permanently blended so that they 
breed true to type. 

As milk-producers, and therefore as dairy cattle, certain strains 
of the Shorthorn (registered as well as non-pedigree), the 
Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn, South Devon, Longhorn, Red Polled, 
Ayrshire, Jersey, Guernsey, Kerry and Dexter breeds have 
acquired eminence. Such breeds as the Shorthorn, Lincolnshire 
Red Shorthorn, South Devon, Welsh, Red Polled and Dexter 
are claimed as useful beef-makers as well as milk-producers, 
and are classified as dual-purpose animals. The others belong 
to the beef-producers. As regards colour, red is characteristic 
of the Lincolnshire Shorthorn, the Hereford, Devon, Sussex 
and Red Polled. Black is the dominating colour of the Welsh, 
Aberdeen- Angus, Galloway, Kerry and Dexter. A yellowish hue 
is seen in the West Highland, Guernsey and South Devon breeds. 
Various shades of fawn colour are usual in Jersey cattle and also 
appear among Highlanders. The Herefords, though with red 
bodies, have white faces, manes, and dewlaps, whilst white 
prevails to a greater or less extent in the Shorthorn, Longhorn 
and Ayrshire breeds. The Shorthorn breed is exceedingly 
variable in colour; pure-bred specimens may be red, or white, 
or roan, or may be marked with two or more of these colours, 
the roan resulting from a blending of the white and red. Black 
is not seen in a pure-bred Shorthorn. The biggest and heaviest 
cattle come from the beef -making breeds, and are often cross-bred. 
Very large or heavy beasts, if pure-bred, usually belong to one 
or other of the Shorthorn, Hereford, Sussex, Welsh, West High- 
land, Aberdeen-Angus and Galloway breeds. The Devon, 
Red Polled and Guernsey are medium-sized cattle; the Ayrshires 
are smaller, although relatively the bullocks grow larger than 
bulls or cows. The Jerseys are small, graceful cattle, but the 
smaller type of Kerries, the Dexters and the Shetlanders furnish 
the smallest cattle of the British Isles. 

See generally the Herd Books of the various breed societies. 

(W. Fr. ; R. W.) 

Rearing and Feeding. 1 — A calf at birth scales from one- twelfth 
to one-fourteenth the weight of the dam. A sucking calf of one 
of the large breeds should gain 3 H> per day for the first month, 
2-5 lb for the second, and 2 lb during the later calf period. 
Colostrum, or first-day milk after calving, contains more than 
five times the albuminoid compounds found in average cows' 
milk. In the course of three or four days it gradually becomes 
normal in composition, although the peculiar flavour remains 
a few days longer. Nature has specially prepared it for the young 

1 See E. Wolff, Farm Foods, by H. H. Cousins (1895) ; A. D. Hall, 
Rothamsted Experiments (1965); R. Warington, Chemistry of the 
Farm (15th ed., 1902); W. A. Henry, Feeds and Feeding (1907); 
H. W. Mumford, Beef Production (1907); H. P. Armsby, Animal 
Nutrition (2nd ed., 1906); T. Shaw, Animal Breeding (1903); R. 
Wallace, Farm Live Stock of Great Britain (4th ed., 1907). 



542 



CATULLUS 



calf with extremely nourishing and also laxative properties, 
and it is of practically no value for any other purpose. Normal 
cows' milk has an albuminoid ratio slightly narrower than 
i : 4- colostrum 1 : -71. [The ratio is arrived at by adding 
to the percentage of milk-sugar, possessing about the food 
equivalent of starch, the fat multiplied by 2-268, and dividing 
by the total albuminoids — all digestible.] 

Common nutrient ratios for older animals are stated in the follow- 
ing table of food standards by Dr Emil Wolff : — 





Food Consumed per Day. 


Dry. 


Digestible. 


Live 


Organic 


Albu- 


Fats. 


Carbo- 


Albuminoid 




Weight. 


Matter. 


minoid. 


Hydrates. 


Ratio. 




lb 


lb 


lb 


lb 


R> 


lb 


Calves, growing, 2 to 3 months 


150 


3-3 


o-6 


0-30 


2-1 


1 :4-7 


Young cattle ,, 3 to 6 „ 


300 


7-0 


1-0 


0-30 


4-1 


1 : 5 


,, ,, 6 to 12 ,, 


500 


12-0 


1-2 


0-30 


6-8 


1 : 6 


„ 12 to 18 „ 


700 


16-8 


1-4 


0-28 


9-1 


1 :7 


,, ,, 18 to 24 „ 


850 


20-4 


1-4 


0-26 


10-3 


1 : 8 


Oxen in complete rest . ... 


1000 


27-5 


0-7 


0-15 


8-o 


1 : 12 


,, fattening, 1st period 


1000 


27-0 


2-5 


0-50 


15-0 


1 :6 5 


f ,, ,, 2nd period 


1000 


26-0 


30 


0-70 


14-8 


1 =5-5 


,, ,, 3rd period 


1000 


25-0 


2-7 


o-6o 


14-8 


1 : 6 


Milch cows 


1000 


24-0 


2-5 


0-40 


125 


1 :5-4 



Digestible albuminoid nitrogen is the scarcest and consequently 
the costliest ingredient in food-stuffs, but, since the introduction of 
vegetable proteid made by Mitchell's process from the castor bean, 
an easy and inexpensive means of balancing cattle food ratios is 
available. By this means the manurial value of the excrement is 
increased. The calculations necessary in arriving at a ratio are 
simplified by the employment of Jeffers's calculator (Flainsboro, 
N. J.). 

There are three common methods of rearing calves. (1) The 
calf sucks its mother or foster-mother. This is the natural method 
and the best for the show-yard and for early fattening purposes; 
but it is the most expensive, and the calves, if not handled, 
grow up wild and dangerous. Store stock may be also raised by 
putting two calves to one cow and weaning at three months old; 
a second pair in turn yielding place to a single calf. (2) Full 
milk from the cow at about 90° F. is given alone until the latter 
part of the milk period; then the calf is trained to eat supple- 
mentary foods to preserve the calf-fat after weaning. A large 
calf at first receives daily three quarts of milk at three meals. 
The amount is increased to 2 gallons by the end of the fourth 
week, and to 2\ gallons at 3 months, when gradual weaning begins. 
Linseed cake meal is specially suitable for such calves. (3) The 
calf receives full milk from the mother for one to two weeks, or 
better, for three to four weeks; then it is slowly transferred to 
fortified separated milk or milk substitutes. Cod-liver oil, 2 oz. 
daily, is a good substitute for butter fat. In America cotton-seed 
oil, \ oz. to the quart of milk, or an equivalent of oleomargarine 
heated to 1 io° F. and churned with separated milk, has produced 
a live-weight-increase of 2 lb daily. Linseed simmered to a jelly 
and added to separated milk gives good results. Moderate 
amounts are easily digested. Oatmeal or maize meal containing 
10 % of linseed meal does well, later, at less cost. Milksubstitutes 
and calf meals require close attention in preparation, and would 
not fetch the prices they do if feeders possessed the technical 
knowledge necessary to select and mix common foods. Ground 
cake or linseed meal is, after a time, better given dry than cooked, 
being then better masticated and not so liable to produce in- 
digestion. 

Grass or fine hay in racks is provided when the calf can chew 
the cud. As cattle get older, live-weight-increase grows less. 
Smithfield weights ' show that a good bullock up to a year old 
will increase 2 lb daily, a two-year-old if lb, and a three-year-old 
a little over \\ lb. 

Cattle feeding on a farm consume crude produce that is in- 
convenient to market, and make farmyard manure; but there 
is frequently no profit left. To secure the balance on the right 

1 E. J. Powell, History of the Smithfield Club from 1798 to 1900 
(1902). 



side the inlaid price per live cwt. requires to be 5s. less than the 
sale price — say 32s. per cwt. for lean cattle, and 37s. per cwt. 
for the animal when sold fat and capable of producing 60% 
of dressed beef. The ordin ary animal yields only a bout 57%. A 
well-bred fattening bullock begins with 2 lb of cake and meal 
per day, increasing to 8 lb at the end of five months (6 lb on 
an average), and receives J cwt. of roots and 12 lb of straw; 
at an average cost of about 4s. 3d. per imperial stone or 50s. per 
cwt. of dressed carcase. Heifers feed faster than bullocks, and 

age tells on the rate at which an 
animal will mature: a three-year- 
old will develop into prime beef 
more quickly and easily than a 
two-year-old. It is difficult to 
produce " baby beef " at a profit, 
and it can only be done with 
picked animals of the best flesh- 
producing breeds, which cannot be 
bought at a price per cwt. below 
the finished sale price, for animals 
producing baby beef must from 
start to finish (under two years 
old) be at all times fit to go to 
the fat market. It is true that 
a very young animal can give a 
better account of food than an older one, but this advantage 
is counterbalanced by the tendency to grow rather than to 
fatten. (See also Agriculture.) 

In cold and stormy districts cattle thrive best in covered courts, 
but in a mild climate they do equally well in open yards with 
shelter-sheds. The more air they get the less liable they are to 
tuberculosis — example Lincolnshire and the drier south-eastern 
counties. The ideal method of house-feeding cattle is singly in 
boxes 10 ft. square, where they are undisturbed, and where the 
best manure is made because it is not washed by rain. 

On the finest British grazing lands two lots of cattle are fed in 
one season. The first is finished early in July, having, without 
artificial feeding, laid on eight to nine stones of beef. The second 
lot requires three or four pounds of undecorticated cotton cake 
each towards the end of September and in October when grass 
begins to fail. (R. W.) 

CATULLUS, GAIUS VALERIUS ^84-54 B.C.), the greatest 
lyric poet of Rome. As regards his names and the dates of his 
birth and death, the most important external witness is that of 
Jerome, in the continuation of the Eusebian Chronicle, under 
the year 87 B.C., " Gaius Valerius Catullus, scriptor lyricus 
Veronae nascitur," and under 57 B.C., "Catullus xxx. aetatis 
anno Romae moritur." There is no controversy a^ to the gentile 
name, Valerius. Suetonius, in his Life of Julius Caesar (ch. 73), 
mentions the poet by the names " Valerium Catullum." Other 
persons who had the cognomen Catullus belonged to the Valerian 
gens, e.g. M. Valerius Catullus Messalinus, a delator in the reign 
of Domitian, mentioned in the fourth satire of Juvenal (1. 113) : — 
" Et cum mortifero prudens Veiento Catullo." 
Inscriptions show, further, that Valerius was a common name 
in the native province of Catullus, and belonged to other 
inhabitants of Verona besides the poet and his family (Schwabe, 
Quaestiones Catullianae, p. 27). Scholars have been divided in 
opinion as to whether his praenomen was Gaius or Quintus, and 
in the best MSS. the volume is called simply Catulli Veronensis 
liver. For Gaius we have the undoubted testimony, not only of 
Jerome, which rests on the much earlier authority of Suetonius, 
but also that of Apuleius. In support of Quintus a passage was 
quoted from the Natural History of Pliny (xxxvii. 6, 81). But 
the praenomen Q. is omitted in the best MSS., and in other 
passages of the same author the poet is spoken of as " Catullus 
Veronensis." The mistake may have arisen from confusion with 
Q. Catulus, the colleague of Marius in the Cimbric War, himself 
also the author of lyrical poems. Allusions in fhe poems show 
that the date of his death given by Jerome (57 B.C.) is wrong, 
and that Catullus survived the second consulship of Pompey 
(55 B.C.) (cf. lv. 6, cxiii. 2), and was present in August of the 



CATULLUS 



543 



following year at the prosecution of Vatinius by Licinius Calvus 
(cf. liii.). The allusion in Hi. 3 — 

" Per consulatum peierat Vatinius," 

does not prove that Catullus must have lived to see the consulship 
bestowed on Vatinius in the end of 47 B.C. but only that Vatinius, 
after being praetor in 55 B.C., was in the habit of boasting of the 
certainty of his attaining the consulship, as Cleopatra was in 
the habit of confirming her most solemn declarations by appealing 
to her hope of one day administering justice in the Capitol (cf. 
Haupt, " Quaestiones Catullianae," Opuscula, vol. i. 1875). 
There is then nothing to prove that Catullus lived beyond the 
month of August 54 B.C. Some of the poems (as xxxvii. and Mi.) 
may have been written during his last illness. If he died in 
54 B.C. or early in 53 B.C., Catullus must either have been born 
later than 87 B.C., or have lived to a greater age than thirty. 
Catullus is described by Ovid as " hedera iuvenalia cinctus 
Tempora " {Amor. iii. 9. 61), — a description somewhat more 
suitable to a man who dies in his thirtieth year than to one who 
dies three or four years later. Further, the age at which a man 
dies is more likely to be accurately remembered than the 
particular date either of his death or of his birth, and the common 
practice of recording the age of the deceased in sepulchral 
inscriptions must have rendered a mistake about this less likely 
to occur. It seems, therefore, on the whole, most likely that 
Jerome's words " xxx. aetatis anno " are correct, and that 
Catullus was born in 84 B.C. 

The statement that he was born at Verona is confirmed by 
passages in Ovid and Martial. Pliny the elder, who was born at 
Como, speaks of Catullus in the preface to his Natural History, 
as his "countryman" (conterraneus) , and the poet speaks of 
Verona as his home, or at least his temporary residence, in more 
than one place. His occasional residence in his native place is 
further attested by the statement of Suetonius (Julius Caesar, 
73), that " Julius Caesar accepted the poet's apology for his 
scurrilous verses upon him, invited him to dine with him on the 
same day, and continued his intimacy with his father as before." 
As this incident could only have happened during the time that 
Julius Caesar was pro-consul, the scene of it must have been in 
the Cisalpine province, and at the house of the poet's father, in 
or near Verona. The verses apologized for were those contained 
in poems xxix. and lvii., the former of which must have been 
written after Caesar's invasion of Britain, so that this interview 
probably took place in the winter of 55-54 B.C. The fact that 
his father was the host of the great pro-consul, and lived on terms 
of intimacy with him, justifies the inference, that he was, in 
wealth and rank, one of the principal men of the province. The 
only other important statement concerning the poet's life which 
rests on external authority is that of Apuleius, that the real name 
of the Lesbia of the poems was Clodia. Another,, which concerns 
the reputation which he enjoyed after his death, is given in the 
Life of A tticus by Cornelius Nepos (12.4). It is to the effect that 
he regarded Lucretius and Catullus as the two greatest poets 
of his own time. 

The poems of Catullus ccnsist of 116 pieces, varying in length 
from 2 to 408 lines, the great mass of them being, however, short 
pieces, written in lyric, iambic or elegiac metre. The arrange- 
ment cannot be the poet's; it is neither chronological nor in 
accordance with the character of the topics. The shorter poems, 
lyric or iambic, are placed first, next the longer epithalamia, 
(most being written in hexameters) amongst which the Attis 
is inserted and then those written in the elegiac metre. But, 
though no chronological order is observed, yet internal evidence 
enables us to determine the occasions on which many of the 
poems were written, and the order in which they followed one 
another. They give a very vivid image of various phases of the 
poet's life, and of the strong feelings with which persons and 
things affected him. They throw much light also on the social 
life of Rome and of the provincial towns of Italy in the years 
preceding the outbreak of the second civil war. In this respect 
they may be compared with the letters of Cicero. 

The poems extend over a period of seven or eight years, from 
61 or 62 till 54 B.C. Among the earliest are those which record 



the various stages of the author's passion for Lesbia. It is in 
connexion with this passion that he is generally mentioned, or 
alluded to, by the later Roman poets, such as Propertius, Ovid. 
Juvenal and Martial. Her real name, as we learn from Apuleius, 
was Clodia. The admiration of Catullus for Sappho, the Lesbian 
poetess, which is clearly indicated by the imitation of her language 
in his fifty-first and sixty-second poems, affords an obvious 
explanation of the Greek name which he gave to his Roman 
mistress. Clodia was the notorious sister of Publius Clodius 
Pulcher, and in the year 56 she charged M. Caelius Rufus, after 
tiring of him, as she had of Catullus, with an attempt to poison 
her. It was in defence of Rufus that Cicero described the spell 
she exercised over young men, in language which might have 
been applied to her previous relations with the youthful poet, 
as well as those with the youthful orator and politician. 

Poems concerning Lesbia occur among both the earliest and 
the latest of those contained in the series. They record the 
various stages of passion through which Catullus passed, from 
absolute devotion and a secure sense of returned affection, 
through the various conditions of distrust and jealousy, attempts 
at renunciation, and short-lived " amoris integrationes," through 
the " odi et amo " state, and the later state of savage indignation 
against both Lesbia and his rivals, and especially against Caelius 
Rufus, till he finally attains, not without much suffering and loss, 
the last state of scornful indifference. Among the earliest of 
the poems connected with Lesbia, and among those written in 
the happiest vein, are ii. and iii., and v. and vii. The 8th, " Miser 
Catulle, desinas ineptire," perhaps the most beautiful of them 
all, expresses the first awakening of the poet to a sense of her 
unworthiness, before the gentler have given place to the fiercer 
feelings of his nature. His final renunciation is sent in a poem 
written after his return from the East, with a union of imaginative 
and scornful power, to his two butts, Furius and Aurelius (xi., 
" Furi et Aureli, comites Catulli "), who, to judge by the way 
Catullus writes of them, appear to have been hangers-on upon 
him, who repaid the pecuniary and other favours they received 
by giving him grounds for jealousy, and making imputations 
on his character (cf. xv., xvi., xviii., xxiii.). 

The intrigue of Caelius Rufus with Lesbia began in 59 or 58 
B.C. It was probably in the earlier stages of this liaison that the 
68th poem was written, from which it appears that Catullus, 
at the time living at Verona, and grieving for the recent death of 
his brother in the Troad, had heard of Lesbia's infidelity, and, in 
consideration of her previous faithlessness in his favour, was not 
inclined to resent it very warmly. Two other poems in the 
series express the grief which Catullus felt for the death of his 
brother, — one, the 65th, addressed to the orator Hortensius, 
who is there, as in some of Cicero's letters, called Hortalus or 
Ortalus, and sent to him along with the Coma Berenices (lxvi.), 
a translation of a famous elegy of Callimachus. The other poem 
referring to this event (ci.) must have been composed some years 
later, probably in 56 B.C., when Catullus visited his brother's 
tomb in the Troad, on his return from Bithynia. Between 59 
and 57 B.C. most of the lampoons on Lesbia and her numerous 
lovers must have been written (e.g. xxxvii., xxxix., &c). Some, 
too, of the poems expressive of his more tender feelings to her, 
such as viii. and lxxvi. belong also to these years; and among 
the poems written either during this period or perhaps in the 
early and happier years of his liaison, some of the most charming 
of his shorter pieces, expressing the affection for his young friends 
Verannius and Fabullus (ix., xii., xiii.), may be included. 

In the year 57 the routine of his life was for a short time broken 
by his accompanying the propraetor C. Memmius, the friend to 
whom Lucretius dedicates his great poem, as one of his staff, 
to the province of Bithynia. His object was probably to better 
his fortunes by this absence from Rome, as humorous complaints 
of poverty and debt (xiii., xxvi.) show that his ordinary means 
were insufficient for his mode of life. He frankly acknowledges 
the disappointment of these hopes, and still more frankly his 
disgust with his chief (x., xxviii.). Some of the most charming 
and perfect among the shorter poems express the delight with 
which the poet changed the dulness and sultry climate of the 



544 



CATULLUS 



province for the freedom and keen enjoyment of his voyage 
home in his yacht, built for him at Amastris on the Euxine, 
and for the beauty and peace of his villa on the shores of Lake 
Benacus, which welcomed him home " wearied with foreign 
travel." To this period and to his first return to Rome after his 
visit to his native district belong the poems xlvi., ci., iv., xxxi. 
and x., all showing by their freshness of feeling and vivid truth 
of expression the gain which the poet's nature derived from his 
temporary escape from the passions, distractions and animosities 
of -Roman society. Two poems, written in a very genial and 
joyous spirit, and addressed to his younger friend Licinius 
Calvus (xiv. and 1.), who is ranked as second only to himself 
among the lyrical poets of the age, and whose youthful promise 
pointed him out as likely to become one of the greatest of Roman 
orators, may, indeed, with most probability be assigned to these 
later years (xiv.). From the expression " Odissem te odio 
Vatiniano," in the third line of xiv., it may be inferred that the 
poem was written not earlier than December (the " Saturnalia ") 
of the year 56 B.C., as it was early in that year, as we learn from 
a letter of Cicero to his brother Quintus (ii. 4. i), that Calvus 
first announced his intention of prosecuting Vatinius. The 
short poem numbered liii. would be written in August 54 B.C. 
The poems which have left the greatest stain on the fame of 
Catullus — those " referta contumeliis Caesaris," the licentious 
abuse of Mamurra,and probably some of those personal scurrilities 
addressed to women as well as men, or too frank confessions, 
which posterity would willingly have let die, may well have been 
written in the last years of his life, under the influence of the 
bitterness and recklessness induced by his experience. It cannot 
be determined with certainty whether the longer and more 
artistic pieces, which occupy the middle of the volume — the 
Epithalamiumin celebr&tionoi themarriageofManliusTorquatus, 
the 62nd poem, written in imitation of the Epithalamia of 
Sappho, " Vesper adest: iuvenes, consurgite "; the Attis, and the 
Epic Idyll representing the marriage festival of Peleus and Thetis 
— belong to the earlier or the later period of the poet's career. 
If the person addressed in the first part of the 68th is the Manlius 
of the Epithalamium, and the lines from 3 to 8— 

" Naufragum ut eiectum . . . pervigilat," 
refer to the death of Vinia, it would follow that the first Epitha- 
lamium was written some time before that poem, and thus belongs 
to the earlier time. While the translations of Sappho, — 

" Ille mi par esse deo videtur," 
and of Callimachus (Ixvi.), — 

" Omnia qui magni dispexit lumina mundi," 
belong to the earlier period, the Attis and the Peleus and Thetis; 
although perhaps suggested by the treatment of the same or 
similar subjects in Greek authors, are executed with such power 
and originality as declare them to be products of the most 
vigorous stage in the development of the poet's genius. That his 
genius came soon to maturity is a reason for hesitation in assign L 
ing any particular time between 62 and 54 B.C. for the composition 
of the Attis and of that part of the Epithalamium (" Peliaco 
quondam prognatae vertice pinus ") which deals with the 
main subject of the poem. But the criticism of Munro in his 
edition of Lucretius, which shows similarities of expression 
that cannot be mere casual coincidences, between the Ariadne- 
episode in the Epithalamium of Catullus (from line 52 to 266) 
and the poem of Lucretius, leaves little doubt that that portion 
at least of the poem was written after the publication of the 
De rerum natura, in the winter of 55-54 B.C. 

No ancient author has left a more vivid impression of himself 
on his writings than Catullus. Coming to Rome in early youth 
from a distant province, not at that time included within the 
limits of Italy, he lived as an equal with the men of his time of 
most intellectual activity and refinement, as well as of highest 
social and political eminence. Among those to whom his poems 
are addressed, or who are mentioned in them, we find the names 
of Hortensius, Cicero, Cornelius Nepos, Licinius Calvus, Helvius 
Cinna and Asinius Pollio, then only a youth (xii. 8). Catullus 
brought into this circle the genius of a great poet, .the social 



vivacity of a vigorous nature, the simplicity and sincerity of an 
unambitious, and the warmth of an affectionate disposition. 
He betrays all the sensitiveness of the poetic temperament, but 
it is never the sensitiveness of vanity, for he is characterized by 
the modesty rather than the self-confidence which accompanies 
genius, but the sensitiveness of a heart which gives and expects 
more sympathy and loyalty in friendship than the world either 
wants or cares to give in return. He shows also in some of his 
lighter pieces the fastidiousness of a refined taste, intolerant of 
all boorishness, pedantry, affectation and sordid ways of life. 
The passionate intensity of his temperament displays itself with 
similar strength in the outpourings of his animosity as of his 
love and affection. It was, unfortunately, the fashion of the 
time to employ in the expression of these animosities a licence 
of speech and of imputation which it is difficult for men living 
under different social conditions to understand, still more 
difficult to tolerate. Munro has examined the 29th poem — 

" Qiiis hoc potest videre, quis potest pati," 
the longest and most important of the lampoons on Caesar and 
Mamurra, and shown with much learning and acuteness the 
motives and intention of Catullus in writing them. Had Julius 
Caesar really believed, as Suetonius, writing two hundred years 
afterwards, says he did, that " an eternal stigma had been cast 
upon him by the verses concerning Mamurra," we should 
scarcely apply the word magnanimity to his condonation of the 
offence. But these verses survive as a memorial not of any 
scandal affecting Julius Caesar which could possibly have been 
believed by his contemporaries, but of the licence of speech 
which was then indulged in, of the jealousy with which the 
younger members of the Roman aristocracy, who a little later 
fought on the side of Pompey, at that time regarded the ascend- 
ancy both of the " father-in-law and the son-in-law," and the 
social elevation of some of their instruments, and also, to a 
certain extent, of the deterioration which the frank and generous 
nature of Catullus underwent from the passions which wasted, 
and the faithlessness which marred his life. 

The great age of Latin poetry extends from about the year 
60 B.C. till the death of Ovid in 17 a.d. There are three marked 
divisions in this period, each with a distinct character of its own: 
the first represented by Lucretius and Catullus, the second by 
Virgil and Horace, the last by Ovid. Force and sincerity are the 
great characteristics of the first period, maturity of art of the 
second, facility of -the last. The educating influence of Greek 
art on the Roman mind was first fully experienced in the Cicer- 
onian age, and none of his contemporaries was so susceptible of 
that influence as Catullus. With the susceptibility to art hi 
combined a large share of the vigorous and genial qualities of the 
Italian race. Like most of his younger contemporaries, he 
studied in the school of the Alexandrine poets, with whom the 
favourite subjects of art were the passion of love, and stories 
from the Greek mythology, which admitted of being treated in a 
spirit similar to that in which they celebrated their own experi- 
ences. It was under this influence that Catullus wrote the Coma 
Berenices, the 68th poem, which, after the manner of the Alex- 
andrines, interweaves the old tale of Protesilaus and Laodamia 
with the personal experiences of the poet himself, and the 
Epithalamium of Peleus and Thetis, which combines two pictures 
from the Greek mythology, one of the secure happiness of mar*- 
riage, the other of the passionate despair of love betrayed. In 
this last poem Catullus displays a power of creative pictorial 
imagination far transcending that displayed in any of the extant 
poetry of Alexandria. We have no means of determining what 
suggested the subject of the Attis to Catullus, whether the previous 
treatment of the subject by some Greek writer, some survival 
of the myth which he found still existing during his residence 
among the " Phrygii Campi," or the growth of various forms of 
Eastern^ superstition and fanaticism, at Rome, in the last age of 
the Republic. Whatever may have been its origin, it is the 
finest specimen we possess, in either Greek or Latin literature, 
of that kind of short poem more common in modern than ancient 
times, in which some situation or passion entirely alien to the 
writer, and to his own age, is realized with dramatic intensity. 



GATULUS— CAUB 



545 



But the genius of Catullus is 1 , perhaps, even happier in the direct 
expression of personal feeling than in artistic creation, or the 
reproduction of tales and situations from mythology. The 
warmth, intensity and sincerity of his own nature are the 
sources of the inspiration in these poems. The most elaborate 
and one of the finest of them is the Epithalamium in honour of 
the marriage of a member of the old house of Manlius Torquatus 
with Vinia Aurunculeia, written in the glyconic in combination 
with the pherecratean metre. To this metre Catullus imparts 
a peculiar lightness and grace by making the trochee, instead 
of the spondee as in Horace's glyconics and pherecrateans, the 
first foot in the line. His elegiac metre is constructed with 
less smoothness and regularity than that of Ovid and Tibullus 
or even of Propertius, but as employed by him it gives a true 
echo to the serious and plaintive feelings of some of his poems, 
while it adapts itself, as it did later in the hands of Martial, 
to the epigrammatic terseness of his invective. But the perfec- 
tion of the art of Catullus is seen in his employment of those 
metres which he adapted to the Latin tongue from the earlier 
poets of Greece, the pure iambic trimeter, as in iv. — 

" Phaselus ille quem videtis hospites," 
the scazon iambic, employed in viii. and xxxi.— 

" Paeninsularum, Sirmio, insularumque," 
and the phalecian hendecasyllabic, a slight modification of the 
Sapphic line, which is his favourite metre for the expression of 
his more joyful moods, and of his lighter satiric vein. The Latin 
language never flowed with such ease, freshness and purity as in 
these poems. Their perfection consists in the entire absence of 
all appearance of effort or reflection, and in the fulness of life and 
feeling, which gives a lasting interest and charm to the most 
trivial incident of the passing hour. In reference to these poems 
Munro has said with truth and force: " A generation had yet to 
pass before the heroic attained to its perfection; while he 
(Catullus) had already produced glyconics, phalecians and 
iambics, each ' one entire and perfect chrysolite,' ' cunningest 
patterns ' of excellence, such as Latium never saw before or 
after, — Alcaeus, Sappho, and the rest then and only then having 

met their match." 

The work of Catullus has not come down to us intact, as is shown 
by lacunae and quotations in ancient writers which cannot now be 
found in his poems. Out of the MSS. only three have claims to 
intrinsic importance. The oldest and best appears to be the Bodleian 
(Canon. 30). But little inferior is the Sangermanensis (Par. 14137)- 
Of the third, the Romanus, we shall be better able to judge when its 
discoverer, Prof. W. G. Hale, has published his collation. None of 
these MSS. are older than the 14th century. One poem, 62, is, 
however, preserved in a MS. of the 9th century (the Thuaneus, 
Par. 8071). Prof. R. Ellis's discovery of the Bodleian MS. and E. 
Baehrens's recognition of its value opened a new chapter in the 
history of the text. Ellis's contributions comprise an indispensable 
commentary (ed. 2, 1889), an elaborate critical edition (ed. 2, 1878) 
and an English translation (1871) in the metres of the original. 
The text in the Oxford series, published in 1905, is inferior to those 
specified below. Baehrens's edition, 2 volumes (text 1876, the 
second edition by K. P. Schulze is a misnomer; and Latin com- 
mentary 1885) is still of value. Amongst other editions with critical 
or explanatory notes or both may be mentioned those of A. Riese 
(1884), L. Schwabe (1886, with index verborum), B. Schmidt (1887), 
J. P. Postgate (1889, text differing little from that in the new Corpus 
Poetarum), E. Benoist and E. Thomas, with French translation by 
Rostand (2 vols., 1882-1890), S. G. Owen (1893, an edition de luxe), 
W. T. Merrill (1893, Boston, U.S.A., with succinct English notes), 
A. Palmer (1896, one of the best of this scholar's works) ; M. Haupt's 
text of the three poets Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius, edited by 
J. Vahlen, reached its sixth edition in 1904. Of the numerous 
contributions to the textual and literary criticism of the poems may 
be named the papers in M. Haupt's Opuscule, L. Schwabe's Quaes- 
tiones Catullianae (1862), B. Schmidt's Prolegomena, H.A.J. Munro's 
Criticisms and Elucidations of Catullus (1878; second edition by 
J. D. Duff, 1905). Translations into English verse by J. Cranstoun 
(1867), SirT. Martin (1861, 1876), R. Ellis (above); a recent version 
in prose with the Latin text by F. W, Cornish (1904). For further 
information see Teuffel's History of Roman Literature (tr. by Warre), 
§ 214, or the more recent accounts by M. Schanz, Geschichte der 
rbmischen Litteratur, i. §§ 102-106, and Frederic Plessis, La Poesie 
latine (1909), pp. i43-!73- (W. Y. S.; X.) 

CATULUS, the name of a distinguished family of ancient Rome 
of 1 the gens Lutatia. The following are its most important 
members. 



1. Gaius Lutatius Catulus, Roman commander during 
the First Punic War, consul 242 B.C. He was sent with a fleet 
of 200 ships to Sicilian waters, and almost without opposition 
occupied the harbours of Lilybaeum and Drepanum. A hurriedly 
equipped fleet sent out from Carthage under Hanno was inter- 
cepted by the praetor Publius Valerius Falto and totally defeated 
(battle of the Aegates Islands, March 10, 241). Catulus, who 
had been wounded at Drepanum, took no part in the queries,
but on his return to Rome was accorded the honour of a triumph, 
which against his will he shared with Valerius. (See Punic 
Wars: First, ad fin.). 

2. Quintus Lutatius Catulus, Roman general and consul 
with Marius in 102 B.C. In the war against the Cimbri and 
Teutones he was sent to defend the passage of the Alps but 
found himself compelled to retreat over the Po, his troops 
having been reduced to a state of panic (see Marius, Gaius). 
In 101 the Cimbri were defeated on the Raudine plain, near 
Vercellae, by the united armies of Catulus and Marius. The 
chief honour being ascribed to Marius, Catulus became his 
bitter opponent. He sided with Sulla in the civil war, was 
included in the proscription list of 87, and when Marius declined 
to pardon him, committed suicide. He was distinguished as an 
orator, poet and prose writer, and was well versed in Greek 
literature. He is said to have written the history of his consul- 
ship and the Cimbrian War after the manner of Xenophon; two 
epigrams by him have been preserved, one on Roscius the 
celebrated actor (Cicero, De Nat. Deorum, i. 28), the other of an 
erotic character, imitated from Callimachus (Gellius xix. 9). 
He was a man of great wealth, which he spent in beautifying 
Rome. Two buildings were known as " Monumenta Catuli ": 
the temple of Fortuna hujusce diei, to commemorate the day of 
Vercellae, and the Porticus Catuli, built from the sale of the 
Cimbrian spoils. 

See Plutarch, Marius, Sulla; Appian, B.C. i. 74; Veil. Pat. 
ii. 21; Florus iii. 21; Val. Max. vi. 3, ix. 13; Cicero, De Oratore, 
iii, 3. 8, Brutus, 35. 

3. Quintus Lutatius Catulus (c. 120-61 b.c), sometimes 
called Capitolinus, son of the above, consul in 102. He inherited 
his father's hatred of Marius, and was a consistent though 
moderate supporter of the aristocracy. In 78 he was consul with 
Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, who after the death of Sulla proposed 
the overthrow of his constitution, the re-establishment of the 
distribution of grain, the recall of the banished, and other 
democratic measures. Catulus vigorously opposed this, and a 
temporary compromise was effected. But Lepidus, having 
levied troops in his province of Transalpine Gaul, returned to 
Rome at the head of an army. Catulus defeated him at the 
Mulvian bridge and near Cosa in Etruria, and Lepidus made his 
escape to Sardinia, where he died soon afterwards. In 67 and 66 
Catulus unsuccessfully opposed, as prejudicial to constitutional 
freedom, the Gabinian "and Manilian laws, which conferred 
special powers upon Pompey (q.v.). He consistently opposed 
Caesar, whom he endeavoured to implicate in the Catilinarian 
conspiracy. Caesar, in return, accused him of embezzling public 
money during the reconstruction of the temple on the Capitol, 
and proposed to obliterate his name from the inscription and 
deprive him of the office of commissioner for its restoration. 
Catulus's supporters rallied round him, and Caesar dropped the 
charge. Catulus was the last princeps senatus of republican 
times; he held the office of censor also, but soon resigned, being 
unable to agree with his colleague Licinius Crassus. Although 
not a man of great abilities, Catulus exercised considerable 
influence through his political consistency and his undoubted 
solicitude for the welfare of the state. 

See Sallust, Catilina, 35- 49; Dio Cassius xxxvi. 13; Plutarch, 
Crassus; Suetonius, Caesar, 15. 

CAUB, or Kaub, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province 
of Hesse-Nassau, on the right bank of the Rhine, 28 m. N.W. 
from Wiesbaden, on the railway from Frankfort-on-Main to 
Cologne. Pop. 2 200. It has a Roman Catholic and an Evangeli- 
cal church, and a statue of Bliicher. The trade mainly consists of 
the wines of the district. On a crag above the town stands the 



546 



CAUCA— CAUCASIA 



imposing ruin of Gutenfels, and facing it, on a rock in the middle 
of the Rhine, the small castle Pfalz, or Pfalzgrafenstein, where, 
according to legend, the Palatine countesses awaited their 
confinement, but which in reality served as a toll-gate for 
merchandise on the Rhine. 

Caub, first mentioned in the year 983, originally belonged to 
the lords of Falkenstein, passed in 1277 to the Rhenish Pala- 
tinate, and attained civic rights in 1324. Here Bliicher crossed 
the Rhine with the Prussian and Russian armies, on New Year's 
night 1813-1814, in pursuit of the French. 

CAUCA, a large coast department of Colombia, South 
• America, lying between the departments of Bolivar, Antioquia, 
Caldas and Tolima on the E., and the Pacific Ocean and Panama 
on the W., and extending from the Caribbean Sea S. to the 
department of Narino. Pop. (1905, estimate) 400,000; area 
26,930 sq. m. Although Cauca was deprived of extensive 
territories on the upper Caqueta and Putumayo, and of a large 
area bordering on Ecuador in the territorial redistribution of 
1905, it remained the largest department of the republic. The 
Western Cordillera, traversing nearly its whole length from south 
to north, and the Central Cordillera, forming a part of its eastern 
frontier, give a very mountainous character to the region. It in- 
cludes, besides, the fertile and healthful valley of the upper Cauca, 
the hot, low valley of the Atrato, and a long coastal plain on 
the Pacific. The region is rich in mines and valuable forests, 
but its inhabitants have made very little progress in agriculture 
because there are not adequate transportation facilities. The 
capital of the department is Popayan at its southern extremity, 
with an estimated population in 1905 of 10,000, other important 
towns are Cali (16,000), Buga, Cartago and Buenaventura. 

CAUCASIA, or Caucasus, a governor-generalship of Russia, 
occupying the isthmus between the Black Sea and the Sea of 
Azov on the west and the Caspian Sea on the east, as well as 
portions of the Armenian highlands. Its northern boundary 
is the Kuma-Manych depression, a succession of narrow, half- 
desiccated lakes and river-beds, only temporarily filled with 
water and connecting the Manych, a tributary of the Don, with 
the Kuma, which flows into the Caspian. This depression is 
supposed to be a relic of the former post-Pliocene connexion 
between the Black Sea and the Caspian, and is accepted by most 
geographers as the natural frontier between Europe and Asia, 
while others make the dividing-line coincide with the principal 
water-parting of the Caucasus mountain system. The southern 
boundary of Caucasia is in part coincident with the river Aras 
(Araxes), in part purely conventional and political. It was 
shifted several times during the 19th century, but now runs 
from a point on the Black Sea, some 20 m. south of Batum, in a 
south-easterly and easterly direction to Mt. Ararat, and thence 
along the Aras to within 30 m. of its confluence with the Kura, 
where it once more turns south-east, and eventually strikes the 
Caspian at Astara(30° 35' N.). This large territory, covering an 
area of 180,843 sc l- m -i an d having in 1897 9,248,695 inhabitants 
(51 persq. m.), may be divided into four natural zones or sections: 
— (i.) the plains north of the Caucasus mountains, comprising 
the administrative division of Northern Caucasia; (ii.) the 
Caucasus range and the highlands of Daghestan; (iii.) the 
valleys of the Rion and the Kura, between the Caucasus range 
and the highlands of Armenia; and (iv.) the highlands of 
Armenia. 

(i.) The plains of Northern Caucasia, which include most of the 
provinces of Kuban and Terek and of the government of Stavropol, 
slope gently downwards from the foot of the Caucasus range towards 
the Kuma-Manych depression. It is only in their centre that they 
reach altitudes of as much as 2000-2500 ft. e.g. in the Stavropol 
" plateau," which stretches northwards, separating the tributaries 
of the Kuban from those of the Terek and the Kuma. Towards the 
foothills of the Caucasus they are clothed' with thick forests, while 
in the west they merge into the steppes of south Russia or end in 
marshy ground, choked with reeds and rushes, in the delta of the 
Kuban. In the north and east they give place, as the Manych and 
the coasts of the Caspian are approached, to arid, sandy, stony 
steppes. The soil of these plains is generally very fertile and they 
support a population of nearly 2,800,000 Russians, composed of 
Cossacks and peasant immigrants, settled chiefly along the rivers 
and grouped in large, wealthy villages. They carry on agriculture — 



wheat-growing on a large scale — with the aid of modern agricultural 
machines, and breed cattle and horses. Vines are extensively 
cultivated on the low levels, and a variety of domestic trades are 
prosecuted in the villages. The higher parts of the plains, which are 
deeply trenched by the upper tributaries of the rivers, are inhabited 
by various Caucasian races — Kabardians and Cherkesses (Cir- 
cassians) in the west, Ossetes in the middle, and several tribal 
elements from Daghestan, described under the general name of 
Chechens, in the east ; while nomadic Nogai Tatars and Turkomans 
occupy the steppes. 

(ii.) The Caucasus range runs from north-west to south-east from 
the Strait of Kerch to the Caspian Sea for a length of 900 m., with a 
varying breadth of 30 to 140 m., and covers a surface of 12,000 sq. m. 
The orographical characteristics of the Caucasus are described in 
detail under that heading. 

(iii.) The combined valleys of the Rion and the Kura, which inter- 
vene between the Caucasus and the Armenian highlands, and stretch 
their axes north-west and south-east respectively, embrace the most 
populous and most fertile parts of Caucasia. They correspond 
roughly with the governments of Kutais, Tiflis, Elisavetpol and 
Baku, and have a population of nearly 3,650,000. The two valleys 
are separated by the low ridge of the Suram or Meskes mountains. 

Spurs from the Caucasus and from the Armenian highlands fill up 
the broad latitudinal depression between them. Above {i.e. west of) 
Tiflis these spurs so far intrude into the valley that it is reduced to a 
narrow 'strip in breadth. But below that city it suddenly widens 
out, an3 the width gradually increases through the stretch of 350 m. 
to the Caspian, until in the Mugan steppe along that sea it measures 
100 m. in width. The snow-clad peaks of the main Caucasus, 
descending by short, steep slopes, fringe the valley on the north, 
while an abrupt escarpment, having the characteristics of a border 
ridge of the Armenian highlands, fronts it on the south. The floor of 
the valley slopes gently eastwards, from 1 200 ft. at Tiflis to 500 ft. 
in the middle, and to 85 ft. below normal sea-level beside the Caspian. 
But the uniformity of the slope is interrupted by a plateau (2000- 
3000 ft. in altitude) along the southern foothills of the east central 
Caucasus, in the region known as Kakhetia, drained by the Alazan, 
a left-hand tributary of the Kura. The deep, short gorges and glens 
which seam the southern slopes of the Caucasus are inhabited by 
Ossetes, Tushes, Pshavs and Khevsurs in the west, and by various 
tribes of Lesghians in the east. In these high and stony valleys 
every available patch of ground is utilized for the cultivation of 
barley, even up to altitudes of 7000 and 8000 ft. above the level of 
the sea; but cattle-breeding is the principal resource of the moun- 
taineers, whose little communities are often separated from one 
another by passes, few of which are lower than 10,000 ft. The 
steppes along the bottom of the principal valley are for the most part 
too dry to be cultivated without irrigation. It is only in Kakhetia, 
where numerous mountain streams supply the fields and gardens of 
the plateau of Alazan, that wheat, millet and maize are grown, 
and orchards, vineyards and mulberry plantations are possible. 
Lower down the valley cattle-breeding is the chief source of wealth, 
while in the small towns and villages of the former Georgian kingdom 
various petty trades, exhibiting a high development of artistic taste 
and technical skill, are widely diffused. The slopes of the Armenian 
highlands are clothed with fine forests, and the vine is grown at their 
base, while on the wide-stretching steppes the Turko-Tatars pasture 
cattle, horses and sheep. The lower part of the Kura valley assumes 
the character of a dry steppe, the rainfall not reaching 14 in. annually 
at Baku, and it is still less in the Mugan steppe, though quite abun- 
dant in the adjacent region of Lenkoran. The vegetation of the 
steppe is on the whole scanty. Trees are generally absent, except 
for thickets of poplars, dwarf oaks and tamarisks along the course of 
the Kura, the delta of which is smothered under a jungle of reeds and 
rushes. The Mugan steppe is, however, in spite of its dryness, a 
more fertile region in virtue of the irrigation practised ; but the Kura 
has excavated its bed too deeply to admit of that being done along 
its course. The Lenkoran district, sometimes called Talysh, on the 
western side of the Kizil-Agach bay, is blessed with a rich vegetation, 
a fertile soil, and a moist climate. 

The inhabitants of the Kura valley consist principally of Iranian 
Tates and Talyshes, of Armenians and Lesghians, with Russians, 
Jews and Arabs.. This conjoint valley of the Rion-Kura was in 
remote antiquity the site of several Greek colonial settlements, 
later the seat of successive kingdoms of the Georgians, and for cen- 
turies it has formed a bulwark against hostile invasions from the 
south and east. It is still inhabited chiefly by Georgian tribes — 
Gurians, Imeretians, Mingrelians, Svanetians — in the basin of the 
Rion, and by Georgians intermingled with Armenians in the valley of 
the Kura, while the steppes that stretch away from the lower course 
of the latter river are ranged over by Turko-Tatars. Mingrelia and 
Imeretia (valley of Rion) are the gardens of Caucasia, but the high 
valleys of Svanetia, farther north on the south slopes of the Caucasus 
mountains, are wild and difficult of access. In the cultivated parts 
the land is so exceedingly fertile and productive that it sells for 
almost fabulous prices, and its vahie is still further enhanced by 
the discovery of manganese and copper mines in the basin of the 
Rion, and of the almost inexhaustible supplies of naphtha and 
petroleum at Baku in the Apsheron peninsula. The principal 
products of the soil are mentioned lower down, while the general 



CAUCASIA 



547 



character of the vegetation is indicated under Caucasus : Western 
Caucasus. In the basin of the Rion, in that of the Chorokh (which 
runs off the Pontic highlands into the Black Sea south of Batura), and 
on the Black Sea littoral from Batum northwards toSukhum-kaleh, 
and beyond, the climate is extremely hot and the rainfall heavy 
(see under Climate below). It is in this valley that the principal 
towns (except Vladikavkaz at the north foot of the Caucasus) of 
Caucasia are situated, namely, Baku (179,133 inhabitants in 1900), 
Tiflis (160,645 in 1897), Kutais (32,492), and the two Black Sea ports 
of Batum (28,512) and Poti (7666). 

(iv.) The highlands of Armenia are sometimes designated the 
Minor Caucasus, Little Caucasus and Anti-Caucasus. But to use 
such terms for what is not only an independent, but also an older, 
orographical formation than the Caucasus tends to perpetuate 
confusion in geographical nomenclature. The Armenian highlands, 
which run generally parallel to the Caucasus, though at much lower 
elevations (5000-6000 ft.), are a plateau region, sometimes quite flat, 
sometimes gently undulating, clothed with luxuriant meadows and 
mostly cultivable. From it rise double or triple ranges connected 
by cross-ridges and spined with outer spurs. These double and triple 
ranges, which have a general elevation of 8500-10,000 ft., stretch 
from the south-east angle of the Black Sea, 400 m. south-eastwards 
to the Kara-dagh and Salavat mountains in north Persia, and the 
latter link them on to the Elburz mountains that skirt the southern 
end of the Caspian Sea. Various names are given to the different 
parts of the constituent ranges, or, perhaps more correctly, elongated 
groups of mountains. The Ajar, Akhalt-sikh and Meskes or Trialety 
groups in the west are succeeded farther east by the Somkhet, 
Murguz, Ganji and Karabakh sections, forming the southern rim 
of the Kura basin, while parallel with them, but farther south, run 
the Mokry, Miskhan, Akmangan and Paltapin ranges, marking the 
northern edge of the Aras drainage area. These two sets of parallel 
ranges are linked together transversely by the cross-ridges of 
Bezobdal, Pambak, Shah-dagh and Gok-cha. From this last 
branches off the highest range in the entire series, namely, the 
Zangezur, which soars up to 10,000 ft. above the left bank of the 
Aras. From it again there shoot away at right angles, one on each 
side, the ranges of the Dar-alagoz and Bergushet. These highlands 
exhibit very considerable evidences of volcanic activity both in 
remote geological periods and also since the Tertiary epoch. Large 
areas are overlain with trachyte, basalt, obsidian, tuff and pumice. 
The most conspicuous features of the entire region, Mount Ararat 
(16,930 ft.) and Mount Alagoz (13,440 ft.), are both solid masses of 
trachyte ; and both rise above the limits of perpetual snow. Extinct 
volcanoes are numerous in several of the ranges, e.g. Akmangan, 
Mokry, Karabakh and Egri-dagh (see below). It is in this region 
of the Armenian highlands that the largest lakes of Caucasia are 
situated, namely, the Gok-cha or Sevanga (540 sq. m. in area) at an 
altitude of 6340 ft., the Chaldir-gol (33 sq. m.) at 6520 ft., and several 
smaller ones, such as the gols of Khozapin, Khopchalu, Arpa, Topo- 
ravan and Tabiztskhur, all situated between 6500 and 7000 ft. 
above sea-level. The principal water-divide in this highland region 
is, however, the range of Egri-dagh (Ararat), which just south of 
40° S. forms for 100 m. the boundary between Russian and Turkish 
Armenia, having Ararat at its eastern extremity and the extinct 
volcano of Kessa-dagh (11,260 ft.) at its western. Its importance 
lies in the fact that it divides the streams which flow into the Black 
Sea and Caspian from those which make their way into the Persian 
Gulf. The Egri-dagh possesses a sharply defined crest, ranges at a 
general elevation of 8000 ft., is bare of timber, scantily supplied 
with water, and rugged and deeply fissured. 

The transverse water-parting between the Black Sea and the 
Caspian begins on the south side of the main range of the Caucasus, 
at Mount Zikara (12,560 ft.), a little south-west of Kasbek, and 
runs south-west along the sinuous crests of the Racha, Suram or 
Meskes (3000-5000 ft.), Vakhan (10,000-11,000 ft.), Arzyan (7000- 
10,000 ft.), and its continuation the Soganluk, thus linking the 
Caucasus ranges with those of the Armenian highlands. This line 
of heights separates the basins of the Chorokh and the Rion (Black 
Sea) from those of-the Aras and the Kura (Caspian Sea). North of 
the Caucasus ranges the water-divide between these two seas 
descends from Mount Elbruz along the Sadyrlar Mountains (11,000 
ft.), and finally sinks into the Stavropol " plateau " (1600 ft.). But 
the main axis of the transverse upheavals would appear to be con- 
tinued in a north-eastern direction in the Andi and other parallel 
ranges of Daghestan, as stated under Caucasus. 

The population in this region consists principally of Armenians, 
Tatars, Turks, Kurds, Ossetes, Greeks, with Persians, Tates and a 
few Russians (see particulars below). 

Climate. — Owing in part to the great differences in altitude 
in different regions of Caucasia and in part to the directions in 
which the mountain ranges run, and consequently the quarters 
towards which their slopes face, the climate varies very greatly 
according to locality. Generally speaking, it may be character- 
ized as a climate of extremes on the Armenian highlands, in the 
Kura valley and in northern Caucasia, and as maritime and 
genial in Lenkoran, on the Black Sea coastlands, and in the 



valley of the Rion. The greatest recorded range of temperature 
is at Erivan (altitude 3230 ft.), namely, of 64 between a January 
average of 14-9° and an August average of 78-8° F. At Sukhum- 
kaleh, on the Black Sea, the corresponding range is only 27-3°, 
between a January average of 48-8° and an August average of 
76-1°. The highest mean temperatures for the whole year are 
those of Lenkoran (6o'3°) and of Sukhum-kaleh and Poti (about 
58 ), and the lowest at Ardahan (5840 ft.), in the province of 
Kars, namely, 37-9°, and at Gudaur (7245 ft.), a few miles south 
of Kasbek, namely, 38-6°. The following table gives particulars 
of temperature averages at a few typical places: — 



Place. 


Altitude. 


Annual 
Mean. 


January 
Mean. 


July 
Mean. 


Stavropol 


2030 


47-0° 


24-0° 


70-0° 


Vladikavkaz 


2345 


47-3° ■ 


23-4° 


68-0° 


Gudaur 


7245 


38-6° 


20-3° 


57-2° 


Baku 


on Caspian 


58-0° 


38-0° 


8o-o° 


Tiflis 


1490 


55-0° 


32-o° 


76-5° 


Batum 


on Black Sea 


59-0° 


42-0° 


75-0° 


Sochi 


on Black Sea 


56-3° 


40-3° 


76-1° 


Lenkoran 


on Caspian 


60-3° 


39-o° 


8o-6° 


Erivan 


3170 


51-0° 


15-0° 


75-0° 



In respect of precipitation the entire region of Caucasia may 
be divided into two strikingly contrasted regions, a wet and a 
dry. To the former belong the Black Sea littoral, where the 
rainfall averages 59 to 93 in. annually, and the valleys that open 
upon it or are exposed to winds blowing off it, in which the 
rainfall varies, however, from 20 in. (Abbas-tuman, Borzhom) 
to 60 (Kutais). In Lenkoran also the rainfall averages 40 to 50 
in. in the year. Between 16 and 40 in. fall as a rule at the 
northern foot of the Caucasus (Mozdok, Pyatigorsk) and in the 
Kura valley (Tiflis, Novo-bayazet) . On the Armenian highlands 
and on the steppes north of Pyatigorsk the rainfall is less than 
12 in. annually, and even in some places less than 8 in., e.g. at 
the foot of Ararat. Most rain falls at Batum and at Lenkoran in 
the autumn, in northern Caucasia and in Transcaucasia in spring 
and summer, but in the vicinity of the Sea of Azov in winter. 

Flora and Fauna. — Plant-life, in such a mountainous country 
as Caucasia, being intimately dependent upon aspect and 
altitude, is treated under Caucasus. The wild animals of 
Caucasia are for the most part the same as those which frequent 
the mountainous parts of central Europe, though there is also an 
irruption of Asiatic forms, e.g. the tiger (in Lenkoran only), 
panther, hyaena and jackal. The more important of the carni- 
vores which haunt the forests, valleys and mountain slopes are 
the bear (Ursus arctos), wolf, lynx, wild cat and fox (Vulpes 
melanotus). The wild boar occurs around Borzhom. The 
aurochs (Bos urus) appears to exist still in the forests of the 
western Caucasus. Of interest for sportsmen, as well as serving 
as prey for the carnivores, are red deer, goats (Capra pallasil 
and C. aegagrus), chamois, roebuck, moufflon (Ovis musimon), 
argali or Asiatic wild sheep (O. Ammon), another species of 
sheep in O. gmelini, and fallow deer (Capreolus pigargtts) in 
northern Caucasus only. Rodents are numerous, the mouse 
(M us sylvaticus) is very destructive, and beavers are met with in 
places. The birds of prey are the same as these of central 
Europe, and include the sea eagle, alpine vulture {Gyps fulvus), 
buzzard, kites (Gypaetus barbatus and Milvus ater), hawks 
(e.g. Astur nisus) , goshawk (A . palumbarius) , fish-hawk (Pandion 
haliaetus) and owls. Among the smaller birds may be enumer- 
ated finches, the siskin, bullfinch, pipit, titmcuse, wagtail, lark, 
fine-crested wren, hedge-sparrow, corn-wren, nut-hatch, starling, 
swallow, martin, swift, thrush, butcher bird, shrike, dipper, 
yellow-hammer, ortolan and a warbler (Accentor alpinus). The 
game birds consist of grouse, blackcock, moorhen, quail and 
partridge. The pheasant derives its name from the ancient 
name (Phasis) of the Rion. 

In the seas and rivers about 190 species of fishes have been 
enumerated. Of these, 115 species are Mediterranean, 30 are com- 
mon to the Caspian Sea, and the remaining species are peculiar to 
the Black Sea. The most useful economically are several species of 
sturgeon and of herring, trout, barbel, chubb, bream, ray, sea-dace, 



548 



CAUCASIA 



carp, anchovy. Insects abound, especially Coleopte.ra. Flies, 
lice, gadflies and mosquitoes are the worst of the insect plagues. 
There are several snakes, including the viper (Pelias berus). 

Ethnology. — The population of Caucasia is increasing rapidly. 
In 1897 it numbered 9,291,090, of whom 4,886,230 were males 
and 4,404,867 were females. The most densely-peopled provinces 
were Kutais and Tiflis, each with 80 inhabitants to the square 
mile; the thinnest the Black Sea government (20I per sq. m.), 
Terek (31), and Kars (39). Of the total population 3,725,543 
lived in northern Caucasia and 5,564,547 in Transcaucasia 
(including Daghestan). In the latter territorial division there 
exists a great disproportion between the sexes, namely, to every 
100 males only 86 females; indeed in the Black Sea government 
there are only 65-5 females to every 100 males. Ethnologically 
the population belongs to a great variety of races. The older 
authorities asserted that these numbered as many as 150, or even 
300; the more recent researches of Baron P. V. Uslar, F. Anton, 
von Schiefner, Zagursky, and others have greatly reduced this 
number; but even then there are not less than fifty represented. 

According to the languages spoken the populations of Caucasia 
admit of being classified as follows, 1 according to Senator N. 
Trointsky, president of the Russian Census Committee for 1897. 



Aryans 4,901,412 

Slavs 3,183,870 

Great Russians 

Little Russians 

White Russians 

Poles 

Germans 47.39 1 

Greeks 100,299 

Rumanians 7,232 

French and Italians !>435 

Lithuanians 6,687 

Lithuanians proper 

Letts 

Iranians 315.695 

Persians 

Talyshes 

Tates 

Ossetes 

Kurds 99,836 

Armenians 1,116,461 



1,829,793 

i ; 3°5,463 
19,642 

25-117 



5,121 
i,5H 

13,929 

34,994 

95,056 

171,716 



46,739 



1,902,142 



3,041 

40,498 
5,353 

7,42.2 

1,879,908 



Gypsies . 
Semites 
Jews 

Chaldaeans (Aisors) 
Ural-Altaians 
Finns 

Esthonians . 
Turko- Tatars 

Tatars 

Osmanli Turks 

Nogai Tatars 

Turkomans 

Bashkirs 

Chuvashes 

Kirghiz 

Sarts 

Karachais 

Kumyks 

Kara-papaks 

Kalmucks 

Caucasians .... 2,439,071 
Georgians (including Imeretians, Gur- 
ians, Svanetians, Lazes, Mingrel- 

ians, &c.) 1,352,455 

Circassians 

Cherkesses (Adigheh) and Kabardians 

Abkhasians 
Chechens 



Chechens proper 
Ingushes 2 . 
Kistines 
Lesghians 

Avaro-Andians . 

Darghis 

Kurins 

ydins . 

Others 



274,318 



600,514 



4,281 

1,509,785 

139,419 

64,048 

24,522 

953 

411 

98 

158 

27,222 

83,408 

29,902 

14,409 



144,847 
72,103 

226,496 

47,409 

413 

212,692 
130,209 

159,213 

7,100 

91,300 



1 Premier Recensement general de la population de V empire de Russie, 
ed. N. Trointsky (St Petersburg, 1905, 2 vols.), in Russian and French. 

2 Although the Ingushes speak a Chechen dialect, they have 
recently been proved to be, anthropologically, quite a distinct race. 



Religion.— Most of the Russians and the Georgians belong to 
the Orthodox Greek Church (over 4,000,000 in all); but con- 
siderable numbers (estimated at nearly 122,000, though in reality 
probably a good many more) are Nonconformists of different 
denominations. The Georgian Lazes are, however, Mussulmans. 
The Armenians are Christians, mostly of the national Gregorian 
Church (979,566), though 34,000 are Roman Catholics. The 
Caucasian races (except the Gregorians) , together with the Turks 
and Tatars, are Mussulmans of the Sunnite sect (2,021,300), and 
the Iranian races mostly Mussulmans of the Shiite sect (884,100). 
The Kalmucks and other Mongolic tribes are Lamaists (20,300), 
and some of the Kurds profess the. peculiar tenets of the 
Yezids. 

Industries. — The principal occupation of the settled inhabitants 
is agriculture and of the nomadic the breeding of live stock, 
including camels. The cultivation of the soil is, however, 
attended in many parts with great difficulties owing to the 
scanty rainfall and the very primitive implements still in use, 
and in the valley of the Kura heavy losses are frequently incurred 
from depredations by locusts. But where irrigation is employed 
the yield of crops is excellent. Rye and wheat are the most im- 
portant crops harvested in northern Caucasia, but oats, barley 
and maize are also cultivated, whereas in Transcaucasia the 
principal crops are maize, rice tobacco and cotton. The rice is 
grown chiefly in the valley of the Kura and in Lenkoran; the 
tobacco in the Rion valley and on the Black Sea coastlands, also 
to some extent in Kuban; and the cotton in the eastern provinces. 
Various kinds of fodder crops are grown in Transcaucasia, such 
as hay, rye-grass and lucerne. It is estimated that nearly 
54,000 acres are under vineyards in northern Caucasia and some 
2 78, 000 acres in Transcarcasia, the aggregate yield of wine being 
30 million gallons annually. The best wine grows in Kakhetia, 
a district lying north-east and east of Tiflis; this district alone 
yields nearly 8 million gallons annually. Large numbers of 
mulberry trees are planted for rearing silkworms, especially in 
Kutais, Erivan, Elisavetpol (Nukha) and Baku (Shemakha); 
the groves occupy nearly 150,000 acres, and the winding of the 
silk gives employment to large numbers of the population. 
Melons and water-melons are also important objects of cultiva- 
tion. Sunflowers are very extensively grown for oil in the 
government of Kuban and elsewhere, and also some flax. 
Liquorice is an article of export. Many varieties of fruit 
are grown, especially good being the apricots, peaches, walnuts 
and hazel nuts. A limited area (not more than n 50 acres) 
of the Black Sea coast between Sukhum-kaleh and Batum is 
planted with the tea-shrub, which succeeds very well. In the 
same district bamboos, ramie-fibre and attar (otto) of roses 
are cultivated. 

The mining industry is growing rapidly in importance in spite of 
costly and deficient means of communication, want of capital, 
and lack of general initiative. So far the principal developments 
of the industry have been in the governments of Kutais, Batum, 
Elisavetpol and Kuban. Copper ore is extracted above the 
Murgul river (some 30 m. south of Batum) , at Akhtala south of 
Tiflis, and at Kedabek in Elisavetpol; manganese to a consider- 
ably greater extent (over 400,000 tons annually) at Chiaturi in 
the Kvirila valley in Kutais. Steam coal of good quality is 
reported to exist about 30 m. inland from the open roadstead of 
Ochemchiri in Kutais, but it is not mined. About 50,000 tons of 
coal of very poor quality are, however, extracted annually, and the 
same quantity of salt in the Armenian highlands and in Kuban. 
Small quantities of quicksilver, sulphur and iron are obtained. 
But all these are insignificant in comparison with the mineral oil 
industry of Baku, which in normal times yields annually between 
ten and eleven million tons of crude oil (naphtha). A good deal 
of this is transported by gravitation from Baku to Batum on the 
Black Sea by means of a pipe laid overland. The refined oil is 
exported as kerosene or petroleum, the heavier refuse (mazut) is 
used as fuel. Naphtha is also obtained, though in much smaller 
quantities, in Terek and Kuban, in Tiflis and Daghestan. 
Numerous mineral springs (chalybeate and sulphurous) exist 
both north and south of the Caucasus ranges, e.g. at Pyatigorsk, 



CAUCASIA 



549 



Zhelesnovodsk, Essentuki, and Kislovodsk in Terek, and at 
Tiflis, Abbastuman and Borzhom in the government of 
Tiflis. 

Manufacturing industry is confined to a few articles and 
commodities, such as cement, tea, tin cans (for oil), cotton goods, 
oil refineries, tobacco factories, flour-mills, silk-winding mills 
(especially at Shusha and Jebrail in the south of Elisavetpol), 
distilleries and breweries. On the other hand, the domestic in- 
dustries are extensively carried on and exhibit a high degree of 
technical skill and artistic taste. Carpets (especially at Shusha) , 
silk, cotton and woollen goods, felts and fur cloaks are made, 
and small arms in Daghestan and at Tiflis, Nukha and Sukhum- 
kaleh; silversmiths' work at Tiflis, Akhaltsikh and Kutais; 
pottery at Elisavetpol and Shusha; leather shoe-making at 
Alexandropol, Nukha, Elisavetpol, Shusha and Tiflis; saddlery 
at Sukhum-kaleh and Ochemchiri on the Black Sea and at Temir- 
khan-shura in Daghestan; and copper work at Derbent and 
Alexandropol. But industries of every description were most 
seriously crippled by the spirit of turbulence and disorder which 
manifested itself throughout Transcaucasia in the years 1904- 
1906, accentuated as they were further by the outbreak of the 
long-rooted racial enmities between the Armenians and the Tatars, 
especially at Baku in 1905. 

Commerce. — The exports through the Black Sea ports of 
Batum, Poti and Novo-rossiysk average in value a little over 
£10,000,000 annually, though showing a tendency to increase 
slightly. By far the most important commodity is petroleum, 
fully one-half of the total value. In addition large quantities are 
shipped at Baku direct for the Volga and the Transcaspian port 
of Krasnovodsk. The export that comes next in value is silk, 
and after it may be named wheat, barley, manganese ore, maize, 
wool, oilcake, carpets, rye, oats, liquorice and timber. The 
import trade reaches nothing like the same value, and what there 
is is confined almost entirely to Batum. The annual average 
vahie may be put at not quite £2,000,000, machinery and tin-plate 
being a long way the most important items. There is further a 
small transit trade through Transcaucasia from Persia to the 
value of less than half a million sterling annually, and chiefly in 
carpets, cocoons and silk, wool, rice and boxwood; and further 
a sea-borne trade between Persia and Caucasian ports (Baku 
and Petrovsk) to the value of over i§ millions sterling in 
all. The very extensive internal trade with Russia can only be 
mentioned. 

Railways. — The principal approach to Caucasia from Russia by 
rail is the line that runs from Rostov-on-Don to Vladikavkaz at 
the foot of the central Caucasus range. Thence, or rather from 
the junction of Beslan, 14 m. north of Vladikavkaz, the main line 
proceeds east of Petrovsk on the Caspian, and from Petrovsk 
skirts the shore southwards as far as Baku, the distance from 
Vladikavkaz to Baku being 414 m. This railway, together with 
the driving roads over the Caucasus mountains via the Mamison 
pass (the Ossetic military road) and the Darial pass (the Georgian 
military road), and the route across the Black Sea to Poti or 
Batum are the chief means of communication between southern 
Russia and Transcaucasia. Baku and Batum (also Poti) are 
connected by another main line, 560 m. long, which traverses 
the valleys of the Kura and the Rion, south of the Caucasus. 
From Tiflis, nearly midway on this last line, a railway proceeds 
30uth as far as Erivan (234 m.), with a branch to Kars (48 m.). 
The Erivan line is being continued into Persia, namely, to 
Tabriz via Julfa on the Aras. 

History. — To the ancient Greeks Caucasia, and the mighty 
range which dominates it, were a region of mystery and romance. 
It was there that they placed the scene of the sufferings of Prome- 
theus (vide Aeschylus, Prometheus Vinctus), and there, in the 
land of Colchis, which corresponds to the valley of the Rion, that 
they sent the Argonauts to fetch the golden fleece. Outside the 
domain of myth, the earliest connexion of the Greeks with that 
part of the world would appear to have been through the mari- 
time colonies, such as Dioscurias, which the Milesians founded on 
the Black Sea coast in the 7th century B.C. For more than 
two thousand years the most powerful state in Caucasia was that 



of Georgia (q.v.), the authentic history of which begins with its 
submission to Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. The southern 
portion of Transcaucasia fell during the 1st century B.C. under 
the sway of Armenia, and with that country passed under the 
dominion of Rome, and so eventually of the Eastern empire. 
During the 3rd century a.d. Georgia and Armenia were invaded 
and in great part occupied by the Khazars, and then for more 
than a thousand years the mountain fastnesses of this border- 
land between Europe and Asia were the refuge, or the resting- 
place, of successive waves of migration, as people alter people 
and tribe after tribe was compelled to give way to the pressure 
of stronger races harassing them in the rear. The Huns, for 
instance, and the Avars appeared in the 6th century, and the 
Mongols in the 13th. In the 10th century bands of Varangians 
or Russified Scandinavians sailed out of the Volga and coasted 
along the Caspian until they had doubled the Apsheron peninsula, 
when they landed and captured Barda, the chief town of Caucasian 
Albania. 

But, apart from Georgia, historical interest in Caucasia centres 
in the long and persistent attempts which the Russians made 
to conquer it, and the heroic, though unavailing, resistance 
offered by the mountain races, more especially the Circassian 
and Lesghian tribes. Russian aggression began somewhat 
early in the 18th century, when Peter the Great, establishing 
his base at Astrakhan on the Volga, and using the Caspian for 
bringing up supplies and munitions of war, captured Derbent 
from the Persians in 1722, and Baku in the following year. 
But these conquests, with others made at the expense of Persia, 
were restored to the latter power after Peter's death, a dozen 
years later. At that period the Georgians were divided into 
various petty principalities, the chief of which were Imeretia 
and Georgia (Kharthlia), owing at times a more or less shadowy 
allegiance to the sultan of the Ottoman Turks at Constantinople. 
In 1770, during the course of a war between Russia and Turkey, 
the Russians crossed over the Caucasus and assisted the Imere- 
tians to resist the Turks, and from the time of the ensuing peace 
of Kuchuk-kainarji the Georgian principalities looked to their 
powerful northern neighbour as their protector against the 
southern aggressors the Turks. In 1783 George XIII. , prince of 
Georgia and Mingrelia, formally put himself under the suzerainty 
of Russia, and after his death Georgia was converted (1801) 
into a Russian province. The same fate overtook Imeretia nine 
years later. Meanwhile the Russians had also subdued the 
Ossetes (1802) and the Lesghian tribes (1803) of the middle 
Caucasus. By the peace of Gulistan in 181 3 Persia ceded to 
Russia several districts in eastern Caucasia, from Lenkoran 
northwards to Derbent. Nevertheless the mountain tribes who 
inhabited the higher parts of the Caucasus were still independent, 
and their subjugation cost Russia a sustained effort of thirty 
years, during the course of which her military commanders were 
more than once brought almost to the point of despair by the 
tenacity, the devotion and the adroitness and daring which the 
mountaineers displayed in a harassing guerilla warfare. The 
animating spirit of their resistance was Shamyl (Samuel), a 
chief and priest of the Lesghians, who, a Mahommedan, pro- 
claimed a " holy war " against the " infidel " aggressors. At 
first the Russians were able to continue their policy of conquest 
and annexation without serious check. After acquiring the 
northern edge of the Armenian plateau, partly from Persia in 
1828 and partly from Turkey in 1829, Russia crushed a rising 
which had broken out in the Caspian coast districts of Daghestan 
on the north of the Caucasus. This took place during the years 
1 831-183 2. The next seven years were occupied with the sub- 
jugation of the Abkhasians along the Black Sea coast, and of 
other Circassian tribes in the west. Meanwhile Shamyl had 
roused the Lesghian tribes farther east and begun his twenty 
years' struggle for freedom, a struggle which called forth the 
sympathy and admiration of nearly the whole of Europe. More 
than once he escaped, in a manner that seemed little short of 
marvellous, out of the hands of the Russians when they held him 
closely invested in some mountain fastness, as at Himry in 1831, 
at Akhulgo in 1839, and again at the same stronghold in 1849. 



55° 



CAUCASUS 



The general who at last broke the back of the long opposition of 
the prophet-chief of the Lesghians was Prince Baryatinsky, who 
after three years of strenuous warfare succeeded in capturing 
Shamyl's stronghold of Weden, and then in surrounding that 
chieftain himself on the inaccessible rocky platform of Gunib 
in the heart of Daghestan. There the hitherto indomitable 
champion of Caucasian independence was forced to surrender to 
the Russians on the 6th of September 1859. Nevertheless the 
spirit of resistance in these stubborn mountaineers was not finally 
broken until 1864, when the Russians eventually stifled all op- 
position in the difficult valleys and glens of the western Caucasus. 
But this was followed, during the next fourteen years, by the 
wholesale emigration of thousands upon thousands of Circassians, 
who sought an asylum in Turkish territory, leaving their native 
region almost uninhabited and desolate, a condition from which 
it has not recovered even at the present day. During the Russo- 
Turkish War of 1877-78 the self -exiled Circassians and other 
Caucasian mountaineers, supported by a force of 14,000 Turks, 
made a determined attempt to wrest their native glens from the 
power of Russia; but, after suffering a severe defeat at the hands 
of General Alkhazov, the Turks withdrew, and were accompanied 
by some 30,000 Abkhasians, who settled in Asia Minor. A few 
months later the Lesghians in Daghestan, who had risen in 
revolt, were defeated and their country once more reduced to 
obedience. By the ensuing peace of Adrianople, Russia still 
further enlarged her Transcaucasian territories by the acquisition 
of the districts of Kars, Batum and Ardahan. After a peaceful 
period of a quarter of a century the Armenian subjects of 
Russia in Transcaucasia were filled with bitterness and discontent 
by the confiscation of the properties of their national (Gregorian) 
church by the Russian treasury. Nor were their feelings more 
than half allayed by the arrangement which made their ecclesias- 
tics salaried officers of the Russian state. This ferment of unrest, 
which was provoked in the years 1 903-1 904, was exacerbated 
in the winters that followed by the renewed outbreak of the 
century -long racial feud between the Tatars and the Armenians at 
Baku and other places. In fact, nearly the whole of the region 
between the Caucasus and the Perso-Turkish frontier on the 
south, from the Caspian Sea on the one side to the Black Sea on 
the other, was embroiled in a civil war of the most sanguinary 
and ruthless character, the inveterate racial animosities of the 
combatants being in both cases inflamed by religious fanaticism. 
Complete anarchy prevailed at the worst centres of disorder, as 
Baku and Batum, the imperial authorities being more powerless 
to preserve even the semblance of order than they were in the 
interior of Russia. Many of the oil wells at Baku were burned, 
and massacres took place at that town, at Shusha, at Erivan, 
at Tiflis, at Batum, at Jebrail and at other places. An end was 
put to these disorders only by the mutual agreement of the two 
contestants, alike horrified and exhausted by the fierce outburst 
of passion, in September 1905. (J. T. Be.) 

CAUCASUS, a mountain range of Asia, wholly within the 
Russian empire, stretching north-west to south-east from the 
Strait of Kerch (between the Black Sea and Sea of Azov) to the 
Caspian Sea, over a length of 900 m., with a breadth varying 
from 30 to 140 m. In its general character and conformation the 
Caucasus presents a closer analogy with the Pyrenees than with 
the Alps. Its general uniformity of direction, its comparatively 
narrow width, and its well-defined limits towards both south and 
north are all features which it has in common with the former. 
The range of the Caucasus, like that of the Pyrenees, maintains 
for considerable distances a high average elevation, and is not 
cleft by deep trenches, forming natural passes across the range, 
such as are common in the Alps. In both ranges, too, some of the 
highest summits stand on spurs of the main range, not on the 
main range itself; as Mont Perdu and Maladetta lie south of the 
main backbone of the Pyrenees, so Mount Elbruz and Kasbek, 
Dykh-tau, Koshtan-tau, Janga-tau and Shkara — all amongst 
the loftiest peaks of the Caucasus — stand on a subsidiary range 
north of the principal range or on spurs connecting the two. On 
the other hand, it is interesting to compare the arrangement of 
the drainage waters of the Caucasus with those of the Alps. In 



both orographical systems the principal rivers start nearly all 
together from a central nucleus, and in both cases they radiate 
to opposite quarters of the compass; but whereas in the Alps 
the Rhone and the Rhine, flowing south-west and north-east 
respectively, follow longitudinal valleys, and the Aar and the 
Ticino, flowing north-west and south-east respectively, follow 
transverse valleys, in the Caucasus the streams which flow 
south-west and north-east, namely, the headwaters of the 
Rion and the Terek, travel along transverse valleys, and 
those of the Kura and the Kuban, flowing south-east and 
north-west respectively, traverse longitudinal valleys. For 
purposes of description it is convenient to consider the range 
in four sections, a western, a middle with two subsections, and 
an eastern. 

1. Western Caucasus. This section, extending from the 
Strait of Kerch to Mount Elbruz in 42 40' E., is over 420 m. 
long, and runs parallel to the north-east coast of the Black Sea 
and at only a short distance from it. Between the main range 
and the sea there intervene at least two parallel ranges separated 
by deep glens, and behind it a third subsidiary parallel range, 
likewise separated by a deep trough-like valley, and known as 
the Bokovoi Khrebet. All these ranges are shorn through trans- 
versely by numerous glens and gorges, and, the rainfall being 
heavy and the exposure favourable, they are densely clothed 
with vegetation. Many of the spurs or broken segments of ranges 
thus formed abut steeply upon the Black Sea, so that this 
littoral region is on the whole very rugged and not readily 
accessible, especially as the general elevations are considerable. 
The seaward flanking ranges run up to 4000 ft. and more, and in 
many places shoot out cliffs which overhang the coast some 
2000-3000 ft. sheer, while the main range gradually ascends to 
10,000-12,000 ft. as it advances eastwards, the principal peaks 
being Fisht (8040 ft.), Oshten (9210 ft.), Shuguz (10,640 ft.), and 
Psysh (12,425 ft.). And whereas the main range is built up of 
hard eruptive or crystalline rocks, the subsidiary chains are 
composed of softer (Cretaceous and Tertiary) laminated forma- 
tions, which easily become disintegrated and dislocated. The 
snow-line runs here at about 9000 ft. on the loftiest summits, and 
east of Oshten the crest of the main range is capped with 
perpetual snow and carries many hanging glaciers, while larger 
glaciers creep down the principal valleys. The passes lie at 
relatively great altitudes and are few in number, so that 
although the northern versants of the various ranges all have 
a tolerably gentle slope, communication between the Black 
Sea and the valley of the Kuban, and the low steppe country 
beyond, is the reverse of easy. The more important passes, 
proceeding from west to east, are Pshekh (5435 ft.) west of 
Oshten, and Shetlib (6060 ft.) east of Oshten, Pseashka 
(6880 ft.) east of Shuguz, Sanchar (7990 ft.) west of Psysh; 
and between the last-named mountain and Elbruz, facilitating 
communication between Sukhum-Kaleh (and the coast as 
far as Poti) and the upper valley of the Kuban, are the 
passes of Marukh (11,500 ft.), Klukhor (9450 ft.) and Nakhar 
(9615 ft.). 

Flora. — The southern exposure of this littoral region, the 
shelter afforded against the bitter winds of the north by the 
lofty Caucasus range, and the copious rainfall all combine to 
foster a luxuriant and abundant vegetation. The most dis- 
tinguishing feature of the flora of this region is the predominance 
of arborescent growths; forests cover in fact 56% of the area, 
and are not only dense but laced together with climbing and 
twining plants. The commonest species of trees are such as 
grow in central Europe, namely, ash, fir, pine, beech, acacia, 
maple, birch, box, chestnut, laurel, holm-oak, poplar, elm, lime, 
yew, elder, willow, oak. The common box is especially prevalent, 
but the preponderating species are Coniferae, including the 
Caucasian species Pinus halepensis and P. insignis. The com- 
monest firs are Abies nordmannia and A. orientalis. There are 
two native oaks, Quercus ponticus and Q. sessiliflora. A great 
variety of shrubs grow on these slopes of the western Caucasus, 
chiefly the following species, several of which are indigenous — 
Rhododendron ponticum, Azalea pontica, Aristotelia maqui, Agave 



CAUCASUS 



55i 



americana, Cephalaria tatarica, Cptoneaster pyracantha, Citrus 
aurantium, Diospyros ebenum, Ficus carica, Illicium anisatum, 
Ligustrumcaucasicum, Punica granatum, Philadelphus coronarius, 
Pyrus salicifolia, Rhus cotinus and six species of Viburnum. 
Aquatic plants thrive excellently and occur in great variety. 
The following purely Caucasian species also grow on the coast — 
five species of spearwort, three of saxifrage, Aster caucasica, 
Dioscorea caucasica, Echinops raddeanus, Hedera colchica, Helle- 
borus caucasica and Peucedanum caucasicum. Here too are 
found many of the more beautiful open-air flowering plants of 
a shrubby character, e.g. magnolia, azalea, camellia, begonia 
and paulownia. Among the cultivated trees and shrubs the 
most valuable economically are the vine, peach, pomegranate, 
fig, olive (up to 1500 ft. above sea-level), chestnut, apricot, apple, 
pear, plum, cherry, melon, tea (on the coast between Sukhum- 
Kaleh and Batum), maize (yielding the staple food of the inhabi- 
tants), wheat (up to 6000 ft.), potatoes, peas, currants, cotton, 
rice, colza and tobacco. Before the Russian conquest the native 
inhabitants of this region were Kabardians, Circassians ( Adigheh) 
and Abkhasians, also a Circassian race. But half a million of 
these people being Mahommedans, and refusing to submit to 
the yoke of Christian Russia, emigrated into Turkish territory 

List of Peaks in the west central Caucasus, with their altitudes, names and dates of mountaineers 

who have climbed them. 





Altitude 






Name of Pea 


*• in Feet. 


By whom ascended. 


Date. 


Elbruz, E. peak 


• • • 18.345 


D. W. Freshfield, A. W. Moore and C. Tucker 


1868 


Elbruz, W. peak 


• ■ • 18,465 


F. C. Grove, H. Walker and F. Gardiner 


1874 


11 ,, 


,, 


H. Woolley 


1889 


Donguz-orun . 


14,600 


G. Merzbacher and L. Purtscheller 


1890 






Donkin and H. Fox 


1888 


,, 


ff 


Helbling, Reichert and Weber . 


1903 


Shtavler 


. ■ 13,105 


Ficker, W. R. Rickmers, Scheck and Wigner 


1903 


Ledosht-tau 


. . 12,580 


Schuster and Wigner 


1903 


Hevai 


• • 13,055 


Schuster and Wigner 


1903 


Lakra-tau . 


. • 12,185 


Rolleston and Longstaff 


1903 


Ushba, N.E. peak 


. . 15,400 


Cockin 


1888 


Ushba, S.W. peak 


. ■ i5,4 10 


Helbling, Schulze, Reichert, Schuster and 

Weber 
Distel, Leuchs and Pfann 


1903 


Ushba, both peaks 




1903 


Sultran-kol-bashi 


• • 12,495 


Grove, Walker and Gardiner 


1874 


Bak ... 


- • ",739 


Collier, Solly and Newmarch 


1894 


Gulba 




12,500 


Freshfield 


1887 


Salynan-bashi 




14,700 


Cockin and H. W. Holder 


1888 


Shikildi-tau 




■ • 14,170 


Helbling, Reichert, Schulze and Weber 


1903 


Bshedukh 




14,010 


Distel, Leuchs and Pfann 


1903 


Ullu-tau-chana 




13,800 


Rolleston and Longstaff 


1903 


Adyr-su-bashi 




• ■ H,335 


Holder, Cockin and Woolley 


1896 


Sullu-kol-bashi 




- • 13,970 


Merzbacher and Purtscheller 


1890 


Tikhtengen . 




• • 15,135 


Rolleston and Longstaff 


1903 


Gestola . 




• ■ 15,940 


C. T. Dent and Donkin 


1886 


Tetnuld. 




• • 15,920 


Freshfield 


1887 


,, 




Merzbacher and Purtscheller 


1890 


Adish or Katuyn-t 


au . 16,295 


Holder and Woolley 


1888 


Janga-tau, E. peak 


• ■ 16,525 


Cockin 


1888 


1, »» 




Merzbacher and Purtscheller 


1890 


Janga-tau, E. a 


nd W. W. peak. 






peaks . 


16,660 


Helbling, Reichert, Schulze and Weber 


1903 


Shkara 


17,040 


Cockin 


1888 


Ailama . 


■ • H,855 


Woolley 


1889 


Ullu-auz 


• • 15,350 


V. Sella 


1888 


Dykh-tau ' . 


■ • 17,050 


Cockin, Holder and Woolley 


1888 


Koshtan-tau 2 . 


• • 16,875 


Woolley 


1888 


Mishirghi-tau, E. p 


eak 16,350 


Woolley 


1889 


Laboda 


■ ■ 14,170 


Dent and Woolley 


t895 


Tsikhvarga, E. pea 


k ■ - 13,575 


V. Sella 


1890 


,, W. pea 


k • • 13,575 


Holder and Cockin 


1890 


Karagom-khokh or 








Burdshula . 


• • I4, 2 95 


Holder and Cockin 


1890 


Adai-khokh 


• • 15,275 


Holder and Cockin 


1890 


Tepli 


■ • H,5io 


V. Sella 


1896 


Kasbek 


■ • i6,545 


Freshfield, Moore and Tucker 


1868 


,, 




Woolley 


1889 


1, 


,, 


Merzbacher 


1890 


,, 


M 


V. Sella 


1S96 


Giraarai-khokh 


• ■ 15,670 


Merzbacher 


1890 


Laila, N. peak 
Laila, middle peak 


• ■ 13,045 


Freshfield and Powell 


1889 


• • 13,155 


V. Sella 


1889 


Laila, S. peak 


■ ■ 13,105 


Merzbacher and Purtscheller 


1890 


Khamkhakhi-khok 


i 14,065 


M. de Dechy 


1884 



1 Formerly the Koshtan-tau. 



between 1864 and 1878, and the country where they had lived 
remained for the most part unoccupied until after the beginning 
of the 20th century. Then, however, the Russian government 
held out inducements to settlers, and these have been responded 
to by Russians, Greeks, Armenians and Rumanians, but the 
process of repeopling the long deserted territory is slow and 
difficult. The coast-line is remarkably regular, there being no 
deep bays and few seaports. The best accommodation that 
these latter afford consists of more or less open roadsteads, e.g. 
Novo-rossiysk, Gelenjik, Anapa, Sukhum-Kaleh, Poti and 
Batum. Along the coast a string of summer bathing resorts is 
springing up similar to those that dot the south-east coast of 
the Crimea. The most promising of these little seaside places 
are Anapa, Gelenjik and Gagry. 

2. Middle Caucasus: (a) Western Half. — This sub-section, 
with a length of 200 m., reaches from Mount Elbruz to Kasbek 
and the Pass of Darial. It contains the loftiest summits of the 
entire range, fully a dozen exceeding Mont BJanc in altitude (see 
table below). 

In addition to the peaks enumerated in the table, the following 
also exist between Elbruz and Kasbek all exceeding 13,000 ft. in 
altitude: Dong-osenghi, 14,265 ft.; Kurmychi, 13,310 ft.; Ullu- 

kara-tau, 14,070 ft. ; Jailyk. 17,780 ft. 
Sarikol-bashi, 13,965 ft.; Dumala-tau 
14,950 ft.; Sugan-tau, 14,730 ft. 
Tiutiu-bashi, 14,500 ft. ; Nuamkuam 
13,975 ft-; Zurungal, 13,915 ft. 
Mala-tau, 14,950 ft.; Tiutiun-tau 
15,115 ft.; Khrumkol-tau, 14,653 ft. 
Bubis-khokh, 14,500 ft. ; Giulchi, 
14,680 ft.; Doppakh, 14,240 ft.; Nak- 
hashbita-khokh, 14,405 ft. ; Shan- 
khokh, 14,335 ft-I Mishirghi-tau (W. 
peak), 16,410 ft.; Fytnargyn-tau, 
I 3,79° ft-; Gezeh-tau, 14,140 ft.; and 
Kaltber, 14,460 ft. 

The crest of the main range runs 
continuously at an altitude exceed- 
ing 10,000 ft., but even it is surpassed 
in elevation by the secondary range 
to the north, the Bokovoi Khrebet. 
These two ranges are connected by 
more than half a dozen short trans- 
verse spurs or necks, inclosing as 
many cirques or high cauldron glens. 
Besides the Bokovoi Khrebet several 
other short subsidiary ranges branch 
off from the main range at acute 
angles, lifting up high montane glens 
between them; for instance, the two 
ranges in Svanetia, which divide, the 
one the river (glen) Ingur from the 
river (glen) Tskhenis-Tskhali.and the 
other the river (glen) Tskhenis- 
Tskhali from the rivers (glens) 
Lechkhum and Racha.Down all these 
glens glacier streams descend, until 
they find an opportunity to pierce 
through the flanking ranges, which 
they do in deep and picturesque 
gorges, and then race down the 
northern slopes of the mountains to 
enter the Terek or the Kuban, or 
down the southern versant to join 
the Rion or the Kura. Amongst all 
these high glens there is a remark- 
able absence of lakes and waterfalls; 
nor are there down in the lower 
valleys at the foot 6f the mountains, 
as one would naturally expect in a 
region so extensively glaciated, any 
sheets of water corresponding to the 
Swiss lakes. In this section of the 
Caucasus the loftiest peaks do not' 



! Formerly the Dykh-tau. 



552 



CAUCASUS 



as a rule rise on the main range, but in many cases on the short 
spurs that link it with the Bokovoi Khrebet and other subsidiary 
ranges. 

" The central chain of the Caucasus," writes Mr Douglas W. 
Freshfield, 1 " consists of a number of short parallel or curved horse- 
shoe ridges, crowned with rocky peaks and enclosing basins filled by 
the neves of great glaciers. . . . On either side of the main chain 
the same succession is repeated, with one important difference. On 
the north the schists come first, sometimes rising into peaks and 
ridges in a state of ruin . . . but more often worn to rolling downs ; 
then the limestone range — writing-desk mountains that turn their 
steep fronts to the central snows; lastly low Cretaceous foothills, 
that sink softly into the steppe. But on the south side the crystal- 
line rocks are succeeded by a broad belt of slates, as to the age of 
which the evidence is at present conflicting and the opinion of 
geologists divided. East of Adai-khokh, by what seems a strange 
freak of nature, the granitic [main] range is rent over and over again 
to its base by gorges, the watershed being transferred to the parallel 
chain of clay slates . . . which has followed it from the Black Sea, 
attaining on its way the height of 13,400 ft. in the Laila, and limiting 
the great parallel basins of the Rion, Ingur and Skenis Shali 
[ = Tskhenis-Tskhali] ..." "At the base of the central core of the 
chain spread (to the north) broad, smooth, grassy downs, the pastures 
of the Turk and the Ossete. . . . Their ridges attain to 9000 to 
10,000 ft. They are composed of friable crystalline schists. . . . 
Beyond these schists rises a broken wall of limestone, cleft to the 
base by gorges, through which flow the mountain torrents, and 
capped by pale precipitous battlements, which face the central 
chain at a height of 1 1,000 to 12,000 ft. Beyond, again, lies a broad 
furrow, or ' longitudinal fold,' as geologists call it, parallel to the 
ridges, and then rises the last elevation, a belt of low calcareous 
hills, on which, here and there among the waves of beech forest, 
purple or blue with distance, a white cliff retains its local colour and 
shines like a patch of fresh snow. Beyond, once more beyond, 
spreads the Scythian steppe, not the dead level of Lombardy, but 
an expanse of long low modulations, which would be reckoned hills 
in our home counties, seamed by long shining ribbons, which mark 
the courses of the tributaries of the Terek. . . . Southwards too, 
immediately under the snows, we find ' crystalline schists,' smooth 
grassy heights, separated by shallow trenches, which form the lesser 
undulations of the three basins, the drei Langenhochthaler Imeritiens 
of Dr Radde. These basins or ' longitudinal folds ' are enclosed on 
the south by the long high ridge of dark slates, which extends 
parallel to the crystalline [main] chain from the neighbourhood of 
Sukhum-Kale to the Krestovaya Gora [pass of Darial.] Behind this 
slate crest spreads a confused multitude of hills, Jurassic and Cre- 
taceous in their formation. . . . Their outer edge, distant some 
30 to 40 m. from the snows, is marked by a limestone belt, lower and 
less continuous than that on the north, which frames the gorges of 
the Rion, and rises in the Kuamli (6352 ft.) and Nakarala (4.774 ft.) 
near Kutais, its best known elevations." 2 It may be added that, 
south of the central watershed, the strata, both Mesozoic and 
Palaeozoic, are compressed, crumpled, faulted and frequently over- 
folded, with their apices pointing to the south. 

Glaciers. — As a rule the snow-line runs at 0500 to 10,000 ft. 
on the northern face and 1000 ft. higher on the southern face. 
It is estimated that there are in all over nine hundred glaciers 
in this section of the range, and although they often rival those 
of the Alps in size, they do not descend generally to such low 
altitudes as the latter. The best known are the Bezingi or Ullu, 
between Dykh-tau and Janga-tau, io§ m. long, covering an 
area of 31 sq. m., and descending to 6535 ft. above sea-level; 
Leksyr, situated south of Adyr-su-bashi, 7! m. long, 19 sq. m. 
in area, and creeping down to as low as 5690 ft., this being the 
lowest point to which any glacier descends on the south side of 
the range; Tseya or Zea, descending 6 m. from the Adai-khokh 
to an altitude of 6730 ft.; Karagom, from the same mountain, 
9§ m. long, 14 sq. m. in area and reaching down to 5790 ft., 
the lowest on the north side; Dyevdorak or Devdorak, from 
Kasbek, 2|m. long, its lower end at 7 530 ft. ; Khaldeh or Geresho 
41 m. long, from Shkara and Janga-tau; Tuyber from Tetnuld, 
6Jm. long, area 21 sq. m., and reaching down to 6565 ft.; Tsanner 
or Zanner, the same length and the same area, but stopping short 
■240 ft. higher, likewise given off by Tetnuld; while between that 
peak, Adish and Gestola originates the Adish or Lardkhat 
glacier, 5 m. long and terminating at 7450 ft. The total area 
covered by glaciers in the central Caucasus is estimated at 625 
to 650 sq. m., the longest being the Maliev on Kasbek, 36 m, 
long; but according to the investigations of M. Rossikov several 



1 Exploration of the Caucasus (2nd ed., 1902), 
2 Op. oil. i. 35-36. 



30-31- 



of the largest glaciers are shrinking or retreating, the Tseya 
at the rate of something like 40-45 ft- per annum. 

Passes.— It is in this section that the entire mountain system 
is narrowest, and here it is that (apart from the "gate" at 
Derbent close beside the Caspian) the principal means of com- 
munication exist between north and south, between the steppes 
of southern Russia and the highlands of Armenia and Asia Minor. 
These means of communication are the passes of Darial and 
Mamison. Over the former, which lies immediately east of 
Kasbek, runs the Georgian military road (made 1811-1864) 
from Vladikavkaz to Tiflis, cutting through the mountains by 
a gorge (8 m. long) of singular beauty, shut in by precipitous 
mountain walls nearly 6000 ft. high, and so narrow that there is 
only just room for the carriage-road and the brawling river 
Terek side by side. The pass by which this road crosses the 
main range, farther south, is known as the Krestovaya Gora 
(Mountain of the Cross) and lies 7805 ft. above sea-level. The 
Mamison Pass, over which runs the Ossetic military road (made 
passable for vehicles in i889)from the Terek(below Vladikavkaz) 
to Kutais in the valley of the Rion, skirting the eastern foot of the 
Adai-khokh, lies at ah altitude of 9270 ft. and is situated a little 
south of the main range. Scarce any of the remaining passes 
in this west-central region are better than mountain paths; 
horses can traverse the best of them only during a few weeks in 
the height of summer. They mostly range at altitudes of 9000* 
12,500 ft., and between the pass of Nakhar in the west and that 
of Mamison in the east there is not a single pass below 10,000 ft. 
The best known in this section are the three Baksan passes of 
Chipei (10,800 and 10,720 ft.), Bassa (9950 ft.) and Donguz-orun 
(10,490 ft.), south of Elbruz; those of Becho (11,070 ft.), 
Akh-su (12,465 ft.), Bak (10,220 ft.), Adyr-su (12,305 ft.) and 
Be2ingi (10,090 ft.), between Elbruz and Dykh-tau; and those 
of Shari-vizk (11,560 ft.), Edena, Pasis-mta or Godivizk (11,270 
ft.), Shtulu-vizk (10,860 ft.), Fytnargyn (11,130 ft.), between 
Dykh-tau and Adai-khokh; the Bakh-fandak (9570 ft.), between 
Adai-khohk and Kasbek; and the two Karaul passes (11,680 
and 11,270 ft.) and Gurdzi-vizk (10,970 ft.), connecting the valley 
of the Urukh with that of the Rion. The most frequented pass 
in Svanetia is that of Latpari (9260 ft.) , situated in the first of the 
southern subsidiary ranges mentioned above, and thus connect- 
ing the valley of the Ingur with the valley of theTskhenis-Tskhali. 

Flora. — In this section of the range again the southern slopes 
are clothed with vegetation of remarkable luxuriance and 
richness, more especially in the region of Svanetia (42°-43° E.). 
Not only are the plants bigger than they grow in the Alps, but 
the blossoms are more abundant. Here again forests of Coniferae 
predominate, especially on the northern and eastern slopes; 
and the other distinguishing features of the flora are gigantic 
male ferns (Aspidium filix-mas) , Paris incompleta (a member of 
the Trilliaceae), Usnea or tree-moss, box, holly (Ilex aguifolium), 
Lilium monadelphum and many of the familiar herbaceous 
plants which flower in English gardens, though here they grow 
to an altogether extraordinary size—" monkshoods, Cephalaria, 
Mulgedia and groundsels, among which men on horseback might 
play at hide and seek without stooping" (E. Levier). Other 
prominent species are Campanula, Pyrethrum, aconite, CephaSlis, 
speedwell, Alchemilla sericea, Centaur ea macrocephala, Primula 
grandis and a species of primrose. And the great height (13,000 
ft.) at which the flowering plants blossom is not less remarkable 
than the great beauty and abundance of the flowers. Species 
which grow on both the northern and the southern slopes 
ascend ,2000 ft. higher on the latter than on the former. Walnuts 
grow up to an altitude of 5400 ft., the vine and mulberry up to 
3250 ft., the lime and ash to 4000 ft. The forests extend to the 
upper end of the limestone gorges. Above that the crystalline 
schists are bare of tree vegetation. The upper limit of arborescent 
vegetation is considered to run at 7000-7500 ft., of shrubs such 
as rhododendrons at 8500 ft., and of pasture-lands up to 9000 ft. 
The principal cultivated varieties of plants in this section are 
wheat, rye, oats, barley, beans, millet and tobacco. 

3. Middle Caucasus : (b) Eastern Part—In this sub-section, 
which stretches from Kasbek and the Darial gorge eastwards to 



CAUCASUS 



553 



the Baba-dagh in 48 25' E., a distance of 230 m., the Caucasus 
attains its greatest breadth. For the whole of that distance the 
main range keeps at an average elevation of 10,000 ft., though 
the peaks in many instances tower up 2000 to nearly 5000 ft. 
higher, the altitudes increasing towards the east. As the main 
range approaches the Caspian i ts granite core gradually disappears , 
giving place to Palaeozoic schists, which spread down both the 
northern and the southern slopes. The glaciers too decrease in 
the same proportion both in magnitude and in extent. Here the 
principal peaks, again found for the most part on the spurs and 
subsidiary ranges, are the Tsmiakom-khokh (13,570 ft.), Shan-tau 
(14,530 ft.), Kidenais-magali (13,840 ft.), Zilga-khokh (12,645 ft.), 
Zikari (12,565 ft.), Choukhi (12,110 ft.), Julti-dagh (12,430 ft.), 
Alakhun-dagh (12,690 ft.) and Maghi-dagh (12,445 ft.). . On the 
main range itself stand Borbalo (10,175 ft.), Great Shavi-kildeh 
(12,325 ft.), Murov (11,110 ft.), Ansal(n,740 ft.), Ginor-roso 
(11,120 ft.), while farther east come Trfanrdagh (13,765 ft.) and 
Bazardyuz or Kichen (14,727 ft.). In the same direction, but 
again outside the main range, lie Shah-dagh (13,955 ft.), Shalbuz 
(13,675 ft.) and Malkamud (12,750 ft.). 

But the most noteworthy feature of this section is the broad 
highland region of Daghestan, which flanks the main range on the 
north, and sinks down both eastwards to the Black Sea and 
northwards to the valley of the Terek. On the north-west this 
rugged highland region is well denned by the distinctive trans- 
verse ridge of Andi, which to the east of Kasbek strikes off from 
the Caucasus range almost at right angles. The rest of the 
Daghestan region consists of a series of roughly parallel folds, of 
Jurassic or Cretaceous age, ranging in altitudes from 7500 up to 
12,500 ft., separated from one another by deep gorge-like river 
glens which cut it up into a number of arid, treeless plateaus 
which have something of the appearance of independent ranges, 
or rather elongated tablelands of a mountainous character. 
The most prominent of these tablelands is Bash-lam, which 
stretches east and west between the Chanti Argun and the 
Andian Koisu, both tributaries of the Terek. Upon it rise the 
conspicuous peaks of Tebulos-mta (14,775 ft.), Tugo-mta 
(13,795 ft-), Komito-tavi or Kachu (14,010 ft.), Donos-mta 
(13,560 ft.), Diklos-mta (13,740 ft.), Kvavlos-mta or Kolos-mta 
(13,080 ft.), Motshekh-tsferi (13,140 ft.) and Galavanas-tsferi 
(13,260 ft.). Farther east come the Bogos tableland, stretching 
from south-south-west to east-north-east between the Andian 
Koisu and the Avarian Koisu and rising to over 13,400 ft. in 
several peaks, e.g. Antshovala(i3,44oft.), Botshokh-meer (13,515 
ft.), Kosara-ku (13,420 ft.) and Addala-shuogchol-meer (13,580 
ft.); and the Dyulty tableland, reaching 12,400 ft. between the 
Kara Koisu and the Kazikumukh Koisu. On some of these 
peaks again there is a considerable amount of glaciation, more 
particularly on the slopes of Diklos-mta, where the glaciers 
descend to 7700 ft. on the north side and to 8350 ft. on the 
south side. In this section of the Caucasus the passes run 
somewhat lower than those between Elbruz and Kasbek, though 
still at appreciable heights, fully equal to those that lead up 
from the Black Sea to the valley of the Kuban in the western 
section of the range. The best known are the Krestovaya Gora 
(7805 ft.) on the Georgian military road, south of Darial; Kodor 
(9300 ft.) and Satskheni, leading up from Telav in the upper 
valley of the Alazan; and Gudur (10,120 ft.) and Salavat 
(9280 ft.), carrying the Akhty military road from the valley of 
the Samur up past the Shah-dagh and the Bazar-dyusi to the 
valley of the Alazan. 

The flora of this section bears a general resemblance to that 
farther west. Ample details will be found in Dr G. Radde's 
(1831-1903) monographs on Daghestan, quoted at the end of 
the present article. 

4. The Eastern Section of the Caucasus gradually dies 
away east of Baba-dagH (11,930 ft.) towards the Caspian, 
terminating finally in the peninsula of Apsheron. It is, however, 
continued under the waters of the Caspian, as stated in the 
article on that sea, and reappears on its eastern side in the 
Kopet-dagh, which skirts the north-east frontier of Persia. In 
this section of the Caucasus no peak exceeds 9000 ft. in altitude 



and the crest of the main range retains no snow. The most 
frequented pass, that of Alty-agach, necessitates a climb of not 
more than 4355 ft. 

Slopes of Range. — Between the northern and the southern 
sides of the range there is quite as great a difference in climate, 
productions and scenery as there is between the Swiss and the 
Italian sides of the Alps. In the south-western valleys and on the 
south-western slopes of the Caucasus, where a heavy rainfall is 
combined with a warm temperature, magnificent forests clothe 
the mountain-sides and dip their skirts into the waters of the 
Black Sea. There not only the littoral from (say) Sukhum-Kaleh 
to Batum but the inland parts of the basin of the Rion will 
bear comparison with any of the provinces of Italy in point of fer- 
tility, and in richness and variety of products. But farther 
inland, upon proceeding eastwards towards Tiflis, a great change 
becomes noticeable on the other side of the transverse ridge of 
the Suram or Meskes mountains. Arid • upland plains and 
parched hillsides take the place of the rich verdure and luxuriant 
arborescent growth of Imeretia, Svanetia and Mingrelia, the 
districts which occupy the valleys of the Ingur and Rion and the 
tributaries of the latter. A very similar change likewise becomes 
noticeable in the higher regions of the Caucasus Mountains 
upon proceeding north of the pass of Mamison, which separates 
the head-waters of the Rion from those of the Ardon, an important 
tributary of the Terek. The valleys of the two streams last 
mentioned, and of others that flow in the same direction, are 
almost wholly destitute of trees, but where the bare rock does 
not prevail, the mountain slopes are carpeted with grass. Fresh- 
field's description of the valley of the Terek above Kasbek will 
apply pretty generally to all the valleys that descend on that 
face of the range: " treeless valleys, bold rocks, slopes of 
forbidding steepness (even to eyes accustomed to those of the 
Alps), and stonebuilt villages, scarcely distinguishable from the 
neighbouring crags." But, austere and unattractive though 
these valleys are, the same epithets cannot be applied to the 
deep gorges by which in most cases the streams make their 
escape through the northern subsidiary range. These defiles are 
declared to be superior in grandeur to anything of the kind in 
the Alps. That of Darial (the Terek) is fairly well known, but 
those of the Cherek and the Urukh, farther west, are stated to 
be still more magnificent. And not only do the snow-clad 
ranges and the ice-panoplied peaks which tower up above them 
surpass the loftiest summits of the Alps in altitude; they also 
in many cases excel them in boldness and picturesqueness of 
outline, and equal the most difficult of them in steepness and 
relative inaccessibility. 

Hydrography. — Nearly all the larger rivers of Caucasia have 
their sources in the central parts of the Caucasus range. The 
short, steep, torrential streams of Mdzimta, Pzou, Bzyb and 
Kodor drain the country west of Elbruz. The Ingur, Tskhenis- 
Tskhali, Rion and its tributaries (e.g. the Kvirila) are longer, but 
also in part torrential; they drain the great glacier region 
between Elbruz and Kasbek. The Rion is the Phasis of the 
ancients and flows through the classic land of Colchis, associated 
with the legends of Medea and the Argonauts. The Lyakhva 
and Aragva, tributaries of the Kura, carry off the waters of 
the main range south of Kasbek, and other tributaries, such as 
the Yora and the Alazan, collect the surplus drainage of the 
main Caucasus range farther east. The other large river of this , 
region, the Aras, has its sources, not in the Caucasus range, but 
on the Armenian highlands a long way south-west of Ararat. 
The rivers which go down from the central Caucasus northwards 
have considerably longer courses than those on the south side 
of the range, partly as a consequence of the gentler versant and 
partly also because of the great distances to which the steppes 
extend across which they make their way to the sea. The most 
important of these are the Kuban and the Terek; but it is the 
latter that picks up most of the streams which have their sources 
among the central glaciers, e.g. the Malka, Baksan, Chegem, 
Cherek, Urukh, Ardon, all confined to deep narrow glens until 
they quit the mountains. The Kuma, which alone pursues an 
independent course through the stepoes, farther north than the 



554 



CAUCASUS 



Terek, has its sources, not in the main ranges of the Caucasus, 
but in an outlying group of mountains near Pyatigorsk, the 
highest summit of which, Besh-tau, does not exceed 4600 ft. 
But its waters become absorbed in the sands of the desert 
steppes before they reach the Caspian. Of the streams that 
carve into chequers the elevated plateau or highland region of 
Daghestan four are known by the common name of. the Koisu, 
being distinguished inter se as the Andian Koisu, the Avarian 
Koisu, the Kara Koisu and the Kazikumukh Koisu, which all 
unite to form the Sulak. The only other stream deserving of 
mention in this province is the Samur. Both rivers discharge 
. their waters into the Caspian; as also does the Zumgail, a small 
stream which drains the eastern extremity of the Caucasus 
range in the government of Baku. 

Volcanic Evidences. — Ancient, but now extinct, volcanic 
upheavals are pretty common at the intersections of the main 
range with the transverse ranges; of these the most noteworthy 
are Elbruz and Kasbek. The town of Shemakha, near the eastern 
end of the system, was the scene of volcanic outbreaks as late 
as 1859, 1872 and 1902; while in the adjacent peninsula of 
Apsheron mud volcanoes exist in large numbers. All along the 
northern foot of the system hot mineral springs gush out at 
various places, such as Pyatigorsk, Zhelesnovodsk, Essentuki 
and Kislovodsk; and the series is continued along the north- 
eastern foot of the highlands of Daghestan, e.g. Isti-su, Eski- 
endery, Akhta.' In this connexion it may also be mentioned 
that similar evidences of volcanic -activity characterize the 
northern border of the Armenian highlands on the southern 
side of the Rion-Kura depression, in the mountains of Ararat, 
Alagoz, Akmangan, Samsar, Godoreby, Great and Little Abull, 
and in the mineral springs of Borzhom, Abbas-tuman, Sleptzov, 
Mikhailovsk and Tiflis. (J. T. Be.; P. A. K.) 

Geology. — The general structure of the Caucasus is comparatively 
simple. The strata are folded so as to form a fan. In the centre of 
the fan, lies a band of crystalline rocks which disappears towards 
the east. Beneath it, on both sides, plunge the strongly folded 
Palaeozoic and Jurassic schists. On the northern flank the folded 
beds are followed by a zone of Jurassic and Cretaceous beds which 
rapidly assume a gentle inclination towards the plain. On the south 
the corresponding zone is affected by numerous secondary folds 
which involve the Sarmatian or Upper Miocene deposits. In the 
eastern part of the chain the structure is somewhat modified. The 
crystalline band is lost. The northern Mesozoic zone is very' much 
broader, and is thrown into simple folds like those of the Jura. The 
southern Mesozoic zone is absent, and the Palaeozoic zone sinks 
abruptly in a series of faulted steps to the plain of the Kura, beneath 
which no doubt the continuation of the Mesozoic zone is concealed. 

The geological sequence begins with the granite and schists of the 
central zone, which form a band extending from Fisht on the west 
to a point some distance beyond Kasbek on the east. Then follow 
the Palaeozoic schists and slates. Fossils are extremely rare in 
these beds ; Buthotrephis has long been known, and doubtful traces 
of Catamites and ferns have been found, but it was not until 1897 
that undoubted Palaeozoic fossils were obtained. They appear to 
indicate a Devonian age. Upon the Palaeozoic beds rest a series of 
Mesozoic deposits, beginning with the Lias and ending with the 
Upper Cretaceous. Whether the series is continuous or not is a 
matter of controversy. F. Loewinson-Lessing states that there is a 
more or less marked discordance between the Lias and the Upper 
Jurassic and between the latter and the Cretaceous; E. Fournier 



Kasbek 



north are nearly horizontal but on the south are in part included in 
the folds— the Eocene and Miocene being folded, while the later 
beds, though sometimes elevated, are not affected by the folding. 
The final folding of the chain undoubtedly occurred at the close of 
the Miocene period. That there were earlier periods of folding is 
almost equally certain, but there is considerable difference of opinion 
as to their dates. The difference in character of the Jurassic beds 
on the two sides of the chain appears to indicate that a ridge existed 



^%£-" ~ u> 






^^m 


//////Al v /}' 

W////A* * * r 

////////£ ' * *>-* 


- K 


<$> \%*fc. 


^Sv\^r v /v i 


•»• 


<r vlBm», 


^^^^.~Y^////////)y'f////A7 


CO 


-" ^^Si 


^^S^^^ s ^~^/z////////^c/\. 




O >£S 


^B ^HBfifi&tal?**'""**"''*' 1 V* 


-^ 


<f 1? 


^flHjiii«^y 




**A 


^W^^p^^^m> 




^fks^M-* m^vvyvv^ifl^Mfc^ 


&v * 




^^^^^^3^//f^<///7^^8Sm^k X/ 






\* ♦ <t ^-^jc^//f7s///V7iaHm)A 






V * *^^Zoy^<Zv/MK 


<0M * 




X'^WgM 








TU *Key 


^"^Pfc 


^<{XJpr~ 


>N 


\^v*y ^'- ■ Vyy//> 


*j/ CO 


English Mile 


AS/ A ^fP| 


K14 m 


9 50 100 200 




vij *" 




— U Quaternary t'-.'".':.v 


M^m Emery Wattef 
Cretaceous wBm Metamorphic 


V//\ T. r *; nr y I 


Jurassic l» ♦ ♦! Plutonic & Volcanic 



in that period. The last phase in the history of the Caucasus was 
marked by the growth of the great volcanoes of Elbruz and Kasbek, 
which stand upon the old rocks of the central zone, and by the 
outflow of sheets of lava upon the sides of the chain. The cones 
themselves are composed largely of acid andesites, but many of the 
lavas are augite andesites and basalts. There seem to have been two 
periods of eruption, and as some of the lavas have flowed over 
Quaternary gravels, the latest outbursts must have been of very 
recent date. 

Near the northern foot of the Caucasus, especially in the neigh- 
bourhood of the hot mineral springs of Pyatigorsk, a group of hills 
of igneous rocks rises above the plain. They are laccolites of trachytic 
rock, and raised the Tertiary beds above them in the form of blisters. 
Subsequent denudation has removed the sedimentary covering and 
exposed the igneous core. (P. La.) 

Bibliography. — Of the older works the following are still useful : 
A. von Haxthausen, Transkaukasia (2 vols., Leipzig, 1856); A. 
Petzholdt, Dtsr Kaukasus (2 vols., Leipzig, 1866-1867); M. G. von 
Thielmann, Travels in the Caucasus (Eng. trans., 2 vols., London, 
1875) ; F. C. Grove, The Frosty Caucasus (London, 1875) ; G. Radde, 
Reisen im mingrelischen Hochgebirge (Tiflis, 1866) and Vier VorlrSge 
uber den Kaukasus (Gotha, 1874); E. Favre, Recherches geologiques 
dans la partie centrale de la chaine du Caucase (Geneva, 1875); 
Batsevich, Simonovich and others, Mat. dlya geologiy Kavkaza 
(Tiflis, 1873 seq.) ; O. Schneider, Naturwissenschaftliche Beitrage zur 
Kenntnis der Kaukasusldnder (Dresden, 1879), and J. Bryce, Trans- 
caucasia (London, 1878). The more important amongst the more 
recent books are D. W. Freshfield, Exploration of the Caucasus 
(2nd ed., 1902, 2 vols., London; A. F. Mummery, My Climbs in 
the Alps and Caucasus (London, 1895); H. Abich, Geologische 
Forschungen in den kaukasischen Landern (3 vols., Vienna, 1878- 
1887), Aus kaukasischen Landern (2 vols., Vienna, 1896), and " Ver- 
gleichende Grundziige des Kaukasus wie der armenischen und 
nordpersischen Gebirge," in Mem. Acad. Sc. St-Petersb. (ser. 6, 



S. 




Vladikavkaz Lars '•--" _ m _ ■?--" i> "" Tiflis 

z^Plain of Vlarlikavka?, b = Upper Jurassic; c = Moraine terrace; d = Folded lias shales; e = Upper Jurassic; t = Paleozoic schists; ft ^Greenstone dykes; h= Granite; 

g'= Gneiss; \- Andesites; k = Jurassic?; 1 = Pliocene (Nagelftuh); m = Miocene; n — Oligocene; r — Nullipore limestone & conglomerate. 

F Lnewtnson-Lessinff 



asserts that there exists a very strongly marked unconformity at 
the base of the Tithonian, and other writers have expressed other 
views. In general the Upper Jurassic beds are much more calcareous 
on the north flank of the chain than they are on the south. The 
Mesozoic beds are followed by the Tertiary deposits, which on the 



Math, et Phys., vii. 359-534) ; R. von Erckert, Der Kaukasus und 
seine Volker (Leipzig, 1887); E. Chantre, Recherches anthropo- 
logiques dans le Caucase (4 vols., Lyons and Paris, 1885-1887); C. 
von Hahn, Aus dem Kaukasus (Leipzig, 1892), Kaukasische Reisen 
und Studien (Leipzig, 1896), and Bilder aus dem Kaukasus (Leipzig, 



CAUCHOIS-LEMAIRE— CAUCHY 



555 



1900); V. Sella and D. Vallino, Nel Caucaso Centrale (Turin, 1890); 
K. Koch, Der Kaukasus (Berlin, 1882); C. Phillipps Woolley, 
Savage Svanetia (2 vols., London, 1883); E. Levier, A travers le 
Caucase (Paris, ed. 1905), especially valuable for botany; G. Merz- 
bacher, A us den Hochregionen des Kaukasus (2 vols., Leipzig, 1901) ; 
A. Fischer, Zwei Kaukasische Expeditionen (Berne, 1891); E. 
Fournier, Description geologique du Caucase central (Marseilles, 
1896) ; G. Radde, Reisen an der persisck-russischen Grenze. Talysch 
und seine Bewohner (Leipzig, 1886), Die Fauna und Flora des sudwest- 
lichen Kaspigebiets (Leipzig, 1886), Karabagh (Gotha, 1890), and Aus 
den daghestanischen Hochalpen (Gotha, 1887); and Count J. Zichy, 
Voyages au Caucase (2 vols., Budapest, 1897). F. Loewinson-Lessing 
has an account of the geology of the district along the military road 
from Vladikavkaz to Tiflis in the Guide des Excursions du VII' 
Congres geol. inlernat. (St Petersburg, 1897). N. Y. Dinnik writes 
on the fauna in Bull. Soc. Imperiale des Naturalistes de Moscou (1901) ; 
J. Mourier on the folk-tales in Contes et legendes du Caucase (1888) ; 
and on modern history G. Baumgarten, Sechzig Jahre des kauka- 
sischen Krieges (Leipzig, 1861). But a very great amount of most 
valuable information about the Caucasus is preserved in articles in 
encyclopaedias and scientific periodicals, especially the Izvestia and 
Zapiski of the Russian and Caucasian geographical societies, in 
P. P. Semenov's Geographical Dictionary (in Russian, 5 vols., St 
Petersburg, 1863-1884), and in the Russkiy encyklopedicheskiy slovar 
(1894), and in the Kavkazskiy kalendar (annually at Tiflis)-. See also 
G. Radde and E. Koenig, " Der Nordfuss des Daghestan und das 
vorlagernde Tiefland bis zur Kuma " (Erganzungsheft No. 117 to 
Petermanns Mitteilungen) , and " Das Ostufer des Pontus und seine 
kulturelle Entwickelung im Verlaufe der letzten 30 Jahre " (Ergan- 
zungsheft No. 112 of the same); by V. Dingelstedt in Scot. Geog. 
Mae. — " Geography of the Caucasus " (July 1889) ; " The Caucasian 
Highlands " (June 1895); "The Hydrography of the Caucasus" 
(June 1899); " The Riviera of Russia " (June 1904), " The Small 
Trades of the Caucasus " (March 1892); and " Caucasian Idioms " 
(June 1888). The best map is that of the Russian General Staff on 
the scale of 1 : 210,000 (ed. 1895-1901). (J. T. Be.; P. A. K.) 

CAUCHOIS-LEMAIRE, LOUIS FRANCOIS AUGUSTE (1789- 
1861), French journalist, was born in Paris on the 28th of August 
1789. Towards the end of the First Empire he was proprietor 
of the Journal de la litterature et des arts, which he transformed 
at the Restoration into a political journal of Liberal tendencies, 
the Nainjaune, in which Louis XVIII. himself had little satirical 
articles secretly inserted. After the return from Elba the Nain 
jaune became Bonapartist and fell into discredit. It was sup- 
pressed at the second Restoration. Cauchois-Lemaire then threw 
himself impetuously into the Liberal agitation, and had to take 
refuge in Brussels in 1816, and in the following year at the Hague, 
whence he was expelled for publishing an Appel d, V opinion 
publique et aux- Etats GenSraux en faveur des palriotes franc,ais. 
Returning to France in 1819, he resumed the struggle against 
the ultra-royalist party with such temerity that he was con- 
demned to one year's imprisonment in 1821 and fifteen months' 
imprisonment in 1827. After the revolution of July 1830 he 
refused a pension of 6000 francs offered to him by King Louis 
Philippe, on the ground that he wished to retain his independence 
even in his relations with a government which he had helped to 
establish. He made a bitter attack upon the Perier ministry in 
his journal Bon sens, and in 1836 was one of the founders of a 
new opposi tion journal, the Steele. He soon, however, abandoned 
journalism for history and, having no private means, in 1840 
accepted the post of head of a department in the Royal 
Archives. Of a Histoire de la Revolution de Juillet, which he 
then undertook, he published only the first volume (1842), 
which contains a historical summary of the Restoration and 
a preliminary sketch of the democratic movement. He died in 
Paris on the 9th of August 1861. 

CAUCHON, PIERRE (d. 1442), French bishop, was born near 
Reims in the latter half of the 14th century. We find him 
rector of the university of Paris in October 1397. In 1413 he 
joined the Burgundian faction, and was exiled by the parle- 
ment of Paris. But on the triumph of his party this decree was 
annulled, and Philip the Good, duke of Burgundy, gave him a 
canonry at Beauvais, sent him to the council of Constance, 
procured him the post of mattre des requites in 1418, and finally in 
1420 had him made bishop of Beauvais. But the people were 
hostile to him, and he was driven from his bishopric in 1429; 
whereupon he attached himself to the English court, and in 
143 1 endeavoured to procure the surrender of Reims to the 
English, so that Henry VI. might be crowned there. In this he 



failed, and Henry was crowned in Paris on the 17th of December 
143 1 by Henry Beaufort, cardinal bishop of Winchester, assisted 
by the bishops of Beauvais and Noyon. On the 24th of May 
1430, Joan of Arc having been taken prisoner at Compiegne, 
within the limits of his diocese, Cauchon acted as her accuser, 
and demanded the right of judging her. Joan was taken to 
Rouen, whither Cauchon followed her, having been driven from 
Beauvais. He conducted the trial with marked partiality 
and malevolence, condemned the maid to imprisonment for life, 
and then, under pressure from the populace and the English, 
had recourse to fresh perfidies, declared Joan a relapsed heretic, 
excommunicated her, and handed her over to the secular arm on 
the 30th of May 1431. As, in consequence of this, it was im- 
possible for him to return to his own diocese, he obtained the 
bishopric of Lisieux in 1432 by favour of the king of England. 
He assisted at the council of Basel in 1435, and died suddenly 
on the 18th of December 1442. Excommunicated posthumously 
by Pope Calixtus IV., his body was exhumed and thrown in the 
common sewer. 

See Cerf, " Pierre Cauchon de Sommievre, chanoine de Reims et 
de Beauvais, evSque de Beauvais et de Lisieux, son origine, ses 
dignites, sa mort et sa sepulture," in the Transactions of the 
Academy of Reims (1896-1898). 

CAUCHY, AUGUSTIN LOUIS, Baron (1789-1857), French 
mathematician, was born at Paris on the 21st of August 1789, 
and died at Sceaux (Seine) on the 23rd of May 1857. Having 
received his early education from his father Louis Francois 
Cauchy (1760-1848), who held several minor public appoint- 
ments and counted Lagrange and Laplace among his friends, 
Cauchy entered Ecole Centrale du Pantheon in 1802, and 
proceeded to the Ecole Polytechnique in 1805, and to the Ecole 
des Ponts et Chauss6es in 1807. Having adopted the profession 
of an engineer, he left Paris for Cherbourg in 18 10, but returned 
in 1813 on account of his health, whereupon Lagrange and 
Laplace persuaded him to renounce engineering and to devote 
himself to mathematics. He obtained an appointment at the 
Ecole Polytechnique, which, however, he relinquished in 1830 
on the accession of Louis Philippe, finding it impossible to take 
the necessary oaths. A short sojourn at Freiburg in Switzerland 
was followed by his appointment in 1831 to the newly-created 
chair of mathematical physics at the university of Turin. In 
1833 the deposed king Charles X. summoned him to be tutor to 
his grandson, the duke of Bordeaux, an appointment which 
enabled Cauchy to travel and thereby become acquainted with 
the favourable impression which his investigations had made. 
Charles created him a baron in return for his services. Returning 
to Paris in 1838, he refused a proffered chair at the College de 
France, but in 1848, the oath having been suspended, he resumed 
his post at the Ecole Polytechnique, and when the oath was 
reinstituted after the coup d'etat of 185 1, Cauchy and Arago 
were exempted from it. A profound mathematician, Cauchy 
exercised by his perspicuous and rigorous methods a great 
influence over his contemporaries and successors. His writings 
cover the entire range of mathematics and mathematical physics. 

Cauchy had two brothers: Alexandre Laurent (1792- 
1857), who became a president of a division of the court of appeal 
in 1847, and .a judge of the court of cassation in 1849; and 
Eugene Francois (1802-1877), a publicist who also wrote 
several mathematical works. 

The genius of Cauchy was promised in his simple solution of the 
problem of Apollonius, i.e. to describe a circle touching three given 
circles, which he discovered in 1805, his generalization of Euler's 
theorem on poly hedra inl8n,andin several other elegant problems. 
More important is his memoir on wave-propagation which obtained 
the Grand Prix of the Institut in 1816. His greatest contributions 
to mathematical science are enveloped in the rigorous methods which 
he introduced. These are mainly embodied in his three great 
treatises, Cours d 'analyse de I'Hcole Polytechnique (1821); Le Calcul 
infinitesimal (1823) ; Lecons sur les applications du'calcul infinitesimal 
d la geometrie (1826-1828) ; and also in his courses of mechanics (fot 
the Ecole Polytechnique), higher algebra (for the Faculte dee- 
Sciences), and of mathematical physics (for the College de France) 
His treatises and contributions to scientific journals (to the numbei 
of 789) contain investigations on the theory of series (where he 
developed with perspicuous skill the notion of convergency) , on tht 
theory of numbers and complex quantities, the theory of groups and 



5Sb 



CAUCUS— CAULAINGOURT 



substitutions, the theory of functions, differential equations and 
determinants. He clarified the principles of the calculus by develop- 
ing them with the aid of limits and continuity, and was the first 
to prove Taylor's theorem rigorously, establishing his well-known 
form of the remainder. In mechanics, he made many researches, 
substituting the notion of the continuity of geometrical displace- 
ments for the principle of the continuity of matter. In optics, he 
developed the wave theory, and his name is associated with the simple 
dispersion formula. In elasticity, he originated the theory of stress, 
and his results are nearly as valuable as those of S. D. Poisson. His 
collected works, CEuvres completes d'Augustin Cauchy, have been 
published in 27 volumes. 

See C. A. Valson, Le Baron Augustin Cauchy: sa vie et ses travaux 
(Paris, 1868). 

CAUCUS, a political term used in America of a special form 
of party meeting, and in Great Britain of a system of party 
organization. The word originated in Boston, Massachusetts, 
in the early part of the 18th century, when it was used as the 
name of a political club, the " Caucus " or " Caucas " club. 
Here public matters were discussed, and arrangements made for 
local elections and the choosing of candidates for offices. The 
first mention of the club in contemporary documents occurs in 
the diary of John Adams in 1763, but William Gordon (History 
of the Independence of the United States of America, 1788) speaks 
of the Caucus as having been in existence some fifty years before 
the time of writing (1774), and describes the methods used for 
securing the election of the candidates the club had selected. 
The derivation of the word has been much disputed. It 
was early connected with " caulkers," and it was supposed 
referred to meetings of the caulkers in the dockyard at Boston 
in 1770, to protest against the action of the British troops, or 
with a contemptuous allusion to the lower class of workmen 
frequenting the club. This is, however, a mere guess, and does 
not agree with the earlier date at which the club is known to have 
existed, nor with the accounts given of it. That it was a fanciful 
classical name for a convivial club, derived from the late Greek 
kovkos, a cup, is far-fetched, and the most plausible origin is 
an Algonquin word kaw-kaiv-was, meaning to talk. Indian 
words and names have been popular in America as titles for 
societies and clubs; cf. " Tammany " (see Notes and Queries. 
sixth series, vols. xi. and xii.). In the United States "caucus" 
is used strictly of a meeting either of party managers or of party 
voters. Such might be a " nominating caucus," either for 
nominating candidates for office or for selecting delegates for 
a nominating convention. The caucus of the party in Congress 
nominated the candidates for the offices of president and vice- 
president from 1800 till 1824, when the convention system was 
adopted, and the place of the local " nominating caucus " is 
taken by the " primaries " and conventions. The word is used 
in America of the meetings of a party in Congress and other 
legislative bodies and elsewhere which decide matters of policy 
and plan campaigns. " Caucus " came first into use in Great 
Britain in 1878. The Liberal Association of Birmingham (see 
Liberal Party) was organized by Mr Joseph Chambeflain and 
Mr F. Schnadhorst on strict disciplinary lines, more particularly 
with a view to election management and the control of voters 
on the principle of " vote as you are told." This managing body 
of the association, known locally as the " Six Hundred," became 
the model for other Liberal associations throughout the country, 
and the Federation of Liberal Associations was organized on the 
same plan. It was to this supposed imitation of the American 
political " machine " that Lord Beaconsfield gave the name 
" caucus," and the name came to be used, not in the American 
sense of a meeting, but of a closely disciplined system of party 
organization, chiefly used as a stock term of abuse applied by 
opponents to each other's party machinery. 

CAUDEBEC-EN-CAUX, a town of France, in the department 
of Seine-Inferieure, 27 m. W.N.W. of Rouen by the Ouest-Etat 
railway. Pop. (1006) 2141. It is situated on the right bank of 
the Seine, the tidal wave of which (mascaret) can be well seen at 
this point. The chief interest of the town lies in its church, a 
building of the 15th and the early 16th centuries. Round its 
top run balustrades formed of Gothic letters, which read as part 
of the Magnificat. Its west portal, the decoration of the spire 
of the tower, and its stained glass are among the features which ' 



make it one of the finest churches of the Rouen diocese. The 
town also possesses several old houses. Its industries include 
tanning and leather-currying, arid there is trade in grain. The 
port has a small trade in coal, live-stock and farm produce. 

CAUDINE FORKS (Furculae Caudinae), a pass in Samnium, 
famous for the disaster which befell the Roman army in the 
second Samnite War (321 B.C.). Livy (ix, 2) describes it as 
formed by two narrow wooded gorges, between which lay a plain, 
grassy and well-watered, but entirely enclosed by mountains. 
Through this plain the road (later the Via Appia) led. The 
Romans, marching from Calatia to the relief of Luceria, entered 
the valley unopposed, but found the exit blocked by the enemy; 
on marching back they saw that the entrance and the hills 
surrounding the plain were also occupied, and there was no way 
of escape. The plain which lies west of Caudium (Montesarchio) 
seems, despite the older views, to be the only possible site for 
such a disaster to an army of as many as 40,000 men; and there 
is no doubt that the Romans wished to leave it by the defile on 
the east, through which later ran the Via Appia to Beneventum. 
The existence of three ancient bridges on the line of the modern 
road renders it impossible to suppose that its course can be 
essentially different from that of the ancient, though Hiilsen 
makes the two diverge considerably after passing Montesarchio. 
There are, however, two possible entrances — one on the north 
by Moiano, and one on the west by Arpaia; the former seems 
to answer better to Livy's description (via alia per cavam rupem), 
while the latter is the shortest route, having been, later on, 
followed by the Via Appia, and bore the name Furculae Caudinae 
in the middle ages. 

See C. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclopddie, iii.. (1802). 

(T. As.) 

CAUDLE (through the 0. Fr. caudel, from the Med. Lat. 
■aldellum, a diminutive of caldum, a warm drink, from calidus, 
hot), a drink of warm gruel, mixed with spice and wine, formerly 
given to women in childbed. 

CAUL (from O. Eng. calle, Fr. cale, a cap), a close-fitting 
woman's cap, especially one made of network worn in the 16th 
and 17th centuries; hence the membranous covering to the 
heart or brain, the omentum, or the similar covering to the 
intestines, and particularly, a portion of the amnion, which is 
sometimes found remaining round the head of a child after birth. 
To this, called in Scotland " sely how," holy or lucky hood, 
mai.y superstitions have been attached; it was looked on as a 
sign of good luck, and when preserved, was kept as a protection 
against drowning. 

CAULAINCOURT, ARMAND AUGUSTIN LOUIS, Marquis 
de (1773-1827), French general and diplomatist, was born of a 
noble family. He early entered the army, did not emigrate in 
the revolution, but was deprived of his grade as captain in 1703 
and served in the ranks. In 1795, through the protection of 
L. Hoche, he became captain again, was colonel in the Army of 
the Rhine in 1790-1800, and after the peace of Luneville (1801) 
was sent to St Petersburg to negotiate an understanding between 
Russia and France. On his return he was named aide-de-camp 
of the First Consul. He was employed to seize some agents of the 
English government in Baden in 1804, which led to the accusa- 
tion that he was concerned in the arrest of the due d'Enghien, an 
accusation against which he never ceased to protest. After the 
establishment of the empire he received various honours and the 
title of duke of Vicenza (1808). Napoleon sent him in 1807 as 
ambassador to St Petersburg, where Caulaincourt tried to 
maintain the alliance of Tilsit, and although Napoleon's ambition 
made the task a difficult one, Caulaincourt succeeded in it for 
some years. In 1811 he strongly advised Napoleon to renounce 
his proposed expedition to Russia. During the war he accom- 
panied the emperor, and was one of those whom Napoleon took 
along with him when he suddenly abandoned his army in Poland 
to return to Paris (December 181 2) . During the last years of the 
empire, Caulaincourt was charged with all the diplomatic 
negotiations. He signed the armistice of Pleswitz, June 1813, 
represented France at the congress of Prague, in August 1813, at 
the congress of Chatillon, in February 18 14, and concluded the 



CAUMCULUS— CAUSATION 



557 



treaty of Fontainebleau on the 10th of April 1814. During the 
first Restoration, Caulaincourt lived in obscure retirement. 
When Napoleon returned from Elba, he became minister of 
foreign affairs, and tried to persuade Europe of the emperor's 
peaceful intentions. After the second Restoration, Caulaincourt's 
name was on the list of those proscribed, but it was erased on 
the personal intervention of Alexander I. with Louis XVIII. 

Caulaincourt's memoirs appeared under the title Souvenirs ■ du due 
de Vicence in 1837-1840. See A. Vandal, Napoleon et Alexandre 
(Paris, 1891-1895); Tatischeff, Alexandre I" et Napoleon (Paris, 
1892); H. Houssaye, 1814 (Paris, 1888), and 1815 (Paris, 1893). 



CAULICULUS (from Lat. caulis, a stalk), in architecture, the 
Stalks (eight in number) with two leaves from which rise the 
helices or spiral scrolls of the Corinthian capital to support the 
abacus. 

CAULON (Gr. KavXwvia) ,' a town of the district of the Bruttii, 
Italy, on the east coast. Its exact site is uncertain (though the 
name has been given to a modern village), and depends on the 
identification of the river Sagras. It was the southernmost of 
the Achaean colonies, founded either by Croton or direct from 
Greece itself. In the 7th century it was allied with Croton and 
Sybaris, and its coins, which go back to 550 B.C., prove its 
importance. It took the side of Athens in the Peloponnesian 
War. In 388 B.C. it was destroyed by Dionysius, but soon after- 
wards restored. It was captured during the invasion of Pyrrhus 
by Campanian troops. Strabo speaks of it as deserted in his time. 
The erection of the lighthouse at Capo Stilo, on the site of one of 
the medieval guard towers of the coast, led to the discovery of a 
wall of Greek origin, and close by of a number of terra-cottas, 
belonging perhaps to a temple erected in honour of the deities of 
the sea. Other remains were found at Fontanelle, 2J m. away, 
including the fragment of a capital of an archaic Greek temple 
(P. Orsi in Notizie degli Scavi, 1891,61). These buildings may be 
connected with the Caulon or a village dependent on it. (T. As.) 

CAUSATION or Causality (Lat. causa, derived perhaps from 
the root cav-, as in caveo, and meaning something taken care of; 
corresponding to Gr. alrla), a philosophical term for the opera- 
tion of causes and for the mental conception of cause as operative 
throughout the universe. The word " cause " is correlative to 
" effect." Thus when one thing B is regarded as taking place in 
consequence of the action of another thing A, then A is said to be 
the cause of B , and B the effect of A. The philosophical problems 
connected with causation are both metaphysical and psycho- 
logical. The metaphysical problem is part of the whole theory of 
existence. If everything is to be regarded as causally related 
with simultaneous and prior things or actions, it follows logically 
that the investigation of existence must, by hypothesis, be a 
regress to infinity, i.e. that we cannot conceive a beginning to 
existence. This explanation has led to the postulate of a First 
Cause, the nature of which is variously explained. The empirical 
school sees no difficulty in assuming a single event; but such a 
theory seems to deny the validity of the original hypothesis. 
Theologians assert a divine origin in the form of a personal self- 
existent creator, while some metaphysical schools, preferring an 
impersonal First Cause, substitute the doctrine of the Absolute 
(q.v.). All the explanations are alike in this respect, that at a 
certain point they pass from the sphere of the senses, the physical 
world, to a metaphysical sphere in which the data and the 
intellectual operation of cognizing them are of a totally different 
quality. For example, the causal connexion between drunken- 
ness and alcohol is not of the same observable character as that 
which is inferred between the infinite First Cause and the whole 
domain of sense-given phenomena. 

A second metaphysical problem connected with causation 
arises when we consider the nature of necessity. It is generally 
assumed when two things are spoken of as cause and effect that 
their relation is a necessary one, or, in other words, that given the 
cause the effect must follow. The arguments connected with 
this problem belong to psychological discussions of causation. 
It is sufficient here to state that, in so far as causation is regarded 
as necessary connexion, it can form no part of a purely empirical 
theory of existence. The senses can say only that in all observed 



cases B has followed A, and this does not establish necessary 
connexion. The idea of causation is a purely intellectual (a 
priori) one. 

The psychological problems connected with causation refer 
(1) to the origin of the conception in our minds; (2) to the 
validity of the conception. As regards the origin of the concep- 
tion modern psychological analysis does not carry us beyond the 
doctrine of Locke contained in his chapter on " Power " (Essay, 
bk. ii. ch. 21), wherein he shows that the idea of power is got 
from the knowledge of our own activity. " Bodies by their 
causes," he says, " do not afford us so clear and distinct an idea of 
active power as we have from reflection on the operation of our 
minds. " Putting Locke's doctrine into modern language, we may 
say that a man has the conception of cause primarily because he 
himself is a cause. The conception thus obtained we " project," 
that is, transfer to external objects, so far as we may find it useful 
to do so. Thus it is by a sort of analogy that we say that the sun 
is the " cause " of daylight. The rival theory to Locke's is that 
of Hume (Treatise, bk. i.), who derives the conception from the 
unaided operation of custom. When one object, A, has been 
noticed frequently to precede another object, B, an association 
between A and B is generated; and by virtue of this association, 
according to Hume, we say that A is the cause of B. The weak- 
ness of this account is that many invariable successions, such as 
day and night, do not make us regard the earlier members of the 
successions as causing the later; while in numberless cases we 
assert a causal connexion between two objects from a single 
experience of them. 

We may proceed now to consider the validity of the conception 
of causation, which has been attacked from two sides. From 
the side of absolute idealism it is argued that the conception of 
cause, as involving a transition in time, cannot be ultimately 
valid, since the time-relation is not ultimately real. Upon this 
view (ably stated in Professor Bosanquet's Logic, bk. i. ch. 6) 
the more we know of causes and effects the less relevant becomes 
the time-relation and the nearer does the conception of cause 
and effect approach to another conception which is truly valid, 
the conception of ground and consequence. This means that* 
viewed from the standpoint of science, a draught of alcohol 
causes intoxication in no other sense than the triangularity of 
a triangle causes the interior angles to be equal to two right 
angles. This argument ceases to have cogency so soon as we 
deny its fundamental proposition that the time-relation is not 
ultimately real, but is irrelevant from the standpoint of science. 
This is a sheer assertion, contrary to all ordinary experience, 
which we have as much right to deny as the absolute idealists 
to amrm. It is only plausible to those who are committed to 
the Hegelian view of reality as consisting of a static system of 
universals, a view which has long been discredited in Germany, 
its native land, and is fast losing ground in England. Against 
the Hegelians we must maintain that the common distinction 
between " ground " and " cause " is perfectly justifiable. 
Whereas "ground" is an appropriate term for the relations 
within a static, simultaneous system, "cause" is appropriate 
to the relations within a dynamic, successive system. 

From the other side the validity of causation has been attacked 
in the interests of the naturalism of the mechanical sciences. 
J. S. Mill argues that, scientifically, the cause of anything is the 
total assemblage of the conditions that precede its appearance, 
and that we have no right to give the name of cause to one of 
them exclusively of the others. The answer to this is that Mill 
fails to recognize that cause is a conception which we find useful 
in our dealings with nature, and that whatever concep- 
tions we find useful we are justified in using. Among the 
conditions of an event there are always one or two that stand 
in specially close relation to it from our point of view; e.g. the 
draught of alcoholic liquor is more closely related to the man's 
drunkenness than is the attraction of the earth's gravity, though 
that also must co-operate in producing the effect. Such closely 
related conditions we find it convenient to single out by a term 
which expresses their analogy to the cause of causes, human 
volition. 



558 



CAUSEWAY— CAUSTIC 



These are the questions respecting causation which are matters 
of present controversy; there are in addition many other points 
which belong to the controversies of the past. Among the most 
important are Aristotle's classification of causes into material, 
formal, efficient and final, set forth in his Physics and elsewhere, 
and known as his doctrine of the Four Causes; Geulincx's 
Occasional Causes, meant as a solution of certain difficulties 
in the cosmology of Descartes; Leibnitz's law of Sufficient 
Reason; and Kant's explanation of cause and effect as an a 
priori category of the understanding, intended as an answer to 
Hume's scepticism, but very much less effective than the line 
of explanation suggested by Locke. 

The following is a list of the various technical terms connected 
with causation which have been distinguished by logicians and 
psychologists. 

The four Aristotelian causes are: (i) Material cause (OXjj), 
the material out of which a thing is made; the material cause 
of a house is the bricks and mortar of which it is composed. 
(2) Formal cause (eldos, \6yos, rb ri r\v tlvax), the general 
external appearance, shape, form of a thing; the formal cause 
of a triangle is its triangularity. (3) Efficient cause (apx^l rijs 
Kwt)<J€u>s) , the alcohol which makes a man drunk, the pistol- 
bullet which kills. This is the cause as generally understood in 
modern usage. (4) Final cause (reXos, t6 ov evena), the object 
for which an action is done or a thing produced; the final cause 
of a commercial man's enterprise is to make his livelihood (see 
Teleology). This last cause was rejected by Bacon, Descartes 
and Spinoza, and indeed in ordinary usage the cause of an action 
in relation to its effect is the desire for, and expectation of, that 
effect on the part of the agent, not the effect itself. The Proxi- 
mate cause of a phenomenon is the immediate or superficial as 
opposed to the Remote or Primary cause. Plurality of Causes 
is the much criticized doctrine of J. S. Mill that a fact may be 
the uniform consequent of several different antecedents. Causa 
essendi means the cause whereby a change is what it is, as opposed 
to the causa cognoscendi, the cause of our knowledge of the 
event; the two causes evidently need not be the same. An 
object is called causa immanens when it produces its changes 
by its own activity; a causa transiens produces changes in some 
other object. Causa sui is a term applied to God by Spinoza 
to denote that he is dependent on nothing and has no need of 
any external thing for his existence. Vera causa is a term used 
by Newton in his Principia, where he says, " No more causes of 
natural things are to be admitted than such as are both true and 
sufficient to explain the phenomena of those things "; verae 
causae must be such as we have good inductive grounds to believe 
do exist in nature, and do perform a part in phenomena analogous 
to those we would render an account of. 

CAUSEWAY, a path on a raised dam or mound across marshes 
or low-lying ground; the word is also used of old paved highways, 
such as the Roman military roads. " Causey " is still used 
dialectically in England for a paved or cobbled footpath. The 
word is properly " causey-way," from causey, a mound or dam, 
which is derived, through the Norman-French caucie (cf. modern 
chaussie), from the late Latin via calciata, a road stamped firm 
with the feet (calcare, to tread). 

CAUSSES (from Lat. calx through local Fr. caous, meaning 
" lime "), the name given to the table-lands lying to the south 
of the central plateau of France and sloping westward from the 
C6vennes. They form parts of the departments of Lozere, 
Aveyron, Gard, Herault, Lot and Tarn-et- Garonne. They are 
of limestone formation, dry, sterile and treeless. These char- 
acteristics are most marked in the east of the region, where the 
Causse de Sauveterre, the Causse Mejan, the Causse Noir and 
the Larzac flank the Cevennes. Here the Causse Mejan, the 
most deserted and arid of all, reaches an altitude of nearly 
4200 ft. Towards the west the lesser causses of Rouergue and 
Quercy attain respectively 2950 ft. and 1470 ft. Once an uninter- 
rupted table-land, the causses are now isolated from one another 
by deep rifts through which run the Tarn, the Dourbie, the 
Jonte and other rivers. The summits are destitute of running 
water, since the rain as it falls either sinks through the permeable 



surface soil or runs into the fissures and chasms, some of great 
depth, which are peculiar to the region. The inhabitants 
(Caussenards) of the higher causses cultivate hollows in the 
ground which are protected from the violent winds, and the 
scanty herbage permits of the raising of sheep, from the milk 
of which Roquefort cheeses are made. In the west, where the 
rigours of the weather are less severe, agriculture is more easily 
carried on. 

CAUSSIN DE PERCEVAL, ARMAND-PIERRE (1795-1871), 
French orientalist, was born in Paris on the 13th of January 
1795. His father, Jean Jacques Antoine Caussin de Perceval 
(1759-1835), was professor of Arabic in the College de France. 
In 1814 he went to Constantinople as a student interpreter, and 
afterwards travelled in Asiatic Turkey, spending a year with the 
Maronites in the Lebanon, and finally becoming dragoman at 
Aleppo. Returning to Paris, he became professor of vulgar 
Arabic in the school of living Oriental languages in 182 1, and 
also professor of Arabic in the College de France in 1833. In 
1849 he was elected to the Academy of Inscriptions. He died 
at Paris during the siege on the 15 th of January 1871. 

Caussin de Perceval published (1828) a useful Grammaire 
arabe vulgaire, which passed through several editions (4th ed., 
1858), and edited and enlarged Elie Bocthor's 1 Dictionnaire 
frangais-arabe (2 vols., 1828; 3rd ed., 1864); but his great 
reputation rests almost entirely on one book, the Essai sur 
I'histoire des Arabes avant Vlslamisme, pendant I'ipoque de 
Mahomet (3 vols., 1847-1849), in which the native traditions as 
to the early history of the Arabs, down to the death of Mahommed 
and the complete subjection of all the tribes to Islam, are brought 
together with wonderful industry and set forth with much learn- 
ing and lucidity. One of the principal MS. sources used is the 
great Kitdb al-Aghdni (Book of Songs) of Abu Faraj, which has 
since been published (20 vols., Boulak, 1868) in Egypt; but no 
publication of texts can deprive the Essai, which is now very 
rare, of its value as a trustworthy guide through a tangled mass 
of tradition. 

CAUSTIC (Gr. KauoriKos, burning), that which burns. In 
surgery, the term is given to substances used to destroy living 
tissues and so inhibit the action of organic poisons, as in bites, 
malignant disease and gangrenous processes. Such substances 
are silver nitrate (lunar caustic), the caustic alkalis (potassium 
and sodium hydrates), zinc chloride, an acid solution of mercuric 
nitrate, and pure carbolic acid. In mathematics, the " caustic 
surfaces " of a given surface are the envelopes of the normals 
to the surface, or the loci of its centres of principal curvature. 

In optics, the term caustic is given to the envelope of luminous 
rays after reflection or refraction; in the first case the envelope is 
termed a catacaustic, in the second a diacaustic. Catacaustics 
are to be observed as bright curves when light is allowed to fall 
upon a polished riband of steel, such as a watch-spring, placed 
on a table, and by varying the form of the spring and moving 
the source of light, a variety of patterns may be obtained. The 
investigation of caustics, being based on the assumption of the 
rectilinear propagation of fight, and the validity of the experi- 
mental laws of reflection and refraction, is essentially of a geo- 
metrical nature, and as such it attracted the attention of the 
mathematicians of the 17th and succeeding centuries, more 
notably John Bernoulli, G. F. de l'H6pital, E. W. Tschirnhausen 
and Louis Carre. 

The simplest case of a caustic curve is when the reflecting surface 
is a circle, and the luminous rays emanate from a point on the 
circumference. If in fig. 1 AQP be the reflecting circle ( . .. 
having C as centre, P the luminous point, and PQ any ~ ust,cs 
incident ray, and we join CQ, it follows, by the law of the ,^ flec( / 0/I 
equality of the angles of incidence and reflection, that the 
reflected ray QR is such that the angles RQC and CQPare equal; 
to determine the caustic, it is necessary to determine the envelope of 
this line. This may be readily accomplished geometrically or 
analytically, and it will be found that the envelope is a cardioid 
(q.v.), i.e. an epicycloid in which the radii of the fixed and rolling 
circles are equal. When the rays are parallel, the reflecting surface 

1 filie Bocthor (1784-1821) was a French orientalist of Coptic 
origin. He was the author of a Traiie des conjugaisons written in 
Arabic, and left his Dictionary in MS. 



CAUTERETS— CAUVERY 



559 



remaining circular, the question can be similarly, treated, and it is 
found that the caustic is an epicycloid in which the radius of the fixed 
circle is twice that of the rolling circle (fig. 2). The geometrical 
method is also applicable when it is required to determine the caustic 






after any number of reflections at a spherical surface of rays, which 
are either parallel or diverge from a point on the circumference. In 
both cases the curves are epicycloids; in the first case the radii of 
the rolling and the fixed circles are a(2n-\)\a,n and o/2», and in the 
second, an/(2n + i) and a/(2rc + 1), Where a is the radius of the mirror 
and » the number of reflections. 

The Cartesian equation to the caustic produced by reflection at a 
circle of rays diverging from any point was obtained by Joseph Louis 
Lagrange; it may be expressed in the form 

. [(4t*-a'')(x i +y>) -2a?cx-aV\ > = 27aVy 2 (* 2 +^-c 2 ) 2 , 
where a is the radius of the reflecting circle, and c the distance of the 
luminous point from the centre of the circle. The polar form is 
[(u+p) cos \6\% + {(u-p) sin §0jt = (2fe)§, where p and^ are the re- 
ciprocals of c and a, and u the reciprocal of the radius vector of any 
point on the caustic. When c = a or =co the curve reduces to the 
cardioid or the two cusped epicycloid previously discussed. Other 





a> c>Ha 



by refrac- 
tion. 



forms are shown in figs. 3, 4, 5, 6. These curves were traced by 
the Rev. Hammet Holditch (Quart. Jour. Math. vol. i.). 

Secondary caustics are orthotomic curves having the reflected or 
refracted rays as normals, and consequently the proper caustic curve, 
being the envelope of the normals, is their evolute. It is usually the 
case that the secondary caustic is easier to determine than the caustic, 
and hence, when determined, it affords a ready means for deducing 
the primary caustic. It may be shown by geometrical considerations 
that the secondary caustic is a curve similar to the first positive pedal 
of the reflecting curve, of twice the linear dimensions, with respect 
to the luminous point. For a circle, when the rays emanate from 
any point, the secondary caustic is a limacon, and hence the primary 
caustic is the evolute of this curve. 

The simplest instance of a caustic by refraction (or diacaustic) is 
when luminous rays issuing from a point are refracted at a straight 

line. It may be shown geometric- 
ally that the secondary caustics 
caustic, if the second 
medium be less refrac- 
tive than the first, is an 
ellipse having the luminous point 
for a focus, and its centre at the 
foot of the perpendicular from the 
luminous point to the refracting 
line. The evolute of this ellipse 
is the caustic required. If the 
second medium be more highly 
refractive than the first, the secondary caustic is a hyperbola having 
the same focus and centre as before, and the caustic is the evolute 
of this curve. When the refracting curve is a circle and the rays 
emanate from any point, the locus of the secondary caustic is a 
Cartesian oval, and the evolute of this curve is the required dia- 
caustic. These curves appear to have been first discussed by 
Gergonne. For the caustic by refraction of parallel rays at a circle 
reference should be made to the memoirs by Arthur Cayley. 

References. — Arthur Cayley's " Memoirs on Caustics " in the 
Phil. Trans, for 1857, vol. 147, and 1867, vol. 157, are especially 
to be consulted. Reference may also be made to R. S. Heath's 
Geometrical Optics and R. A. Herman's Geometrical Optics (1900). 

CAUTERETS, a watering-place of south-western France in 
the department of Hautes-Pyrenees, 20 m. S. by W. of Lourdes 
by rail. Pop. (1906) 1030. It lies in the beautiful valley of the 
Gave de Cauterets, and is well known for its copious thermal 




Fig. 6. 



springs. They are chiefly characterized by the presence of 
sulphur and silicate of soda, and are used in the treatment of 
diseases of the respiratory organs, rheumatism, skin diseases 
and many other maladies. Their temperature varies between 
75° and 137° F. The springs number twenty-four, and there 
are nine bathing establishments. Cauterets is a centre for ex- 
cursions, . the Monne (8935 ft.), the Cabaliros (7655 ft.), the 
Pic de Chabarrou (955° ft.), the Vignemale (10,820 ft.), and 
other summits being in its neighbourhood. 

CAUTIN, a province of southern Chile, bounded N. by Arauco, 
Malleco and Bio-Bio, E. by Argentina, S. by Valdivia, and W. 
by the Pacific. Its area is officially estimated at 5832 sq. m. 
Cautin lies within the temperate agricultural and forest region 
of the south, and produces wheat, cattle, lumber, tan-bark 
and fruit. The state central railway from Santiago to Puerto 
Montt crosses the province from north to south, and the Cautin, 
or Imperial, and Tolten rivers (the latter forming its southern 
boundary) cross from east to west, both affording excellent 
transportation facilities. The province once formed part of the 
territory occupied by the Araucanian Indians, and its present 
political existence dates from 1887. Its population (1905) was 
96,139, of whom a large percentage were European immigrants, 
principally Germans. The capital is Temuco, on the Rio Cautin; 
pop. (1895) 7078. The principal towns besides Temuco are 
Lautaro (3139) and Nueva Imperial (2179), both of historic 
interest because they were fortified Spanish outposts in the long 
struggle with the Araucanians. 

CAUTLEY, SIR PROBY THOMAS (1802-1871), English 
engineer and palaeontologist, was born in Suffolk in 1802. After 
some years' service in the Bengal artillery, which he joined in 
1819, he was engaged on the reconstruction of the Doab canal, 
of which, after it was opened, he had charge for twelve years 
(1831-1843). In 1840 he reported on the proposed Ganges canal, 
for the irrigation of the country between the rivers Ganges, 
Hindan and Jumna, which was his most important work. This 
project was sanctioned in 1841, but the work was not begun till 
1843, and even then Cautley found himself hampered in its 
execution by the opposition of Lord Ellenborough. From 1845 
to 1848 he was absent in England owing to ill-health, and on his 
return to India he was appointed director of canals in the North- 
western Provinces. After the Ganges canal was opened in 1854 
he went back to England, where he was made K.CrB., and from 
1858 to 1868 he occupied a seat on the council of India. He died 
at Sydenham, near London, on the 25th of January 1871. In 
i860 he published a full account of the making of the Ganges 
canal, and he also contributed numerous memoirs, some written 
in collaboration with Dr Hugh Falconer, to the Proceedings of 
the Bengal Asiatic Society and the Geological Society of London 
on the geology and fossil remains of the Sivalik Hills. 

CAUVERY, or ICweri, a river of southern India. Rising in 
Coorg, high up amid the Western Ghats, in 12 25' N. lat. and 
75 34' E. long., it flows with a general south-eastern direction 
across the plateau of Mysore, and finally pours itself into the Bay 
of Bengal through two principal mouths in Tanjore district. 
Its total length is 472 m., the estimated area of its basin 27,700 
sq. m. The course of the river in Coorg is very tortuous. Its bed 
is generally rocky; its banks are high and covered with luxuriant 
vegetation. On entering Mysore it passes through a narrow 
gorge, but presently widens to an average breadth of 300 to 
400 yds. Its bed continues rocky, so as to forbid all navigation; 
but its banks are here bordered with a rich strip of cultivation. 
In its course through Mysore the channel is interrupted by 
twelve anicuts.or dams for the purpose of irrigation. From the 
most important of these, known as the Madadkatte, an artificial 
channel is led to a distance of 72 m., irrigating an area of 10,000 
acres, and ultimately bringing a water-supply into the town of 
Mysore. In Mysore state the Cauvery forms the two islands of 
Seringapatam and Sivasamudram, which vie in sanctity with the 
island of Seringam lower down in Trichinopoly district. Around 
the island of Sivasamudram are the celebrated falls of the Cauvery, 
unrivalled for romantic beauty. The river here branches into 
two channels, each of which makes a descent of about 200 m. 



5 bo 



CAVA DEI TIRRENI— CAVAIGNAC 



in a succession of rapids and broken cascades. After entering 
the Madras presidency, the Cauvery forms the boundary between 
the Coimbatore and Salem districts, until it strikes into Trichi- 
nopoly district. Sweeping past the historic rock of Trichinopoly, 
it breaks at the island of Seringam into two channels, which 
enclose between them the delta of Tanjore, the garden of southern 
India. The northern channel is called the Coleroon (Kolidam) ; 
the other preserves the name of Cauvery. On the seaward face 
of its delta are the open roadsteads of Negapatam and French 
Karikal. The only navigation on any portion of its course is 
carried on in boats of basket-work. It is in the delta that the 
real value of the river for irrigation becomes conspicuous. This is 
the largest delta system, and the most profitable of all the works 
in India. The most ancient irrigation work is a massive dam 
of unhewn stone, 1080 ft. long, and from 40 to 60 ft. broad, 
across the stream of the Cauvery proper, which is supposed to 
date back to the 4th century, is still in excellent repair, 
and has supplied a model to British engineers. The area of the 
ancient system was 669,000 acres, the modern about 1,000,000 
acres. The chief modern work is the anicut across the Coleroon, 
2250 ft. long, constructed by Sir Arthur Cotton between 1836 
and 1838. The Cauvery Falls have been utilized for an electric 
installation, which supplies power to the Kolar gold-mines and 
light to the city of Mysore. 

The Cauvery is known to devout Hindus as Dakshini Ganga, 
or the Ganges of the south, and the whole of its course is holy 
ground. According to the legend there was once born upon 
earth a girl named Vishnumaya or Lopamudra, the daughter of 
Brahma; but her divine father permitted her to be regarded as 
the child of a mortal, called Kavera-muni. In order to obtain 
beatitude for her adoptive father, she resolved to become a 
river whose waters should purify from all sin. Hence it is that 
even the holy Ganges resorts underground once in the year to 
the source of the Cauvery, to purge herself from the pollution 
contracted from the crowd of sinners who have bathed in her 
waters. 

CAVA DEI TIRRENI, a town and episcopal see of Campania, 
Italy, in the province of Salerno, 6 m. N.W. by rail from the town 
of Salerno. Pop. (1901) town, 7611; commune, 23,415. It lies 
fairly high in a richly cultivated valley, surrounded by wooded 
hills, and is a favourite resort of foreigners in spring and autumn, 
and of the Neapolitans in summer. A mile to the south-west 
is the village of Corpo di Cava (1970 ft.), with the Benedictine 
abbey of La Trinita della Cava, founded in 1025 by St Alferius. 
The church and the greater part of the buildings were entirely 
modernized in 1796. The old Gothic cloisters are preserved. 
The church contains a fine organ and several ancient sarcophagi. 
The archives, now national property, include documents and 
MSS. of great value (e.g. the Codex Legum Longobardorum of 
1004) and fine incunabula. The abbot is keeper, and also head 
of a boarding school. 

See M. Morcaldi, Codex Diplomaticus Cavensis (Naples and Milan, 
1873-1893)- 

CAVAEDIUM, in architecture, the Latin name for the central 
hall or court within a Roman house, of which five species are 
described by Vitruvius. (1) The Tuscanicum responds to the 
greater number apparently of those at Pompeii, in which the 
timbers of the roof are framed together, so as to leave an open 
space in the centre, known as the compluvium; it was through 
this opening that all the light was received, not only in the hall 
itself, but in the rooms round. The rain from the roof was 
collected in gutters round the compluvium, and discharged from 
thence into a tank or open basin in the floor called the impluvium. 
(2) In the tetrastylon additional support was required in conse- 
quence of the dimensions of the hall; this was given by columns 
placed at the four angles of the impluvium. (3) Corinthian is the 
term given to the species where additional columns were required. 
(4) In the displuviatum the roofs, instead of sloping down towards 
the compluvium, sloped outwards, the gutters being on the outer 
walls; there was still an opening in the roof, and an impluvium 
to catch the rain falling through. This species of roof, Vitruvius 
states, is constantly in want of repair, as the water does not easily 



run away, owing- to the stoppage in the rain-water pipes. (5) 
The testudinatum was employed when the hall was small and 
another floor was built over it; no example of this type has been 
found at Pompeii, and only one of the cavaedium displuviatum. 

CAVAGNARI, SIR PIERRE LOUIS NAPOLEON (1841-1879), 
British military administrator, the son of a French general by 
his marriage with an Irish lady, was born at Stenay, in the 
department of the Meuse, on the 4th of July 1841 . He neverthe- 
less obtained naturalization as an Englishman, and entered the 
military service of the East India Company. After passing 
through the college at Addiscombe, he served through the Oudh 
campaign against the mutineers in 1858 and 1859. In 1861 he 
was appointed an assistant commissioner in the Punjab, and in 
1877 became deputy commissioner of Peshawar and took part 
in several expeditions against the hill tribes. In 1878 he was 
attached to the staff of the British mission to Kabul, which the 
Afghans refused to allow to proceed. In May 1879, after the 
death of the amir Shere Ali, Cavagnari negotiated and signed 
the treaty of Gandamak with his successor, Yakub Khan. By 
this the Afghans agreed to admit a British resident at Kabul, 
and the post was conferred on Cavagnari, who also received the 
Star of India and was made a K.C.B. He took up his residence 
in July, and for a time all seemed to go well, but on the 3rd of 
September Cavagnari and the other European members of the 
mission were massacred in a sudden rising of mutinous Afghan 
troops. (See Afghanistan.) 

CAVAIGNAC, JEAN BAPTISTE (1762-1829), French politician, 
was born at Gourdon (Lot). He was sent by his department 
as deputy to the Convention, where he associated himself with 
the party of the Mountain and voted for the death of Louis XVI. 
He was constantly employed on missions in the provinces, and 
distinguished himself by his rigorous repression of opponents 
of the revolution in the departments of Landes, Basses-Pyrenees 
and Gers. With his colleague Jacques Pinet (1754-1844) he 
established at Bayonne a revolutionary tribunal with authority 
in the neighbouring towns. Charges of cruelty were preferred 
against him by a local society before the Convention in 1795, 
but were dismissed. He had represented the Convention in the 
armies of Brest and of the Eastern Pyrenees in 1793, and in 
1795 he was sent to the armies of the Moselle and the Rhine. 
He filled various minor administrative offices, and in 1806 became 
an official at Naples in Murat's government. During the Hundred 
Days he was prefect of the Somme. At the restoration he was 
proscribed as a regicide, and spent the- last years of his life at 
Brussels, where he died on the 24th of March 1829. His second 
son was General Eugene Cavaignac (q.v.). 

The eldest son, Eleonore Louis Godefroi Cavaignac (1801- 
1845), was i like his father, a republican of the intransigeant type. 
He was bitterly disappointed at the triumph of the monarchical 
principle after the revolution of July 1830, in which he had taken 
part. He took part in the Parisian risings of October 1830, 1832 
and 1834. On the third occasion he was imprisoned, but escaped 
to England in 1835. When he returned to France in 1841 he 
worked on the staff of La Rtforme, and carried on an energetic 
republican propaganda. In 1843 he became president of the 
Society of the Rights of Man, of which he had been one of the 
founders in 1832. He died on the 5th of May 1845. The re- 
cumbent statue (1847) °f Godefroi Cavaignac on his tomb at 
Montmartre (Paris) is one of the masterpieces of the sculptor 
Francois Rude. 

Jean Baptiste's brother, Jacques-Marie, Vicomte Cavaignac 
(1773-1855), French general, served with distinction in the army 
under the republic and successive governments. He commanded 
the cavalry of the XI. corps in the retreat from Moscow, and 
eventually became Vicomte Cavaignac and inspector-general 
of cavalry. 

CAVAIGNAC, LOUIS EUGENE (1802-1857), French general, 
son of J. B. Cavaignac, was born at Paris on the 15th of October 
1802. After going through the usual course of study for the 
military profession, he entered the army as an engineer officer 
in 1824, and served in the Morea in 1828, becoming captain in 
the following year. When the revolution of 1830 broke out 



CAVAILLON— CAVALIER, J. 



he was stationed at Arras, and was the first officer of his regiment 
to declare for the new order of things. In 1831 he was removed 
from active duty in consequence of his declared republicanism, 
but in 1832 he was recalled to the service and sent to Algeria. 
This continued to be the main sphere of his activity for sixteen 
years, and he won especial distinction in his fifteen months' 
command of the exposed garrison of Tlemcen, a command for 
which he was selected by Marshal Clausel (1836-1837), and in 
the defence of Cherchel (1840). Almost every step of his pro- 
motion was gained on the field of battle, and in 1844 the due 
d'Aumale himself asked for Cavaignac's promotion to the rank 
of marechal de camp. This was made in the same year, and 
he held various district commands in Algeria up to 1848, when 
the provisional government appointed him governor-general 
of the province with the rank of general of division. The post 
of minister of war was also offered to Cavaignac, but he refused 
it owing to the unwillingness of the government to quarter troops 
in Paris, a measure which the general held to be necessary for 
the stability of the new regime. On his election to the National 
Assembly, however, Cavaignac returned to Paris. When he 
arrived on the 17 th of May he found the capital in an extremely 
critical state. Several Smeutes had already taken place, and by 
the 22nd of June 1848 a formidable insurrection had been 
organized. The only course now open to the National Assembly 
was to assert its authority by force. Cavaignac, first as minister 
of war and then as dictator, was called to the task of suppressing 
the revolt. It was no light task, as the national guard was 
untrustworthy, regular troops were not at hand in sufficient 
numbers, and the insurgents had abundant time to prepare 
themselves. Variously estimated at from 30,000 to 60,000 men, 
well armed and organized, they had entrenched themselves 
at every step behind formidable barricades, and were ready. to 
avail themselves of every advantage that ferocity and despair 
could suggest to them. Cavaignac failed perhaps to appreciate 
the political exigencies of the moment; as a soldier he would 
not strike his blow until his plans were matured and his forces 
sufficiently prepared. When the troops at last advanced in three 
strong columns, every inch of ground was disputed, and the 
government troops were frequently repulsed, till, fresh regiments 
arriving, he forced his way to the Place de la Bastille and crushed 
the insurrection in its headquarters. The contest, which raged 
from the 23rd to the morning of the 26th of June, was without 
doubt the bloodiest and most resolute the streets of Paris have 
ever seen, and the general did not hesitate to inflict the severest 
punishment on the rebels. 

Cavaignac was censured by some for having, by his delay, 
allowed the insurrection to gather head; but in the chamber 
he was declared by a unanimous vote to have deserved well of 
his country. After laying down his dictatorial powers, he 
continued to preside over the Executive Committee till the 
election of a regular president of the republic. It was expected 
that the suffrages of France would raise Cavaignac to that 
position. But the mass of the people, and especially the rural 
population, sick of revolution, and weary even of the moderate 
republicanism of Cavaignac, were anxious for a stable govern- 
ment. Against the five and a half million votes recorded for 
Louis Napoleon, Cavaignac received only a million and a half. 
Not without chagrin at his defeat, he withdrew into the ranks 
of the opposition. He continued to serve as a representative 
during the short remainder of the republic. At the coup d'etat 
of the 2nd December 185 1 he was arrested along with the other 
members of the opposition; but after a short imprisonment at 
Ham he was released, and, with his newly-married wife, lived 
in retirement till his death, which took place at Ourne (Sarthe) 
on the 28th of October 1857. 

His son, Jacques Marie Eugene Godefroi Cavaignac 
(1853-1905), French politician, was born in Paris on the 21st of 
May 1853. He made public profession of his republican prin- 
ciples as a schoolboy at the Lycee Charlemagne by refusing 
in 1867 to receive a prize at the Sorbonne from the hand of the 
prince imperial. He received the military medal for service in 
the Franco-Prussian War, and in 1872 entered the ficole 



56l 

Polytechnique. He served as a civil engineer in Angouleme until 
1881, when he became master of requests in the council of state. 
In the next year he was elected deputy for the arrondissement 
of Saint-Calais (Sarthe) in the republican interest. In 1885- 
1886 he was under-secretary for war in -the Henri Brisson 
ministry, and he served in the cabinet of Emile Loubet (1892) 
as minister of marine and of the colonies. He had exchanged his 
moderate republicanism for radical views before he became 
war minister in the cabinet of Leon Bourgeois (189 5- 18 96). 
He was again minister of war in the Brisson sabinet in July 
1898, when he read in the chamber a document which definitely 
incriminated Captain Alfred Dreyfus. On the 30th of August, 
however, he stated that this had been discovered to be a forgery 
by Colonel Henry, but he refused to concur with his colleagues 
in a revision of the Dreyfus prosecution, which was the logical 
outcome of his own exposure of the forgery. Resigning his port- 
folio, he continued to declare his conviction of Dreyfus's guilt, 
and joined the Nationalist group in the chamber, of which he 
became one of the leaders. He also was an energetic supporter 
of the Ligue de la Patrie Francaise. In 1899 Cavaignac was an 
unsuccessful candidate for the presidency of the republic. He 
had announced his intention of retiring from political life when 
he died at his country-seat near Flee (Sarthe) on the 25th of 
September 1905. He wrote an important book on the Formation 
de la Prusse contemporaine ( 2 vols., 1 891- 1898), dealing with 
the events of 1806-1813. 

CAVAILLON, a town of south-eastern France in the depart- 
ment of Vauduse; 20 m. S.E. of Avignon by rail. Pop. (1906) 
town, 5760; commune, 9952. Cavaillon lies at the southern 
base of Mont St Jacques on the right bank of the Durance above 
its confluence with the Coulon. It has a hotel de ville of the 
18th century, a church of the 12th century, dedicated to St Veran, 
and the mutilated remains of a triumphal arch of the Roman 
period. The town is an important railway junction and the 
commercial centre of a rich and well-irrigated plain, which pro- 
duces melons and other fruits, early vegetables (artichokes, 
tomatoes, celery, potatoes), and other products in profusion. 
Silk-worms are reared, and silk is an important article of trade. 
The preparation of preserved vegetables, fruits and other pro- 
visions, distilling, and the manufacture of straw hats and 
leather are carried on. Numerous minor relics of the Roman 
period have been found to the south of the present town, on the 
site of the ancient Cabellio, a place of some note in the territory 
of the Cavares. In medieval and modern history the town has 
for the most part followed the fortunes of the Comtat Venaissin, 
in which it was included. Till the time of the Revolution it 
was the see of a bishop, and had a large number of monastic 
establishments. 

CAVALCANTI, GUIDO (c. 1250-1300), Italian poet and 
philosopher, was the son of a philosopher whom Dante, in the 
Inferno, condemns to torment among the Epicureans and 
Atheists; but he himself was a friend of the great poet. By 
marriage with Beatrice, daughter of Farinata Uberti, he became 
head of the Ghibellines; and when the people, weary of continual 
brawls, aroused themselves, and sought peace by banishing the 
leaders of the rival parties, he was sent to Sarzana, where he 
caught a fever, of which he died. Cavalcanti has left a number 
of love sonnets and canzoni, which were honoured by the praise 
of Dante. Some are simple and graceful, but many are spoiled 
by a mixture of metaphysics borrowed from Plato, Aristotle 
and the Christian Fathers. They are mostly in honour of a 
French lady, whom he calls Mandetta. His Canzone d'Amore 
was extremely popular, and was frequently published; and his 
complete poetical works are contained in Giunti's collection 
(Florence, 1527; Venice, 1531-1532). He also wrote in prose on 
philosophy and oratory. 

See D. G. Rossetti, Dante and his Circle (1874). 

CAVALIER, JEAN (1681-1740), the famous chief of the 
Camisards (<?.».), was born at Mas Roux, a small hamlet in the 
commune of Ribaute near Anduze (Gard), on the 28th of 
November 1681. His father, an illiterate peasant, had been 
compelled by persecution to become a Roman Catholic along 



562 



CAVALIER 



•with his family, but his mother brought him up secretly in the 
Protestant faith. In his boyhood he became a shepherd, and 
about his twentieth year he was apprenticed to a baker. 
Threatened with prosecution for his religious opinions he went 
to Geneva, where he passed the year 1701; he returned to the 
Cevennes on the eve of the rebellion of the Camisards, who by 
the murder of the Abbe du Chayla at Pont-de-Monvert on the 
night of the 24th of July 1702 raised the standard of revolt. 
Some months later he became their leader. He showed himself 
possessed of an extraordinary genius for war, and Marshal 
Villars paid him the high compliment of saying that he was as 
courageous in attack as he was prudent in retreat, and that by 
his extraordinary knowledge of the country he displayed in the 
management of his troops a skill as great as that of the ablest 
officers. Within a period of two years he was to hold in check 
Count Victor Maurice de Broglie and Marshal Montrevel, 
generals of Louis XIV., and to carry on one of the most 
terrible partisan wars in French history. 

He organized the Camisard forces and maintained the most 
severe discipline. As an orator he derived his inspiration from 
the prophets of Israel, and raised the enthusiasm of his rude 
mountaineers to a pitch so high that they were ready to die 
with their young leader for the sake of liberty of conscience. 
Each battle increased the terror of his name. On Christmas day 
1702 he dared to hold a religious assembly at the very gates of 
Alais, and put to flight the local militia which came forth to 
attack him. At Vagnas, on the 10th of February 1703, he 
routed the royal troops, but, defeated in his turn, he was com- 
pelled to find safety in flight. But he reappeared, was again 
defeated at Tour de Bellot (April 30) , and again recovered himself, 
recruits flocking to him to fill up the places of the slain. By a 
long series of successes he raised his reputation to the highest 
pitch, and gained the full confidence of the people. It was in 
vain that more rigorous measures were adopted against the 
Camisards. Cavalier boldly carried the war into the plain, 
made terrible reprisals, and threatened even Nimes itself. On 
the 1 6th of April 1704 he encountered Marshal Montrevel 
himself at the bridge of Nages, with 1000 men against 5000, and, 
though defeated after a desperate conflict, he made a successful 
retreat with two-thirds of his men. It was at this moment 
that Marshal Villars, wishing to put an end to the terrible 
struggle, opened negotiations, and Cavalier was induced to 
attend a conference at Pont d'Avene near Alais on the nth of 
May 1704, and on the 16th of May he made submission at Nimes. 
These negotiations, with the proudest monarch in Europe, he 
carried on, not as a rebel, but as the leader of an army which 
had waged an honourable war. Louis XIV. gave him a com- 
mission as colonel, which Villars presented to him personally, 
and a pension of 1200 livres. At the same time he authorized 
the formation of a Camisard regiment for service in Spain under 
his command. 

Before leaving the Cevennes for the last time he went to Alais 
and to Ribaute, followed by an immense concourse of people. 
But Cavalier had not been able to obtain liberty of conscience, 
and his Camisards almost to a man broke forth in wrath against 
him, reproaching him for what they described as his treacherous 
desertion. On the 21st of June 1704, with a hundred Camisards 
who were still faithful to him, he departed from Nimes and 
came to Neu-Brisach (Alsace), where he was to be quartered. 
From Dijon he went on to Paris, where Louis XIV. gave. him 
audience and heard his explanation of the revolt of the Cevennes. 
Returning to Dijon, fearing to be imprisoned in the fortress of 
Neu-Brisach, he escaped with his troop near Montbeliard and 
took refuge at Lausanne. But he was too much of a soldier to 
abandon the career of arms. He offered his services to the duke 
of Savoy, and with his Camisards made war in the Val d'Aosta. 
After the peace he crossed to England, where he formed a 
regiment of refugees which took part in the Spanish expedition 
under the earl of Peterborough and Sir. Cloudesley Shovel in 
May 1705. At the battle of Almansa the Camisards found 
themselves opposed to a French regiment, and without firing 
the two bodies rushed one upon the other. Cavalier wrote 



later (July 10, 1707): "The only consolation that remains to 
me is that the regiment I had the honour to command never 
looked back, but sold its life dearly on the field of battle. I 
fought as long as a man stood beside me and until numbers 
overpowered me, losing also an immense quantity of blood 
from a dozen wounds which I received." Marshal Berwick 
never spoke of this tragic event without visible emotion. 

On his return to England a small pension was given him and 
he settled at Dublin, where he published Memoirs of the Wars 
of the Cevennes under Col. Cavalier, written in French and trans- 
lated into English with a dedication to Lord Carteret (1726). 
Though Cavalier received, no doubt, assistance in the publica- 
tion of the Memoirs, it is none the less true that he provided the 
materials, and that his work is the most valuable source for the 
history of his life. He was made a general on the 27th of October 
1735, and on the 25th of May 1738 was appointed lieutenant- 
governor of Jersey. Writing in the following year (August 26, 
1739) he says: "I am overworked and weary; I am going to 
take the waters in England so as to be in a fit condition for the 
war against the Spaniards if they reject counsels of prudence." 
He was promoted to the rank of major-general on the 2nd of 
July 1739, and died in the following year. In the parochial 
register of St Luke's, Chelsea, there is an entry: " Burial a.d. 
1740, May 18, Brigadier John Cavalier." 

There is a story which represents him as the fortunate rival 
of Voltaire for the hand of Olympe, daughter of Madame Dunoyer, 
author of the Lettres galantes. During his stay in England he 
married the daughter of Captain de Ponthieu and Marguerite 
de la Rochefoucauld, refugees living at Portarlington. Males- 
herbes, the courageous defender of Louis XVI., bears the follow- 
ing eloquent testimony to this young hero of the Cevennes: — 
" I confess," he says, " that this warrior, who, without ever having 
served, found himself by the mere gift of nature a great general, 
— this Camisard who was bold to punish a crime in the presence 
of a fierce troop which maintained itself by little crimes — this 
coarse peasant who, when admitted at twenty years of age into 
the society of cultivated people, caught their manners and won 
their love and esteem, this man who, though accustomed to a 
stormy life, and having just cause to be proud of his success, 
had yet enough philosophy in him by nature to enjoy for thirty- 
five years a tranquil private life — appears to me to be one of 
the rarest characters to be found in history." 

For a more detailed account see F. Puaux, Vie de Jean Cavalier 
(1868); David C. A. Agnew, Protestant Exiles from France, ii. 54-66 
(Lond., 1871); Charvey, Jean Cavalier: nouveaux documents inedits 
(1884). Eugene Sue popularized the name of the Camisard chief in 
Jean Cavalier ou les fanatiques des Cevennes (1840). (F. Px.) 

CAVALIER, a horseman, particularly a horse-soldier or one of 
gentle birth trained in knightly exercises. The word is taken 
from one of the French words which derived ultimately from 
the Late Lat. caballarius, a horseman, from Lat. caballus, 
properly a pack-horse, which gave the Fr. cheval, a chevalier. 
This last word is the regular French for " knight," and is chiefly 
used in English for a member of certain foreign military or other 
orders, particularly of the Legion of Honour. Cavalier in English 
was early applied in a contemptuous sense to an overbearing 
swashbuckler — a roisterer or swaggering gallant. In Shakespeare 
(2 Henry IV. v. iii. 62) Shallow calls Bardolph's companions 
" cavaleros."" Cavalier " is chiefly associated with the Royalists, 
the supporters of Charles I. in the struggle with the Parliament 
in -the Great Rebellion. Here again it first appears as a term of 
reproach and contempt, applied by the opponents of the king. 
Charles in the Answer to the Petition (June 13, 1642) speaks of 
cavaliers as a " word by what mistake soever it seemes much in 
disfavour." Further quotations of the use of the word by the 
Parliamentary party are given in the New English Dictionary. 
It was soon adopted (as a title of honour) by the king's party, 
who in return applied Roundhead to their opponents, and at the 
Restoration the court party preserved the name, which survived 
till the rise of the term Tory (see Whig and Tory). The term 
" cavalier " has been adopted from the French as a term in 
fortification for a work of great command constructed in the 



CAVALIERE— GAVALRY 



563 



interior of a fort, bastion or other defence, so as to fire over the 
main parapet without interfering with the fire of the latter. A 
greater volume of fire can thus be obtained, but the great height 
of the cavalier makes it an easy target for a besieger's guns. 

CAVALIERE, EMILIO DEL, 16th-century Italian musical 
composer, was born in Rome about 155° of a noble family. 
He held a post at the court of Ferdinand I. of Tuscany from 
1588 to 1597, and during his residence at Florence was on terms 
of intimacy with J. Peri, 0. Rinuccini, G. Caccini and the rest 
of the Bardi circle. In 1597 he returned to Rome, and became 
connected with the Congregation of the Oratory founded by St 
Philip Neri. Here in 1 600 was performed Cavaliere's contribution 
to the musical reformation initiated by his circle of friends in 
Florence — La Rappresentazione di Anima e di Corpo, a sacred 
drama, which is regarded as the first example of what is now 
called oratorio. It is generally supposed that he was no longer 
living when the work was performed, but some authorities assign 
1602 as the date of his death. 

Cavaliere's style is more facile than that of Peri and Caccini, 
but he is inferior to them in depth of musical expression. He 
is, however, important as being the first to apply the new monodic 
style to sacred music, and as the founder of the Roman school 
of the 17th century which included Mazzocchi, Carissimi and 
Alessandro Scarlatti. 

See also H. Goldschmidt, Studien zur Geschichte der italieniscJien 
Oper im 17. Jahrhundert, Band i. 

CAVALLI, FRANCESCO (iS99?-i676), Italian musical com- 
poser, was born at Crema in 1599 or 1600. His real name was 
Pier Francesco Caletti-Bruni, but he is better known by that of 
Cavalli, the name of his patron, a Venetian nobleman. He 
became a singer at St Mark's in Venice in 161 7, second organist in 
1639, first organist in 1665, and in 1668 maestro di cappella. 
He is, however, chiefly important for his operas. He began to 
write for the stage in 1639 (Le Nozze di Teti e di Peleo), and soon 
established so great a reputation that he was summoned to Paris 
in 1660 to produce an opera (Serse) at the Louvre in honour of 
the marriage of Louis XIV. He visited Paris again in 1662, 
bringing out his Ercole Amante. His death occurred in Venice 
on the' 14th of January 1676. Twenty-seven operas of Cavalli 
are still extant, most of them being preserved in the library of 
St Mark at Venice. Monteverde had found opera a musico- 
literary experiment, and left it a magnificent dramatic spectacle. 
Cavalli succeeded in making opera a popular entertainment. 
He reduced Monteverde's extravagant orchestra to more practical 
limits, introduced melodious arias into his music and. popular 
types into his libretti. His operas have all the characteristic 
exaggerations and absurdities of the 17th century, but they have 
also a remarkably strong sense of dramatic effect as well as a 
great musical facility, and a grotesque humour which was 
characteristic of Italian grand opera down to the death of 
Alessandro Scarlatti. 

CAVALLINI, PIETRO (c. 12 59-1344), Italian painter, born in 
Rome, was an artist of the earliest epoch of the modern Roman 
school, and was taught painting and mosaic by Giotto while 
employed at Rome; it is believed that he assisted his master in 
the mosaic of the Navicella or ship of St Peter, in the porch of the 
church of that saint. He also studied under the Cosmati. Lanzi 
describes him as an adept in both arts, and mentions with appro- 
bation his grand fresco of a Crucifixion at Assisi, still in tolerable 
preservation; he was, moreover, versed in architecture and in 
sculpture. According to George Vertue, it is highly probable 
that Cavallini executed, in 1279, the mosaics and other orna- 
ments of the tomb of Edward the Confessor in Westminster Abbey. 
He would thus be the " Petrus Civis Romanus " whose name is 
inscribed on the shrine; but a comparison of dates invalidates 
this surmise. He died in 1344, at the age of eighty -five, in the 
odour of sanctity, having in his later years been a man of eminent 
piety. He is said to have carved for the Basilica of San Paolo 
fuori le Mura, close to Rome, a crucifix which spoke in 1370 to a 
female saint. Some highly important works by Cavallini in the 
church of Santa Cecilia in Trastevere, Rome, have been recently 
discovered. ' 



CAVALLO, TIBERIUS (1749-1809), Anglo-Italian electrician 
and natural philosopher, was born on the 30th of March 1749 at 
Naples, where his father was a physician. In 177 1 he came to 
England with the intention of pursuing a mercantile career, but 
he soon turned his attention to scientific work. Although he 
made several ingenious improvements in scientific instruments, 
his mind was rather imitative and critical than creative. He 
published numerous works on different branches of physics, 
including A Complete Treatise on Electricity (1777), Treatise on 
the Nature and Properties of Air and other permanently Elastic 
Fluids (1781), History and Practice of Aerostation (1785), Treatise 
on Magnetism (1787), Elements of Natural and Experimental 
Philosophy (1803), Theory and Practice of Medical Electricity 
(1780), and Medical Properties of Factitious Air (1798). He died 
in London on the 21st of December 1809. 

CAVALLOTTI, FELICE (1842-1898), Italian politician, poet 
and dramatic author, was born at Milan on the 6th of November 
1842. In i860 and 1866 he fought with the Garibaldian Corps, 
but first attained notoriety by bis anti-monarchical lampoons in 
the Gazzetta di Milano and in the Gazzettina Rosa between 1866 
and 1872. Elected to parliament as deputy for Corteolona in 
the latter year, he took the oath of allegiance after having 
publicly impugned its validity. Eloquence and turbulent, com- 
bativeness in and out of parliament secured for him the leader- 
ship of the extreme Left on the death of Bertani in 1886. 
During his twelve years' leadership his party increased in number 
from twenty to seventy, and at the time of his death his parlia- 
mentary influence was greater than ever before. Though am- 
bitious and addicted to defamatory methods of personal attack 
which sometimes savoured of political blackmail, Cavallotti's 
eloquent advocacy of democratic reform, and apparent generosity 
of sentiment, secured for him a popularity surpassed by that of 
no contemporary save Crispi. Services rendered in the cholera 
epidemic of 1885, his numerous lawsuits and thirty-three duels, 
his bitter campaign against Crispi, and his championship of 
French interests, combined to enhance his notoriety and to 
increase his political influence. By skilful alliances with the 
marquis di Rudini he more than once obtained practical control 
of the Italian government, and exacted notable concessions 
to Radical demands. He was killed on the 6th of March 1898 
in a duel with Count Macola, editor of the conservative Gazetta 
di Venezia, whom he had assailed with characteristic intemper- 
ance of language. By his death the house of Savoy lost a re- 
lentless foe, and the revolutionary elements in Italy a gifted, 
if not entirely trustworthy, leader. - (H. W. S.) 

CAVALRY (Fr. cavalerie, Ger. Kavallerie or Reiterei, derived 
ultimately from late Lat. caballus, horse), a word which came 
into use in military literature about the middle of the 16th 
century as applied to mounted men of all kinds employed for 
combatant purposes, whether intended primarily for charging in 
masses, in small bodies, or for dismounted fighting. By degrees, 
as greater refinement of terminology has become desirable, the 
idea has been narrowed down until it includes only " horsemen 
trained to achieve the purpose of their commander by the com- 
bined action of man and horse," and this definition will be found 
to cover the whole field of cavalry activity, from the tasks 
entrusted to the cavalry " corps " of 10,000 sabres down to the 
missions devolving on isolated squadrons and even troops. 

History.— The evolution of the cavalry arm has never been 
uniform at any one time over the surface of the globe, but has 
always been locally modified by the conditions of B . 
each community and the stage of intellectual develop- use f 
ment to which at any given moment each had attained, mounted 
The first condition for the existence of the arm warrlors - 
being the existence of the horse itself, its relative scarcity 
or the reverse and its adaptability to its environment in 
each particular district have always exercised a preponderating 
influence on the development of cavalry organization and 
tactics. The indigenous horses of Europe and Asia being 
very small, the first application of their capabilities for war 
purposes seems everywhere to have been as draught animals 
for chariots, the construction of which implies not only the 



5 6 4 



CAVALRY 



existence of level surfaces, perhaps of actual roads, but a very 
considerable degree of mechanical skill in those who designed and 
employed them. The whole of the classical and Oriental mytho- 
logies, together with the earliest monuments of Egypt, Assyria 
and India, are convincing on this point. Nowhere can we find 
a trace either of description or delineation of animals physically 
capable of carrying on their backs the armed men of the period. 
All the earliest allusions to the use of the horse in war either 
point directly to the employment as a draught animal, or where 
not specific, as in the description of the war-horse in Job, they 
would apply equally well to one harnessed to a chariot as to one 
ridden under the saddle. 

The first trace of change is to be found, according to Prof. 
Wm. Ridgeway (Origin and Influence of the Thoroughbred Horse, 
p. 243), in an Egyptian relief showing Nubians mounted on 
horses of an entirely different breed, taller and more powerful 
than any which had gone before them. These horses appear 
to have come from the vicinity of Dongola, and the strain still 
survives in the Sudan. The breed is traced into Arabia, where 
only second-rate horses had been reared hitherto, and thence 
to different parts of Europe, where eventually centres of cavalry 
activity developed. The first detailed evidence of the existence 
of organized bodies of mounted men is to be found in Xenophon, 
whose instructions for the breaking, training and command 
of a squadron remain almost as a model for modern practice. 
Their tactical employment, however, seems still to have been 
relatively insignificant, for the horses were still far too small 
and too few to deliver a charge with sufficient momentum to 
break the heavy armed and disciplined hoplites. The strain of 
ancient battle was of an entirely different order to that of 
modern fighting. In the absence of projectiles of sufficient 
range and power to sweep a whole area, the fighting was entirely 
between the front ranks of the opposing forces. When a front 
rank fighter fell, his place was immediately taken by his comrade 
in the rear, who took up the individual combat, excited by his 
comrade's fate but relatively fresh in mind and muscle. This 
process of feeding the fight from the rear could be protracted 
almost indefinitely. If then, as a consequence of a charge, a 
few mounted men did penetrate the ranks, they encountered 
such a crowd of well-protected and fresh swordsmen that they 
were soon pulled off their ponies and despatched. Now and 
again great leaders, Alexander, Hannibal and Scipio Africanus, 
for instance, succeeded in riding down their opponents, but in 
the main, and as against the Roman infantry in particular, 
mounted troops proved of very little service on the battlefield. 

It was, however, otherwise in the sphere of strategy. There, 
information was of even greater importance, because harder to 
obtain, than it is nowadays, and the army which could push out 
its feelers to the greater distance, surround its enemy and 
intercept his communications, derived nearly the same advan- 
tages as it does at present. Hence both sides provided them- 
selves with horsemen, and when these met, each in the per- 
formance of their several duties, charges of masses naturally 
ensued. This explains the value attaching in the old days to the 
possession of horse-flesh and the rapid spread of the relatively 
new Dongola or African strain over the then known world. 

The primitive instinct of aboriginal man is to throw stones 
or other missiles for purposes of defence (apes will throw anything 
they can find, but they never use sticks) ; hence, as the Romans 
penetrated ever farther amongst the barbarian tribes, their 
horsemen in first line found ever-increasing need for protection 
against projectiles. But the greater the weight of armour 
carried, the greater the demands upon the endurance of the 
horse. Then, as the weight-carrying breed was expensive 
and, with the decay of the Roman Empire, corruption and 
peculation spread, a limit was soon placed on the multiplication 
of charging cavalry, and it became necessary to fall back on 
the indigenous pony, which could only carry a rider from place 
to place, not charge. Thus there was a gradual levelling down 
of the mounted arms, the heavy cavalry becoming too heavy to 
gallop and the light not good enough for united action. Against 
such opponents, the lighter and better mounted tribesmen of 



Asia found their task easy. They cut off the supplies of the 
marching infantry, filled up or destroyed the wells, &c, and 
thus demonstrated the strategic necessity of superior mobility. 

With the decay of civilization discipline also disappeared, 
and, as discipline consists essentially in the spirit of self-sacrifice 
for the good of the community, its opposite, self-preservation, 
became the guiding principle. This in turn led to the increase 
of armour carried, and thence to the demand for heavier horses, 
and this demand working through several centuries led ulti- 
mately to the breeding of the great weight-carrying animals on 
whose existence that of medieval chivalry depended. These 
horses, however, being very costly and practically useless for 
general purposes, could only become the property of the wealthy, 
who were too independent to feel the need of combination, and 
preferred to live on the spoliation and taxation of the weak. 
This spoliation eventually impelled the weaker men to combine, 
and at first their combination took the form of the construction 
of fortified places, against which mounted men were powerless. 
On the other hand, expense put a limit to the area which fortifica- 
tions could enclose, and this again limited the supplies for the 
garrison". Horsemen sweeping the country for miles around had 
no difficulty in feeding themselves, and the surrender of all 
beleaguered places through starvation was ultimately inevitable, 
unless food could be introduced from allied towns in the vicinity. 
It was of no use to introduce fighting men only into a place 
which primarily required food (cf. Lucknow, 1857) to protract 
its resistance. Hence some means had to be found to surround 
the supply-convoys with a physically impenetrable shield, and 
eighteen-foot pikes in the hands of powerful disciplined soldiers 
met the requirements. Against eight to ten ranks of such men 
the best cavalry in the world, relying only on their swords, 
were helpless, and for the time (towards the close of the 15th 
century) infantry remained masters of the field on the continent 
of Europe. 

England meanwhile had developed on lines of her own. Thanks 
to her longbowmen and the military genius of her leaders, she 
might have retained indefinitely the command of the continent 
had it not been for the invention of gunpowder, which, though 
readily accepted by the English for sieges in France, proved the 
ultimate cause of their undoing. It was the French who developed 
the use of siege artillery most rapidly, and their cavalry were not 
slow to take the hint; unlike the longbow and the crossbow, the 
pistol could be used effectively from horseback, and presently 
the knights and their retainers, having the deepest purses, 
provided themselves with long pistols in addition to their lances 
and swords. These weapons sent a bullet through any armour 
which a foot-soldier could conveniently carry, or his commander 
afford, and if anything went wrong with their mechanism (which 
was complicated and uncertain) the speed of his horse soon 
carried the rider out of danger. A new form of attack against 
infantry, introduced by the French at Cerisoles, 1544, thus 
developed itself. A troop or squadron, formed in from twelve 
to sixteen ranks, trotted up to within pistol shot of the angle of 
the square to be attacked and halted; then each rank in suc- 
cession cantered off man by man to the left, discharging his pistol 
at the square as he passed, and riding back to his place behind the 
column to reload. This could be prolonged indefinitely, and 
against such tactics the infantry were powerless. The stakes 
carried by English archers to check the direct charge of horse- 
men became useless, as did also chevaux de frise, though the 
latter (which originated in the 14th century) continued to be 
employed by the Austrians against the swiftly-charging Turks 
till the close of the 17 th century. Thus it became necessary to 
devise some new impediment which, whilst remaining mobile, 
would also give cover and an advantage in the final hand-to- 
hand shock. The problem was solved in Bohemia, Poland and 
Moravia (Hussite wars, about 1420), where, distances being great 
and the country open, greater mobility and capacity in the 
convoys became essential. Great trains of wagons were placed 
in charge of an infantry escort, of which a part had become 
possessed of firearms, and these moved across country in as 
many as twelve parallel lines drilled to form laagers, as nowadays 



CAVALRY 



565 



in South Africa. Again the cavalry proved helpless, and for 
nearly a century in central Europe the word " Wagenburg " 
(wagon-fortress) became synonymous with " army." Then an 
unfortunate inspiration came to the wagon-men. A large gun 
was relatively cheaper to manufacture, and more effective 
than a small one. To keep their assailants at a distance, they 
mounted wall-pieces of about one-inch bore on their wagons. 
For a moment the balance inclined in their favour, but the 
cavalry were quick to see their advantage in this new idea, and 
they immediately followed suit. They, too, mounted guns on 
wheels, and, as their mobility gave them choice of position, they 
were able to concentrate their fire against any side of the laager, 
and again ultimate surrender was the only way out of the 
defenders' dilemma. 

The interesting problem thus raised was never finally solved, 
for the scene of action now shifted to western Europe, to the 
valley of the Po, and more particularly to the Netherlands, 
where fortresses were closer together and the clayey nature of 
the Rhine delta had already made paved roads necessary. Then, 
the Wagenburg being no longer needed for the short transits 
between one fortified town and another, the infantry reasserted 
themselves. Firearms having been much improved in the interval 
the spearmen (pikemen) had already (about 151 5) learnt to 
protect themselves by musketeers trained to take advantage of 
cover and ground somewhat in the same fashion as the modern 
skirmisher. These musketeers kept light guns at a distance 
from their pikemen, but dared not venture far out, as their fire 
was altogether inadequate to stop a rush of horsemen; when the 
latter threatened to intervene, they had to run for safety to the 
squares of pikemen, whom they assisted in turn by keeping 
the cavalry beyond pistol range. Hence the horsemen had to 
fall back upon more powerful guns, and these, being slow and 
requiring more train, could be most economically protected by 
infantry (see also Artillery). 

Thus about the close of the 16th century western armies 
differentiated themselves out into the still existing three types — 
cavalry, artillery and infantry. Moreover, each type 
ceatary was subdivided, the cavalry becoming heavy, medium 
progress. an d dragoons. At this period there was nothing to 
disturb the equilibrium of two contending forces except 
the characters of their respective leaders. The mercenary element 
had triumphed everywhere over the feudal levies. The moral 
qualities of all were on the same indifferent level, and battles in 
the open followed one recognized course. Neither army being 
able to outmarch the other, both drew up masses of pikes in 
parallel lines. The musketeers covered the deployment of the 
heavy guns on either side, the cavalry drew up on the wings and 
a strictly parallel fight ensued, for in the absence of a common 
cause for which men were willing to die, plunder was the ruling 
motive, and all control and discipline melted in the excitement 
of the contest. 

It is to the growth of Protestantism that cavalry owes its next 
great forward leap. To sweep the battlefield, it was absolutely 
essential that men should be ready tc subordinate selfish con- 
siderations to the triumph of their cause. The Roman Catholicism 
of the day gave many loopholes for the evasion of clear duty, 
but from these the reformed faith was free, and it is to the 
reawakened sense of duty 'that Gustavus Adolphus appealed. 
This alone rendered combination amongst his subordinate 
leaders possible, and on this power of combination all his victories 
depended. Other cavalry soldiers, once let loose in the charge, 
could never be trusted to return to the field, the prospective 
plunder of the enemy's baggage being too strong a temptation; 
but the king's men could be depended on, and once brought 
back in formed bodies, they rode over the enemy's skirmishers 
and captured his batteries. Then the equilibrium of force 
was destroyed, and all arms combined made short work of the. 
opposing infantry alone (Breitenfeld, 1631). But the Swedish 
king perished with his work half done, and matters reverted to 
their former condition until the appearance of Cromwell, another 
great leader capable of animating his men with the spirit of 
devotion, again rendered the cavalry arm supreme. The essence 



of his success lay in this, that his men were ready everywhere 
and always to lay down their lives for their common cause. 
Whether scouting 70 m. to the front of their army, or fighting 
dismounted to delay the enemy at defiles or to storm fortified 
strongholds, or charging home on the battlefield, their will 
power, focused on, and in turn dependent on, the personality 
of their great leader, dominated all human instincts of fear, 
rapacity or selfishness. It is true that they had not to ride 
against the modern rifle, but it is equally true that there was no 
quick-firing artillery to carry terror through the enemy's army, 
and it was against masses of spearmen and musketeers, not then 
subjected to bursting shells or the lash of shrapnel and rifle 
bullets, that the final charges had always to be ridden home. 

Each succeeding decade thereafter has seen a steady diminu- 
tion in the ultimate power of resistance of the infantry, and a 
corresponding increase in the power of fire preparation at the 
disposal of the supreme leader; and the chances of cavalry have 
fluctuated with the genius of that leader in the employment of 
the means at his disposal, and the topographical conditions 
existing within each theatre of war. During the campaigns in 
Flanders, with its multiplicity of fortresses and clayey soil, 
cavalry rapidly degenerated into mounted infantry, throwing 
aside sword and lance-proof armour, and adopting long muskets 
and heavier ammunition. Presently they abandoned the charge 
at a gallop and reverted to an approach at the trot, and if (as 
at Blenheim) their influence proved decisive on the field of 
battle, this was because the conditions were common to both 
combatants, and the personal influence of " Corporal John," as 
his soldiers called Marlborough, ensured greater steadiness and 
better co-operation. 

When Frederick II. became king of Prussia (1740), he 
found his cavalry almost at the nadir of efficiency; even his 
cuirassiers drilled principally on foot. " They can Frederick 
manoeuvre," on foot, "with the same precision as 11.; reform 
my grenadiers, but unfortunately they are equally of the 
slow." His enemies the Austrians, thanks to their Pruss'aa 
wars against the Turks who always charged at a cavalry - 
gallop, had maintained greater dash and mobility, and at Moll- 
witz the Prussians only escaped disaster by the astounding 
rapidity of their infantry fire. In disgust the king then 
wrote, " Die Cavallerie is nicht einmal werth dasz sie der 
Teufel week holet," and he immediately set about their re- 
form with his usual energy and thoroughness. Three years 
after Mollwitz, the result of his exertions was apparent in 
the greatly increased importance the arm acquired on the 
battlefield, and the charge of the Bayreuth dragoons at Hohen- 
friedberg (June 4, 1745), who with 1500 horses rode over and 
dispersed 20 Austrian battalions, bringing in 2500 prisoners and 
67 colours, will always rank as one of the most brilliant feats in 
military history. 1 The following years of peace (1745-1756) 
were devoted to the methodical preparation of the cavalry to 
meet the requirements that Frederick's methods of war would 
make upon them, and it is to this period that the student should 
devote special attention. From the very outbreak of the Seven 
Years' War (1756) this training asserted its influence, and 
Rossbach (1757) and Zorndorf (1758) are the principal examples 
of what cavalry handled in masses can effect. At Rossbach 
General v. Seydlitz, at the head of 38 squadrons, practically 
began and ended the destruction of the French army, and at 
Zorndorf he saved the day for the Prussians by a series of the 
most brilliant charges, which successively destroyed the Russian 
right wing and centre. These battles so conclusively demon- 
strated the superiority of the Prussian cavalry that their enemies 
completely altered their tactical procedure. They now utilized 
their enormous numerical superiority by working in two separate 
armies, each almost as strong as the whole Prussian force. When 
the latter moved against either, the one threatened immediately 
threw up heavy entrenchments, against which cavalry were, of 
course, ineffective, whilst the other pursued its march. When 
Frederick, having more or less beaten his immediate opponent, 

1 The loss of the regiment was twenty-eight killed and sixty-six 
wounded. 



5 66 



GAiVAI^ 



began to threaten the other army it entrenched likewise. Against 
these methods the Prussian army soon wore itself out, and though 
from time to time the cavalry locally distinguished itself, no 
further opportunities for great decisive blows presented them- 
selves. 

The increased demands made upon the mobility of the Prussian 
horsemen naturally resulted in the gradual rejection of everything 
which was not essential to their striking power. The long muskets 
and bayonets were laid aside, but the cuirass was retained for 
the melee, and by the close of the great struggle the various 
branches of the arm had differentiated themselves out into the types 
still adhered to, heavy cavalry, dragoons, hussars, whose equip- 
ment as regards essentials thenceforward hardly varied up to the 
latter years of the 19th century. The only striking difference 
lies in the entire rejection of the lance in the armament of the 
charging squadrons, and the reason is characteristic of the prin- 
ciples of the day. The Prussian cavalry had realized that success 
was decided, not primarily by actual collision, but by the moral 
effect of the appearance of an absolutely closed wall of horse- 
men approaching the adversary at full speed. If the necessary 
degree of cohesion was attained, the other side was morally beaten 
before collision took place, and either turned to flight, or met the 
shock with so little resolution that it was ridden over without 
difficulty. In the former case any weapon was good enough 
to kill a flying enemy; in the latter, in the melee which then 
ensued, the crush in the ranks of the victors was still so great 
that the lance was a hindrance rather than a help. 

In the years succeeding the war the efficiency of the Prussian 
cavalry sank very rapidly, the initial cause being the death of 
Seydlitz at the early age of fifty-two. His personality had alone 
dominated the discontent, lethargy and hopelessness created by 
ruthless financial economies. When he was gone, as always in the 
absence of a great leader, men adapted their lives to the line of 
least resistance. In thirty years the wreck was complete, and 
within the splendid squadrons which had been accustomed to 
manoeuvre with perfect precision at the highest speed, there 
were (as F. A. von der Marwitz in his Nachlass clearly shows) not 
more than seven thoroughly trained men and horses to each, the 
remainder being trained for little longer and receiving less atten- 
tion than is the case with modern 2nd line or auxiliary cavalry. 

For the generation preceding the outbreak of the French 
Revolution, Frederick the Great's army, and especially his 
cavalry, had become the model for all Europe, but 
in the the mainspring of the excellence of his squadrons 
revolu- was everywhere overlooked. Seydlitz had manoeuvred 
tionary g re at masses of horsemen, therefore every one else 
must have great masses also; but no nation grasped 
the secret, viz. the unconditional obedience of the horse to 
its rider, on which his success had depended. Neither 
was it possible under the prevailing social conditions to 
secure the old stamp of horse, or the former attention to 
detail on the part of men and officers. In France, owing to the 
agricultural decay of the country, suitable remounts for charg- 
ing cavalry were almost unobtainable, and as this particular 
branch of the arm was almost exclusively commanded by the 
aristocracy it suffered most in the early days of the Revolution. 
The hussars, being chiefly recruited and officered by Alsatians and 
Germans from the Rhine provinces, retained their individuality 
and traditions much longer than the dragoons and cuirassiers, 
and, to the very close of the great wars, we find them always 
ready to charge at a gallop; but the unsteadiness and poor 
horsemanship of the other branches was so great that up to 181 2, 
the year of their destruction, they always charged at a trot only, 
considering that the advantage of superior cohesion thus gained 
more than balanced the loss of momentum due to the slower pace. 

Generally, the growth of the French cavalry service followed 
the universal law. The best big horses went to the heavy charging 
cavalry, viz. the cuirassiers, the best light horses to the hussars, 
and the dragoons received the remainder, for in principle they 
were only infantry placed on horseback for convenience of loco- 
motion, and were not primarily intended for combined mounted 
action. Fortunately for them, their principal adversaries, the 



Austrians, had altogether failed to grasp the lesson of the Seven 
Years' War. Writing in 17:80 Colonel Mack, a very capable 
officer, said, " Even in 1 760, the cavalry could not ride, could not 
manage to control their horses. Not a single squadron could keep 
its dressing at a gallop, and before they had gone fifty yards at 
least ten out of forty -horses in the first rank would break out 
to the front," and though the veteran field marshal Lacy 
issued new regulations, their spirit seems always to have escaped 
the executive officers. The British cavalry was almost worse 
off, for economy had reduced its squadrons to mere skeletons, 
and the traditional British style of horsemanship, radically 
different from that in vogue in France, made their training for 
combined action even more difficult than elsewhere. Hence the 
history of cavalry during the earlier campaigns of the Revolution 
is marked by no decisive triumphs, the results are always in- 
adequate when judged by the magnitude of the forces employed, 
and only the brilliant exploit of the 15th Light Dragoons (now 
Hussars) at VOlers en Couch6 (April 24, 1794) deserves to be 
cited as an instance of the extraordinary influence which even 
a few horsemen can exercise over a demoralized or untrained mob 
of infantry. 

Up to the campaign of Poland (see Napoleonic Campaigns) 
French victories were won chiefly! by the brilliant infantry 
fighting, cavalry only intervening (as at Jena) to charge a beaten 
enemy and complete his destruction by pursuit. But after the 
terrible waste of life in the winter of 1806-7, and the appalling 
losses in battle, Napoleon introduced a new form of attack. 
The case-shot preparation of his artillery (see Artillery) sowed 
confusion and terror in the enemy's ranks, and the opportunity 
was used by masses of cavalry. Henceforward this method 
dominated the Napoleonic tactics and strategy. The essential 
difference between this system arid the Frederician lies in this, 
that with the artillery available in the former period it was not 
possible to say in advance at what point, the intervention of 
cavalry would be necessary, hence the need for speed and 
precision of manoeuvre to ensure their arrival at the right time 
and place. Napoleon now selected beforehand the point he 
meant to overwhelm and could bring his cavalry masses within 
striking distance at leisure. Once placed, it was only necessary 
to induce them to run away in the required direction to over- 
whelm everything by sheer weight of men and horses* ■ This 
method failed at Waterloo because the ground was too heavy, 
the slope of it against the charge, and the whole condition of the 
horses too low for the exertion demanded of them. 

The British cavalry from ,1793 to 1815 suffered from the same 
causes which at the beginning of the 20th century brought 
about its breakdown in the South African War. Over-sea 
transport brought the horses to land in poor condition, and it 
was rarely possible to afford them sufficient time to recover and 
become accustomed to the change in forage, the conditions of 
the particular theatre of queries, &c, before they had to be
led against the enemy— hence a -heavy casualty roll and the 
introduction into the ranks of raw unbroken horses which 
interfered with the precision of manoeuvre of the remainder. 
Their losses (about 13% per annum) were small as compared 
with those of South Africa, but this is mainly accounted for by the 
fact that, queries being generally in the northern hemisphere,
the change of climate was never so severe. Tactically, they 
suffered, like the Austrians and Prussians, from the absence of 
any conception of the Napoleonic strategy amongst their principal 
leaders. As it was not known where the great blow was to fall, 
they were distributed along the whole line, and thus became 
habituated to the idea of operating in relatively small bodies. 
This is the worst school for the cavalry soldier, because it is only 
when working in masses of forty to sixty squadrons that the 
cumulative consequences of small errors of detail become so 
apparent as to convince all ranks of the necessity of conforming 
accurately to established prescriptions. Nevertheless, they still 
retained the practice of charging at a gallop, and as a whole 
were by far the most efficient body of horsemen who survived 
at the close of the great wars. 

In the reaction that then ensued all over Europe, cavalry 



CAVALRY 



567 



practically ceased to exist. The financial and agricultural 
exhaustion of all countries, and of Prussia in particular, was so 
complete that money was nowhere to be found for the great 
concentrations and manoeuvre practices which are 
mh' more essential to the efficiency of the cavalry than to 
century. that of the other arms. Hence a whole generation of 
officers grew up in ignorance of the fundamental 
principles which govern the employment of their arm. It was 
not till 1848 that the Prussians began again to unite whole 
cavalry divisions for drill and manoeuvre, and the soldiers of the 
older generation had not yet passed away when the campaigns 
of 1866 and 1870 brought up again the realities of the battle-field. 
Meanwhile the introduction of long-range artillery and small 
arms had entirely destroyed the tactical relation of the three 
arms on which the Napoleonic tactics and strategy had been 
based, and the idea gained ground that the battle-field would no 
longer afford the same opportunities to cavalry as before. The 
experiences gained by the Americans in the Civil War helped to 
confirm this preconception. If in battles waged between in- 
fantries armed only with muzzle-loading rifles, cavalry could find 
no opportunity to repeat past exploits, it was argued that its 
chances could not fail to be still further reduced by the breech- 
loader. But this reasoning ignored the principal factors of former 
successes. The mounted men in America failed not as a con- 
sequence of the armament they encountered, but because the 
war brought out no Napoleon to create by his skill the opportunity 
for decisive cavalry action, and to mass his men beforehand 
in confident anticipation. The same reasoning applies to the 
European campaigns of 1866 and 1870, and the results obtained 
by the arm were so small, in proportion to the numbers of squad- 
rons available and to their cost of maintenance as compared with 
the other arms, that a strong reaction set in everywhere against 
the existing institutions, and the re-creation of the dragoon, under 
the new name of mounted rifleman, was advocated in the hope 
of obtaining a cheap and efficient substitute for the cavalryman. 

Later events in South Africa and in Manchuria again brought 
this question prominently to the front, but the essential difference 
between the old and new schools of thought has not been gener- 
ally realized. The " mounted rifle " adherents base their argu- 
ments on the greatly increased efficiency of the rifle itself. The 
"■ cavalry " school, on the other hand, maintains that, the weapons 
themselves being everywhere substantially equal in efficiency, 
the advantage rests with the side which can create the most 
favourable conditions for their employment, and that, funda- 
mentally, superior mobility will always confer upon its possessor 
the choice of the circumstances under which he will elect to 
engage. Where the two sides are nearly equally matched in 
mobility, neither side can afford the time to dismount, for the 
other will utilize that time to manoeuvre into a position which 
gives him a relative superiority for whichever form of attack he 
may elect to adopt, and this relative superiority will always more 
than suffice to eliminate any advantage in accuracy of fire that his 
opponent may have obtained by devoting his principal attention 
to training his men on the range instead of on the mounted 
manoeuvre ground. 

Finally, the " cavalry" school reasons that in no single cam- 
paign since Napoleon's time have the conditions governing 
encounters been normal. Either the roadless and barren nature 
of the country has precluded of itself the rapid marching which 
forms the basis of all modern strategy, as in America, Turkey, 
South Africa and Manchuria, or the relative power of the infantry 
and artillery weapons, as in Bohemia (1866) and in France (1870) , 
has rendered wholly impossible the creation of the great tactical 
opportunity characteristic of Napoleon's later method, for there 
then existed no means of overwhelming the enemy with a suffi- 
cient hail of projectiles to render the penetration of the cavalry 
feasible. The latest improvement in artillery, viz. the perfected 
shrapnel and the quick-firing guns, have, however, enormously 
facilitated the attainment of this primary fire superiority, and, 
moreover, it has simplified the procedure to such a degree that 
Napoleon is no longer needed to direct. The battles of the future 
will thus, in civilized countries, revert to the Napoleonic type, 



and the side which possesses the most highly trained and mobile 
force of cavalry will enjoy a greater relative superiority over its 
adversary than at any period since the days of Frederick. 

The whole experience of the past thus goes to show that no 
nation in peace has ever yet succeeded in maintaining a highly 
trained cavalry sufficiently numerous to meet all the demands 
of a great war. Hence at the outbreak of hostilities there has 
always been a demand for some kind of supplementary force 
which can relieve the regular squadrons of those duties of ob- 
servation and exploration which wear down the horses most 
rapidly and thus render the squadrons ineffective for their 
culminating duty on the battle-field. This demand has been met 
by the enrolment of men willing to fight and rendered mobile 
by mounts of an inferior description, and the greater the urgency 
the greater has been the tendency to give them arms which they 
can quickly learn to Use. To make a man an expert swordsman 
or lancer has always taken years, but he can be taught to use 
a musket or rifle sufficiently for his immediate purpose in a very 
short time. Hence, to begin with, arms of this description have 
invariably been issued to him. But once these bodies have been 
formed, and they have come into collision with trained cavalry, 
the advantages of mobility, combined with the power of shock, 
have become so apparent to all, that insensibly the " dragoon" 
has developed into the cavalry soldier, the rate of this evolution 
being conditioned by the nature of the country in which the 
fighting took place. 

This evolution is best seen in the American Civil War. The 
men of the mounted forces engaged had been trained to the use 
of the rifle from childhood, while the vast majority had never 
seen a sword, hence the formation of " mounted rifles ";and 
these " mounted rifles " developed precisely in accordance with 
the nature of their surroundings. In districts of virgin forests 
and marshland they remained " mounted rifles," in the open 
prairie country of the west they became cavalry pure and simple, 
though for want of time they never rivalled the precision of 
manoeuvre and endurance of modern Prussian or Austrian horse. 
In South Africa the same sequence was followed, and had the 
Boer War lasted longer it is certain that such Boer leaders as 
de Wet and de la Rey would have reverted to cavalry tactics 
of shock and cold steel at the earliest possible opportunity. 

Therefore when we find, extending over a cycle of ages, the 
same causes producing the same effects, the natural conclusion is 
that the evolution of the cavalry arm is subject to a universal 
law which persists in spite of all changes of armament. 

Employment of Cavalry. .-■—It is a fundamental axiom of all 
military action that the officer commanding the cavalry of any 
force comprising the three arms of the service is in the strictest 
sense an executive officer under the officer commanding that 
particular force as a whole. The latter again is himself responsible 
to the political power he represents. When intricate political 
problems are at stake, it may be, and generally is, quite impractic- 
able that any subordinate can share the secret knowledge of 
the power to which he owes his allegiance. 

The essence of the value of the cavalry soldier's services 
lies in this, that the demand is never made upon him in its 
supremest form until the instinct of the real commander realizes 
that the time has come. Whether it be to cover a retreat, and 
by the loss of hundreds to save the fives of tens of thousands, 
or to complete a victory with commensurate results in the 
opposite direction, the obligation remains the same — to stake 
the last man and horse in the attainment of the immediate 
object in view, the defeat of the enemy. This at once places the 
leader of cavalry in face of his principal problem. It is a matter 
of experience that the broader the front on which he can deliver 
a charge, the greater the chances of success. However strong 
the bonds of discipline may be, the line is ultimately, and at a 
certain nervous tension, only a number of men on horses, acting- 
and reacting on one another in various ways. When therefore, 
of two lines, moving to meet one another at speed, one sees 
itself overlapped to either hand, the men in the line thus over- 
lapped invariably and inevitably tend to open outwards, so as 
at least to meet their enemy on an equal frontage. Hence 



5 68 



CAVALRY 



every cavalry commander tries to strike at- the flank of his enemy, 
and the latter manoeuvres to meet him, and if both have equal 
mobility, local collision must ensue on an equal and parallel 
front. Therefore both strive to put every available man and horse 
in their first line, and if men and horses were invulnerable such 
a line would sweep over the ground like a scythe and nothing 
could withstand it. Since, however, bullets kill at a distance, 
and inequalities and unforeseen difficulties of the ground may 
throw hundreds of horses and riders, a working compromise 
has to be found to meet eventualities, and, other things being 
equal, victory inclines to the leader who best measures the risks 
and uncertainties of his undertaking, and keeps in hand a 
sufficient reserve to meet all chances. 

Thus there has arisen a saying, which is sometimes regarded 
as axiomatic, that in cavalry encounters the last closed reserve 
always wins. The truth is really that he who has best judged 
the situation and the men on both sides finds himself in possession 
of the last reserve at the critical moment. The next point is, 
how to ensure the presence of this reserve, and what is the critical 
moment. The battle-field is the critical moment in each phase 
of every campaign — not the mere chance locality on which a 
combat takes place, but the decisive arena on which the strategic 
consequences of all pre-existing conditions of national cohesion, 
national organization and of civilization are focussed. It is indeed 
the judgment-seat of nature, on which the right of the race to 
survive in the struggle for existence is weighed and measured in 
the most impartial scales. 

Before, however, the final decision of the battle-field can be 
attained, a whole series of subordinate decisions have to be fought 
out, success in each of which conditions the result of the next 
series of encounters. Every commanding officer of cavalry 
thus finds himself successively called on to win a victory locally 
at any cost, and the question of economy of force does not concern 
him at all. Hence the same fundamental rules apply to all 
cavalry combats, of whatever magnitude, and condition the whole 
of cavalry tactics. Broadly speaking, if two cavalries of approxi- 
mately equal mobility manoeuvre against each other in open 
country, neither side can afford the loss of time that dismounting 
to fight on foot entails. Hence, assuming that at the outset 
of a campaign each side aims at securing a decisive success, both 
seek out an open plain and a mounted charge, sword in hand, 
for the decision. When the speed and skill of the combatants 
are approximately equal, collision ensues simultaneously along 
parallel fronts, and the threat of the overlapping line is the 
principal factor in the decision. The better the individual 
training of man and horse the less will be the chances of unsteadi- 
ness or local failures in execution, and the less the need of reserves; 
hence the force which feels itself the most perfect in the individual 
efficiency of both man and horse (on which therefore the whole 
ultimately depends) can afford to keep fewer men in reserve and 
can thus iifcrease the width of its first line for the direct collision. 
Careful preparation in peace is therefore the first guarantee of 
success in action. This means that cavalry, unlike infantry, 
cannot be expanded by the absorption of reserve men and horses 
on the outbreak of hostilities, but must be maintained at war 
strength in peace, ready to take the field at a moment's notice, 
and this is actually the standard of readiness attained on the 
continent of Europe at the present day. 

Further, uniformity of speed is the essential condition for the 
execution of closed charges, and this obviously cannot be assured 
if big men on little horses and small men on big horses are in- 
discriminately mixed up in the same units. Horses and men 
have therefore been sorted out everywhere into three categories, 
light, medium and heavy, and in periods when war was practically 
chronic, suitable duties have been allotted to each. It is clear, 
on purely mechanical grounds, that the greater the velocity of 
motion at the moment of collision the greater will be the chances 
of success, and this greater speed will be on the side of the bigger 
horses as a consequence of their longer stride. On the other hand, 
these horses, by reason of their greater weight, are used up much 
more rapidly than small ones. Hence, to ensure the greater 
speed at the moment of contact, it is necessary to save them as 



much as possible to keep them fresh for the shock only, and this 
has been the practice of all great cavalry leaders all over the world, 
and has only been departed from under special circumstances, 
as by the Germans in France in 1870, when their cavalry prac- 
tically rode everywhere unopposed. 

Collisions, however, must be expected by every body of 
troops large or small; hence each regiment — ultimately each 
squadron — endeavours to save its horses as far as this is com- 
patible with the attainment of the special object in view, and this 
has led everywhere and always to a demand for some inter- 
mediate arm, less expensive to raise and maintain than cavalry 
proper, and able to cover the ground with sufficient rapidity 
and collect the information necessary to ensure the proper 
direction of the cavalry commands. Originally this intermediate 
force received the designation of dragoons; but since under 
pressure of circumstances during long periods of war these 
invariably improved themselves into cavalry and became 
permanent units in the army organization, fresh names have 
had to be invented for them, of which Mounted Infantry and 
Mounted Rifles are the latest, and every improvement in firearms 
has led to an increased demand for their services. 

It is now relatively easy to trace out the considerations which 
should govern the employment of his cavalry by the officer 
commanding a force of the three arms. Assuming for purposes 
of illustration an army numerically weak in cavalry, what course 
will best ensure the presence of the greatest number of sabres at 
the decisive point, i.e. on the battle-field? To push out cavalry 
screens far to the front will be to court destruction, nor is the 
information they obtain of much real service unless the means 
to act upon it at once is at hand. This can only be supplied 
economically by the use of strong advanced guards of infantry, 
and such supplementary security and information as these may 
require will be best supplied by mounted infantry, the sacrifice 
of whom will disturb least the fighting integrity of the whole army. 

Imagine an army of 300,000 men advancing by five parallel 
roads on a front of 50 m., each column (60,000 men, 2 army corps) 
being covered by a strong advance guard, coming in contact with 
a similarly constituted army movfcig in an opposite direction. 
A series of engagements will ensue, in each of which the object 
of the local commander will be to paralyse his opponent's 
will-power by a most vigorous attack, so that his superior 
officer following him on the same road will be free to act as he 
chooses. The front of the two armies will now be defined by a 
line of combats localized - each about a comparatively small 
area, and between them will be wide gaps which it will be the 
chief business of the directing minds on either side to close by 
other troops as soon as possible. Generally the call will be made 
upon the artillery for this purpose, since they can cover the re- 
quired distances far more rapidly than infantry. Now, as artillery 
is powerless when limbered up and always very vulnerable on 
the flanks of the long lines, a strong cavalry escort will have to 
be assigned to them which, trotting forward to screen the march, 
will either come in contact with the enemy's cavalry advancing 
with a similar object, or themselves find an'opportunity to catch 
the enemy's guns at a disadvantage. These are opportunities 
for the cavalry, and if necessary it must sacrifice itself to turn 
them to the best account. The whole course of the battle 
depends on success or failure in the early formation of great lines 
of guns, for ultimately the victor in the artillery duel finds 
himself in command of the necessary balance of guns which are 
needed to prepare the way for his final decisive infantry attack. 
If this latter succeeds, then any mounted men who can gallop 
and shoot will suffice for pursuit. If it fails, no cavalry, however 
gallant, has any hope of definitely restoring the combat, for 
against victorious infantry, cavalry, now as in the past, can but 
gain a little time. This time may indeed be worth the price at 
which it can be bought, but it will always be more economical 
to concentrate all efforts to prevent the emergency arising. 

After the Franco-German War much was written about the 
possibility of vast cavalry encounters to be fought far in advance 
of the main armies, for the purpose of obtaining information, 
and ideas were freely mooted of wide-flung raids traversing 



CAVALRY 



569 



the enemy's communications, breaking up his depots, reserve 
formations, &c. But riper consideration has relegated these 
suggestions to the background, for it is now evident that such 
expeditions involve the dissemination of force, not its concentra- 
tion. Austria and France for example would scarcely throw their 
numerically inferior cavalry against the Germans, and nothing 
would suit them better than that the latter should hurl their 
squadrons against the frontier guards, advanced posts, and, 
generally, against unbeaten infantry; nor indeed would the 
Germans stultify their whole strategic teaching by weakening 
themselves for the decisive struggle. It follows therefore that 
cavalry reconnaissance duties will be strictly local and tactical, 
and that arrangements will be made for procuring strategical 
information by wireless telegraphy, balloons, motor cars, bicycles, 
&c, and that on the whole that nation will be best served in 
war which has provided in peace a nucleus of mounted infantry 
capable of rapid expansion to fill the gap which history shows 
always to have existed between the infantry and the cavalry. 
Such troops need not be organized in large bodies, for their 
mission is to act by " slimness," not by violence. They must 
be the old " verlorene Haufe " (anglice, " forlorn hope ") of 
former days, men whose individual bravery and decision is of 
the highest order. But they can never become a " decision- 
compelling arm," though by their devotion they may well hope 
to obtain the grand opportunity for their cavalry, and share with 
them in harvesting the fruits of victory. 

The great cavalry encounters of forty to sixty squadrons on 
either side, which it has been shown must arise from the necessity 
of screening or preventing the formation of the all-important 
artillery lines, will take their form mainly from the topographical 
conditions of the district, and since on a front of 60 to 100 m. 
these may vary indefinitely, cavalry must be trained, as 
indeed it always has been, to fight either on foot or on horseback 
as occasion requires. In either case, thoroughness of preparation 
in horsemanship (which, be it observed, includes horsemastership) 
is the first essential, for in the end victory will rest with the side 
which can put in the right place with the greatest rapidity the 
greatest number of sabres or rifles. In the case of rifles there is 
a greater margin of time available and an initial failure is not 
irremediable, but the underlying principle is the same in either 
case; and since it is impossible to foretell exactly the conditions 
of the collision, all alike, according to the class to which they 
belong, must be brought up to the highest standard, for this alone 
guarantees the smooth and rhythmical motion required for 
covering long distances with the least expenditure of physical 
and nervous strength on the part both of horse and rider. As a 
consequence of successes gained in these preliminary encounters, 
opportunities will subsequently arise for the balance of fresh or 
rallied squadrons in hand to ride home upon masses of infantry 
disorganized and demoralized by the combined fire of infantry 
and artillery, and such opportunities are likely to be much more 
numerous at the outbreak of future wars than they have been in 
the past, because the enormous gain in range and rapidity of 
fire enables a far greater weight of metal to be concentrated on 
any chosen area within a given time. It cannot be too often 
reiterated that cavalry never has ridden over unshaken infantry 
of average quality by reason of its momentum alone, but that 
every successful cavalry charge has always owed its issue to a 
previously acquired moral superiority which has prevented the 
infantry from making adequate use of their means of defence. 
Nor will such charges entail greater losses than in the past, for, 
great though the increase of range of modern infantry weapons 
has been, the speed and endurance of cavalry has increased in 
a yet higher ratio; whereas in Napoleon's days, with an extreme 
range for musketry of 1000 yds., cavalry were expected only 
to trot 800 yds. and gallop for 200, nowadays with an extreme 
infantry range of under 4000 yds., the cavalry are trained to 
trot for 8000 yds. and gallop for 2000. 

Neither the experiences in South Africa nor those in Manchuria 
seriously influenced the views of the leading cavalry experts 
as above outlined, for the conditions of both cases were entirely 
abnormal. No nation in western Europe can afford to mount 



the whole of its able-bodied manhood, nor, with the restricted 
area of its possessions, could repeat the Boer tactics with useful 
effect; in Manchuria, the theatre of operation was so far roadless, 
and the motives of both combatants so distinct from any con- 
ceivable as a basis for European strategy, that time was always 
available to construct entrenchments and obstacles physically 
insuperable to mounted arms. In western Europe, with its ex- 
treme development of communications, such tactics are impractic- 
able, and under the system of compulsory service which is in 
force in all nations, an early decision must be sought at any cost. 
This motive imposes a rapid-marching campaign in the Napole- 
onic style, and in such warfare there is neither time nor energy 
available for the erection of extemporised fortresses. Victory 
must therefore fall to the side that can develop the greatest 
fire power in the shortest time. The greatest factor of fire power 
is the long artillery lines, and as cavalry is the one arm which by 
its mobility can hamper or prevent the formation of such lines, on 
its success in this task all else must depend. Hence both sides 
will concentrate every available horse and man for this special 
purpose, and on the issue of the collisions this mutual concentra- 
tion must entail will hang the fate of the battle, and ultimately 
of the nation. But the cavalry which will succeed in this task 
will be the one in which the spirit of duty burns brightest, and the 
oath of allegiance, renewed daily on the cross of the sword, is 
held in the highest esteem. 

Organization. — The existing organization of cavalry throughout 
the civilized world is an instance of the " survival of the fittest " 
in an extreme form. The execution of the many manoeuvres 
with the speed and precision which condition success is only 
possible by a force in which, as Frederick the Great said, " every 
horse and trooper has been finished with the same care that a 
watchmaker bestows upon each wheel of the watch mechanism." 
Uniformity of excellence is in fact the keystone of success, and 
this is only attainable where the mass is subdivided into groups, 
each of which requires superintendence enough to absorb the 
whole energy of an average commander. Thus it has been found 
by ages of experiment that an average officer, with the assistance 
of certain subordinates to whom he delegates as much or as little 
responsibility as he pleases, finds his time fully occupied by the 
care of about one hundred and fifty men and horses, each in- 
dividual of which he must understand intimately, in character, 
physical strength and temper, for horse and man must be 
matched with the utmost care and judgment if the best that each 
is capable of is to be attained. The fundamental secret of the 
exceptional efficiency attained by the Prussian cavalry lies in 
the fact that they were the first to realize what the above implies. 
After the close of the Napoleonic Wars they made their squadron 
commanders responsible, not only for the training of the com- 
batants of their unit, but also for the breaking in of remounts 
and the elementary teaching of recruits as well, and in this manner 
they obtained an intimate knowledge of their material which is 
almost unattainable by British officers owing to the conditions 
entailed by foreign service and frequent changes of garrisons. 

Further, to obtain the maximum celerity of manoeuvre with 
the minimum exertion of the horses, the squadron requires to 
be subdivided into smaller units, generally known as troops, 
and experience has shown that with 128 sabres in the ranks 
(the average strength on parade, after deducting sick and young 
horses, and the N.c. officers required as troop guides, &c.) four 
troops best satisfy all conditions; as, with this number, the 
squadron will, under all circumstances of ground and surroundings, 
make any change of formation in less time and with greater 
accuracy than with any other number of subdivisions. The size 
of the unit next above the squadron, the regiment, is again fixed 
by the number of subordinates that an average commander can 
control, and the universal experience of all arms has settled this 
as not less than four and not more than eight. Experiments 
with eight and even ten squadrons have been tried both in 
Austria and Prussia, but only exceptional men have succeeded 
in controlling such large bodies effectively, and in the end the 
normal has been fixed at four or five squadrons in quarters, 
and three or four in the field. Of these, the larger number 



57© 



CAVALRY 



is undoubtedly preferable, for, with the work of the quarter- 
Boaster and the adjutant to supervise, in addition, the regimental 
commander is economically applied to the best advantage. 
The essential point, however, is that the officer commanding the 
regiment does not interfere in details, but commands his four 
squadron commanders, his quartermaster, and his adjutant, 
and holds them absolutely responsible for results. 

There is no unity of practice in the constitution of larger units. 
Brigades vary according to circumstances from two regiments 
to four, and the composition of divisions fluctuates similarly. 
The custom in the German cavalry has been to form brigades of 
two regiments and divisions of three brigades, but this practice 
arose primarily from the system of recruiting and has no tactical 
advantage. The territory assigned to each army corps provides 
men and horses for two regiments of cuirassiers or lancers (classed 
as heavy in Germany), two of dragoons, and two of hussars, 
and since it is clearly essential to ensure uniformity of speed and 
endurance within those units most likely to have to work together, 
it was impossible to mix the different classes. But the views now 
current as to the tactical employment of cavalry contemplate 
the employment not only of divisions but of whole cavalry 
corps, forty to sixty squadrons strong, and these may be called 
on to fulfil the most various missions. The farthest and swiftest 
reconnaissances are the province of light cavalry, i.e. hussars, 
the most obstinate attack and defence of localities the task 
of dragoons, and the decisive charges on the battle-field essentially 
the duty of the heavy cavalry. It seems probable then that 
the brigade will become the highest unit the composition of which 
is fixed in peace, and that divisions and corps will be put together 
by brigades of uniform composition, and assigned to the several 
sections of the theatre of war in which each is likely to find the 
most suitable field for its special character. This was the case 
in the Frederician and Napoleonic epochs, when efficiency and 
experience in the field far outweighed considerations of ad- 
ministration and convenience in quarters. 

Hitherto, horse artillery in Europe has always formed an 
integral portion of the divisional organization, but the system 
has never worked well, and in view of the technical evolution 
of artillery material is no longer considered desirable. As it is 
always possible to assign one or more batteries to any particular 
brigade whose line of march will bring it across villages, defiles, 
&c. (where the support of its fire will be essential), and on 
the battle-field itself responsibility for the guns is likely to prove 
more of a hindrance than a help to the cavalry commander, 
it is probable that horse artillery will revert to the inspection of 
its own technical officers, and that the sole tie which will be re- 
tained between it and the cavalry will be in the batteries being 
informed as to the cavalry units they are likely to serve with in 
war, so that the officers may make themselves acquainted with 
the idiosyncrasies of their future commanders. The same course 
will be pursued with the engineers and technical troops required 
for the cavalry, but it seems probable that, in accordance with a 
suggestion made by Moltke after the 1866 campaign, the supply 
columns for one or more cavalry corps will be held ready in peace, 
and specially organized to attain the highest possible mobility 
which modern technical progress can ensure. 

The general causes which have led to the differentiation of 
cavalry into the three types — hussars, dragoons and heavy — 
have already been dealt with. Obviously big men on little horses 
cannot manoeuvre side by side with light men on big horses. 
Also, since uniformity of excellence within the unit is the prime 
condition of efficiency, and the greatest personal dexterity is 
required for the management of sword or lance on horseback, 
a further sorting out became necessary, and the best light weights 
were put on the best light horses and called hussars, the best 
heavy weights on the best heavy horses and called lancers, the 
average of either type becoming dragoons and cuirassiers. In 
England, the lance not being indigenous and the conditions of 
foreign service making adherence to a logical system impossible, 
lancers are medium cavalry, but the difference of weights carried 
and type of horses is too small to render these distinctions of 
practical moment. In Germany, where every suitable horse 



finds its place in the ranks and men have no right of individual 
selection, the distinctions are still maintained, and there is a 
very marked difference between the weights carried and the 
types of men and horses in each branch, though the dead weight 
which it is still considered necessary to carry in cavalries likely 
to manoeuvre in large masses hardly varies with the weight of 
the man or size of the horse. 

Where small units only are required to march and scout, the 
kit can be reduced to a minimum, everything superfluous for 
the moment being carried on hired transport, as in South Africa. 
But when 10,000 horsemen have to move by a single road all 
transport must be left miles to the rear, and greater mobility 
for the whole is attained by carrying upon the horse itself the 
essentials for a period of some weeks. Still, even allowing for 
this, it is impossible to account for the extraordinary load that 
is still considered necessary. In India, the British lancer, 
averaging n st. per man, could turn out in marching order at 
17 st. 8 lb (less forage nets). In Germany, the hussar, averaging 
10 st. 6 lb, rode at 18 st., also without forage, and the cuirassier 
at 21 st. to 22 st. Cavalry equipment is, in fact, far too heavy, 
for in the interests of the budgets of the departments which supply 
saddlery, harness, &c, everything is made so as to last for many 
years. Cavalry saddles fifty years old frequently remain in good 
condition, but the losses in horse-flesh this excessive solidity 
entails are ignored. The remount accounts are kept separately, 
and few realize that in war it is cheaper to replace a horse than 
a saddle. In any case, the armament alone of the cavalry soldier 
makes great demands on the horses. His sword and scabbard 
weigh about 4 lb, carbine or rifle 7 lb to 9 lb, 120 rounds of 
ammunition with pouches and belts about 12ft, lance about 5 lb, 
and two days' forage and hay at the lowest 40 lb, or a gross total 
of 70 lb or s st., which with n st. for the man brings the total 
to 16 st.; add to this the lightest possible saddle, bridle, cloak 
and blanket, and 17 st. 8 lb is approximately the irreducible 
minimum. It may be imagined what care and management 
of the horses is required to enable them under such loads to 
manoeuvre in masses at a trot, and gallop for distances of 5 m. 
and upwards without a moment for dismounting. 

Reconnaissance and Scouting. — After 1870 public opinion, 
misled by the performances of the " ubiquitous Uhlan " and 
disappointed by the absence of great cavalry charges on the field 
of battle, came somewhat hastily to the conclusion that the day 
of " shock tactics " was past and the future of cavalry lay in 
acting as the eyes and ears of the following armies. But, as 
often happens, the fact was overlooked that the German cavalry 
screen was entirely unopposed in its reconnoitring expeditions, 
and it was not till long afterwards that it became apparent how 
very little these far-flung reconnaissances had contributed to 
the total success. 

It has been calculated by German cavalry experts that not 
1 % of the reports sent in by the scouts during the advance from 
the Saar to the Meuse, August 1870, were of appreciable import- 
ance to the headquarters, and that before the orders based upon 
this evidence reached the front, events frequently anticipated 
them. Generally the conviction has asserted itself, that it is 
impossible to train the short-service soldiers of civilized nations 
sufficiently to render their reports worth the trouble of collating, 
and if a few cases of natural aptitude do exist nothing can ensure 
that these particular men should be sufficiently well mounted to 
transmit their information with sufficient celerity to be of im- 
portance. It is of little value to a commander to know that 
the enemy was at a given spot forty-eight hours previously, 
unless the sender of the report has a sufficient force at his disposal 
to compel the enemy to remain there; in other words, to attack 
and hold him. Cavalry and horse artillery alone, however, cannot 
economically exert this holding power, for, whatever their effect 
against worn-out men at the close of a great battle, against fresh 
infantry they are relatively powerless. Hence, it is probable 
that we shall see a revival of the strategic advanced guard of all 
arms, as in the Napoleonic days, which will not only reconnoitre, 
but fix the enemy until the army itself can execute the manoeuvre 
designed to effect his destruction. The general situation of the 



CAVALRY 



Plate I. 



pr^ 






< -2i 



!■'» « '' '• '» \/ ) 3 I ,- '; ', \ 'i > : 1 I ' 



1 



f- ? 



ri#TO$!&& ^ 



' '. " v ■ $ 



«^P3£$« 



5*.; 








V. SW. 



Plate II, 



CAVALRY 






.• ■&*>*•' 






"'^mm^ "aJ 



!U' -^-" *£*J*sS*;-. ; - ! 





BATTLE OF STAFFARDA, 1690. (From a contemporary engraving.) 



m^*****-^ 



L1*RS&j 




ACTION ON" THE BULGANAK, 1854. (From a lithograph by W. Simpson.) 




GERMAN GUARD DRAGOONS. (Photo, Cebriider Haeckel.) 



CAVALRY 



57i 



enemy's masses will, in western Europe, always be sufficiently 
fixed by the trend of his railway communications, checked by 
reports of spies, newspapers, &c, for, with neutral frontiers 
everywhere within a few hours' ride for a motor cyclist, anything 
approaching the secrecy of the Japanese in Manchuria is quite 
unattainable, and, once the great masses begin to move, the 
only " shadowing " which holds out any hope of usefulness is 
that undertaken by very small selected parties of officers, per- 
fectly mounted, daring riders, and accustomed to cover distances 
of 100 m. and upwards. These will be supported by motor cars 
and advanced feelers from the field telegraphs, though probably 
the motor car would carry the eye-witness to his destination in 
less time than it would take to draft and signal a complete report. 
Tactical scouting, now as always, is invaluable for securing the 
safety of the marching and sleeping troops, and brigade, divisional 
and corps commanders will remain dependent upon their own 
squadrons for the solution of the immediate tactical problem 
before them; but, since both sides will employ mounted men to 
screen their queries, intelligence will generally only be won
by fighting, and the side which can locally develop a marked fire 
superiority will be the more likely to obtain the information it 
requires. In this direction the introduction of the motor car 
and of cyclists is likely to exercise a most important influence, 
but, whatever may be the conveyance, it must be looked upon 
as a means of advance only, never of retreat. The troops thus 
conveyed must be used to seize villages or defiles about which 
the cavalry and guns can manoeuvre. 

Formations and Drill. — Cavalry, when mounted, act exclusively 
by " shock " or more precisely by " the threat of their shock," 
for the immediate result of collision is actually decided some 
instants before this collision takes place. Experience has shown 
that the best guarantee for success in this shock is afforded by 
a two-deep line, the men riding knee to knee within each squadron 
at least. Perfect cavalry can charge in larger bodies without 
intervals between the squadrons, but, ordinarily, intervals of 
about 10 yds. between adjacent squadrons are kept to localize 
any partial unsteadiness due to difficulties of ground, casualties, 
&c. The obvious drawbacks of a two-deep line are that it 
halves the possible extent of front, and that if a front-rank 
horse falls the rear-rank horse generally tumbles over it also. 
To minimize the latter evil, the charge in two successive lines, 
150 to 200 yds. apart, has often been advocated, but this has 
never stood the test of serious cavalry fighting; first, because 
when squadrons are galloping fast and always striving to keep 
the touch to the centre, if a horse falls the adjacent horses close 
in with such force that their sidelong collision may throw down 
more and always creates violent oscillation; and secondly, be- 
cause owing to the dust raised by the first rank the following 
one can never maintain its true direction. It is primurily to 
avoid the danger and difficulty arising from the dust that the 
ranks in manoeuvre are closed to within one horse's length, as, 
when moving at speed, the rear rank is past before the dust has 
time to rise. 

Of all formations, the line is the most difficult to handle, and, 
particularly, to conceal — hence various formations in column are 
necessary for the preliminary manoeuvres requisite to place the 
squadrons in position for the final deployment previous to the 
charge. Many forms of these columns have been tried, but, 
setting aside the columns intended exclusively for marching 
along roads, of which " sections " (four men abreast) is most 
usual in England, only these survive:— 

Squadron column. 

Double column of squadrons. 

Half column. 

In squadron column, the troops of the squadron formed are in 
line one behind the other at a distance equal to the front of the 
troop in line. The ideal squadron consists of 128 men formed 
in two ranks giving 64 files, and divided into four troops of 16 files 
—a larger number of troops makes the drill too complicated, a 
smaller number makes each troop slow and unhandy. When 
the squadron is weak, therefore, the troop should still be main- 
tained as near 16 files as possible, the number of troops being if 



necessary reduced. Thus with only 32 files, two troops of 16 
files would be better than four of only 8 files. 

All other formations of the regiment or brigade are funda- 
mentally derived from the squadron column, only varying with 
the order in which the squadrons are grouped, and the intervals 
which separate them. Thus the regiment may move in line erf 
squadron columns at close interval, i.e. n paces apart or in 
double column as in the diagram. To form line for the charge, 
the squadrons open out, still in column, to full interval, i.e. 
the width they occupy when in line; and then on the command 
" Line to the front," each troop moves up to its place in line as 
shown in the diagram. When in line a large body of cavalry 
can no longer vary its direction without sacrificing its appearance 
of order, and as above pointed out, it is this appearance of order 
which really decides the result of the chaige before the actual 
collision. Since, however, the enemy's movements may compel 
a change, an intermediate formation is provided, known as the 



Regiment in Line 



Line of Squadron Columns (Close interval) 



I— £-1 i-i^-n i-J^-1 i^J-i 

csfea g^i c^H cslb 

c£b 1^3 r=5=°i i=£i ' 

C^ f^i i^i r^. 



mU mkt 



Double Column 



J^JVJ%J$ 1 Orlg. the - i 



Half Column 
Manoeuvres 



*&(&. 



j Original Una 



Half Column.. HB 

Intermediate... ...|H1IHI 

Final Formation. ..£33 



*=_!£._ J%.'± 



■ — ^E^ fr ^ T ^ fr <°"0- u " 3fc-j|£--%_^£ 'Original lint 



" half column." When this formation is ordered, the troops 
within each squadron wheel half right or left, and each squadron 
is then able to form into column or line to the front as circum- 
stances demand, or the whole line can be formed into column of 
troops by continuing the wheel and in this formation gallop out 
into a fresh direction, re-forming line .by a simple wheel in the 
shortest possible time., 

Bibliography.— G. H. Elliot, Cavalry Literature (1893); v. 
Bismarck, Uses and Application of Cavalry in War (1818, English 
translation by Lieut.-Col. Beamish, 1855) ; G. T. Denison, A History 
of Cavalry (1877); Prince Kraft zu Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen, Letters 
on Cavalry and Conversations on Cavalry (English translations, 1880 
and 1892); Colonel Mitchell, Considerations on Tactics (1854) and 
Thoughts on Tactics and Organization (1838) ; E. Nolan, Cavalry, its 
History and Tactics (1855); Roemer, Cavalry, its History, Manage- 
ment and Uses (New York, 1863); Maitland, Notes on Cavalry 
(1878) ; F. N. Maude, Cavalry versus Infantry and Cavalry, its Past 
and Future; C. von Schmidt, Instructions for the Training, Employ^ 
ment and Leading of Cavalry (English translation, 1881); V. Verdy 
du Vernois, The Cavalry Division (1873); Maj.-Gen. Walker, The 
Organization and Tactics of the Cavalry Division (1876); C. W. 
Bowdler Bell, Notes on the German Cavalry Regulations of 1886; 
F. de Brack, Light Cavalry Outposts (English translation) ; Dwyer, 
Seats and Saddles (1869); J. Jacob, Views and Opinions (1837); 
F. Hoenig, Die Kavallerie als Schlachtenkdrper (1884); Sir Evelyn 
Wood, Achievements of Cavalry (1893); H. T. Siborne, Wattrlot 
Letters; Desbriere and Sautai, La Cavalerie de 1740 & 1789 (1806); 
Warnery, Remarques sur la cavalerie (1781); v. Canitz, Histoire des 
exploits et des vicissitudes de la cavalerie prussienne dans les campagnes 
de Frederic II (1849); Cherfils, Cavalerie en campagne (1888), 



572 



CAVAN 



Sendee de stireti stratSgique de la cavalerie (1874); Bonie, Tactique 
francaise, cavalerie en campagne, cavalerie au combat (1887-1888) ; 
Foucart, Campagne de Pologne, queries de la cavalerie, nov. 1806-
jan. 1807 (1882), La Cavalerie pendant la campagne de Prusse (1880) ; 
De Galliffet, Projet d 'instruction sur I'amploi de la cavalerie en liaison 
avec les autres armes (1880), Rapport sur les grandes manotuvres de 
cavalerie de 1870; Kaehler, Die preussische Reitersi 1806-1876 
(French translation, La Cavalerie prussienne de 1806 & 1876) ; Cavalry 
Studies (translated from the French of Bonie and the German of 
Kaehler, with a paper on U.S. cavalry in the Civil War) ; v.Bernhardi, 
Cavalry in Future Wars (English translation, 1906) ; P. S., Cavalry 
in the Wars of the Future (translated from the French by T. Formby, 
1905) ; D. Haig, Cavalry Studies (1907) ; v. Pelet Narbonne, Die 
Kavalleriedienst ( 1 90 1 ), Cavalry on Service (English translation, 1906) ; 
Erziehung vnd Fuhrung von Kavallerie. The principal cavalry 
periodicals are the Revue de cavalerie, the Kavalleristische Monatshefte 
(Austrian), the Cavalry Journal (British), and the Journal of the U.S. 
Cavalry Association. (F. N. M.) 

CAVAN, a county in the province of Ulster, Ireland, bounded 
N. by Fermanagh and Monaghan, E. by Monaghan and Meath, 
S. by Meath, Westmeath and Longford, and W> by Longford 
and Leitrim. The area is 477,399 acres, or about 746 sq. m. 
The surface of the county is uneven, consisting of hill and dale, 
without any great extent of level ground, but only in its northern 
extremity attaining a mountainous elevation. The barony of 
Tullyhaw, bordering on Fermanagh, a wild dreary mountain 
district, known as the kingdom of Glan or Glengavlin, contains 
the highest land in the county, reaching 2188 ft. in Cuilcagh, the 
place of inauguration for the Maguires, chieftains of Fermanagh, 
held in veneration by the peasantry, in connexion with legends 
and ancient superstitions. The remainder of the county is not 
deficient in wood, and contains numerous lakes, generally of 
small dimensions, but of much beauty, especially Lough Oughter, 
with its many inlets and islands formed by the Erne river, 
between the towns of Cavan and Killashandra. The county 
also shares with other counties the waters of Lough Gowna and 
Lough Sheelin, in which, as elsewhere in the county, the fishing 
is good. The chief river in the county is the Erne, which 
Originates in Lough Scrabby, one of the minor sheets of 
water communicating with Lough Gowna on the borders of 
Longford. The river takes a northerly direction by Killashandra 
and Belturbet, being enlarged during its course by. the Annalee 
and other smaller streams, and finally enters Lough Erne near 
the northern limit of the county. The other watefs, consisting 
of numerous lakes and their connecting streams, are mostly 
tributary to the Erne. A copious spring called the Shannon 
Pot, at the foot of the Cuilcagh Mountain, in the barony of 
Tullyhaw, is regarded as the source of the river Shannon. The 
Blackwater, a tributary of the Boyne, also rises in this county, 
near Bailieborough. Several mineral springs exist in this county, 
the chief of which is near the once frequented village of Swanlin- 
bar. In the neighbourhood of Belturbet, near the small lake of 
Annagh, is a carbonated chalybeate spring. There are several 
other springs of less importance; and the small Lough Leighs, 
or Lough-an-Leighaghs, which signifies the healing lake, on the 
summit of a mountain between Bailieborough and Kingscourt, 
is celebrated for its antiscorbutic properties. The level of this 
lake never varies. It has no visible supply nor vent for its 
discharge; nor is it ever frozen during the severest winters. 

Geology. — This elongated county includes on the north-west some 
of the highland of Millstone Grit and Coal-Measures that rises above 
Lough Allen. The beds below these are referred to the English 
Yoredale series, and include some flaggy sandstones. It is on this 
series that the Shannon rises, under the high outlier of grit on 
Cuilcagh. The Carboniferous Limestone then stretches down to 
Cavan town, a bold outlier of the higher strata being left above 
Ballyconnell. The river Erne forms, in the limestone area, a char- 
acteristic series of expansions and loops, with islands between them, 
known as Lough Oughter. At this point we pass on to the axis 
of underlying Silurian strata that runs from Longford to Donagha- 
dee in Co. Down, and the country becomes hilly and irregular, 
culminating about Cross Keys on the old Dublin coach-road. A 
patch of granite, indicating doubtless a core like that exposed at 
Newry, is seen in a hollow at Crossdoney. On the south side of this 
axis of older rocks, we reach Carboniferous shale and limestone at 
Lough Sheelin, and here enter on the great central plain. The 
extreme south-east of the county includes part of the Triassic outlier 
of Kingscourt. The coal-seams and concretions of clay-ironstone 
in the north-west area resemble those mentioned under the head of 



Co. Roscommon. Anthracite, probably of inorganic origin, has 
been mined without permanent success in the Silurian beds near 
Kilnaleck, and is traceable freely, associated with veins of quartz 
and haematite, at Ballyjamesduff a little farther east. 

Climate and Industries. ^-The climate suffers from the damp- 
ness arising from the numerous lakes and the nature of the soil, 
and from the boisterous winds which frequently prevail, more 
especially in the higher districts. The soil is generally a stiff 
clay, cold and watery, but capable of much improvement by 
drainage, for which its undulating surface affords facilities. 
Only about one-sixteenth of the total area is quite barren. 
Agriculture makes little progress; the extent of the farms being 
generally small. Oats and potatoes are the principal crops. 
Flax, once of some importance, is almost neglected. In the 
mountainous parts, however, where the land is chiefly under 
grazing, the farms are larger, and in stock-raising the county 
is progressing. 

Cavan is not a manufacturing county. The bleaching of 
linen and the distillation of whisky are both carried on to a 
small extent, but the people are chiefly employed in agri- 
cultural pursuits and in the sale of home produce. The soil in 
those districts not well adapted for tillage is peculiarly favourable 
for trees. The woods were formerly very considerable, and the 
timber found in the bogs is of large dimensions; but plantations 
are now chiefly found in demesnes, where they are extensive. 

The county is not well served by railways. The Great 
Northern from Clones to Cavan, and the Midland Great Western 
from Mullingar in Westmeath to Cavan, form a through line 
from north to south. The Great Northern has branches to 
Belturbet from Ballyhaise, and to Cootehill from Ballybay; 
the Midland Great Western has a branch to Killashandra, and 
from Navan in Meath to Kingscourt, just within Cavan. The 
Cavan & Leitrim railway starts from Belturbet and soon leaves 
the county to the west. 

Population and Administration. — The population (111,917 in 
1891; 97,541 in 1901), of which about 80% are Roman Catholics, 
shows a decrease among the most serious of the Irish counties, 
and emigration returns are among the heaviest. The population 
is almost wholly rural, the only towns being the small ones of 
Cavan (pop. 2822, the county town), Cootehill (1509), Belturbet 
(1587) and Bailieborough (1004). The county is divided into 
eight baronies, and contains thirty-two parishes and parts of 
parishes. It is almost entirely within the Protestant and 
Roman Catholic dioceses of Kilmore. The assizes are held at 
Cavan, and quarter sessions are held at Cavan, Bailieborough, 
Cootehill and Ballyconnell. Before the Union the county re- 
turned six members to the Irish parliament, two for the county at 
large, and two for each of the boroughs of Cavan and Belturbet; 
but since that period it has been represented in the imperial par- 
liament by two members only, for the east and west divisions. 

History and Antiquities. — At the period of the English settle- 
ment, and for some centuries afterwards, this district was known 
as the Brenny, being divided between the families of O'Rourke 
and O'Reilly; and its inhabitants, protected by the nature of 
the country, long maintained their independence. In 1579 
Cavan was made shire ground as part of Connaught, and in 1584 
it was formed into a county of Ulster by Sir John Perrott, and 
subdivided into seven baronies, two of which were assigned to 
Sir John O'Reilly and three to other members of the family; 
while the two remaining, possessed by the septs of Mackernon 
and Magauran, and situated in the mountains bordering on 
O'Rourke's country, were left subject to their ancient tenures 
and the exactions of their Irish lord. The county subsequently 
came within the scheme for the plantation of Ulster under 
James I. The population is less mixed in race than in most 
parts of Ulster, being generally of Celtic extraction. Some few 
remains of antiquity remain in the shape of cairns, raths and 
the ruins of small castles, such as Cloughoughter Castle on an 
island (an ancient crannog) of Lough Oughter. Three miles 
from the town of Cavan is Kilmore, with its cathedral, a plain 
erection containing a Romanesque doorway brought from the 
abbey of Trinity Island, Lough Oughter. The bishopric dates 



CAVAN— CAVE 



573 



from about 1450. A portion of a round tower is seen in the 
churchyard of the parish of Drumlane at Belturbet. 

CAVAN, a market-town and the county town of Co. Cavan, 
Ireland, near the centre of the county, in the west parliamentary 
division, 85I m. N.W. of Dublin by the Midland Great Western 
railway, and the terminus of a branch of the Great Northern 
railway from Clones. Pop. of urban district (1901), 2822. It is 
on one of the tributary streams of the Annalee river, in a broad 
valley surrounded on every side by elevated ground, with 
picturesque environs, notably the demesnes of Farnham and of 
Kilmore, which belongs to the bishops of that diocese. Cavan 
has no buildings of antiquarian interest, but the principal county 
institutions are here, and the most conspicuous building is the 
grammar school, founded by Charles I. It was rebuilt in 18 19 
on an eminence overlooking one of the main entrances into 
the town, and is capable of accommodating 100 resident 
pupils. The college of St Patrick is near the town. Cavan has 
some linen trade, and a considerable retail business is transacted 
in the town. A monastery of Dominican friars, founded by 
O'Reilly, chieftain of the Brenny, formerly existed here, and 
became the burial-place of the celebrated Irish general, Owen 
O'Neill, who died as is supposed by poison, in 1649, at Clough- 
oughter. There was also the castle of the O'Reillys, but this 
and all other antiquities of the town were swept away during 
the violent and continuous feuds to which the country was 
subjected. In 1600 the chief portion of the town was burned 
by the Enniskilleners under General Wolseley, when they routed 
a body of James II. 's troops under the duke of Berwick. 

CAVANILLES, ANTONIO J0S6 (1745-1804), Spanish botanist, 
was born at Valencia on the 16th of January 1745. He was 
educated at the university of that town, and in 1777 went to 
Paris, where he resided twelve years, engaged in the study of 
botany. In 1801 he became director of the botanic gardens 
at Madrid, where he died on the 4th of May 1804. In 1 785-1 786 
he published Monadelphiae Classis Dissertationes X., and in 1791 
he began to issue Icones et descriptiones plantarum Hispaniae. 

His nephew, Antonio Cavanilles (1805-1864), was a dis- 
tinguished advocate, and the author of a history of Spain, 
published at Madrid in 1860-1864. 

CAVATINA (Ital. diminutive of cavala, the producing of tone 
from an instrument, plural cavatine), originally a short song 
of simple character, without a second strain or any repetition 
of the air. It is now frequently applied to a simple melodious 
air, as distinguished from a brilliant aria, recitative, &c, and 
often forms part of a large movement or scena in oratorio or 
opera. 

CAVE, EDWARD (1691-1754), English printer, was born at 
Newton, Warwickshire, on the 27th of February 1691. His 
father, Joseph Cave, was of good family, but the entail of the 
family estate being cut off, he was reduced to becoming a cobbler 
at Rugby. Edward Cave entered the grammar school of that 
town, but was expelled for robbing the master's hen-roost. After 
many vicissitudes he became apprentice to a London printer, and 
after two years was sent to Norwich to conduct a printing house 
and publish a weekly paper. While still a printer he obtained 
a place in the post office, and was promoted to be clerk of the 
franks. He was at this time engaged in supplying London news- 
letters to various country papers; and his enemies, who had 
twice summoned him before the House of Commons for breach 
of privilege, now accused him of opening letters to obtain his 
news, and he was dismissed the service. With the capital which 
he had saved, he set up a small printing office at St John's Gate, 
Clerkenwell, which he carried on under the name of R. Newton. 
He had long formed a scheme of a magazine " to contain the 
essays and intelligence which appeared in the two hundred 
half-sheets which the London press then threw off monthly," 
and had tried in vain to persuade some publisher to take it up. 
In 1731 he himself put it into execution, and began the Gentle- 
man's Magazine (see Periodicals), of which he was the editor, 
under the pseudonym " Sylvanus Urban, Gent." The magazine 
had a large circulation and brought a fortune to the projector. 
In 1732 he began to issue reports of the debates in both Houses 



of Parliament. He commissioned friends to note the speeches, 
which he published with the initial and final letters of personal 
names. In 1738 Cave was censured by parliament for printing 
the king's answer to an address before it had been announced by 
the speaker. From that time he called his reports the debates 
of a " parliament in the empire of Lilliput " (see Reporting). 
To piece together and write out the speeches for this publication 
was Samuel Johnson's first literary employment. In 1747 Cave 
was reprimanded for publishing an account of the trial of Lord 
Lovat, and the reports were discontinued till 1752. He died on 
the 10th of January 1 754. Cave published Dr Johnson's Rambler, 
and his Irene, London and Life of Savage, and was the subject of 
a short biography by him. 

CAVE, WILLIAM (163 7-1 7 13), English divine, was born at 
Pickwell in Leicestershire. He was educated at St John's 
College, Cambridge, and successively held the livings of Islington 
(1662), of All-Hallows the Great, Thames Street, London (1679), 
and of Isleworth in. Middlesex (1690). Dr Cave was chaplain 
to Charles II., and in 1684 became a canon of Windsor. The two 
works on which his reputation principally rests are the Apostolici, 
or History of Apostles and Fathers in the first three centuries 
of the Church (1677), and Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia 
Liter aria (1688). The best edition of the latter is the Clarendon 
Press, 1740-1743, which contains additions by the author and 
others. In both works he was drawn into controversy with 
Jean le Clerc, who was then writing his Bibliotheque universelle, 
and who accused him of partiality. He wrote several other 
works of the same nature which exhibit scholarly research and 
lucid arrangement. He is said to have been a good talker and 
an eloquent preacher. His death occurred at Windsor on the 
4th of July 1713. 

CAVE (Lat. cavea, from cavus, hollow), a hollow extending 
beneath the surface of the earth. The word " cavern " (Lat. 
caverna) is practically a synonym, though a distinction is some- 
times drawn between sea caves and inland caverns, but the term 
" cave " is used here as a general description. Caves have 
excited the awe and wonder of mankind in all ages, and have 
been the centres round which have clustered many legends and 
superstitions. They were the abode of the sibyls and the nymphs 
in Roman mythology, and in Greece they were the temples of 
Zeus, Pan, Dionysus, Pluto and the Moon, as well as the places 
where the oracles were delivered at Delphi, Corinth and Mount 
Cithaeron. In Persia they were connected with the obscure 
worship of Mithras. Their names frequently are survivals of the 
superstitious ideas of antiquity, as, for example, the Fairy, 
Dragon's, or Devil's Caves of France and Germany. Long after 
the Fairies and Little Men had forsaken the forests and glens of 
Germany, they dwelt in their palaces deep in the Harz Mountains, 
in the Dwarfholes, &c, whence they came from time to time into 
the upper air. 

The Seven Sleepers of Ephesus slept their long sleep in a cave. 
The hills of Granada are still believed by the Moorish children to 
contain the great Boabdil and his sleeping host, who will awake, 
when an adventurous mortal invades their repose, to restore the 
glory of the Moors in Spain. 

Caves have been used in all ages by mankind for habitation, 
refuge and burial. In the Old Testament we read that when Lot 
went up out of Zoar he dwelt in a cave with his two daughters. 
The five kings of the Canaanites took refuge from Joshua, and 
David from Saul, in the caves of Palestine, just as the Aquitani 
fled from Caesar to those of Auvergne, and the Arabs of Algeria 
to those of Dahra, where they were suffocated by Marshal Pelissier 
in 1845. In Central Africa David Livingstone discovered vast 
caves in which whole tribes found security with their cattle and 
household stuff. 

The cave of Machpelah may be quoted as an example of their 
use as sepulchres, and the rock-hewn tombs of Palestine and of 
Egypt and the Catacombs of Rome probably owe their existence 
to the ancient practice of burial in natural hollows in the rock. 
We might therefore expect to find in them most important 
evidence as to the ancient history of mankind, which would 
reach long beyond written record; and since they have always 



574 



CAVE 



been used by wild beasts as lairs we might reasonably believe also 
that their exploration would throw light upon the animals which 
have in many cases disappeared from the countries which they 
formerly inhabited. The labours of Buckland, Pengelly, Falconer, 
Lartet and Christy, and Boyd Dawkins have added an entirely 
new chapter to the history of man in Europe, as well as established 
the changes that have taken place in the European fauna. The 
physical history of caves will be taken first, and we shall then pass 
on to the discoveries relating to man and the lower animals which 
have been made in them of late years. 

Physical History. — The most obvious agent in hollowing out 
caves is the sea. The set of the currents, the force of the breakers, 
the grinding of the shingle inevitably discover the weak places in 
the cliff, and leave caves as one of the results of their work, 
modified in each case by the local conditions of the rock. Those 
formed in this manner are easily recognized from their floors 
being rarely much out of the horizontal; their entrances are all 
in the same plane, or in a succession of horizontal and parallel 
planes, if the land has been elevated at successive times. From 
their inaccessible position they have been rarely occupied by 
man. Among them Fingal's Cave, on the island of Staffa, off the 
south-west coast of Scotland, hollowed out of columnar basalt, 
is perhaps the most remarkable in Europe. In volcanic regions 
also there are caves formed by the passage of lava to the surface 
of the ground, or by the expansion of steam and gases in the lava 
while it was in a molten state. They have been observed in the 
regions round Vesuvius and Etna, in Iceland and Teneriffe. We 
may take as an example the Grotto del Cane (" cave of the dog "), 
near Pozzuoli, a few miles to the south-west of Naples, remark- 
able for the flow of carbonic acid from crevices in the floor, which 
fills the lower part of the cave and suffocates any small animal, 
such as a dog, immersed long enough in it. 

The most important class of caves, however, and that which 
immediately demands our notice, is that composed of those 
which have been cut out of calcareous rocks by the action of 
carbonic acid in the rain-water, combined with the mechanical 
friction of the sand and stones set in motion by the streams 
which have, at one time or another, flowed through them. They 
occur at various levels, and are to be met with wherever the 
strata are sufficiently compact to support a roof. Those of 
Brixham and Torquay and of the Eifel are in the Devonian 
limestone; those of Wales, Somerset, the Pennine chain, Ireland, 
the central and northern counties of Belgium, Saxony, and 
Westphalia, of Maine and Anjou, of Virginia and Kentucky, are 
in that of the Carboniferous age. The cave of Kir kdale in York- 
shire, and most of those in Franconia and Bavaria, penetrate 
Jurassic limestones. The Neocomian and Cretaceous limestones 
contain most of the caverns of France, rendered famous by the 
discovery of the remains of the cave-men along with the animals 
which they hunted; as well as those of the Pyrenees, the Alps, 
Sicily, Greece, Dalmatia, Carniola and Palestine. The cave of 
Lunelviel near Montpellier is the most important of those which 
have been hollowed in limestones of the Tertiary age. They are 
also met with in rocks composed of gypsum; in Thuringia, for 
example, they occur in the saliferous and gypseous strata of the 
Zechstein, and in the gypseous Tertiary rocks of the neighbour- 
hood of Paris, as, for example, at Montmorency. 

Caves formed by the action of carbonic acid and the action of 
water are distinguished from others by the following characters. 
They open on the abrupt sides of valleys and ravines at various 
levels, and are arranged round the main axes of erosion, just as the 
branches are arranged round the trunk of a tree. In a great many 
cases the relation of the valley to the ravine, and of the ravine to 
the cave, is so intimate that it is impossible to deny that all three 
have been produced by the same causes. The caves themselves 
ramify in the same irregular fashion as the valleys, and are to be 
viewed merely as the capillaries in the general valley system 
through which the rain passes to join the main channels. Some- 
times, as in the famous caves of Adelsberg, Kentucky, Wookey 
Hole in Somersetshire, the Peak in Derbyshire, and in many in 
the Jura, they are still the passages of subterranean streams; 
but very frequently the drainage has found an outlet at a lower 



level, and the ancient watercourses have been deserted. These 
in every case present unmistakable proof that they have been 
traversed by water in the sand, gravel and clay which they 
contain, as well as in the worn surfaces of the sides and bottom. 
In all districts where there are caves there are funnel-shaped 
depressions of various sizes called pot-holes or swallow-holes, 
or betoires, " chaldrons du diable," " marmites des geants," or 
" katavothra," in which the rain is collected before it disappears 
into the subterranean passages. They are to be seen in all stages, 
some being mere hollows which only contain water after excessive 
rain, while others are profound vertical shafts into which the 
water is continually falling. Gaping Ghyl, 330 ft., and Helln Pot 
in Yorkshire, 300 ft. deep, are examples of the latter class. The 
cirques described by M. Desnoyers belong to the same class as the 
swallow-holes. 

The history of swallow-holes, caves, ravines and valleys in 
calcareous strata may be summed up as follows: — The calcareous 
rocks are invariably traversed by joints or lines of shrinkage, 
which are lines of weakness by which the direction of the drainage 
is determined; and they are composed to a large extent of 
carbonate of lime, which is readily exchanged into soluble 
bicarbonate by the addition of carbonic acid. The rain in its 
passage through the air takes up carbonic acid, and it is still 
further charged with it in percolating through the surface soil in 
which there is decomposing vegetable matter. As the raindrops 
converge towards some one point, determined by some local 
accident on the surface, and always in a line of joint, the carbonic 
acid attacks the carbonate of lime with which it comes into 
contact, and thus a funnel is gradually formed ending in the ver- 
tical joint below. Both funnel and vertical joint below are being 
continually enlarged by this process. This chemical action goes 
on until the free carbonic acid is used up. The subterranean 
passages are enlarged in this manner, and what was originally an 
insignificant network of fissures is developed into a series of halls, 
sometimes as much as from 80 to 100 ft. high. These results are 
considerably furthered by the mechanical friction of the pebbles 
and sand hurried along by the current, and by falls of rock from 
the roof produced by the removal of the underlying strata. In 
many cases the results of this action have produced a regular 
subterranean river system. The thick limestones of Kentucky, 
for example, are traversed by subterranean waters which collect 
in large rivers, and ultimately appear at the surface in full power. 
The river Axe, near Wells, the stream flowing out of the Peak 
Cavern at Castleton, Derbyshire, that at Adelsberg in Carniola, 
flow out of caverns in full volume. The river Styx and the waters 
of Acheron disappear in a series of caverns which were supposed 
to lead down to the infernal regions. 

If the direction of the drainage in the rock has been altered, 
either by elevations such as those with which the geologist is 
familiar, or by the opening out of new passages at a lower level, 
these watercourses become dry, and present us with the caves 
which have afforded shelter to man and the wild animals from the 
remotest ages, sometimes high up on the side of a ravine, at other 
times close to the level of the stream at the bottom. 

Caves, as a general rule, are as little effected by disturbances of 
the rock as the ravines and valleys, which have been formed, in 
the main, irrespective of the lines of fault or dislocation. 

We must now examine what happens to the bicarbonate of 
lime which has been formed by the action of the acid on the 
limestone. If a current of air play upon the surface of the water, 
the carbonic acid, which floats up the lime, so to speak, is given 
off and the insoluble carbonate is deposited, and as a result of this 
action we have the elaborate and fantastic stony incrustations 
termed stalactites and stalagmites. The water percolating 
through the rock covers the sides of the cavern with a stalactitic 
drapery, and if a line of drops persistently falls from the same 
point to the floor, the calcareous deposit gradually descends from 
the roof, forming in some cases stony tassels, and in others long 
columns which are ultimately united to the calcareous boss 
formed by the plash of the water on the floor. The surface also of 
the pools is sometimes covered over with an ice-like sheet of 
stalagmite, which shoots from the sides, and sometimes forms a 



GAVE 



57.5 



solid and firm floor when the water on which it was supported has 
disappeared. Sometimes the drops form a little calcareous basin, 
beautifully polished inside, which contains small pearl-like 
particles of carbonate of lime, polished by friction one against the 
other. The most beautiful stalactitic caves in Great Britain are 
those of Cheddar in Somerset, Caldy Island and Poole's Cavern 
at Buxton. A portion only of the carbonate of lime is thus 
deposited in the hollows of the rock from which it was taken; the 
rest is carried into the open air by the streams, in part deposited 
on the sides and bottom, forming tufa and the so-called petrifica- 
tions, and partly being conveyed down to the sea to be ultimately 
secreted in the tissues of the Mollusca, Echinodermata and 
Foraminif era. Through these it is again collected in a solid form , 
and in the long course of ages it is again lifted up above the level 
of the water as limestone rock, and again undergoes the same 
series of changes. Thus the cycle of carbonate of lime is a never- 
ending one from the land to the ocean, from the ocean to the land, 
and so it has been ever since the first stratum of limestone was 
formed out of the remains of the animals and plants of the sea. 
The rate of the accumulation of stalagmite in caverns is neces- 
sarily variable, since it is determined by the presence of varying 
currents of air. In the Ingleborough cavern a stalagmite, 
measured in 1830 and in 1873, is growing at the rate of -2946 in. 
per annum. It is obvious, therefore, that the vast antiquity of 
deposits containing remains of man underneath layers of stalag- 
mite cannot be inferred from a thickness of a few inches or even of 
a few feet. 

The intimate relation which exists between caves and ravines 
renders it extremely probable that many of the latter have been 
originally subterranean watercourses, which have been unroofed 
by the degradation of the rock. In all limestone districts ravines 
are to be found continued in the same direction as the caves, 
and the process of atmospheric erosion may be seen in the fallen 
blocks of stone which generally are to be met with at the 
mouths of the caverns. In illustration of this the valley and caves 
of Weathercote, in Yorkshire, may be quoted, or the source of 
the Axe at Wookey; and the ravine formed in this way has very 
frequently been widened out into a valley by the action of 
subaerial waste, or by the, grinding of glaciers through it during 
the glacial stage of the Pleistocene period. 

For further details as to the physical history of caverns we must 
refer the reader to the works quoted at the-end of this article, by 
E. A. Martel, the intrepid explorer of most of the large European 
caves, including those of Great Britain and Ireland. The history of 
the Glaciires or Ice-caves will be found in Browne's Ice Caves in 
France and Switzerland. 

Classification. — The caves which have offered shelter to the 
mammalia are classified according to their contents, and are of 
various ages, ranging from the Pliocene to the present day. 

(1) Those containing the Pliocene mammalia belong to that age. 

(2) Those with the remains of the mammoth, woolly rhinoceros 
and other extinct species, or with paleolithic man (see Archaeo- 
logy), are termed Pleistocene. These are sometimes called 
Quaternary, under the mistaken idea that "they belong to an age 
succeeding the Tertiary period. (3) Those which contain the 
remains of the domestic animals in association with the remains 
of man either in the Neolithic, Bronze or Iron stages of civiliza- 
tion are termed Prehistoric. (4) The fourth group consists 
of those which can be brought into relation with the historic 
period, and are therefore termed Historic. 

The Pliocene Caves. — It is a singular fact, only to be explained 
by the vast denudation of the earth's surface since the Pliocene 
Age, that only one cave referable to that age has as yet been 
discovered, that at Doveholes near Buxton, Derbyshire, described 
by Boyd Dawkins in 1903 {Quart. Joum. Geol, Soc). The 
cave consists of a large horizontal chamber and a small passage, 
connected with a, swallow-hole close by, and exposed in the 
working face of a quarry in 1901, at a depth of about 40 ft. from 
the surface. The locality is in the limestone plateau, 1158 ft. 
high, which forms the divide between the waters flowing into the 
Mersey on the west and the Humber on the east. Both swallow- 
bole and cave were comDletely blocked up with debris, and the 



latter was filled with red and yellow clay, horizontally stratified 
and containing pebbles of sandstone from the neighbouring ridge 
of Axe Edge, and bones and teeth of fossil mammals, some 
waterworn and others without traces of transport by water. 
All the mammals belong to well-known species found in the 
Pliocene strata of East Anglia, and in Auvergne and Italy. 
Among them were the sabre-toothed lion (Machairodus crena- 
tidens), the hyena of Auvergne, the mastodon, and the southern 
elephant (E. meridionalis) , and rhinoceros (R. Etruscus), and 
Steno's horse. Most of the bones had evidently been gnawed 
by hyenas and accumulated in one of their dens, and had after- 
wards been carried by water into the chambers deep down in 
the rock, where they were found. Since that time the general 
level of the district has been lowered by denudation to an extent 
of more than 230 ft., and all the hyena dens destroyed with the 
Pliocene surface not only in this district but generally over the 
world... In this case a covering of limestone some 270 ft. thick, 
including the depth from the present surface, protected the 
remains from the denuding forces. 

The Pleistocene Caves. — The search after ebur fossile or unicorns' 
horn, or in other words the fossil bones which ranked high in the 
materia medica of the 16th and 17th centuries, led to the discovery 
of the ossiferous caverns of the Harz Mountains, and of Hungary 
and Franconia. The famous cave of Gailenreuth in the last of 
these districts was explored by Goldfuss in 1810. The bones of . 
the hyena, lion, wolf, fox and stag, which it contained, were 
identified by Baron Cuvier, and some of the skulls have been 
proved by Busk to belong to the grizzly bear. They were as- 
sociated with the bones of the reindeer, horse and bison, as well as 
with those of the great cave bear. These discoveries were of very 
great interest, because they established the fact that the above 
animals had lived in Germany in ancient times. The first bone 
cave systematically explored in England was one at Oreston near 
Plymouth in 18 16, which proved that an extinct species of 
rhinoceros (R. leptorhinus) lived in that district. Four years 
later the famous hyena den at Kirkdale in Yorkshire was explored 
by Buckland. He brought forward proof that it had been in- 
habited by hyenas, and that the broken and gnawed bones of the 
mammoth, rhinoceros, stag, bison and horse belonged to animals 
which had been dragged in for food. He pointed out that all 
these animals had lived in Yorkshire in ancient times, and that 
it was impossible for the carcases of the rhinoceros, hyena and 
mammoth to have been floated from tropical regions into the 
places where he found their bones. He subsequently investigated 
bone caves in Derbyshire, South Wales and Somerset, as well 
as in Germany, and published his Reliquiae Diluvianae in 1822, 
a work which laid the foundations of the new science of cave- 
hunting in this country. The well-known cave of Kent's Hole 
near Torquay furnished McEnery, between the years 1825 
and 1 84 1, with the first flint implements discovered in intimate 
association with the bones of extinct animals. He recognized 
the fact that they proved the existence of man in Devonshire 
while those animals were alive, but the idea was too novel to be 
accepted by his contemporaries. His discoveries have since been 
verified by the subsequent investigations carried on by Godwin 
Austen, and ultimately by the committee of the British Associa- 
tion, which worked for several years under the guidance of 
Pengelly. There are four distinct strata in the cave. 1st, The 
surface is composed of dark earth, and contains medieval 
remains, Roman pottery and articles which prove that it was 
in use during the Iron, Bronze and Neolithic Ages. 2nd, Below 
this is a stalagmite floor, varying in thickness from 1 to 3 ft., 
and covering (3rd) the red earth, which contained bones of the 
hyena, lion, mammoth, rhinoceros and other animals, in associa- 
tion with flint implements and an engraved antler, which proved 
man to have been an inhabitant of the cavern during the time of its 
deposition. 4th, Filling the bottom of the cave is a hard breccia, 
with the remains of bears and flint implements, in the main 
ruder than those found above; in some places it was no less than 
12 ft. thick. The most remarkable animal found in Kent's Hole 
is the sabre-toothed carnivore, Machairodus latidens of Owen. 
While the value of McEnery's discoveries was in dispute the 



57^ 



CAVE 



exploration of the cave of Brixham near Torquay in 1858 proved 
that man was coeval with the extinct mammalia, and in the 
following year additional proof was offered by the implements 
that were found in Wookey Hole. Similar remains have been 
met with in the caves explored since that time in Wales, and in 
England as far north as Derbyshire (Creswell), proving that 
palaeolithic man hunted the mammoth and rhinoceros and other 
extinct animals over the whole of southern and middle England. 

The discoveries in Kent's Hole and in the Creswell caves prove 
further that palaeolithic man was in two stages of civilization — the 
ruder or riverdrift man, with implements of the type found in 
the river gravels (see Archaeology; and Palaeolithic) being 
the older; and the more highly advanced, or the cave-man, 
mainly characterized by the better implements, and a singular 
facility in depicting animal life (as shown by the figure of a horse 
incised on the fragment of a bone found in the Creswell caves), 
being the newer. We may also conclude from the absence of 
palaeolithic implements from the glaciated regions in which most 
of these caves occur, that both riverdrift and cave-men dwelt in 
middle and northern Britain in the pre-glacial age, their remains 
being protected in the caverns from the denuding forces that 
removed all traces of their existence from the surface of the ground 
in glacial and post-glacial times. The riverdrift man is, however, 
proved to be post-glacial in southern and eastern England, by 
the occurrence of his implements in the river gravels of that age. 
Both these peoples inhabited southern England and the continent 
before and after the glacial period. The riverdrift man, whose 
implements occur in river deposits in middle and southern 
Europe, in Africa, Palestine and Hindustan, is everywhere in 
the same age of primitive barbarism, and has not as yet been 
identified with any living race. The cave-men are in a higher 
and more advanced stage, and led a life in Europe identical with 
that of the Eskimos in the Arctic regions. 

The Pleistocene Caves of the European Continent. — The re- 
searches of Mortillet have proved that the same two groups of 
cave-dwellers occur in the caves of France, the older being 
represented by the Chelleen and Mousterien sections, and the 
newer by that of Solutre and La Madelaine. To the former 
belong the human remains found in the caverns of Spy and 
Neanderthal, which prove that the riverdrift man had " the most 
brutal of all known human skulls." To the latter we must 
assign all the caves and rock-shelters of Perigord, with the better 
implements, explored by Lartet and Christy in 1 863-1 864 in 
the valleys of the Vezere and Dordogne. These offer as vivid a 
picture of the life of the cave-men as that revealed of Italian 
manners in the 1st century by the buried cities of Herculaneum 
and Pompeii. The old floors of human occupation consist of 
broken bones of animals killed in the chase, mingled with 
rude implements and weapons of bone and unpolished stone, 
and with charcoal and burnt stones, which indicate the position 
of the hearths. Flakes without number, awls, lance-heads, 
hammers and saws made of flint rest pUe-mUe with bone needles, 
sculptured reindeer antlers, arrowheads and harpoons, and bones 
of the reindeer, bison, horse, ibex, Saiga antelope and musk 
sheep. These singular accumulations of debris mark the places 
where the ancient hunters lived, and are merely the refuse cast 
aside. The reindeer formed by far the greater portion of the 
food, and must have lived in enormous herds at that time in 
the centre of France. From this, as well as from the presence 
of the most arctic of the herbivores, the musk sheep, we may infer 
the severe climate of that portion of France at that time. Besides 
these animals the cave bear and lion have been met with in one, 
and the mammoth in five localities, and their remains bear 
marks of cutting or scraping which showed they fell a prey to 
the hunters. The most remarkable remains left behind in these 
refuse heaps are the sculptured reindeer antlers and figures 
engraved on fragments of schist and on ivory. A well-defined 
outline of an ox stands out boldly from one piece of antler; a 
second represents a reindeer kneeling down in an easy attitude 
with his head thrown up in the air so that the antlers rest on the 
shoulders, and the back forms an even surface for a handle, 
which is too small to be grasped by an ordinary European nana; 



in a third a man stands close to a horse's head, and on the other 
side of the same cylinder are two heads of bisons drawn with 
sufficient clearness to ensure recognition by any one who has 
seen that animal. On a fourth the natural curvature of one of 
the tines has been taken advantage of by the artist to engrave 
the head and the characteristic recurved horns of the ibex; 
and on a fifth horses are represented with large heads, up- 
right, dishevelled manes and shaggy ungroomed tails. The most 
striking figure is that of the mammoth engraved on a fragment 
of its own tusk; the peculiar spiral curvature of the tusk and the 
long mane, which are now not to be found in any living elephant, 
prove that the original was familiar to the eye of the artist, 
These drawings probably employed the idle hours of the hunter, 
and hand down to us the scenes which he witnessed in the chase. 
They are full of artistic feeling and are evidently drawn from 
life. The mammoth is engraved in its own ivory, and the reindeer 
and the stag on their respective antlers. Further researchej 
have revealed the fact that in Auvergne and in the Pyrenees the 
cave-men ornamented some of their caves with incised figures 
and polychrome frescoes of the wild animals. Riviere has dis- 
covered on the walls of the grotto of La Mouthe (Dordogne) 
three large hunting scenes, one with bisons and horses, a second 
representing a primitive hut, a bison, reindeer, ibex and mam- 
moth, and a third with a mammoth, hinds and horses. In 
the Pyrenees similar frescoes have been described by Cartailhac 
and Breuil. They are on the walls of the cavern and roof of 
Altamira, and on the walls of Marsoulas. The outlines have 
been engraved first, and afterwards filled in with colour in brown 
and red ochre and black oxide of manganese. 

The cave-men ranged over middle Europe as far south as the 
Pyrenees and the Alps, and inhabited the caverns of Belgium 
and Germany, Hungary and Switzerland. Their remains have 
not as yet been met with in southern Europe. They lived by 
hunting and fishing, they were fire users, and fit up the darkness 
of their caves with stone lamps filled with fat (Altamira) . They 
were clad in skins sewn together with sinews of reindeer or strips 
of intestines. They used huts as well as caves for habitation. 
They had a marvellous facility for drawing animal figures. 
They possessed no domestic animals, nor were they acquainted 
with spinning or with the potter's art. We have no evidence 
that they buried their dead — the interments, such as those of 
Aurignac, Les Eyzies and Mentone, most probably belonging to 
a later age. 

If these remains be compared with those of existing races, it 
will be found that the cave-men were in the same hunter stage 
of civilization as the Eskimos, and that they are unlike any other 
races of hunters. If they were not allied to the Eskimos by blood, 
there can be no doubt that they handed down to the latter their 
art and their manner of life. The bone needles, and many of 
the harpoons, as well as the flint spearheads, arrowheads and 
scrapers, are of precisely the same form as those now in use 
amongst the Eskimos. The artistic designs from the caves of 
France, Belgium and Switzerland, are identical in plan and 
workmanship with those of the Eskimos, with this difference only, 
that the hunting scenes familiar to the Palaeolithic cave-dwellers 
were not the same as those familiar to the inhabitants of the 
shores of the Arctic Ocean. Each represented the animals which 
he knew, and the whale, walrus and seal were unknown to the 
inland dwellers of Aquitaine, just as the mammoth, bison and 
wild horse are unknown to the Eskimos. The reindeer, which 
they both knew, is represented in the same way by both. The 
practice of accumulating large quantities of the bones of animals 
round their dwelling-places, and the habit of splitting the bones 
for the sake of the marrow, are the same in both. The hides were 
prepared with the same sort of instruments, and the needles with 
which they were sewn together are of the same pattern. The 
stone lamps were used by both. In both there was the same 
disregard of sepulture. All these facts can hardly be mere 
coincidences caused by both peoples leading a savage life under 
similar conditions. The conclusion, therefore, seems inevitable 
that, so far as we have any evidence of the race to which the 
r' cave-dwellers belong, that evidence points only in the direction 



CAVE 



577 



of the Eskimos. It is to a considerable extent confirmed by a con- 
sideration of the animals found in the caves. The reindeer and 
musk sheep afford food to the Eskimos now in the Arctic Circle, 
just as they afforded it to the cave-men in Europe; and both 
these animals have been traced by their remains from the 
Pyrenees to the north-east through Europe and Asia as far as 
the very regions in which they now live. The mammoth and 
bison also have been tracked by their remains in the frozen river 
gravels and morasses through Siberia as far as the American side 
of Bering Strait. Palaeolithic man appeared in Europe with the 
arctic mammalia, lived in Europe with them, and in all human 
probability retreated to the north-east along with them. 

There are refuse heaps in north-eastern Siberia containing the 
remains of the mammoth and woolly rhinoceros as well as the 
reindeer and musk sheep, which may be referred with equal 
justice to the cave-men or to the Eskimos. 

Ancient Geography of Europe. — The remains of man and the 
animals described in the preceding paragraphs have been intro- 
duced into the caves either by man or the wild beasts, or by 
streams of water, which may or may not now occupy their ancient 
courses; and the fact that the same species are to be met with in 
the caves of France, Switzerland and Britain implies that our 
island formed part of the continent, and that there were no 
physical barriers to prevent their migration from the Alps, as far 
to the north-west as Ireland. 

The same conclusion may be gathered from the exploration of 
caves in the south of Europe, which has resulted in the discovery 
of African species, in Gibraltar, Sicily and Malta. In the first of 
these the spotted hyena, the serval and Kaffre cat lie side by 
side with the horse, grizzly bear and slender rhinoceros (R. 
hptorhinus) — see Falconer's Palaeonto graphical Memoirs. To 
these African animals inhabiting the Iberian peninsula in the 
Pleistocene age, Lartet has added the African elephant and 
striped hyena, found in a stratum of gravel near Madrid, along 
with flint implements. The hippopotamus, spotted hyena and 
African elephant occur in the caves of Sicily, and imply that in 
ancient times there was a continuity of land between that spot 
and Africa, just as the presence of the Elephas antiquus proves 
the non-existence of the Straits of Messina during a portion, to 
say the least, of the Pleistocene age. A small species of hippo- 
potamus (H. Pentlandi) occurs in incredible abundance in the 
Sicilian caves. It has also been found in those of Malta along 
with an extinct pigmy elephant species (E. Melitensis). It has 
also been discovered in Candia and in the Peloponnese. For 
these animals to have found their way to these regions, a con- 
tinuity of land is necessary. The view advanced by Dr Falconer 
and Admiral Spratt, that Europe was formerly connected with 
Africa by a bridge of land extending southwards from Sicily, is 
fully borne out by these considerations. The present physical 
geography of the Mediterranean has been produced by a depres- 
sion of land to the amount of about 400 fathoms, by which the 
Sicilo-African and Ibero-African barriers have been submerged, 
and Crete and Malta separated from the South-European 
continent. It is extremely probable that this submergence took 
place at the same time that the adjoining sea-bottom was elevated 
to about the same amount so as to constitute that region now 
known as the Sahara. 

Pleistocene Caves of the Americas and Australia. — The Pleisto- 
cene caverns of the Euro- Asiatic continent contain the pro- 
genitors of the animals now alive in some parts of the Old World, 
the extinct forms being closely allied to those now living in the 
same geographical provinces. Those of Brazil and of Penn- 
sylvania present us with animals whose nearest analogues are 
to be found in North and South America, such as sloths, arma- 
dillos and agoutis. Those, again, of Australia present us with 
marsupials (metatheria) only, allied to, or identical with, those 
of that most ancient continent. The extinct forms in each case 
are mainly those of the larger animals, which, from their large 
size, and low fecundity, would be specially liable to be beaten 
in the battle for life by their smaller and more fertile contem- 
poraries, and less likely to survive those changes in their environ- 
ment which have undoubtedly taken place in the long lapse of 
v. 19 



ages. It is, therefore, certain that the mammalian life in the 
Old, New and Australian worlds, was as well marked out into 
geographical provinces in the Pleistocene age as at the present 
time, and that it has been continuous in these areas from that 
remote time to the present day. 

Prehistoric Caves of Neolithic Age in Europe. — The prehistoric 
caves are distinguished from Pleistocene by their containing 
the remains of domestic animals, and by the wild animals to 
which they have afforded shelter belonging to living species. 
They are divisible into three groups according to the traces of 
man which occur in them — into the Neolithic, Bronze and Iron 
Ages. 

The Neolithic caves are widely spread throughout Europe, 
and have been used as the habitations and tombs of the early 
races who invaded Europe from the East with their flocks and 
herds. The first of these systematically explored was at Perthi 
Chwareu, near the village of Llandegla, Denbighshire, in 1869. 
In the following years five others were discovered close by, as 
well as a second group in the neighbourhood of Cefn on the banks 
of the Elwy. They contained polished celts, flint flakes, rude 
pottery and human skeletons, along with the broken bones of 
the pig, dog, horse, Celtic shorthorn and goat. The remains of 
the wild animals belong to the wolf, fox, badger, bear, wild boar, 
stag, roe, hare and rabbit. Most of the bones were broken or 
cut, and the whole group was obviously an accumulation which 
resulted from these caves having been used as dwellings. They 
had subsequently been used for burial. The human skeletons 
in them were of all ages, from infancy to old age; and the inter- 
ments had been successive until each became filled. The bodies 
were buried in the contracted posture which is so characteristic 
of Neolithic interments generally. The men to whom these 
skeletons belonged were a short race, the tallest being about 
5 ft. 6 in., and the shortest 4 ft. 10 in.; their skulls are ortho- 
gnathic, or not presenting jaws advancing beyond a vertical line 
dropped from the forehead, in shape long or oval, and of fair 
average capacity. The face was oval, and the cheek bones 
were not prominent. Some of the individuals were characterized 
by a peculiar flattening of the shinbone (platycnemism), which 
probably stood in relation to the free action of the foot that was 
not hampered by the use of a rigid sole or sandal. This, however, 
cannot be looked upon as a race character, or.as a tendency 
towards a simian type of leg. These Neolithic cave-dwellers have 
been proved to be identical in physique with the builders of the 
cairns and tumuli which lie scattered over the face of Great 
Britain and Ireland. (See Thurnam, Crania Britannica.) They 
have also been met with abundantly in France. In the Caverne 
de 1'Homme Mort, for example, in the department of Lozere, 
explored in 1871, the association of remains was of precisely the 
same nature as those mentioned above, and the human skeletons 
were of the same small type. The same class of remains has also 
been discovered in Gibraltar, in the caves of Windmill Hill, and 
some others. The human remains examined "by Busk are of 
precisely the same type as those of Denbighshire. In the work 
of Don Manuel Gongora J. Martinez (Anliguedades prehistoricas 
de Andalusia, 1868), several interments are described in the cave 
of Murcielagos, which penetrates the limestone out of which the 
grand scenery of the southern Sierra Nevada has been to a great 
extent carved. In one place a group of three skeletons was met 
with, one of which was adorned with a plain coronet of gold, and 
clad in a tunic made of esparto grass finely plaited, so as to 
form a pattern like that on some of the gold ornaments in 
Etruscan tombs. In a second spot farther within, twelve 
skeletons formed a semicircle round one covered with a tunic 
of skin, and wearing a necklace of esparto grass, ear-rings of 
black stone, and ornaments of shell and wild boar tusk. There 
were other articles of plaited esparto grass, such as baskets and 
sandals. There were also flint flakes, polished-stone axes, 
implements of bone and wood, together with pottery of the same 
type as that from Gibraltar. The same class of remains have 
been discovered in the Woman's Cave, near Alhama de Granada. 
From the physical identity of the human remains in all these 
cases it maybe inferred that in the Neolithic Age a long-headed, 

IX 



57* 



GAVE 



small race inhabited the Iberian peninsula, extending through 
France, as far north as Britain, and to the north-west as far as 
Ireland — a race considered by Professor Busk " to be at the 
present day represented by at any rate a part of the population 
now inhabiting the Basque provinces." This identification of 
the ancient Neolithic cave-dwellers with the modern Basque- 
speaking inhabitant of the western Pyrenees is corroborated 
by the elaborate researches of Broca, Virchow and Thurnam 
on modern Basque skulls. It may, therefore, be concluded 
that in the Neolithic Age an Iberian population occupied the 
whole of the area mentioned above, inhabiting caves and burying 
their dead in caves and chambered tombs, and possessed of the 
same habits of life. The remains of the same small, oval- 
featured, long-headed race have been found in Belgium in the 
cave of Chauvaux, and they have been described by Sergi in 
southern Europe under the name of the Mediterranean race. 

There is no evidence that any other race except the Iberic 
buried their dead in the caves of Britain in the Neolithic Age. In 
Belgium, however, the exploration of the cave of Sclaigneaux 
by Soreil proves that broad-headed men of the type defined by 
Huxley and Thurnam as brachycephalic, and characterized by 
high cheek-bones, projecting muscles and large stature, the 
average height being 5 ft. 8-4 in. (Thurnam) , inhabited and buried 
their dead in the caves of that region. In France they occur 
in the sepulchral cave of Orrouy (Oise) in association with those 
of the Iberic type. They have also been met with in Gibraltar. 
This type is undistinguishable from the Celtic (Goidelic) or 
Gaulish, found so abundantly in the chambered tombs of the 
Neolithic Age in France. Both these ancient races are repre- 
sented at the present day by the Basques and Aquitanians of 
France and Spain, and by the Celts or Gauls of France, Britain and 
the Mediterranean border of Spain, their relative antiquity being 
proved by an appeal to their history and geographical distribution. 
For just as the earliest records show that the Iberic power ex- 
tended as far north as the Loire, and as far east as the Rhone, 
so we have proof of the gradual retrocession of the Iberic frontier 
southwards, under the attacks of the successive Celtic hordes, 
until ultimately we find the latter in possession of a considerable 
part of southern Spain, forming by their union with the con- 
quered the powerful nation of Celt-Iberi. The Iberians were in 
possession of the continent before they were dispossessed by the 
Goidels,and at a later time by the Brythons. They are recognized 
by Tacitus in Britain in the Silures of Wales; and they are still 
to be seen in the small, dark, lithe inhabitants of North Wales. 
The discovery of the characteristic skulls of both these races 
in the same family vault in the cave of Gop near Prestatyn, 
Flintshire, proves that the two races were mingled together in 
Britain as far back as the Bronze Age. 

From the present distribution of this non-Aryan race it is 
obvious that they were gradually pushed back westward by the 
advance of tribes coming from the East, and following those routes 
which were subsequently taken by the Low and High Germans. 

The exploration of the Grotta dei Colombi, in the island of 
Palmaria, overlooking the Gulf of Spezzia, in 1873, proves that 
the stories scattered through the classical writers, that the caves 
on the Mediterranean shores were inhabited by cannibals, are 
not altogether without foundation. In it broken and cut bones 
of children and young adults were found along with those of the 
goat, hog, fox, wolf, wild-cat, flint flakes, bone implements and 
shells perforated for suspension. 

Prehistoric Caves of Bronze and Iron Ages. — The extreme 
rarity of articles of bronze in the European caves implies that 
they were rarely used by the Bronze folk for habitation or burial. 
Bronze weapons mingled with gold ornaments have, however, 
been discovered in the Heatheryburn cave near Stanhope, Dur- 
ham, as well as in those of Kirkhead in Cartmell, in Thor's cave 
in Staffordshire, and the Cat Hole in Gower in Glamorganshire. 
In the Iberian peninsula the cave of Cesareda, explored by Signor 
Delgado, in the valley of the Tagus, contained bronze articles, 
associated with broken and cut human bones, as well as those of 
domestic animals, rendering it probable that cannibalism was 
practised in early times in that region. Busk believes, however, 



that the facts are insufficient to support the charge of cannibalism 
against the ancient Portuguese. 

Caves containing articles of iron, and therefore belonging to 
that division of the prehistoric age, are so unimportant that they 
do not deserve notice in this place. As man increased in civiliza- 
tion he* preferred to live in houses of his own building, and he 
no longer buried his dead in the natural sepulchres provided for 
him in the rock. 

Prehistoric caves have been rarely explored in extra- European 
areas. Among those which abound in Palestine, one in Mount 
Lebanon, examined by Canon Tristram, contained flint imple- 
ments along with charcoal and broken bones and teeth, some of 
which may be referred to a small ox, undistinguishable from the 
small short-horn, Bos longifrons. In North America the remains 
found by F. W. Putnam in the caves of Kentucky, consisting 
of moccasins, rudely-plaited cloth, and other articles, may be 
referred to the same division. 

Historic Caves in Britain. — The historic caves have only 
attracted notice in fairly recent years, and in Britain alone, 
principally through the labours of the Settle Cave Committee 
from the year 1869 to the present day. To them is due the 
exploration of the Victoria cave, which had been discovered and 
partially investigated as early as the year 1838. It consists of 
three large ill-defined chambers opening on the face of the cliff, 
1450 ft. above the sea, and filled with debris very nearly up to 
the roof. It presented three distinct eras of occupation — one 
by hyenas, which dragged into it rhinoceroses, bisons, mammoths, 
horses, reindeer and bears. This was defined from the next 
occupation, which is probably of the Neolithic Age, by a layer 
of grey clay, on the surface of which rested a bone harpoon and 
a few flint flakes and bones. Then after an interval of debris at 
the entrance was a layer of charcoal, broken bones, fragments 
of old hearths, and numerous instruments of savage life associated 
with broken pottery, Roman coins, and the rude British imita- 
tions of them, various articles of iron, and elaborate personal 
ornaments, which implied a considerable development of the 
arts. The evidence of the coins stamps the date of the occu- 
pation of the cave to be between the first half of the 5th 
century and the English conquest. Some of the brooches 
present a peculiar flamboyant and spiral pattern in relief, 
of the same character as the art of some of the illuminated 
manuscripts, as for example one of the Anglo-Saxon gospels at 
Stockholm, and of the gospels of St Columban in Trinity College, 
Dublin. It is mostly allied to that work which is termed by 
Franks late Celtic. From its localization in Britain and Ireland, 
it seems to be probable that it is of Celtic derivation; and if this 
view be accepted, there is nothing at all extraordinary in its being 
recognized in the illuminated Irish gospels. Ireland, in the 6th 
and 7th centuries, was the great centre of art, civilization and 
literature; and it is only reasonable to suppose that there would 
be intercourse between the Irish Christians and those of the west 
of Britain, during the time that the Romano-Celts, or Brit-Welsh, 
were being slowly pushed westwards by the heathen English 
invader. Proof of such an intercourse we find in the brief notice 
of the Annates Cam briae, in which Gildas, the Brit- Welsh historian, 
is stated to have sailed over to Ireland in the year a.d. 565. It 
is by no means improbable that about this time there was a Brit- 
Welsh migration into Ireland, as well as into Brittany. Objects 
with these designs found in Germany are probably directly or 
indirectly due to the Irish missionaries, who spread Christianity 
through those regions. The early Christian art in Ireland grew 
out of the late Celtic, and is to a great extent free from the in- 
fluence of Rome, which is stamped on the Brit- Welsh art of the 
same age in this country. 

Several other ornaments with enamel deserve especial notice. 
The enamel, composed of red, blue and yellow, has been inserted 
into the hollows in the bronze, and then heated so as to form a 
close union with it. They are of the same design as those which 
have been met with in late Roman tumuli in this country, and 
in places which are mainly in the north. They all belong to a 
class named late Celtic by Franks, and are considered by him to 
be of British manufacture. This view is supported by the only 



CAVEA-+CA¥ENDISH, G. 



579 



reference to the art of enamelling furnished by the classical 
writers. Philostratus, a Greek sophist in the court of Julia 
Domna, the wife of the emperor Severus, writes, " It is said that 
the barbarians living in the ocean pour these colours (those of 
horse-trappings) on heated bronze, and . that these adhere, 
grow as hard as stone, and preserve the designs that are made in 
them." It is worthy of remark that, since the emperor Severus 
built the wall which bears his name, marched in person against 
the Caledonians, and died at York, the account of the enamels 
may have reached Philostratus from the very district in which 
the Victoria Cave is situated. 

Associated with these were bronze ornaments inlaid with 
silver, and miscellaneous iron articles, among which was a Roman 
key. Remains of this kind have been met with in the Albert 
and Kelko caves in the neighbourhood, in that of Dowker- 
bottom near Arncliffe, in that of Kirkhead on the northern shore 
of Morecambe Bay, in Poole's Cavern near Buxton, and in Thor's 
Cave near Ashbourne, and over a wide area ranging from York- 
shire and the Lake district southwards into Somerset and Devon. 

List of Principal Animals and Objects found in Brit-Welsh 
Strata in Caves. 



Animals. 



Domestic— 

Canis familiaris. Dog . 

Sus scrofa. Pig 

Equus caballus. Horse . 
Bos longifrons. Celtic short-horn 
Capra hircus. Goat 
Wild— 

Canis vulpes. Fox .... 
Meles taxus. Badger 
Cervus elaphus. Stag . 
Cervus capreolus. Roe . 

Roman coins, or imitations 
Enamelled ornaments, in bronze 
Bronze ornaments, inlaid with 
silver ...... 

Iron articles 

Samian ware 

Black ware 

Bone spoon fibulae . . 
Bone combs . . . . 



o o 
0-° 



ui£ 



2 > 



& 



X 



It is obvious in all these cases that men accustomed to luxury 
and refinement were compelled, by the pressure of some great 
calamity, to flee for refuge to caves with whatever they could 
transport thither of their property. The number of spindle- 
whorls and personal ornaments imply that they were accom- 
panied by their families. We may also infer that they were cut 
off from the civilization to which they had been accustomed, 
because in some cases they extemporized spindle-whorls out of 
fragments of Samian ware, instead of using those which were 
expressly manufactured for the purpose. Why the Caves were 
inhabited is satisfactorily explained by an appeal to contem- 
porary history. In the pages of Gildas, in the Anglo-Saxon 
Chronicle, and in the Annates Cambriae, we have a graphic 
picture of that long war of invasion by which the inhabitants of 
the old Roman province of Britannia were driven back by the 
Jutes, Angles and Saxons, who crossed over with their families 
and household stuff: Slowly, and in the chances of a war which 
extended through three centuries, they were gradually pushed 
back into Cumberland, Wales and West Somerset, Devon and 
Cornwall. While this war was going on the coinage became 
debased and Roman coins afforded the patterns for the small 
bronze minimi, which are to be met with equally in these caves 
and in the ruins of Roman cities. As the tide of war rolled to the 
west, the English tongue and, until towards the close of the 
struggle, the worship of Thor and Odin supplanted the British 
tongue and the Christian faith, and a rude barbarism replaced 
what was left of the Roman civilization in the island. It is to 
this period that relics of this kind in the caves must be assigned. 
They are traces of the anarchy of those times, and complete the 



picture of the desolation of Britain, revealed by the ashes of the 
cities and villas that were burnt by the invader. They prove that 
the vivid account given by Gildas of the straits to which his 
countrymen were reduced was literally true. 

The shrines of Zeus in the Idaean and Dictaean caves have been 
explored by Halbher and Orsi {Antichita dell' anlro de Zeus Ideo) 
and by Arthur Evans and Hogarth {Journal of Hellenic Studies). 
These discoveries prove that the cult of Zeus began among the 
Mycenaean peoples some 2000 years B.C. according to Evans, and 
was practised far down into the later Greek times. They show 
that the Greeks are indebted to the Mycenaean peoples not 
only for their art, but for the chief of their divinities. 

Authorities. — 1. Britain: Boyd Dawkins, Cave-hunting (1874); 
Early Man (1880); Mattel, Irlande et cavernes anglaises (1897); 
Buckland, Reliquiae Diluvianae (1821); Brit. Assoc. Reports (1860- 
1875); Journ. Anthrop. Inst. (1870-1876); Quart. Geol. Journ. 
(1860-^1875); Pengelly, Trans. Devonshire Association. 2. The 
European Continent: Martel, Les AMmes (1894)* Cartailhac and 
Breuil, L' Anthropologic, xv., xvi.; Lartet and Christy, Reliquiae 
A'quitanicae; Internal. Congress of Prehistoric Archaeology; Marcel 
de Serres, Les Ossemens fossiles de Lunel Viel; Dupont, V Homme 
pendant les dges de la pierre dans les environs de Dinant-sur-Meuse; 
Schmerling, Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles decouverts dans les 
cavernes de Liege; Merk, Excavations at Kesserloch, transl. J. E. Lee 
(1876). For the chief American caves, see Luray Cavern, 
Mammoth Cave, Wyandotte Cave, Colossal Cavern, Jacob's 
Cavern. (W. B. D.) 

CAVEA, the Latin name given to the subterranean cells in 
which the wild beasts were confined prior to the combats in the 
Roman arena. The term is ; sometimes applied to the amphi- 
theatre (q.v.) itself. 

CAVEAT (Latin for " let him beware," from cavere), in law, a 
notice given by the party interested (caveator) to the proper 
officer of a court of justice to prevent the taking of a certain step 
without warning. It is entered in connexion with dealings in 
land registered in the land registry, with the grant of marriage 
licences, to prevent the issuing of a lunacy commission, to stay 
the probate of a will, letters of administration, &c. Caveat is also 
a term used in United States patent law (see Patents). 

Caveat emptor (" let the buyer beware ") is a maxim which 
implies that the responsibility for making a bad bargain over a 
purchase rests On the purchaser. In an ordinary contract for the 
sale of goods, there is no implied warranty or condition as to the 
quality or fitness for any particular purpose of the goods supplied, 
with certain exceptions, and, therefore, the buyer takes at his own 
risk. The maxim does not apply (a) where the buyer, expressly 
or by implication, makes known to the seller the particular 
purpose for which the goods are required, so as to show that the 
buyer relies on the seller's skill or judgment, and that the goods 
are of a description which it is in the course of the seller's business 
to supply; (b) where goods are bought by description from a 
seller who deals in goods of that description, for there is an 
implied condition that the goods are of merchantable quality, 
though if the buyer has actually examined the goods, there is no 
implied condition as regards defects which the examination ought 
to have revealed; (e) where the usage of trade annexes an implied 
warranty or condition to the goods as to their quality or fitness 
for a particular purpose. The maxim of caveat emptor is said to 
owe its origin to the fact that in early times sales of goods took 
place principally in market overt. (See further Sale of Goods.) 

CAVEDONE, JACOPO (1577-1660), Italian painter, born at 
Sassuolo in the Modenese, was educated in the school of the 
Caracci, and under them painted in the churches of Bologna. 
His' principal works are the " Adoration of the Magi," the 
" Four Doctors," and the " Last Supper "; and more especially 
the "Virgin and Child in Glory," with San Petronio and other 
saints, painted in 1614, and now in the Bolognese Academy. 
Cavedone became an assistant to Guido Reni in Rome; his art 
was generally of a subdued undemonstrative character, with 
rich Titianesque colouring. In his declining years his energies 
broke down after his wife had been accused of witchcraft, and 
after the death of a cherished son. He died in extreme poverty, 
in a stable at Bologna. : 

CAVENDISH, GEORGE (1500-1562?), English writer, the 
biographer of Cardinal Wolsey, was the elder son of Thomas 



5 8o 



CAVENDISH, H. 



Cavendish, clerk of the pipe in the exchequer, and his wife, 
Alice Smith of Padbrook Hall. He was probably born at his 
father's manor of Cavendish, in Suffolk. Later the family 
resided in London, in the parish of St Alban's, Wood Street, 
where Thomas Cavendish died in 1524. Shortly after this event 
George married Margery Kemp, of Spains Hall, an heiress, and 
the niece of Sir Thomas More. About 1527 he entered the service 
of Cardinal Wolsey as gentleman-usher, and for the next three 
years he was divided from his wife, children and estates, in the 
closest personal attendance on the great man. Cavendish was 
wholly devoted to Wolsey's interests, and also he saw in this 
appointment an opportunity to gratify his master-passion, a 
craving " to see and be acquainted with strangers, in especial 
with men in honour and authority." He was faithful to his 
master in disgrace, and showed the courage of the " loyal 
servitor." It is plain that he enjoyed Wolsey's closest confidence 
to the end, for after the cardinal's death George Cavendish was 
called before the privy council and closely examined as to 
Wolsey's latest acts and words. He gave his evidence so clearly 
and with so much natural dignity, that he won the applause 
of the hostile council, and the praise of being " a just and diligent 
servant." He was not allowed to suffer in pocket by his fidelity 
to his master, but retired, as it would seem, a wealthy man to 
his estate of Glemsford, in West Suffolk, in 1530. He was only 
thirty years of age, but his appetite for being acquainted with 
strange acts and persons was apparently sated, for we do not hear 
of his engaging in any more adventures. It is not to be doubted 
that Cavendish had taken down notes of Wolsey's conversation 
and movements, for many years passed before his biography 
was composed. At length, in 1557, he wrote it out in its final 
form. It was not, however, possible to publish it in the author's 
lifetime, but it was widely circulated in MS. Evidently one of 
these MSS. fell into Shakespeare's hands, for that poet made use 
of it in his King Henry VIII., although it is excessive to say, 
as Singer has done, that Shakespeare " merely put Cavendish's 
language into verse." The book was first printed in 1641, in a 
garbled text, and under the title of The Negotiations of Thomas 
Wolsey. The genuine text, from contemporary MSS., was given 
to the world in 1810, and more fully in 1815. Until that time 
it was believed that the book was the composition of George 
Cavendish's younger brother William, the founder of Chatsworth, 
who also was attached to Wolsey. Joseph Hunter proved this 
to be impossible, and definitely asserted the claim of George. 
The latter is believed to have died at Glemsford in or about 1562. 
The intrinsic value of Cavendish's Life of Cardinal Wolsey has 
long been perceived, for it is the sole authentic record of a multi- 
tude of events highly important in a particularly interesting 
section of the history of England. Its importance as a product 
of biographical literature was first emphasized by Bishop 
Creighton, who insisted over and over again on the claim of 
Cavendish to be recognized as the earliest of the great English 
biographers and an individual writer of particular charm and 
originality. He writes with simplicity and with a certain vivid 
picturesqueness, rarely yielding to the rhetorical impulses which 
governed the ordinary prose of his age. (E. G.) 

CAVENDISH, HENRY (1731-1810), English chemist and 
physicist, elder son of Lord Charles Cavendish, brother of the 
3rd duke of Devonshire, and Lady Anne Grey, daughter of 
the duke of Kent, was born at Nice in October 1731. He was 
sent to school at Hackney in 1742, and in 1749 entered Peter- 
house, Cambridge, which he left in 1753, without taking a degree. 
Until he was about forty he seems to have enjoyed a very mode- 
rate allowance from his father, but in the latter part of his life he 
was left a fortune which made him one of the richest men of his 
time. He lived principally at Clapham Common, but he had also 
a town-house in Bloomsbury, while his library was in a house 
in Dean Street, Soho; and there he used to attend on appointed 
days to lend the books to men who were properly vouched for. 
So methodical was he that he never took down a volume for his 
own use without entering it in the loan-book. He was a regular 
attendant at the meetings of the Royal Society, of which he 
became a fellow in 1760, and he dined every Thursday with the 



club composed of its members. Otherwise he had little inter- 
course with society; indeed, his chief object in life seems to have 
been to avoid the attention of his fellows. With his relatives 
he had little intercourse, and even Lord George Cavendish, 
whom he made his principal heir, he saw only for a few minutes 
once a year. His dinner was ordered daily by a note placed on 
the hall-table, and his women servants were instructed to keep 
out of his sight on pain of dismissal. In person he was tall and 
rather thin; his dress was old-fashioned and singularly uniform, 
and was inclined to be shabby about the times when the precisely 
arranged visits of his tailor were due. He had a slight hesitation 
in his speech, and his air of timidity and reserve was almost 
ludicrous. He was never married. He died at Clapham on the 
24th of February 1810, leaving funded property worth £700,000, 
and a landed estate of £8000 a year, together with canal and 
other property, and £50,000 at his bankers. 

Cavendish's scientific work is distinguished for the wideness 
of its range and for its extraordinary exactness and accuracy. 
The papers he himself published form an incomplete record 
of his researches, for many of the results he obtained only 
became generally known years after his death; yet in spite of 
the absence of anything approaching self-advertisement he 
acquired a very high reputation within his own country and 
abroad, recognized by the Institute of France in 1803 when it 
chose him as one of its eight foreign associates. Arsenic formed 
the subject of his first recorded investigation, on which he was 
engaged at least as early as 1764, and in 1766 he began those 
communications to the Royal Society on the chemistry ol gases, 
which are among his chief titles to fame. The first {Phil. Trans., 
1766) consists of "Three papers containing experiments on 
Factitious Airs," dealing mostly with " inflammable air " 
(hydrogen), which he was the first to recognize as a distinct 
substance, and " fixed air " (carbon dioxide). He determined 
the specific gravity of these gases with reference to common air, 
investigated the extent to which they are absorbed by various 
liquids, and noted that common air containing one part in nine 
by volume of fixed air is no longer able to support combustion, 
and that the air produced by fermentation and putrefaction 
has properties identical with those of fixed air obtained from 
marble. In the following year he published a paper on the 
analysis of one of the London pump-waters (from Rathbone 
Place, Oxford Street), which is closely connected with the 
memoirs just mentioned, since it shows that the calcareous 
matter in that water is held in solution by the " fixed air " present 
and can be precipitated by lime. Electrical studies seem next 
to have engaged his attention, and in 1771 and 1772 he read 
to the Royal Society his " Attempt to explain some of the 
principal phenomena of electricity by an elastic fluid," which was 
followed in 1775 by an " Attempt to imitate the effects of the 
Torpedo (a fish allied to the ray)" {Phil. Trans., 1776). But 
these two memoirs contain only a part of the electrical researches 
he carried out between 1771 and 1781, and many more were 
found aftei his death in a number of sealed packets of papers. 
The contents of these for a long time remained unknown, but 
ultimately by permission of the duke of Devonshire, to whom 
they belonged, they were edited by James Clerk Maxwell and 
published in 1879 by the Cambridge University Press as the 
Electrical Researches of the Hon. Henry Cavendish. About 1777 
or 1778 he resumed his pneumatic inquiries, though he published 
nothing on the subject till 1783. In that year he described 
a new eudiometer to the Royal Society and detailed observations 
he had made to determine whether or not the atmosphere is 
constant in composition; after testing the air on nearly 6d 
different days in 1781 he could find in the proportion of oxygen 
no difference of which he could be sure, nor could he detect any 
sensible variation at different places. Two papers on " Experi- 
ments with Airs," printed in the Phil. Trans, for 1784 and 1785, 
contain his great discoveries of the compound nature of water 
and the composition of nitric acid. Starting from an experiment, 
narrated by Priestley, in which John Warltire fired a mixture 
of common air and hydrogen by electricity, with the result that 
there was a diminution of volume and a deposition of moisture 



CAVENDISH, T.— CAVENDISH, SIR W. 



5 8r 



Cavendish burnt about two parts of hydrogen with five of com- 
mon air, and noticed that almost all the hydrogen and about 
one-fifth of the common air lost their elasticity and were con- 
densed into a dew which lined the inside of the vessel employed. 
This dew he judged to be pure water. In another experiment he 
fired, by the electric spark, a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen 
(dephlogisticated air), and found that the resulting water con- 
tained nitric acid, which he argued must be due to the nitrogen 
present as an impurity in the oxygen (" phlogisticated air with 
which it [the dephlogisticated air] is debased")- In the 1785 
paper he proved the correctness of this supposition by showing 
that when electric sparks are passed through common air there 
is a shrinkage of volume owing to the nitrogen uniting with the 
oxygen to form nitric acid. Further, remarking that little was 
known of the phlogisticated part of our atmosphere, and thinking 
it might fairly be doubted " whether there are not in reality 
many different substances confounded together by us under the 
name of phlogisticated air," he made an experiment to determine 
whether the whole of a given portion of nitrogen (phlogisticated 
air) of the atmosphere could be reduced to nitric acid. He found 
that a small fraction, not more than r^th part, resisted the 
change, and in this residue he doubtless had a sample of the 
inert gas argon which was only recognized as a distinct entity 
more than a hundred years later. His last chemical paper, 
published in 1 788, on the " Conversion of a mixture of dephlogisti- 
cated and phlogisticated air into nitrous acid by the electric 
spark," describes measures he took to authenticate the truth of 
the experiment described in the 1785 paper, which had " since 
been tried by persons of distinguished ability in such pursuits 
without success." It may be noted here that, while Cavendish 
adhered to the phlogistic doctrine, he did not hold it with any- 
thing like the tenacity that characterized Priestley; thus, in his 
1784 paper on " Experiments on Air," he remarks that not only 
the experiments he is describing, but also " most other pheno- 
mena of nature seem explicable as well, or nearly as well," upon 
the Lavoisierian view as upon the commonly believed principle 
of phlogiston, and he goes on to give an explanation in terms 
of the antiphlogistic hypothesis. 

Early in his career Cavendish took up the study of heat, and 
had he promptly published his results he might have anticipated 
Joseph Black as the discoverer of latent heat and of specific 
heat. But he made no reference to his work till 1783, when he 
presented to the Royal Society some " Observations on Mr 
Hutchins's experiments for determining the degree of cold at 
which quicksilver freezes." This paper, with others published 
in 1786 and 1788, is concerned with the phenomena attending 
the freezing of various substances, and is noteworthy because in 
it he expresses doubt of the supposition that " the heat of 
bodies is owing to their containing more or less of a substance 
called the matter of heat," and inclines to Newton's opinion that 
it " consists in the internal motion of the particles of bodies." 
His " Account of the Meteorological Apparatus used at the Royal 
Society's House " (Phil. Trans., 1776) contains remarks on the 
precautions necessary in making and using thermometers, a 
subject which is continued in the following year in a report signed 
by him and six others. 

Cavendish's last great achievement was his famous series of 
experiments to determine the density of the earth (Phil. Trans., 
1798). The apparatus he employed was devised by the Rev. 
John Michell, though he had the most important parts recon- 
structed to his own designs; it depended on measuring the 
attraction exercised on a horizontal bar, suspended by a vertical 
wire and bearing a small lead ball at each end, by two large 
masses of lead. (See Gravitation.) The figure he gives for 
the specific gravity of the earth is 5-48, water being 1, but in 
fact the mean of the 29 results he records works out at 5-448. 
Other publications of his later years dealt with the height of an 
aurora seen in 1784 (Phil. Trans., 1790), the civil year of the 
Hindus (Id. 1792), and an improved method of graduating 
astronomical instruments (Id. 1809). Cavendish also had a 
taste for geology, and made several tours in England for the 
purpose of gratifying it. 



A life by George Wilson (1818-1859), printed for the Cavendish 
Soeiety in 1851, contains an account of his writings, both published 
and unpublished, together with a critical inquiry into the claims of 
all the alleged discoverers of the composition of water. Some of his 
instruments are preserved in the Royal Institution, London, and 
his name is commemorated in the Cavendish Physical Laboratory at 
Cambridge, which was built by his kinsman the 7th duke of Devon- 
shire. 

CAVENDISH [CandishI, THOMAS (i555?-i592), the third 
circumnavigator of the globe, was born at Trimley St Martin, 
Suffolk. On quitting Corpus Christi College, Cambridge (without 
a degree), he almost ruined himself by his. extravagance as a 
courtier. To repair his fortune he turned to maritime and 
colonial enterprise, and in 1585 accompanied Sir Richard 
Grenville to America. Soon returning to England, he undertook 
an elaborate imitation of Drake's great voyage. On the 21st of 
July 1586, he sailed from Plymouth with 123 men in three vessels, 
only one of which (the " Desire," of 140 tons) came home. By 
way of Sierra Leone, the Cape Verde Islands and C. Frio in 
Brazil, he coasted down to Patagonia (where he discovered 
" Port Desire," his only important contribution to knowledge), 
and passing through Magellan's Straits, fell upon the Spanish 
settlements and shipping on the west coast of South and Central 
America and of Mexico. Among his prizes were nineteen vessels 
of worth, and especially the treasure-galleon, the " Great St 
Anne," which he captured off Cape St Lucas, the southern 
extremity of California (November 14, 1587). After this 
success he struck across the Pacific for home; touched at the 
Ladrones, Philippines, Moluccas and Java; rounded the Cape 
of Good Hope; and arrived again at Plymouth (September 9- 
10, 1588), having circumnavigated the globe in two years and 
fifty days. It is said that his sailors were clothed in silk, his sails 
were damask, and his top-mast covered with cloth of gold. Yet 
by 1591 he was again in difficulties, and planned a fresh American 
and Pacific venture. John Davis (q.v .) accompanied him, bu*t the 
voyage (undertaken with five vessels) was an utter failure, much of 
the fault lying with Cavendish himself, who falsely accused Davis, 
with his last breath, of deserting him (May 20, 1592). He died 
and was buried at sea, on the way home, in the summer of 1592. 

See Hakluyt's Principal Navigations, (a) edition of 1589, p. 809 
(N. H.'s narrative of the voyage of 1586-1588) ; (b) edition of 1599- 
1600, vol. iii. pp. 803-825 (Francis Pratty's narrative of the same); 
(c) edition of 1599-1600, vol. iii. pp. 251-253 (on the venture of 
1585); (d) edition of 1599-1600, vol. iii. pp. 845-852 (John Lane's 
narrative of the last voyage, of I 591-1592) ; also Stationers' Registers 
(Arber), vol. ii. pp. 505-509; the Molyneux Globe of 1592, in the 
library of the Middle Temple, London, and the Ballads in Biog. Brit., 
vol. i. p. 1 196. 

CAVENDISH, SIR WILLIAM (c. is°5-i557), founder of the 
English noble house of Cavendish, was the younger brother of 
George Cavendish (q.v.). His father, Thomas, was a descendant 
of Sir John Cavendish, the judge, who in 1381 was murdered 
by Jack Straw's insurgent peasants at Bury St Edmunds. Of 
William's education nothing seems known, but in 1530 he was 
appointed one of the commissioners for visiting monasteries; 
he worked directly under Thomas Cromwell, whom he calls 
" master " and to whom many of his extant letters are addressed. 
In 1 54 1 he was auditor of the court of augmentations, in 1546 
treasurer of the king's chamber, and was knighted and sworn of 
trie privy council. Under Edward VI. and Mary he continued in 
favour at court; during the latter's reign he partially conformed, 
but on the occasion of the war with France he with other 
Derbyshire gentlemen refused the loan of £100 demanded by the 
queen. He died in 1557. Cavendish acquired large properties 
from the spoils of the monasteries, but in accordance with the 
wish of his third wife Elizabeth he sold them to purchase land in 
Derbyshire. This wife was the celebrated " building Bess of 
Hardwick," daughter of John Hardwicke, of Hardwicke, Derby- 
shire ; she completed the original building of Chatsworth House — 
begun in 1553 by her husband, — of which nothing now remains. 
Her fourth husband was George Talbot, 6th earl of Shrewsbury. 
By her Cavendish had six children; an elder son who died 
without issue; William, who in 1618 was created earl of Devon- 
shire; Charles, whose son William became 1st duke of Newcastle; 



582 



GAVETTO— CAVOUR 



Frances, who married Sir Henry Pierpont, and was the ancestress 
of the dukes of Kingston; Elizabeth, who married Charles 
Stuart, earl of Lennox, and was the mother of Arabella Stuart; 
and Mary, who married Gilbert Talbot, 7th earl of Shrewsbury. 

CAVETTO (Ital. diminutive of cavo, hollow), in architec- 
ture, the term given to a hollow concave moulding sometimes 
employed in the place of the cymatium of a cornice, as in that 
of the Doric order of the theatre of Marcellus. It forms the 
crowning feature of the Egyptian temples, and took the place 
of the cymatium in many of the Etruscan temples. 

CAVIARE, or Caviar, the roe of various species of Acipehser 
or sturgeon (q.v.), prepared, in several qualities, as an article of 
food. The word is common to most European languages and 
supposed to be of Turk or Tatar origin, but the Turk word 
khavyah is probably derived from the Ital. caviale; the word 
does not appear in Russian. The best caviare, which can only be 
made in winter and is difficult to preserve, is the loosely granu- 
lated, almost liquid, kind, known in Russia as ikra. It is prepared 
by beating the ovaries and straining through a sieve to clear the 
eggs of the membranes, fibres and fatty matter; it is then salted 
with from 4-6 % of salt. The difficulty of preparation and of 
transport has made it a table delicacy in western Europe, where 
it has been known since the 16th century, as is evidenced by 
Hamlet's " His play ... pleased not the million, 'twas caviare 
to the general." It is eaten either as an hors d'ceuvre, particularly 
in Russia and northern Europe with kummel or other liqueurs, or 
as a savoury, or as a flavouring to other dishes. The coarser 
quality, in Russia known as pdjusnaya (from pajus, the adherent 
skin of the ovaries), is more strongly salted in brine and is pressed 
into a more solid form than the ikra; it is then packed in small 
barrels or hermetically-sealed tins. This forms a staple article of 
food in Russia and eastern Europe. Though the best forms of 
caviare are still made in Russia, and the greater quantity of the 
coarser kinds are exported from Astrakhan, the centre of the 
trade, larger amounts are made each year for export in America 
and also in Germany, Norway and Sweden. The roe of tunny 
and mullet, pickled in brine and vinegar, is used, under the name 
of " Botargo," along the Mediterranean littoral and in the Levant. 

CAVITE, a fortified seaport, the capital of the province of 
Cavite, Luzon, Philippine Islands, and the seat bf the principal 
Asiatic naval station of the United States, on a forked tongue of 
land in Manila Bay, 8 m. S. of the city of Manila. Pop. (1903) 
4494; with the barrios of San Roque and Caridad (on the main 
peninsula) , which are under the municipal government of Cavite 
(15,630). Cavite is the terminus of a railway which follows the 
shore of the bay from Manila. The northern part of the town, 
Sangley Point (one of the two forks of the main peninsula), is the 
principal coaling station of the U.S. fleet in Asiatic waters^ The 
naval station proper and the old town of Cavite are on the south 
fork of the peninsula. Cavite's buildings are mostly of stone, 
with upper storeys of wood; its streets are narrow and crooked. 
It has five churches (one of these is an independent Filipino 
church), and is the seat of a provincial high school. Cavite has 
long been the principal naval base of the Philippine Islands, and 
one of the four Spanish penitentiaries in the Islands was here. 
During the 19th century Cavite was the centre of political disturb- 
ances in the Philippines; in 1896 on the parade ground thirteen 
political prisoners were executed, and to their memory a monu- 
ment was erected in 1906 at the head of the isthmus connecting 
with the main peninsula. The town was nearly destroyed by 
an earthquake in 1880. It was taken from the Spanish by an 
American squadron under Commodore GeorgeDeweyinMayi898. 

CAVOUR, CAMILLO BENSO, Count (1810-1861), Italian 
statesman, was born at Turin on the 1st of August 1810. The 
Bensos, who belonged to the old Piedmontese feudal aristocracy, 
were a very ancient house, said, to be descended from a Saxon 
warrior who settled at Santena in the 12 th century and married 
a Piedmontese heiress; Camillo's father, the marquis Michele, 
married a noble Genevese lady, and both he and his wife held 
offices in the household of Prince Borghese, the governor of 
Piedmont under Napoleon, and husband of the lafter's sister, 
Pauline Bonaparte. Being a younger son (his brother Gustavo 



was the eldest) Cavour was destined for the army, and when 
ten years old he entered the military academy at Turin. On 
leaving the college at the age of sixteen he was first of his class, 
and received a commission in the engineers. He spent the next 
five years in the army, residing at Ventimiglia, Genoa, and various 
Alpine fortresses to superintend defence works; but he spent 
his leisure hours in study, especially of the English language. 
He soon developed strongly marked Liber'al tendencies and an 
uncompromising dislike for absolutism and clericalism, which, 
as he had not acquired the art of reticence, made him a suspect 
in the eyes of the police and of the reactionaries; at the same 
time he does not seem to have joined any secret society, for he 
was too loyal to conspire against the king whose uniform he 
wore, and he did not believe that the time was yet ripe for a 
revolution. But after the accession to the throne Of Charles 
Albert, whom he always distrusted, he felt that his position in 
the army was intolerable, and resigned his commission (1831). 
From that moment we find him in the ranks of the opponents 
of the government, although his was always a loyal and straight- 
forward opposition which held aloof from conspiracies. During 
the next few years he devoted himself to the study of political 
and social problems, to foreign travel, and to acquiring a thorough 
knowledge of practical agriculture. Cavour's political ideas 
were greatly influenced by the July revolution of 1830 in France, 
which proved that an historic monarchy was not incompatible 
with Liberal principles, and he became more than ever convinced 
of the benefits of a constitutional monarchy as opposed both to 
despotism and to republicanism. But he was not affected by the 
doctrinaire Liberalism of the time, and his views were strength- 
ened by his studies of the British constitution, of which he 
was a great admirer; he was even nicknamed " Milord Camillo." 
He frequently visited Paris and London, where he plunged into 
the political and social questions of the day, and contributed 
among other essays two admirable and prophetic articles, one 
on the Irish question, in which he strongly defended the Union, 
and another on the Corn Laws. He applied his knowledge of 
agriculture to the management of his father's estate at Leri, 
which he greatly improved, he founded the Piedmontese Agricul- 
tural Society, and took the lead in promoting the introduction of 
steam navigation, railways and factories into the country. 

Thus his mind gradually evolved, and he began to dream dreams 
of a united Italy free of foreign influence, but owing to the 
reactionary policy of the Piedmontese government he was unable 
to take any active part in politics. In 1847, however, the psycho- 
logical moment seemed to have arrived, for the new pope, Pius 
IX., showed marked Liberal tendencies and seemed ready to 
lead all the forces of Italian patriotism against the Austrian 
domination. The hopes of the Italian Liberals rose high and the 
so-called neo-Guelph party, represented by such men as Vincenzo 
Gioberti and Cesare Balbo, believed that an Italian confederation 
might be formed under the presidency of the pope. CavOur, 
although he realized that a really Liberal pope was an impossi- 
bility, saw the importance of the movement and the necessity of 
profiting by it. Together with Balbo, P. di Santa Rosa, and M. 
Castelli, he founded a newspaper at Turin called II Risorgimento, 
which advocated the ideas of constitutional reform in Piedmont, 
with a view to preparing that country for an important role in 
the upheaval which seemed imminent. In January 1848 the 
revolution first broke out in Sicily. Cavour, in a speech before 
a delegation of journalists, declared that the king must take a 
decided line and grant his people a constitution. Strong pressure 
was brought to bear on Charles Albert, and after much hesitation 
he was induced to grant a charter of liberties (February 8, 1848). 
Cesare Balbo was called upon to form the first constitutional 
ministry; but Cavour was not offered a seat in it, being suspected 
by Liberals and Conservatives alike. He continued his journal- 
istic activity, and his articles in the Risorgimento came to exercise 
great influence both on the king and on public opinion. When the 
news of the revolt of the Milanese against the Austrians, known 
as the Five Days, reacted Turin on the 19th of March, Cavour 
felt that the time for Piedmont to act with energy had come; and 
advocated war against Austria. " After deliberately weighing 



GAVOUR 



583 



each word," he wrote, " we are bound in conscience to declare 
that only one path is open to the nation, the government, and 
the king: war, immediate war!" Piedmont was the only part 
of Italy enjoying a government at once national and independent, 
and if it did not hasten to the assistance of the Milanese in their 
desperate struggle, if possible before the Austrians were expelled, 
the monarchy could not survive. The situation was most critical, 
and even the British government was not friendly to Piedmont; 
but Cavour was prepared to face any danger rather than see 
his country inactive. In an article in the Risorgimento he de- 
clared that, while he never believed that material help was to 
be expected from England, he was convinced that she would not 
actively help Austria to crush the revolution, but that if she did 
"she would have against her a coalition not of princes, but of 
peoples." Cavour's article made such an impression that it 
put an end to the king's vacillations, and a few days after its 
appearance war was declared (March 25). 

For a few months patriotic and revolutionary enthusiasm 
carried all before it. In Hungary, in Germany, in Paris, in 
Vienna itself the revolution was triumphant; constitutions were 
granted, dynasties tottered and fell, and provisional governments 
were set up. In all parts of Italy, too, revolts broke out against 
the established order. But the Piedmontese army, although the 
troops behaved with gallantry, was no match for Austria's 
veteran legions, and except in a few minor engagements, in one 
of which Cavour's nephew Gustavo was killed, it was generally 
unsuccessful, and an armistice was concluded in the summer. In 
the meanwhile the elections were being held in Piedmont. Cavour 
himself was not returned until the supplementary elections in 
June, and he took his seat in parliament on the right as a Con- 
servative. His parliamentary career was not at first very suc- 
cessful; he was not a ready speaker; his habit of talking 
French made Italian difficult for him, and, although French was 
at that time allowed in the chamber, he preferred to speak 
Italian. But he gradually developed a strong argumentative 
power, his speeches became models of concise reasoning, and he 
rose at times to the highest level of an eloquence which was never 
rhetorical. After the dissolution in January 1849, Cavour was 
not re-elected. The new parliament had to discuss, in the 
first instance, the all-important question of whether the campaign 
should be continued now that the armistice was about to expire. 
The king decided on a last desperate throw, and recommenced 
hostilities. On the 23rd of March the Piedmontese were totally 
defeated at Novara, a disaster which was followed immediately 
by the abdication of Charles Albert in favour of his son Victor 
Emmanuel II. 

Although the new king was obliged to conclude peace with 
Austria and the Italian revolution was crushed, Cavour neverthe- 
less did not despair; he believed that so long as the constitution 
was maintained in Piedmont, the Italian cause was safe. There 
were fresh elections in July, and this time Cavour was returned. 
He was still in the difficult position of a moderate Liberal at a 
time when there seemed to be room for none but reactionaries 
and conspirators, but by his consummate ability he convinced 
men that his attitude was the right one, and he made it triumph. 
His speech on the 7th of March 1850, in which he said that, 
.": Piedmont, gathering to itself all the living forces of Italy, would 
be soon in a position to lead our mother-country to the high 
destinies to which she is called," made a deep impression, for 
it struck the first note of encouragement after the dark days of 
the preceding year. He supported the ministry of which Massimo 
d' Azeglio was president in its work of reform and restoration, 
and in October of the same year, on the death of Santa Rosa, 
he himself was appointed minister of agriculture, industry and 
commerce. In 185 1 he also assumed the portfolio of finance, and 
devoted himself to the task of reorganizing the Piedmontese 
finances. By far the ablest man in the cabinet, he soon came 
to dominate it, and, in his anxiety to dominate the chamber as 
well, he negotiated the union of the Right Centre with the Left 
Centre (a manoeuvre known as the connubio), and promoted the 
election of Urbano Rattazzi to the presidency of the chamber. 
This, which he accomplished without d' Azeglio's knowledge, 



led to a split between that statesman and Cavour, and to the 
latter's resignation. Cavour has been blamed for not informing 
his colleagues of the compact, but for public reasons it was not 
desirable that the connubio should be discussed before it was 
consummated. D' Azeglio indeed bore no malice, and remained 
Cavour's friend. Cavour made use of his freedom to visit England 
and France again, in order to sound public opinion on the Italian 
question. In London he found the leaders of both parties 
friendly, and Lord Palmerston told him that if the constitutional 
experiment in Piedmont succeeded the Italian despots were 
doomed. At this time Sir James Hudson was appointed 
British minister at Turin, where he became the intimate friend of 
Cavour and gave him valuable assistance. In Paris, Cavour had 
a long interview with Prince Louis Napoleon, then president 
of the republic, and he already foresaw the great part which 
that ruler was destined to play in Italian affairs. He also met 
several Italian exiles in France. 

On Cavour's return he found the country in the throes of 
a new cabinet crisis, in consequence of which, on d' Azeglio's 
recommendation, he was invited to form a ministry. By the 
4th of November he was prime minister, a position which he 
held with two short interruptions until his death. He devoted 
the first years of his premiership to developing the economic 
resources of the Country; but in preparing it for greater des- 
tinies, he had to meet the heavy expenditure by increased 
taxation, and some of his measures made him the object of hostile 
demonstrations, although he soon outlived his unpopularity. 
Cavour's first international difficulty was with Austria; after 
the abortive rising at Milan in February 1853, the Austrian 
government, in addition to other measures of repression, con- 
fiscated the estates of those Lombards who had become natural- 
ized Piedmontese, although they had nothing to do with the 
outbreak. Cavour took a strong line on this question, and on 
Austria's refusal to withdraw the obnoxious decree, he recalled 
the Piedmontese minister from Vienna, thus by his very audacity 
winning the sympathy of the Western powers. 

Then followed the Crimean War, in which Cavour first showed 
his extraoidinary political insight and diplomatic genius. The 
first suggestion of Piedmontese co-operation is usually believed 
to have come from England, who desired the Italian contingent, 
not only as material assistance, but also in order to reduce the 
overwhelming French preponderance. From the Piedmontese 
point of view there were several reasons why Cavour should 
desire his country to participate in the campaign. Firstly, it 
was advisable to use every opportunity of making the Italian 
question an international one; secondly, by joining the alliance 
Piedmont would place the Western powers under an obligation; 
thirdly, Cavour, like Balbo, believed that the Italian question 
was bound up with the Eastern problem, and as Austria was 
demanding the permission of the powers to occupy Alessandria, 
as a guarantee that Piedmont would not profit by the war in the 
East to create trouble in Italy, Piedmontese participation 
would in itself prove the best guarantee; and finally, as he 
always looked to Italy and not merely to Piedmont, he felt that, 
having proved to Europe that Italians could combine order 
with liberty, it remained to show that they were capable of 
fighting as well. But there were serious difficulties in the way. 
Had Austria joined the allies, as at one time seemed probable, 
Sardinia's position fighting by her side would have been an 
impossible one. On the other hand, Piedmont could not 
demand definite promises of future aid from the Western powers 
as some politicians desired, because these would never have 
been given, lest Austria should be offended and driven into the 
arms of Russia. Then, both the extreme Conservatives and 
the extreme Radicals were opposed to expenditure on foreign 
adventures for which they could see no use. In all these diffi- 
culties, however, Cavour was loyally supported by the king, 
who saw the advantages of Piedmontese participation, even 
if unattended by definite promises. General Dabormida, the 
minister of foreign affairs, disapproved of this policy and 
resigned. The vacant portfolio was offered to d' Azeglio, who 
refused it; whereupon Cavour assumed it himself. On the same 



s*+ 



CAVOUR 



day (January 10, 1855) the treaty with France and England 
was signed, and shortly afterwards 15,000 Piedmontese troops 
under General La Marmora were despatched to the Crimea. 

Events at first seemed to justify the fears of Cavour's oppo- 
nents. Cholera attacked the Piedmontese soldiers, who for a 
long time had no occasion to distinguish themselves in action; 
public opinion became despondent and began to blame Cavour, 
and even he himself lost heart. Then came the news of the 
battle of the Tchernaya, fought and won by the Italians, which 
turned sadness and doubt into jubilation. Joy was felt through- 
out Italy, especially at Milan, where the victory was the first 
sign of daylight amid the gloom caused by the return of the 
Austrians. Everyone realized that the Piedmontese contingent 
was fighting Italy's battles. But to Cavour the announcement 
that Russia had accepted Austrian mediation (January 16, 
1856) was a great disappointment. He had always hoped that 
if the war continued Austria would be forced to side with Russia 
in return for the aid given by the emperor Nicholas in suppress- 
ing the Hungarian revolt in 1849, and the Western powers 
would then have an opportunity of helping the Italian cause. 
He sent a memorandum, at Napoleon's request, to Count 
Walewski, the French minister of foreign affairs, setting forth 
a kind of minimum programme of Piedmont's claims. On the 
summoning of the congress of Paris at the conclusion of the war, 
Cavour first proposed that d' Azeglio should represent Piedmont, 
and on the latter's refusal decided to go himself. After much 
discussion, and in spite of the opposition of Austria, who as 
mediator occupied a predominant position, behaving " as though 
she had taken Sevastopol," Cavour obtained that Piedmont 
should be treated as one of the great powers. Although he did 
not expect that the congress would liberate Italy, yet by his 
marvellous diplomatic skill, far superior to that of his colleagues, 
he first succeeded in isolating Austria, secondly in indirectly 
compromising Napoleon in the Italian question, and thirdly 
in getting the wretched conditions of Italy discussed by the 
representatives of the great powers, who declared that some 
remedy to that state of things was necessary, not in the interests 
of Italy alone, but of all Europe. A scheme of reform proposed 
by Count Walewski gave Cavour the opportunity to plead the 
Italian cause, and from that moment it was manifest to all 
that the liberation of Italy was personified in him, the statesman 
who came to hold all the strings of European politics in his 
hands. 

Cavour's chief measure of internal reform during this period 
was a bill for suppressing all monastic orders unconnected with 
education, preaching or charity; this aroused strong opposition 
from the extremists of both parties and also from the king, and 
led to the minister's resignation. But he was soon recalled, 
for the country could not do without him, and the bill was 
passed (May 29, 1855). 

Cavour now saw that war with Austria was merely a question 
of time, and he began to establish connexions with the revolu- 
tionists of all parts of Italy, largely by means of La Farina; 
but it was necessary that this policy should not be advertised 
to Europe, and he strongly discountenanced Mazzini's abortive 
revolutionary attempts. He continued to strengthen Piedmont's 
military resources, and the army soon grew too large for the 
country and was obviously destined for more than merely 
defensive purposes. But he well knew that although Piedmont 
must be made as efficient as possible from the military point 
of view, it could not defeat Austria single-handed. He would 
have preferred an alliance with Great Britain, who would never 
demand territorial compensation; but although British sym- 
pathies were wholly Italian, the government was desperately 
anxious to avoid war. From Napoleon more was to be hoped, 
for the emperor still preserved some of his revolutionary in- 
stincts, while the insecurity of his situation at home made him 
eager to gain popularity by winning military glory abroad; 
but he still hesitated, and Cavour devoted the whole of his 
ability to overcoming his doubts. In the midst of these negotia- 
tions came Orsini's attempt on Napoleon's life (January 14, 
1858), which threatened to alienate his Italian sympathies 



and cause serious embarrassments to Piedmont. But after 
some remonstrances to Piedmont for not acting with sufficient 
energy against the revolutionists, the incident was settled: 
and Napoleon was, in fact, afraid that if he did not help the 
Italian cause more such attempts would be made. A month 
after the Orsini outrage he laid before Cavour a proposal for a 
Franco-Piedmontese alliance and the marriage of Prince Jerome 
Bonaparte with Princess Clothilde, the daughter of Victor 
Emmanuel. 

An " accidental " meeting between Napoleon and Cavour 
was arranged and took place at Plombieres in July, and although 
no one knew what passed, the news of it fell like a bombshell 
on the diplomatic world. No definite treaty was signed, but the 
basis of an agreement was laid, whereby France and Piedmont 
were to declare war against Austria with the object of expelling 
her from Italy, and a north Italian state was to be formed; in 
exchange for this help France was to receive Savoy and possibly 
Nice. But the emperor still hesitated, and refused to decide 
on war unless Austria attacked Piedmont; the British govern- 
ment, too, in its anxiety to preserve peace, was not very friendly 
to the Italian cause. Cavour saw that the only way to overcome 
all these obstacles was to force Austria's hand. Then there was 
the danger lest an Italy freed by French arms should be over- 
whelmed under French predominance; for this reason Cavour 
was determined to secure the co-operation of volunteers from 
other parts of Italy, and that the war should be accompanied 
by a series of risings against Austria and the local despots. 
It was also necessary that the risings should break out in the 
various provinces before the Piedmontese and French troops 
arrived, so that the latter should not appear as invaders and 
conquerors, but merely as liberators. 

The moment war was seen to be imminent, parties of Italians 
of all classes, especially Lombards, poured into Piedmont to 
enlist in the army. Cavour also had a secret interview with 
Garibaldi, with whom he arranged to organize volunteer corps so 
that the army should be not merely that of Piedmont, but of all 
Italy. Every day the situation grew more critical, and on the 
10th of January 1859 the king in his speech from the throne 
pronounced the memorable words " that he could not remain 
deaf to the cry of pain (il grido di dolore) that reached him from 
all parts of Italy " — words which, although actually suggested by 
Napoleon, rang like a trumpet-call throughout the land. In the 
meanwhile the marriage negotiations were concluded, and during 
the emperor's visit to Turin a military convention was signed 
between the two states, and Savoy and Nice were promised to 
France as a reward for the expulsion of the Austrians from Italy. 
But the British government was still unfavourable, and Napoleon, 
ever hesitating, again sought an excuse for backing out of his 
engagements; he jumped at the Russian proposal to settle the 
Italian question by means of his own favourite expedient, a 
congress. To this Austria agreed on condition that Piedmont 
should disarm and should be excluded from the congress; 
England supported the scheme, but desired that all the Italian 
states should be represented. Cavour was in despair at the turn 
events were taking, and appealed to Napoleon, actually threaten- 
ing to emigrate to America and publish all his correspondence 
with the emperor if the latter did not keep his engagements. He 
decided at last most reluctantly to accept the English proposal, 
lest Piedmont should be abandoned by all, but clung to the hope 
that Austria would reject it. On the 19th of April the Austrian 
emperor, on the advice of the military party, did reject it; and 
on the 23rd, to Cavour's inexpressible joy, Austria sent an 
ultimatum demanding the disarmament of Piedmont. Cavour 
replied that his government had agreed to the congress proposed 
by the powers and that it had nothing more to say. On quitting 
the chamber that day he said to a friend: " I am leaving the 
last sitting' of the last Piedmontese parliament " — the next 
would represent united Italy. France now allied herself definitely 
with Piedmont, and England, delighted at Cavour's acquiescence 
to her own proposal and enraged by Austria's ultimatum, 
became wholly friendly to the Italian cause. A few days later 
Austria declared war. 



CAVOUR 



5*5 



. As La Marmora now took the chief command of the army, 
Cavour added the ministry of war to the others he already held. 
His activity at this time was astounding, for he was virtually 
dictator and controlled single-handed nearly all the chief offices of 
the state. The French troops entered Piedmont, where they were 
received with enthusiasm, and the allies marched into Lombardy; 
the victory of Magenta, which opened the gates of Milan to 
them, was shortly followed by that of Solferino. The people 
rose in arms at Parma, Modena, Florence and Bologna, which 
had been occupied by Austria for the pope since 1849; the local 
princes were expelled and provisional governments set up. 
Cavour sent special commissioners to take charge of the various 
provinces in Victor Emmanuel's name. But these events, 
together with Prussia's menacing attitude, began to alarm 
Napoleon, who, although he wished to destroy Austrian influence 
in Italy, was afraid of a large and powerful Italian state. Conse- 
quently, after Solferino, he concluded an armistice with Austria 
at Villafranca on the 8th of July, without previously informing 
Cavour. When Cavour heard of it he was thunderstruck; he 
immediately interviewed the king at Monzambano, and in violent, 
almost disrespectful language implored him not to make peace 
until Venice was free. But Victor Emmanuel saw that nothing 
was to be gained by a refusal, and much against his own inclina- 
tion, signed the peace preliminaries at Villafranca, adding the 
phrase, " pour ce qui me concerne," which meant that he was not 
responsible for what the people of other parts of Italy might do 
(July 12). Lombardy was to be ceded to Piedmont, Venetia to 
remain Austrian, the deposed princes to be reinstated, and the 
pope made president of an Italian confederation. 

The cabinet resigned the next day, but remained in office 
provisionally, and Cavour privately advised the revolutionists of 
central Italy to resist the return of the princes, by force if neces- 
sary: " for we must now become conspirators ourselves," he 
said. His policy was thus continued after he left office, and 
Palmerston, who had meanwhile succeeded Malmesbury as foreign 
minister, informed France and Austria that Great Britain would 
never tolerate their armed intervention in favour of the central 
Italian despots. The new Piedmontese ministry, of which La 
Marmora was the president, but Rattazzi the leading spirit, 
hesitated between annexing central Italy and agreeing to the 
terms of peace, but on the 10th of November peace was signed at 
Zurich. Napoleon proposed a new congress, which never met, 
and on the fall of the Rattazzi-La Marmora cabinet the king, in 
spite of the quarrel at Monzambano, asked Cavour to take office 
again. By January he was once more premier, as well as minister 
for foreign affairs and of the interior. His first act was to invite 
the people of Italy to declare their own wishes with regard to 
annexation to Piedmont; but Napoleon still refused to consent 
to the union of Tuscany with Piedmont, for he contemplated 
placing one of his own relatives on the throne of the grand-duchy. 
Cavour now saw that Napoleon might be ready to deal, and, 
although the bargain of the preceding year had not been exactly 
fulfilled, as the Austrians were still in Venice, he again brought 
forward the question of Nice and Savoy. To Cavour no less 
than to the king the loss of these two provinces was a cruel 
wrench, but it was a choice between them and central Italy. 
The plebiscites in the latter region had unanimously declared in 
favour of union with Piedmont, and Napoleon became more 
pressing, going so far as to threaten that unless the cession were 
made, the French troops would leave Lombardy at the mercy of 
Austria and occupy Bologna and Florence. On the 24th of March 
the treaty was signed and the emperor's opposition to the annexa- 
tion of central Italy withdrawn. On the 2nd of April the parlia- 
ment representing Piedmont, the duchies of Parma and Modena, 
Tuscany and Romagna, met, and Cavour had the difficult and 
ungrateful task of explaining the cession of Nice and Savoy. In 
spite of some opposition, the agreement was ratified by a large 
majority. 

The situation in the kingdom of Naples was now becoming 
critical, but there seemed as yet little chance of union with 
upper Italy, for the Bourbon government was a more or less 
regular one, and, although risings had broken out, there was no 



general revolution. Cavour therefore had to follow a somewhat 
double-faced policy, on the one hand negotiating with the Bour- 
bon king (Francis II.), suggesting a division of Italy between him 
and Victor Emmanuel, and on the other secretly backing up the 
revolutionary agitation. Having now learnt that Garibaldi 
was planning an expedition to Sicily with his volunteers, he 
decided, after some hesitation, not to oppose its departure; 
on the 5th of May it sailed from Quarto near Genoa, and Cavour 
was only deterred from declaring war on Naples by the fear of 
foreign complications. Garibaldi with his immortal Thousand 
landed at Marsala, and the whole rotten fabric of the Bourbon 
government collapsed. At Palermo they were welcomed by the 
Piedmontese admiral Persano, and soon the whole island was 
occupied and Garibaldi proclaimed dictator. The general now 
proposed to cross over to the mainland, and this placed Cavour 
in a serious dilemma; Russia and Austria protested against the 
expedition, France and Prussia were unfriendly, Great Britain 
alone remained warmly pro-Italian. He still hoped for a revolu- 
tion in Naples, so that King Victor's authority might be estab- 
lished before Garibaldi's arrival, but this proved impossible. 
When Garibaldi crossed the straits of Messina the Neapolitan 
government fell, and he entered Naples in triumph. But there 
was still danger that he might be subsequently defeated, for the 
Neapolitan army was still a force in being, and Cavour feared, 
moreover, that, although Garibaldi himself had always loyally 
acted in the king of Italy's name, the red republicans around him 
might lead him to commit some imprudence and plunge the 
country into anarchy. The cession of Nice, Garibaldi's birthplace, 
had made an impassable gulf between the two men, and neither 
quite trusted the other. Cavour also feared that Garibaldi 
might invade the papal states, which would have led to further 
international complications. In any case, Rome must not be 
touched for the present, since Napoleon was pledged to protect 
the pope; but as the latter had made large armaments, and his 
forces, consisting largely of brigands and foreigners under the 
French general Lamoriciere, were in a menacing attitude on 
the frontier, Cavour decided on the momentous step of annexing 
the papal states with the exception of the Roman province. 
The Italian army crossed the frontier from Romagna on the nth 
of September, whereupon every power, except Great Britain and 
Sweden, withdrew its minister from Turin. But the troops 
advanced and were everywhere received with open arms by the 
people; Ancona was taken, Lamoriciere was defeated and 
captured at the battle of Castelfidardo, and on the 20th King 
Victor marched into the Neapolitan kingdom. On the 1st of 
October Garibaldi defeated the Neapolitan troops on the 
Volturno, and Gaeta alone, where King Francis of Naples had 
retired, still held out. 

New difficulties with Garibaldi arose, for he would not resign 
his dictatorship of the southern provinces, and wished to march 
on Rome. Cavour had to use all his tact to restrain him and at 
the same time not to appear ungrateful. He refused to act 
despotically, but he summoned parliament to vote on the annexa- 
tion, which it did on the nth. Two days later Garibaldi 
magnanimously gave in to the nation's will and handed his con- 
quests over to King Victor as a free gift. Gaeta was invested, 
and after a siege prolonged through the action of Napoleon, who 
for some reason unknown kept his fleet before the town, prevent- 
ing any attack by sea until England induced him to withdraw 
it, the garrison surrendered on the 13 th of February, and King 
Francis retired to Rome. Parliament was dissolved once more; 
the new chamber showed an overwhelming majority in favour 
of Cavour, and Victor Emmanuel was proclaimed king of Italy. 

The last question with which Cavour had to deal was that of 
Rome. For some years past the pope had only been able to 
maintain his authority by the help of foreign troops, and Cavour 
saw that as long as this state of things lasted there could be no 
united Italy. In October he declared in parliament that Rome 
must be the capital of Italy, for no other city was recognized as 
such by the whole country, and in January 1861 a resolution 
to that effect was passed. But owing to Napoleon's attitude he 
had to proceed warily, and made no attempt for the present to 



586 



CAVtD^R-^CAVY 



carry out the nation's Wishes. At the same time he was anxious 
that the church should preserve the fullest liberty, and he 
believed in the principle of " a free church in a free state." His 
great dream, save for Rome and Venice, was now realized, and 
Italy was free and united. But the wear and tear of these last 
years had been almost unbearable, and at last began to tell; the 
negotiations with Garibaldi were particularly trying, for while 
the great statesman wished to treat the hero and his volunteers 
generously, far more so than seemed wise to the Conservatives 
and the strictly military party, he did not wish the Italian cause 
to be endangered by their imprudences, and could not permit 
all the Garibaldian officers to be received into the regular army 
with the same grades they held in the volunteer forces. This 
question, together with that of Nice, led to a painful scene in the 
chamber between the two men, although they were formally 
reconciled a few days later. For some time past Cavour had been 
unwell and irritable, and the scene with Garibaldi undoubtedly 
hastened his end. A fever set in. and after a short illness he 
passed away on the 6th of June 1861. He was buried at his 
ancestral castle of Santena. 

The death of Cavour was a terrible loss to Italy; there re- 
mained many problems to be solved in which his genius and 
personality were urgently needed. But the great work had been 
carried to such a point that lesser men might now complete the 
structure. He is undoubtedly the greatest figure of the Risor- 
gimento, and although other men and other forces co-operated 
in the movement, it was Cavour who organized it and skilfully 
conducted the negotiations which overcame all, apparently 
insuperable, obstacles. " That which in Alfieri and Gioberti 
was lacking," wrote T. Artom, his private secretary, " a deep 
and lively sense of reality, Cavour possessed to a supreme 
degree. He was not a litterateur ; he was never a political dreamer. 
His views broadened progressively; at each stage he discovered 
a new horizon, and he followed his path without ever seeking 
anything save what was real and possible." He was gifted with 
pronounced political genius and with an astounding power 
of foresight. In his ideas he was always a moderate Liberal, 
and although he disapproved of republicanism, he was an ardent 
constitutionalist, ever refusing to resort to arbitrary methods, 
for he felt that, the Italian character being what it is, Italian 
unity could not last if unsupported by popular feeling. In meet- 
ing opposition he could not, like Bismarck, rely on a great military 
power, for the Piedmontese army was a small one; Austria must 
first be isolated and then an alliance had to be obtained with some 
other power. Some of his acts, especially his policy towards 
the Neapolitan kingdom, have been criticized as politically 
immor?l; but apart from the fact that few revolutions — and 
Cavour, after all, was a revolutionist — can be conducted without 
attacking vested rights, it is hard to see that any policy which 
led to the destruction of a government, rightly described as the 
" negation of God on earth," could be deemed immoral. He 
has been accused of changing his views, but what statesman has 
not? Moreover, in the extremely complicated and difficult diplo- 
matic situations which he had to face, what was impossible 
or dangerous one day became possible and desirable the next. 
This was particularly the case with the Neapolitan question. 
Cavour's one absorbing passion was the liberation and regenera- 
tion of Italy, and to this he devoted his whole life and talent. 

Bibliography. — G. Buzziconi, Bibliografia Cavouriana (Turin, 
1898); Countess Evelyn Martinengo Cesaresco, Cavour (London, 
1898), an excellent and handy little monograph which brings out 
the chief points of Cavour's life in the right light; G. Massari, // 
Conte di Cavour (Turin, 1873); W. de la Rive, Le Comte de Cavour 
(Paris, 1862), interesting and valuable as the work of a contemporary 
and intimate friend of Cavour; L. Chiala, Letters edite ed inedite del 
Conte di Cavour (7 vols., Turin, 1883-1887); D. Zanichelli, Gli 
Scritti del Conte di Cavour (Bologna, 1892), and Cavour (Florence, 
1905) ; H. von Treitschke, "Cavour," in his Historische und politische 
Aufsdtze (Leipzig, 1871); E. Dicey, A Memoir of Catour (London, 
1861); Conte C. di Cavour, Discorsi parlamentari (8 vols., Turin, 
1863-1872), Opere politico-economiche (Cuneo, 1855); F. X. Krauss, 
Cavour (Mainz, 1902) ; E. Artom, L'Opere politica del Senatore T. 
Artom nel Risorgimento Italiano (Bologna, 1906), a biography of 
Cavour's devoted private secretary, containing new material. 

(L. V.*) 



CAVOUR (ahc. Caburrum or Forum Vibii), a town of Tiedraont, 
Italy, in the province of Turin, 32 m. S.W. by rail and steam 
tram (via Pinerolo from the town of Turin). Pop. (1901) town, 
2091 ; commune, 6843. It lies on the north side of a huge isolated 
mass of granite (the Rocca di Cavour) which rises from the plain. 
On the summit was the Roman village, which, belonged to the 
province of the Alpes Cottiae. There are some ruins of medieval 
fortifications. The town gave its name to the Benso family of 
Chieri, who were raised to the marquisate in 1771, and of 
which the statesman Cavour was a member. 

For the ancient name see Th. Mommsen in Corp. Inscrip. Lat. 
v. (Berlin, 1877), p. 825. 

CAVY, a name commonly applied to several South American 
rodent animals included in the family Caviidae (see Rodentia), 
but perhaps properly applicable only to those belonging to the 
typical genus Cavia, of which the most familiar representative 
is the domesticated guinea-pig. Cavies in general, the more 
typical representatives of the Caviidae, are rodents with hoof- 
like nails, four front and three hind toes, imperfect collar-bones, 
and the cheek-teeth divided by folds of enamel into transverse 
plates. The tail is short or rudimentary, the incisors are short, and 
the outer surface of the lower jaw is marked by a distinct ridge. 

True cavies, or couies (Cavia), are best known by the guinea- 
pig, a domesticated and parti-coloured race derived from one of 
the wild species, all of which are uniformly coloured. They 
are comparatively small and stoutly built animals, with' short, 
rounded ears and no tail. In habits they are partly diurnal; 
and live either in burrows among the crevices of rocks, beneath 
the leaves of aquatic plants in marshy districts, or underneath 
the floors of outbuildings. Their cries are faint, squeaks and 
grunts. They feed upon nearly all vegetable substances, but 
drink little. Generally they associate in small societies, and 
seldom wander far from home. Although the guinea-pig is a 
fertile breeder, the wild species only produce one or two young 
a-t a birth, and this but once in a year. The young come into the 
world in a highly developed condition, being able to feed them- 
selves the day following their birth. Cavies are widely distri- 
buted in South America, and are represented by several species. 
Among them may be mentioned the aperea or restless cavy 
(C. p&rcellus or C. aperea) of Brazil; the Bolivian C. boliviensis, 
found at great elevations in the Andes; the Brazilian rock-cavy 
(C. rupestris), characterized by its short blunt claws; and the 
Peruvian C. cutleri. The latter was tamed by the Incas, and is 
the ancestor of the guinea-pig. As to the origin of that name, 
some writers consider it a corruption of Guiana-pig, but it is 
more probable that the word " Guinea " merely signifies foreign. 
The guinea-pig is a singularly inoffensive and defenceless creature, 
of a restless disposition, and wanting in that intelligence which 
usually characterizes domestic pets, although said to show some 
discrimination. It is of no particular service to man, neither 
its flesh nor its fur being generally put to use, while the state- 
ment that its presence is sufficient to drive off rats and mice 
appears to be without foundation. It is exceedingly prolific, 
beginning to breed at the age of two months; the number of 
young varying, according to the age of the parent, from four 
to twelve. It has been calculated that a single pair of guinea- 
pigs may prove the parent stock of a thousand individuals in a 
single year. 

A very different animal is the Patagonian cavy, or mara 
(Dolichotis patachonica) , the typical representative of a genus 
characterized by long limbs, comparatively large ears, and a 
short tail. The animal is about the size of a hare, to which it 
approximates in form and habits. It is most abundant in the 
open districts of Patagonia, but also ranges on to the Argentina 
Pampas, where it is now scarce. Although occasionally seen 
in large flocks, the mara is more commonly found in small 
parties or in pairs, the parties commonly moving in single file. 
It has a peculiar kind of hopping gait; and is mainly diurnal, in 
accordance with which habit its eyes are protected by lashes. 
It lives in a burrow, generally excavated by itself; but when 
pursued, seeks safety in flight, rather than by a retreat to, its 
hole. From two to five young are produced twice a year. A 



CAWJDOR^CAXTON 



587 



much : smaller species, D. salinicola, without the characteristic 
black band above the tail, inhabits the salt-plains of Argentina. 
Maras. have been introduced into several British parks. Fossil 
Species of Dolichotis occur in the caverns of Brazil, and also 
in the superficial deposits of Argentina. (R. L.*) 

•• CAWDOB, a village and parish of Nairnshire, Scotland. 
Pop. of parish (1901) 925. The village is situated 5 m. S.S.W. 
of Nairn and 3 m. from Gollanfield Junction on the Highland 
railway. The castle was the scene, according to the tradition 
which Shakespeare has perpetuated, of the murder of King 
Duncan by Macbeth, thane of Cawdor (or Calder), in 1040. 
Sinqe the 'oldest part of the structure dates from 1454, however, 
and Seemingly had no predecessor, the tradition has no founda- 
tion in fact. The building stands on the rocky bank of Cawdor 
Burn, a right-hand tributary of the Nairn. The massive keep 
with small turrets is the original portion of the castle, and to it 
were added, in the 17 th century, the modern buildings forming 
two sides of a square. 

Kilravock (pronounced Kilrawk) Castle, i|m. W. of Cawdor, 
occupies a commanding site on the left bank of the Nairn. 
Its keep dates from 1460, and the later buildings belong to the 
17 th century. It has been continuously tenanted by the Roses, 
one of the most remarkable families in Scotland. They came 
over with William the Conqueror and settled at Kilravock in 
1293, since which date son has succeeded father without the 
interposition of a collateral heir, an instance of direct descent 
unique in Scottish history. Moreover, nearly every Rose has 
borne the Christian name of Hugh, and only one attained to a 
higher social rank than that of laird. Queen Mary was received 
at the castle in 1562, and Prince Charles Edward was entertained 
four days before the battle of Culloden. The gardens are remark- 
able for their beauty. 

CAWNPORE, or Kanpur, a city and district of British India 
in the Allahabad division of the United Provinces. The city 
is situated on the south bank of the Ganges, 40 m. south-west 
of Lucknow, and formed from early times a frontier outpost 
of the people of Oudh and Bengal against their northern neigh- 
bours. Clive selected it, on account of its commanding position, 
as the cantonment for the brigade of troops lent him by the 
nawab of Oudh. In 1801, when the Ceded Provinces were ac- 
quired by the East India Company, it became the chief British 
frontier station. But by the time of the Mutiny the frontier 
had left it behind, and it was denuded of troops. Now it is 
chiefly known as the junction of four railways, the East Indian, 
Oudh & Rohilkand, Rajputana and Indian Midland, and as 
a great emporium for harness, shoes and other leather-work. 
In 1901 the population was 197,170, showing an increase of 4 % 
in the decade. In 1903 the city was devastated by an epidemic 
of plague. 

The name of Cawnpore is indelibly connected with the blackest 
episode in the history of the Indian Mutiny — the massacre here 
injury 1857 of hundreds of women and children by the Nana 
Sahib. The full details of the siege and massacre will be found 
under Indian Mutiny, and here it will suffice to refer to the 
local memorials of that evil time. The entrenchment, where 
General Sir H. M. Wheeler with his small band of soldiers and 
the European and Eurasian residents were exposed for 21 days 
to the fire of the mutineers, is merely a bare field, containing 
the well where many women and children were shot while getting 
water. This well is now surrounded by an enclosure with an 
inscription upon its cross. About three-quarters of a mile away, 
on the banks of the river Ganges, is the Massacre Ghat. A grassy 
road between banks 10 to 12 ft. high leads down to the river, 
and it was among the trees on these banks that the murderers 
concealed themselves who shot down the little garrison as soon 
as they were embarked in the boats which were to take them to 
safety. On the river bank is a temple to Siva, of hexagonal 
shape, old and going to ruin. Steps lead from this temple to an 
enclosed flight of stairs, which in the cold season descend to 
the water, but in the rains are covered almost to the top. This 
is the ghat where some 600 helpless people were slain, in spite 
of a promise of safe-conduct from the Nana. The r remaining 



200 victims, who had escaped the bullets of the siege and survived 
the butchery of the river bank, were massacred afterwards and 
cast down the famous well of Cawnpore, which is now marked 
by a memorial and surrounded by gardens. The memorial is 
crowned by the figure of an angel in white marble, and on the 
wall of the well itself is the following inscription: — 

Sacred to the perpetual Memory of a great company of 
Christian people, chiefly Women and Children, who near this 
spot were cruelly murdered by the followers of the rebel 
Nana Dhundu Pant, of Bithur, and cast, the dying with the 
dead, into the well below, on the xvth day of July, MDCCCLVII. 

The district or Cawnpore is situated between the Ganges 
and Jumna rivers, and is a portion of the well-watered and 
fertile tract known as the Doab, the total area being 2384 sq. m. 
The general inclination of the country is from north to south. 
Besides the two great rivers, the principal streams are the Arand 
or Rhind, the Kavan or Singar, the Isan and the Pandu. The 
district is watered by four branches of the Ganges canal, and 
traversed by two lines of railway. It used to be a great centre of 
the indigo industry, which has now declined. The population in 
1901 was 1 ,258,868, showing an increase of 4 % during the decade. 

CAXTON, WILLIAM (c. 1422-1491), the first English printer, 
was born somewhere in the Weald of Kent, perhaps at Tenterden. 
The name, which was apparently pronounced Cauxton, is 
identical with Causton, the name of a manor in the parish of 
Hadlow, and was a fairly common surname in the 15th century. 
The date of Caxton's birth was arbitrarily fixed in 1748 by Oldys 
as 141 2. Blades, however, inferred that in 1438, when he was 
apprenticed to Robert Large, he would not have been more than 
sixteen years of age. This would place his birth in 1422-1423. 
Robert Large was a rich silk mercer who became sheriff in 1430 
and lord mayor of London in 1439, and the fact of Caxton's 
apprenticeship to him argues that Caxton's own parents were 
in a good position. Large died in 1441, leaving a small be- 
quest to Caxton, and his executors would be bound to place the 
young man where he could finish his term. He was probably sent 
direct to Bruges, then the central foreign market of the Anglo- 
Flemish trade, for he presently entered business there on his 
own, account. In 1450 his name appears in the Bruges records 
as standing joint surety for the sum of £100; and in 1463 he 
was acting governor of the company of Merchant Adventurers 
in the Low Countries. This association, sometimes known 
as the " English Nation," was dominated by the Mercers' 
Company, to the livery of which Caxton had been formally 
admitted in London in 1453. The first governor, appointed 
in terms of a charter granted by Edward IV. in 1462, was 
W. Obray, but Caxton's position is definitely asserted in 1464. 
In that year he was appointed, together with Sir Richard 
Whitehill, to negotiate with Philip, duke of Burgundy, the 
renewal of a treaty concerning the wool trade, which was about 
to expire. These attempts failed, but he was again employed, 
with two other members of the Mercers' Company, in a similar 
but successful mission in October 1468 to the new duke, Charles 
the Bold, who earlier in the year had married Princess Margaret 
of York, sister of Edward IV. The last mention of Caxton in the 
capacity of governor of the " English Nation " is on the 13th of 
August 1469, and it was probably about that time that he entered 
the household of the duchess Margaret, possibly in the position 
of commercial adviser. In his diplomatic mission in 1468 he had 
been associated with Lord Scales, afterwards Earl Rivers and one 
of his chief patrons, and at the Burgundian court he must have 
come in touch with Edward IV. during his brief exile in 1470. 

He had begun his translation of the popular medieval romance 
of Troy, The Recuyell of the Historyes of Troye, from the French 
of Raoul le Fevre, early in 1469; and, after laying it aside for 
some time, he resumed it at the wish of the duchess Margaret, 
to whom the MS. was presented in September 1471. During 
his thirty-three years' residence in Bruges Caxton would have 
access to the rich libraries of the duke of Burgundy and other 
nobles, and about this time he learned the art of printing. His 
disciple, Wynkyn de Worde, says that he was taught at Cologne, 
probably during a visit there in 1471, recorded in the preface to 



5 88 



CAYENNE 



the Recuydl; Blades suggests that he learnt from Colard Man- 
sion, but there is no evidence that Mansion set up his press at 
Bruges before 1474. He ceased to be a member of the gild of 
St John (a gild of illuminators) in 1473, and the first dated book 
he is known to have printed is dated 1476. Mansion and Caxton 
were partners or associates at Bruges, where Caxton printed 
his Recuydl in 1474 or 1475. His second book, The Game and 
Playe of Chesse, from the Liber de ludo scacchorum of Jacobus 
de Cessolis through the French of Jehan de Vignay, was finished 
in 1474, and printed soon after; the last book printed by 
Mansion and Caxton at Bruges was the Quatre derrenieres choses, 
an anonymous treatise usually known as De quattuor novissimis. 
Other books in the same type were printed by Mansion at Bruges 
after Caxton's departure. 

By September 1476 Caxton had established himself in the 
almonry at Westminster at the sign of the Red Pale. Robert 
Copland the printer, who was afterwards one of Caxton's assist- 
ants, states that Caxton began by printing small pamphlets. 
The first dated book printed in England was Lord Rivers's 
translation (revised by Caxton) of The Dictes or sayengis of the 
philosophres (1477). From this time until his death in 1491 
Caxton was busy writing and printing. His services to English 
literature, apart from his work as a printer (see Typography), 
are very considerable. His most important original work is an 
eighth book added to the Polychronicon (vol. viii. in the Rolls 
Series edition) of Ralph Higden. Caxton revised and printed 
John of Trevisa's work, and brought down the narrative himself 
from 1358 to 1460, using as his authorities Fasciculus lemporum, 
a popular work in the 15th century, and an unknown Aureus de 
universo. In the year before his death he complained in the 
preface to his Eneydos of the changing state of the English 
language, a condition of things which he did as much as any man 
to remedy. He printed Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (1478? and 
1483), Troilus and Creseide (1483 ?), the House of Fame (1483 ?), 
and the translation of Boethius (1478?); Gower's Confessio 
Amantis (1483), and many poems of Lydgate. His press was, 
however, not worked for purely literary ends, but was a com- 
mercial speculation. For the many service-books which he 
printed there was no doubt a sure sale, and he met the taste of 
the upper classes by the tales of chivalry which issued regularly 
from his press. He printed Malory's Morte d' 'Arthur, and himself 
translated from the French the Boke of Histories of Jason (1477 ?), 
The Historye of Reynart the Foxe (from the Dutch, 1481 and 
1489?), Godfrey of Boloyne or The Siege and Conqueste of 
Jherusalem (1481), The Lyf of Charles the Grete (1485), The 
Knyght Parys and the Fayr Vyenne (1485), Bldnchardyn and 
Eglantine (1489?), The Foure Sonnes of Aytnon (1489?); also 
the Morale Proverbs (1478), and the Fayttes of Armes and of 
Chyualrye (1489) of Christine de Pisan. The most ambitious 
production of his press was perhaps his version of the Golden 
Legend, the translation of which he finished in November 1483. 
It is based on the lives of the saints as given in the 13th century 
Legenda aurea of Jacobus de Voragine, but Caxton chiefly used 
existing French and English versions for his compilation. The 
book is illustrated by seventy woodcuts, and Caxton says he was 
only encouraged to persevere in his laborious and expensive 
task by the liberality of William, earl of Arundel. The idleness 
which he so often deprecates in his prefaces was no vice of his, for 
in addition to his voluminous translations his output as a printer 
was over 18,000 pages, and he published ninety-six separate 
works or editions of works, with apparently little skilled assist- 
ance, though later printers, Wynkyn de Worde, Robert Copland 
and possibly Richard Pynson, were trained under him. 

The different founts of type used by Caxton are illustrated by 
Blades and Duff, and there is an excellent selection of Caxtons in 
the British Museum, in the University library at Cambridge, 
besides those in private hands. A record price for a Caxton was 
reached in 1902 when Mr Bernard Quaritch paid £2225 for The 
Royal Book (1487?), a translation of the popular Somme des 
vices et des vertus. His books have no title-pages, and from 1487 
onwards are usually adorned with a curious device, consisting of 
the letters W. C. separated by a trade mark, with an elaborate 




$<$><&<&<$><&<$> 



•i^messams^mjis 



border above and below. The flourishes on the trade mark have 
been fancifully interpreted as S.C. for Sancta Colonia, implying 
that Caxton learnt his art at 
Cologne, and the whole mark has 
been read as 74, for 1474, the date 
of his first printed book. This 
device was first used in an edition 
of the Sarum missal, printed for 
Caxton by George Maynial in Paris, 
and was subsequently adopted with 
small alterations by his successor at 
the Westminster press, Wynkyn de 
Worde. The first of his books con- 
taining woodcut illustrations was 
his Myrrour of the World (148 1), 
translated from Vincent de Beau- 
vais, which has diagrams and 
pictures for the assistance of young students. He had used a 
woodcut initial letter in his broadside Indulgence printed in 1480. 

No record of Caxton's marriage or of the birth of his children 
has been found, but Gerard Croppe was separated from his wife 
Elizabeth, daughter of William Caxton, before 1496, when Croppe 
made certain claims in connexion with his father-in-law's will. 

Authorities. — Earlier biographies of Caxton were superseded by 
the work of William Blades, whose Life and Typography of William 
Caxton (2 vols., 1861-1863) remains the standard authority. It 
contains a bibliography of each of the works issued from Caxton's 
press. For later discoveries see George Bullen's Catalogue of the 
Caxton celebration loan collection exhibited at South Kensington 
in 1877; articles by E. J. L. Scott in the Athenaeum (Feb. 10, 1900; 
May 21 and June 8, 1892); articles in Notes and Queries (April 21, 
1900; Feb. 24, 1906), and the publications of the Caxton Club, 
Chicago, notably William Caxton, by E. Gordon Duff (1905). See 
also Census of Caxtons, by Seymour de Ricci, No. xv. of the 
illustrated monographs of the Bibliographical Society, 1909. Many 
of Caxton's translations are available in modern reprints; the 
Golden Legend, the Recuyell and Godeffroy of Boloyne, were printed 
by William Morris at the Kelmscott Press in 1892-1893; the Boke 
of Curtesye ( 1 868) , the Lyf of Charles the Grete ( 1 880) , Alain Chartier's 
Curial (1888), Foure Sonnes of Aymon (1884), Eneydos (1890), 
Blanchardyn and Eglantine (1890), and others, by the Early English 
Text Society. For modern editions of Reynart see Reynard the 
Fox. No authentic portrait of Caxton is known, but a MS. at Mag- 
dalene College, Cambridge, of the last six books of the Metamorphoses 
of Ovid, translated by Caxton, is probably in his handwriting. 

CAYENNE, a seaport and the capital of French Guiana, on 
the N.W. extremity of the island of Cayenne, and near the 
mouth of the river of that name, in 4 56' 28" N., and 52° 20' 36" 
W. Pop. about 12,600. The town forms an almost perfect 
square, and has clean and well-macadamized streets. The 
houses, mostly of two storeys, are of wood, strengthened on the 
first and ground floors by brickwork. In the old town, which 
contains the government-house and Jesuits' College, the streets 
are not so regularly and. well built as in the new. The Place 
d'Armes, a fine quadrangular space, lies between them. To the 
right of the governor's house is Mount Ceperon, on which stand 
Fort St Michel, the marine barracks, the signal station and the 
lighthouse. Here, too, are the capacious reservoirs for the 
water-supply of the town, the source of which is a lake to the 
south of the island. The harbour is shallow at its entrance, and 
craft drawing more than 14 ft. are obliged to anchor 6 m. from 
the town. There is no dock for the repair of vessels; but there 
are two quays at the town. The principal exports of Cayenne 
are gold, cocoa, phosphates, hides, woods and spices. The 
imports are French wines, spirits and liqueurs; silk and cotton 
stuffs, tobacco, hardware, glass, earthenware, clothing, preserved 
meat, fish, and vegetables, maize, flour, hay, bran, oils and 
cattle. There is a regular mail service between Cayenne and 
Martinique once a month. Cayenne is the seat of the government 
of French Guiana, and was formerly a penal settlement for 
political offenders. Food as well as clothing is exorbitantly dear, 
the only cheap articles of consumption being bread and French 
wines. The temperature of Cayenne is between 76 and 88° Fahr. 
throughout the year; but the heat is tempered by easterly winds. 
Between December and March a north wind blows, unfavourable 
to weak constitutions. Yellow and other fevers often attack the 



CAYENNE PEPPER— CAYLEY 



589 



inhabitants of the town, but the climate, though moist, is as a 
whole healthy. (See Guiana.) 

CAYENNE PEPPER (Guinea Pepper, Spanish Pepper, 
Chilly), a preparation from the dried fruit of various species of 
Capsicum,a, genus of the natural order Solanaceae. The true peppers 
are members of a totally distinct order, Piperaceae. The fruits of 
plants of the genus Capsicum have all a strong, pungent flavour. 
The capsicums bear a greenish-white flower, with a star-shaped 
corolla and five anthers standing up in the centre of the flower 
like a tube, through which projects the slender style. The pod- 
like fruit consists of an envelope at first fleshy and afterwards 
leathery, within which are the spongy pulp and several seeds. 
The plants are herbaceous or shrubby; the leaves are entire, and 
alternate, or in pairs near one another; the flowers are solitary 
and do not arise in the leaf-axils. There are about thirty 
species, natives of Central and South America. They are now 
grown in various parts of the world, both for the sake of the fruit 
and for ornament. In England the annual sorts are sown from 
March to the middle of April under a frame. They can be 
planted out when 2 or 3 in. high, and in June may be transferred 
to a light rich soil in the open garden. They flower in July or 
August, and produce pods from August till the end of September. 
The perennial and shrubby kinds may be wintered in a conserva- 
tory. Several species or varieties are used to make cayenne 
pepper. The annual or common capsicum (C. annuum), the 
Guinea pepper plant, was brought to Europe by the Spaniards, 
and was grown in England in 1548. It is indigenous to South 
America, but is now cultivated in India, Hungary, Italy, Spain 
and Turkey, with the other species of capsicum. It is a hardy 
herbaceous plant, which attains a height of 2 or 3 ft. There are 
numerous cultivated forms, differing in the shape and colour of 
the pod, which varies from more or less roundish to narrow- 
conical, with a smooth or wrinkled coat, and white, yellow, red 
or black in colour. The principal source of cayenne pepper is C. 
frutescens, the spur or goat pepper, a dwarf shrub, a native of 
South America, but commonly cultivated in the East Indies. It 
produces a small, narrow, bright red pod, having very pungent 
properties. C. telragonum, or bonnet pepper, is a species much 
esteemed in Jamaica; it bears very fleshy fruits. Other well- 
known kinds of capsicum are the cherry pepper (C. cerasiforme) , 
with small berries; bell pepper (C. grossum ), which has thick and 
pulpy fruit, well adapted for pickling; and berry or bird pepper 
(C. baccatum). The last mentioned has been grown in England 
since 1731; its fruit is globular, and about the size of a cherry. 
The West Indian stomachic man-dram is prepared by mashing a 
few pods of bird pepper and mixing them with sliced cucumber 
and shallots, to which have been added a little lime-juice and 
Madeira wine. Chillies, the dried ripe or unripe fruit of capsicums, 
especially C. annuum and C. frutescens, are used to make chilly- 
vinegar, as well as for pickles. Cayenne pepper is manufactured 
from the ripe fruits, which are dried, ground, mixed with wheat 
flour, and made into cakes with yeast; the cakes are baked till 
hard like biscuit, and then ground and sifted. The pepper is 
sometimes prepared by simply drying the pods and pounding 
them fine in a mortar. Cayenne pepper is occasionally adulter- 
ated with red lead, vermilion, ochre, salt, ground-rice and 
turmeric. The taste of the pepper is impaired by exposure 
to damp and the heat of the sun. Chillies have been in use 
from time immemorial; they are eaten in great quantity by the 
people of Guiana and other warm countries, and in Europe are 
largely consumed both as a spice and as medicine. 

The dried ripe fruit of Capsicum frutescens from Zanzibar, 
known as pod pepper and Guinea pepper, is official in the British 
Pharmacopoeia under the name Capsici Fructus. The fruit has 
a characteristic, pungent odour and an intensely bitter taste. 
The chief constituents are a crystallizable resin, capsaicin, a 
volatile alkaloid, capsicine and a volatile oil. The dose is f-i 
grain. The British Pharmacopoeia contains two preparations of 
capsicum, a tincture (dose 5-15 minims) and an ointment. 
Externally the drug has the usual action of a volatile oil, being a 
very powerful counter-irritant. It does not, however, cause 
pustulation. Its internal action is also that of its class, but its 



marked contact properties make it specially useful in gastri- 
atony and flatulence, and sometimes in hysteria. 

CAYEY, an inland district and mountain town of the depart- 
ment of Guayama, Porto Rico, celebrated for its cool, invigorat- 
ing climate and the beauty of its scenery. Pop. (1899) of the 
town, 3763; of the district, 14,442. The town is surrounded by 
mountain summits, the highest of which, El Torito, rises to an 
elevation of 2362 ft. above sea-level. It was made a military 
post by the Spaniards and used as an acclimatizing station. 
The old Spanish barracks have been enlarged and improved by 
the American military authorities and, under the name of 
" Henry Barracks," are used for the same purpose. The town is a 
popular summer resort for residents of the coast cities. The 
surrounding country is wooded and very fertile, being especially 
noted for its coffee and tobacco. The town has large cigar 
factories. Cayey is connected with Guayama by an excellent 
military road. 

CAYLEY, ARTHUR (1821-1895), English mathematician, 
was born at Richmond, in Surrey, on the 16th of August 1821, 
the second son of Henry Cayley, a Russian merchant, and 
Maria Antonia Doughty. His father, Henry Cayley, retired 
from business in 1829 and settled in Blackheath, where Arthur 
was sent to a private school kept by the Rev. G. B. F. Potticary; 
at the age of fourteen he was transferred to King's College school, 
London. He soon showed that he was a boy of great capacity, 
and in particular that he was possessed of remarkable mathe- 
matical ability. On the advice of the school authorities he was 
entered at Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner. He was 
there coached by William Hopkins of Peterhouse, was admitted 
a scholar of the college in May 1840, and graduated as senior 
wrangler in 1842, and obtained the first Smith's Prize at the next 
examination. In 1842, also, he was elected a fellow of Trinity, 
and became a major fellow in 1845, the year in which he proceeded 
to the M.A. degree. He was assistant tutor of Trinity for three 
years. In 1846, having decided to adopt the law as a profession, 
he left Cambridge, entered at Lincoln's Inn, and became a pupil 
of the conveyancer Mr Christie. He was called to the bar in 1849, 
and remained at the bar fourteen years, till 1863, when he was 
elected to the new Sadlerian chair of pure mathematics in the 
university of Cambridge. He settled at Cambridge in the same 
year, and married Susan, daughter of Robert Moline of Green- 
wich. He continued to reside in Cambridge and to hold the 
professorship till his death, which occurred on the 26th of 
January 1895. From the time he went first to Cambridge till 
his death he was constantly engaged in mathematical investiga- 
tion. The number of his papers and memoirs, some of them 
of considerable length, exceeds 800; they were published, at 
the time they were composed, in various scientific journals in 
Europe and America, and are now embodied, through the enter- 
prise of the syndics of the Cambridge University Press, in thirteen 
large quarto volumes. These form an enduring monument 
to his fame. He wrote upon nearly every subject of pure mathe- 
matics, and also upon theoretical dynamics and spherical and 
physical astronomy. He was quite as much a geometrician as 
he was an analyst. Among his most remarkable works may 
be mentioned his ten memoirs on quantics, commenced in 1854 
and completed in 1878; his creation of the theory of matrices; 
his researches on the theory of groups; his memoir on abstract 
geometry, a subject which he created; his introduction into 
geometry of the " absolute "; his researches on the higher 
singularities of curves and surfaces; the classification of cubic 
curves; additions to the theories of rational transformation 
and correspondence; the theory of the twenty-seven lines that 
lie on a cubic surface; the theory of elliptic functions; the 
attraction of ellipsoids; the British Association Reports, 1857 
and 1862, on recent progress in general and special theoretical 
dynamics, and on the secular acceleration of the moon's mean 
motion. He is justly regarded as one of the greatest of mathe- 
maticians. Competent judges have compared him to Leonhard 
Euler for his range, analytical power and introduction of new 
and fertile theories. He was the recipient of nearly every 
academic distinction that can be conferred upon an eminent man 



59° 



CAY LUS^GAZEMBE 



of sdence. Amongst others may be noted honorary degrees by 
the universities of Oxford, Dublin, Edinburgh, Gottingen, 
Heidelberg, Leiden and Bologna. He was fellow .or foreign 
corresponding member of the French Institute, the academies 
of Berlin, Gottingen, St Petersburg, Milan, Rome, Leiden, 
Upsala and Hungary; and he was nominated an officer of the 
Legion of Honour by President Carnot. At various times he 
was president of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, of the 
London Mathematical Society and of the Royal Astronomical 
Society. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1852, 
and received from that body a Royal medal in 1850 and the 
Copley medal in 1882. He also received the De Morgan medal 
from the London Mathematical Society, and the Huygens medal 
from Leiden. His nature was noble and generous, and the 
universal appreciation of this fact gave him great influence in 
his university. His portrait, by Lowes Dickinson, was placed 
in the hall of Trinity College in 1874, and his bust, by Henry 
Wiles, in the library of the same college in 1888. (P. A. M.) 

CAYLUS, ANNE CLAUDE PHILIPPE DE TUBIERES DE 
GRIMOARD DE PESTELS DE LEVIS, Comte de, Marquis 
d'Esternay, . baror de Bransac (1692-1765), French archaeo- 
logist and man of letters, was born at Paris on the 31st of October 
1692. He was the eldest son of Lieutenant-General Count de 
Caylus. His mother, Marthe Marguerite le Valois de Vilette de 
Murcay, comtesse de Caylus (1673-1729), was a cousin of Mme 
de Maintenon, who brought her up like her own daughter. She 
wrote valuable memoirs of the court of Louis XIV. entitled 
Souvenirs; these were edited by Voltaire (1770), and by many 
later editors, notably Renouard (1806), Ch. Asselineau (i860), M. 
de Lescure (1874), M. E. Raunie (1881), J. Soury (1883). While 
a young man Caylus distinguished himself in the campaigns of 
the French army, from 1 709 to 1 7 14. After the peace of Rastadt 
he spent some time in travelling in Italy, Greece, the East, 
England and Germany, and devoted much attention to the 
study and collection of antiquities. He became an active 
member of the Academy of Painting and Sculpture and of the 
Academy of Inscriptions. Among his antiquarian works are 
Recueil d'antiquites igyptiennes, Urusques, grecques, romaineS, et 
gauloises (6 vols., Paris, 1752-1755), Numismata Aurea Impera- 
torum Romanorum, and a Memoir e (1755) on the method of en- 
caustic painting with wax mentioned by Pliny, which he claimed 
to have rediscovered. Diderot, who was no friend to Caylus, 
maintained that the proper method had been found by J. J. 
Bachelier. Caylus was an admirable engraver, and copied many 
of the paintings of the great masters. He caused engravings to 
be made, at his own expense, of Bartoli's copies from ancient 
pictures and published Nouveaux sujets de peinture et de sculpture 
(1755) and Tableaux tire's de I'lliade, de I'Odysse, et de I'EnSide 
(1757). He encouraged artists whose reputations were still in 
the making.but his patronage was somewhat capricious. Diderot 
expressed this fact in an epigram in his Salon of 1765 : "La mort 
nous a delivrds du plus cruel des amateurs." Caylus had quite 
another side to his character. He had a thorough acquaintance 
with the gayest and most disreputable sides of Parisian life, and 
left a number of more or less witty stories dealing with it. These 
were collected (Amsterdam, i787)as his (Euvres iodines completes. 
The best of them is the Histoire de M. Guillaume, cocker (c. 1730). 

The Souvenirs du comte de Caylus, published in 1805, is of very 
doubtful authenticity. See also A. and J. de Goncourt, Portraits 
intimes du X VI I I e siecle; Ch. Nisard's edition of the Corre- 
spondance du comte de Caylus avec le pere Paciaudi (1877); and a 
notice by O. Uzanne prefixed to a volume of his Faceties (1879). 

CAYMAN ISLANDS, a group of three low-lying islands in the 
West Indies. They consist of Grand Cayman, Little Cayman 
and Cayman Brae, and are situated between 79 44' and 8o° 26' 
W. and 19 44' and 19° 46' N., forming a dependency of Jamaica, 
which lies 178 m. E.S.E. Grand Cayman, a rock-bound island 
protected by coral reefs, is 17 m. long and varies from 4 m. to 7 m. 
in breadth. It has two towns, Georgetown and Boddentown. 
Little Cayman and Cayman Brae are both about 70 m. E.N.E. of 
Grand Cayman. Excepting near the rocky coast, the islands are 
fruitful, mahogany and other valuable timbers with some dye- 



wood are grown, and large quantities of coco-nuts are produced 
by the two smaller islands. Phosphate deposits ofconsiderable 
value are worked, but the principal occupation of the inhabitants 
is catching turtles for export to Jamaica. The people are 
excellent shipwrights and do a considerable trade in schooners 
built of native wood. The islands are governed by a com- 
missioner, and the laws passed by the local legislative assembly 
are subject to the assent of the governor of Jamaica. The 
population of the group is about 5000. The islands were dis- 
covered by Columbus, who named them Tortugas from the 
turtles with which the surrounding sea abounds. They were 
never occupied by the Spaniards and were colonized from Jamaica 
by the British. 

CAZALES, JACQUES ANTOINE MARIE DE ^758-1805), 
French orator and politician, was born at Grenade in Languedoc, 
of a family of the lower nobility. Before 1789 he was a cavalry 
officer, but in that year was returned as deputy to the states 
general. In the Constituent Assembly he belonged to the section 
of moderate royalists who sought to set up a constitution on the 
English model, and his speeches in favour of retaining the right 
of war and peace in the king's hands and on the organization- of 
the judiciary gained the applause even of his opponents. Apart 
from his eloquence, which gave him a place among the finest 
orators of the Assembly, Cazales is mainly remembered for a duel 
fought with Barnave. After the insurrection of the 10th of 
August 1792, which led to the downfall of royalty, Cazales 
emigrated. He fought in the army of the emigre's against 
revolutionary France, lived in Switzerland and in England, arid 
did not return to France until 1803. He died on the 24th of 
November 1805. His son, Edmond de Cazales, wrote philo- 
sophical and religious studies. 

See Discours de Cazales, edited by Chare (Paris, 1821), with an 
introduction; F. A. Aulard, Les Orateurs de la Constituante (2nd ad., 
Paris, 1905.) 

CAZALIS, HENRI (1840-^909), French poet and man of 
letters, was born at Cormeilles-en-Parisis (Seine-et-Oise) in 1840. 
He wrote under the pseudonyms of Jean Caselli and Jean Labor. 
His works include: Chants poptdaires de I'ltalie (1865); Vita 
tristis, Reveries fantastiques, Romances sans musique (1865);' Le 
Livre du neant (1872) ; Henry Regnault, sa vie et son ceuvre(i&j2); 
L' Illusion (1875-1893) ; Melancholia (1878); Cdntique des 
cantiques (1885); Les Quatrains d'Al-Gazali (1896); William 
Morris (1897). The author of the Livre du n&ant has a predilec- 
tion for gloomy subjects and especially for pictures of death. 
His oriental habits of thought earned for him the title of the 
" Hindou du Parnasse contemporain." He died in July 1909. 

See a notice by P. Bourget in Anthologig des poltes fr. du XIX' 
siecle , (1887-1888); J. Lemaitre, Les Contemporains (1889); E. 
Faguet in the Revue bleue (October 1893). 

CAZEMBE, the hereditary name of an African chief, whose 
territory was situated south of Lake Mweru and north of 
Bangweulu, between 9° and n° S. In the end of the 18th century 
the authority of the Cazembe was recognized over a very ex- 
tensive district. The kingdom, known also as the Cazembe, 
continued to exist, though with gradually diminishing power arid 
extent, until the last quarter of the 19th century, when the 
Cazembe sank to the rank of a petty chief. The country is now 
divided between Great Britain and Belgian Congo. The British 
half, lying east of the Luapula, forms part of Rhodesia, and the 
chief town in it is called Kazembe. The native state, ruled by a 
negro race who overcame the aboriginals, had attained a certain 
degree of civilization. Agriculture was diligently followed, and 
cotton cloth, earthenware and iron goods manufactured. The 
country contains rich deposits of copper, and copper ore was one 
of the principal articles of export. The Cazembe had despotic 
power and used it in barbarous fashion. He had hundreds of 
wives, and his chiefs imitated his example according to their 
means. On his accession every new Cazembe chose a new site 
for his residence. In 1796 the Cazembe was visited by Manoel 
Caetano Pereira, a Portuguese merchant; and in r798 a more 
important journey to the same region was undertaken by Dr 
Francisco Jose Maria de Lacerda. He died in that country oh 



CAZIN— CEARA 



59i 



the i8tb of October that year, but left behind him a valuable 
journal. In 1802 two native traders or pombeiros, Pedro Jo ao 
Baptista and Amaro Jose, were sent by the Portuguese on a 
visit to the Cazembe; and in 183 1 a more extensive mission was 
despatched by the Portuguese governor of Sena. It consisted of 
Major Jos6 Monteiro and Antonio Gamitto, with an escort of 20 
soldiers and 120 negro slaves as porters; but its reception by 
the Cazembe was not altogether satisfactory. In 1868 David 
Livingstone visited the Cazembe, whose capital at that time 
numbered no more than 1000 souls. Since 1894, when the 
country was divided between Britain and the Congo State, it has 
been thoroughly explored. An important copper mining industry 
is carried on in the Congo division of the territory. 

See The Lands of the Cazembe, published by the Royal Geographical 
Society in 1873, containing translations of Lacerda and Baptista s 
journals, and a resume of Gamitto's Muata Cazembe (Lisbon, 
1854); also Livingstone's Last Journals (Lofidon, 1874). 

CAZIN, JEAN CHARLES (1840-1901), French landscape- 
painter, son of a well-known doctor, F. J. Cazin (1 788-1 864), was 
bornat Samer, Pas-de-Calais. AfterstudyinginFrance,he wentto 
England, where he was strongly influenced by the pre-Raphaehte 
movement. His chief earlier pictures have a religious interest, 
shown in such examples as " The Flight into Egypt " (1877), or 
"Hagar and Ishmael" (1880, Luxembourg); and afterwards 
his combination of luminous landscape with figure-subjects 
(" Souvenir de fSte," 1881; " Journee faite," 1888) gave him a 
wide repute, and made him the leader of a new school of idealistic 
subject-painting in France. He was made an officer of the 
Legion of Honour in 1 889. His charming and poetical treatmen t 
of landscape is the feature in his painting which in later years has 
given them an increasing value among connoisseurs. His wife, 
Marie Cazin, who was his pupil and exhibited her first picture at 
the Salon in 1876, the same year in which Cazin himself made his 
debut there, was also a well-known artist and sculptor. 

CAZOTTE, JACQUES (1719-1792), French author, was born at 
Dijon, on the 17th of October 17 19. He was educated by the 
Jesuits, and at twenty-seven he obtained a public office at 
Martinique, but it was not till his return to Paris in 1760 with the 
rank of commissioner-general that he made a public appearance 
as an author. His first attempts, a mock romance, and a coarse 
song, gained so much popularity, both in the court and among 
the people, that he was encouraged to essay something more 
ambitious. He accordingly produced his romance, Les Prouesses 
inimitables d'Ollivier, marquis d'fidesse. He also wrote a number 
of fantastic oriental tales, such as his Mille et unefadaises, Conies 
a dormir debout (1742). His first success was with a " poenv" in 
twelve cantos, and in prose intermixed with verse, entitled 
Ollivier (2 vols., 1762), followed in 1771 by another romance, the 
Lord Impromptu. But the most popular of his works was the 
Diable amoureux (1772), a fantastic tale in which the hero raises 
the devil. The value of the story lies in the picturesque setting, 
and the skill with which its details are carried out. Cazotte 
possessed extreme facility and is said to have turned off a seventh 
canto of Voltaire's Guerre civile de Geneve in a single night. 
About 1775 Cazotte embraced the views of the Illuminati, 
declaring himself possessed of the power of prophecy. It was 
upon this fact that La Harpe based his famous jeu d' esprit, in 
which he represents Cazotte as prophesying the most minute 
events of the Revolution. On the discovery of some of his letters 
in August 1792, Cazotte was arrested; and though he escaped for 
a time through the love and courage of his daughter, he was 
executed on the 25 th of the following month. 

The only complete edition is the CEuvres badines et morales, 
historigues et philosophiques de Jacques Cazotte (4 vols., 1816-1817), 
though more than one collection appeared during his lifetime. An 
edition de luxe of the Diable amoureux was edited (1878) by A. J. 
Pons, and a selection of Cazotte's Conies, edited (1880) by Octave 
Uzanne, is included in the series of Petits Conteurs du XVIII" Steele. 
The best notice of Cazotte is in the Illumines (1852) of Gerard de 
Nerval. 

CEANOTHUS, in botany, a genus of the natural order Rham- 
naceae, containing about forty species of shrubs or small trees, 
natives of North America. They are very attractive from their 
dense panicles of white or blue flowers, and several species are 



known as garden plants. The leaves of one of these, C. america- 
nus, New Jersey tea, or red-root, are used instead of the true tea; 
the root, which contains a red colouring matter, has long been 
employed by the Indians as a febrifuge. 

CEARA, a northern maritime state of Brazil, bounded N. by 
the Atlantic, E. by the Atlantic and the states of Rio Grande 
do Norte and Parahyba, S. by Pernambuco. and W. by Piauhy; 
and having an area of 4°.253 S Q- m - It lies partly upon the 
north-e^st slope of the great Brazilian plateau, and partly upon 
the sandy coastal plain. Its surface is a succession of great ter- 
races, facing north and north-east, formed by the denudation of 
the ancient sandstone plateau which once covered this part of the 
continent; the terraces are seamed by watercourses, and their 
valleys are broken by hills and ranges of highlands. The latter 
are usually described as mountain ranges, but they are, in fact, 
only the remains of the ancient plateau, capped with horizontal 
strata of sandstone, and having a remarkably uniform altitude 
of 2000 to 2400 ft. The flat top of such a range is called a chapada 
or taboleira, and its width in places is from 32 to 56 m. The 
boundary line with Piauhy follows one of these ranges, the Serra 
de Ibiapaba, which unites with another range on the southern 
boundary of the state, known as the Serra do, Araripe. Another 
range, or escarpment, crosses the state from east to west, but 
is broken into two principal divisions, each having several local 
names. These ranges are not continuous, the breaking down 
of the ancient plateau having been irregular and uneven. The 
higher ranges intercept considerable moisture from the prevailing 
trade winds, and their flanks and valleys are covered with 
forest, but the plateaus are either thinly wooded or open campo. 
These upland forests are of a scrubby character and are called 
catingas. 

The sandy, coastal plain, with a width of 12 to 18 m., is nearly 
bare of vegetation. The rivers of the state are small and, with 
one or two exceptions, become completely dry in the dry season. 
The largest is the Jaguaribe, which flows entirely across the state 
in a north-east direction with an estimated length of 210 
to 465 m. The year is divided into a rainy and dry season, the 
rains beginning in January to March and lasting until June. The 
dry season, July to December, is sometimes broken by slight 
showers in September and October, but these are of very slight 
importance. The soil is thin and porous and does not retain 
moisture, consequently the long, dry season turns the country 
into a barren desert, relieved only by vegetation along the 
river courses and mountain ranges, and by the hardy, widely- 
distributed carnahuba palm (Copernicia cerif era) , .which in places 
forms groves of considerable extent. Sometimes the rains fail 
altogether, and then a drought (sicca) ensues, causing famine 
and pestilence throughout the entire region. The most destruc- 
tive droughts recorded are those of 1711, 1723, i777 -I 77 8 » I 79°. 
1825, 1844-1845, and 1877-1878, the last-mentioned destroy- 
ing nearly all the live-stock in the state, and causing the death 
through starvation and pestilence of nearly half-a-million people, 
or over half the population. The climate, which is generally de- 
scribed as healthful, is hot and humid on the coast, tempered by 
the cool trade winds; but in the more elevated regions it is very 
hot and dry, although the nights are cool. The sandy zone along 
the coast is nearly barren, but behind this is a more elevated 
region with broken surfaces and sandy soil which is amenable to 
cultivation and produces fruit and most tropical products when 
conditions are favourable. 

The higher plateau is devoted almost exclusively to cattle- 
raising, once the principal industry of the state, though recurring 
seccas have been an insuperable obstacle to its profitable develop- 
ment. There is still a considerable export of cattle, hides and 
skins, but no effort is made to develop the production of jerked 
beef on a large scale. Horses are raised to a limited extent; also 
goats, sheep and swine. The principal agricultural products are 
cotton, coffee, sugar, mandioca and tropical fruits. The pro- 
duction of cotton has increased largely since the development 
of cotton manufactures in Brazil. The natural vegetable pro- 
ductions are important, and include manicoba or Ceara rubber, 
carnahuba wax and fibre, caju wine and ipecacuanha. 



59* 



CEAWLIN— CEBU 



There are two lines of railway running inland from the coast: 
the Baturite line from Fortaleza to Senador Pompeu, 179 m., 
and the Sobral line from Camocim (a small port) to Ipu, 134 m. 
These railways were built by the national government after the 
drought of 1877-1878 to give work to the starving refugees, and 
are now operated under leases. Great dams were also begun 
for irrigation purposes. 

The misfortunes and poverty of the people have hindered their 
material development to a large extent, but another obstacle 
is to be found in their racial and social composition. Only a 
very small percentage of the population which numbered 805,687 
in 1890, and 849,127 in 1900, is of pure European origin, the 
great majority being of the coloured races and their mixtures with 
the whites. The number of landed proprietors, professional men, 
merchants, &c, is comparatively small (about one-sixth), and 
a part of these are of mixed blood; the remaining five-sixths 
own no property, pay no taxes, and derive no benefits from the 
social and political institutions about them beyond the protection 
of the proprietors upon whose estates they live, the nominal 
protection of the state, and an occasional day's wage. Education 
has made no impression upon such people, and is confined almost 
exclusively to the upper classes, from which some of the most 
prominent men in Brazilian politics and literature have come. 
The state of Ceara has formed a bishopric of the Roman Catholic 
Church since 1853, the bishop having his residence at Fortaleza. 
The state is represented in the national congress by three senators 
and ten deputies. Its local government is vested in a president 
and legislative assembly of one chamber elected for a period of 
four years. Three vice-presidents are elected at the same time 
who succeed to the presidency in case of a vacancy according to 
the number of votes received. The judicial organization con- 
sists of the tribunal da Relaca.6 at the state capital and sub- 
ordinate courts in the comarcas and termos. The judges of the 
higher courts are appointed for life. The capital of the state is 
Fortaleza, sometimes called Ceara, which is also the principal 
commercial centre and shipping port. The principal towns 
are Aracaty, Baturite, Acarahu, Crato, Maranguape and Sobral. 
The territory of Ceara. includes three of the capitanias originally 
granted by the Portuguese crown in 1534. The first attempts 
to settle the territory failed, and the earliest Portuguese settle- 
ment was made near the mouth of the Rio Camocim in 1604. 
The French were already established on the coast, with their 
headquarters at Saint Louis, now Mar'anh ao. Ceaf a was occupied 
by the Dutch from 1637 to 1654, and became a dependency of 
Pernambuco in 1680; this relationship lasted until 1799, when 
the capitania of Ceara was made independent. The capitania 
became a province in 1822 under Dom Pedro I. A revolution 
followed in 1824, the president of the province was deposed fifteen 
days after his arrival, and a republic was proclaimed. Internal 
dissensions immediately broke out, the new president was as- 
sassinated, and after a brief reign of terror the province resumed 
its allegiance to the empire. Ceara. was one of the first provinces 
of Brazil to abolish slavery. 

See Rodolpho Theophilo, Historia da Secca do Ceara, 1877 a 1880 
(Fortaleza, 1883) ; Professor and Mrs Louis Agassiz, A Journey in 
Brazil (Boston, 1869); George Gardiner, Travels in the Interior of 
Brazil (London, 1846) ; C. F. Hartt, Geology and Physical Geography 
of Brazil (Boston, 1870); and H. H. Smith, Brazil: the Amazon 
and the Coast (New York, 1879). 

CEAWLIN (d. 593), king of the West Saxons, first mentioned 
in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle under the date 556 as fighting with 
his father Cynric against the Britons at the battle of Beranbyrig 
or Barbury Hill. Becoming king in 560, he began a career of 
conquest. Silchester was taken, and moving eastwards Ceawlin 
and his brother Cutha defeated the forces of ^Ethelberht, king of 
Kent, at the battle of Wibbandun in 568. In 577 he led the West 
Saxons from Winchester towards the Severn valley; gained an 
important victory over some British kings at Deorham, and 
added the district round /Gloucester, Bath and Cirencester to 
his kingdom. A further advance was begun in 583. Uriconium, 
a town near the Wrekin, and Pengwyrn, the modern Shrewsbury, 
were destroyed; but soon Ceawlin was defeated by the Britons 



at Fethanleag or Faddiley, near Nantwich, and his progress was 
effectually checked. Intestine strife among the West Saxons 
followed. In 591 Ceawlin lost the western part of his kingdom, 
and in 592 was defeated by his nephew, Ceolric, at Wanborough, 
and driven from Wessex. He was killed in 593, possibly in 
an attempt to regain his kingdom. Ceawlin is included in the 
Chronicle among the Bretwaldas. 

See Two of the Saxon Chronicles, ed. by C. Plummer (Oxford, 1892); 
Dictionary of National Biography, vol. ix (London, 1887); E. Guest, 
Origines Celticae, vol. ii. (London, 1883), 

CEBES, the name of two Greek philosophers. (1) Cebes of 
Cyzicus, mentioned in Athenaeus (iv. 156 d), seems to have been 
a Stoic, who lived during the reign of Marcus Aurelius. Some 
would attribute to him the Tabula Cebetis (see below), but as that 
work was well known in the time of Lucian, it is probably to 
be placed earlier. (2) Cebes of Thebes, a disciple of Socrates 
and Philolaus. He is one of the speakers in the Phaedo of Plato, 
in which he is represented as an earnest seeker after virtue 
and truth, keen in argument and cautious in decision. Three 
dialogues, the 'E^donn, the Qphvixos and the IIiVa£ or Tabula, 
are attributed to him by Suidas and Diogenes Laertius. The 
two former are lost, and most scholars deny the authenticity 
of the Tabula on the ground of material and verbal anachronisms. 
They attribute it either to Cebes of Cyzicus (above) or to an 
anonymous author, of the 1st century A.D., who assumed the 
characteV of Cebes of Thebes. The work professes to be an 
interpretation of an allegorical picture in the temple of Cronus 
at Athens or Thebes. The author develops the Platonic theory 
of pre-existence, and shows that true education consists not in 
mere erudition, but rather in the formation of character. 

The Tabula has been widely translated both into European 
languages and into Arabic (the latter version published with the 
Greek text and Latin translation by Salmasius in 1640). It is usually 
printed together with Epictetus. Separate editions by C. S. Jerram 
(with introduction and notes, 1878), C. Prachter (1893), and many 
others. See Zeller's History of Greek Philosophy; F. Klopfer, De 
Cebetis Tabula (1818-1822); C. Prachter, Cebetis Tabula quanam 
aetate conscripta esse videatur (1885). 

CEBtJ, a city and municipality, port of entry, and the capital 
of the province of Cebu, island of Cebu, Philippine Islands, on 
the E. coast, a little N. of the centre. Pop. (1903) of the city 
proper, 18,330;. of the municipality, 31,079; in the same year, 
after the census enumeration, the neighbouring municipalities 
of Mabolo (pop. 1903, 8454) and EI Pardo (pop. 6461) were 
added to the municipality of Cebu. The surrounding country, 
which is level and fertile, is traversed by several good carriage 
roads. The port, formed by the north-west shore of the island 
of Mactan, is well protected from violent winds, and in front of 
it stands a picturesque Spanish fort. The streets are wide and 
regularly laid out. The government buildings are fairly good, 
and the church buildings very fine. Cebu is an episcopal see, 
and the palace of the bishop, although small, is widely known 
for its interior decorations. The Augustinian church is famous 
for its so-called miraculous image of Santo Nino. The Recoleto 
monastery and the seminary of San Carlos are worthy of mention. 
The cathedral was finished toward the end of the eighteenth 
century. The San Jose hospital here was founded by one of 
the religious orders. There was a leper hospital in the outskirts 
of the city until 1906, when a leper colony was established on the 
island of Culion. Commercially, Cebu is the second city of the 
Philippines. Hemp, tobacco, sugar and copra are the most 
important exports. In addition to the trade with foreign ports, 
an important domestic commerce is carried on with Manila, 
Bohol, Negros and northern Mindanao. Salt, pottery and 
fabrics of silk, sinamay, hemp and cotton are manufactured, 
and sugar sacks are woven in considerable quantity. The island 
of Cebu is known for its excellent mangoes and for the rare 
cornucopia-shaped sponges, called Venus's flower basket 
{Euplectella aspergillum), found here. Historically Cebu is 
famous as the scene of Magellan's landing in 1521. A cross, 
said to be the one first erected by him, is still preserved in the 
cathedral. The great explorer lost his life in the neighbouring 
island of Mactan; a monument marks the place where he was 



CECGO D'ASCOLI— CECILIA 



593 



killed. The first Spanish settlement in the Philippines was 
established at Cebu in 1565, and from that year to 1571 it was 
the capital of the colony. The city is unincorporated. The 
language is Cebu-Visayan. 

CECCO D'ASCOLI (i257-i327),the popular name of Francesco 
degli Stabixi, a famous Italian encyclopaedist and poet — Cecco 
being the diminutive of Francesco, and Ascoli, in the marshes of 
Ancona, the place of the philosopher's birth. He devoted himself 
to the study of mathematics and astrology, and in 1322 was made 
professor of the latter science at the university of Bologna. It 
is alleged that he entered the service of Pope John XXII. at 
Avignon, and that he cultivated the acquaintance of Dante 
only to quarrel with the great poet afterwards; but of this there 
is no evidence. It is certain, however, that, having published 
a commentary on the sphere of John de Sacrobosco, in which he 
propounded audacious theories concerning the employment 
and agency of demons, he got into difficulties with the clerical 
party, and was condemned in 1324 to certain fasts and prayers, 
and to the payment of a fine of seventy crowns. To elude 
this sentence he betook himself to Florence, where he was 
attached to the household of Carlo di Calabria. But his free- 
thinking and plain speaking had got him many enemies; he 
had attacked the Commedia of Dante, and the Canzone d' A more 
of Guido Cavalcanti; and his fate was sealed. Dino di Garbo, 
the physician, was indefatigable in pursuit of him; and the 
old accusation of impiety being renewed, Cecco was again tried 
and sentenced, this time to the stake. He was burned at Florence 
the day after sentence, in the seventieth year of his age. 

Cecco d' Ascoli left many works in manuscript, most of which 
have never been given to the world. The book by which he 
achieved his renown and which led to his death was the Acerba 
(from acervus), an encyclopaedic poem, of which in 1546, the 
date of the last reprint, more than twenty editions had been 
issued. It is unfinished, and consists of four books in sesta rima. 
The first book treats of astronomy and meteorology; the second 
of stellar influences, of physiognomy, and of the vices and virtues; 
the third of minerals and of the love of animals; while the fourth 
propounds and solves a number of moral and physical problems. 
Of a fifth book, on theology, the initial chapter alone was com- 
pleted. A man of immense erudition and of great and varied 
abilities, Cecco, whose knowledge was based on experiment and 
observation (a fact that of itself is enough to distinguish him from 
the crowd of savants of that age),had outstripped his contempor- 
aries in many things. He knew of metallic aerolites and shooting 
stars; the mystery of the dew was plain to him; fossil plants 
were accounted for by him through terrene revolutions which 
had resulted in the formation of mountains; he is even said to 
have divined the circulation of the blood. Altogether a remark- 
able man, he may be described as one of the many Cassandras 
of the middle ages — one of the many prophets who spoke of 
coming light, and were listened to but to have their words cast 
back at them in accusations of impiety and sentences of death. 

The least faulty of the many editions of the Acerba is that of 
Venice, dated 1510. The earliest known, which has become exces- 
sively rare, is that of Brescia, which has no date, but is ascribed to 
1473 or thereabouts. 

CECIL, the name of a famous English family. This house, 
whose two branches hold each a marquessate, had a great 
statesman and administrator to establish and enrich it. The 
first Lord Burghley's many inquiries concerning the origin of 
his family created for it more than one splendid and improbable 
genealogy, although his grandfather is the first ascertained 
ancestor. In the latter half of the 15th century a family of 
yeomen or small gentry with the surname of Seyceld, whose 
descendants were accepted by Lord Burghley as his kinsmen, 
lived on their lands at Allt yr Ynys in Walterstone, a Hereford- 
shire parish on the Welsh marches. Of the will of Richard ap 
Philip Seyceld of Allt yr Ynys, made in 1508, one David ap 
Richard Seyceld, apparently his younger son, was overseer. 
This David seems identical with David Cyssell, Scisseld or Cecill, 
a yeoman admitted in 1494 to the freedom of Stamford in Lincoln- 
shire. He may well have been one of those men from the Welsh 



border who fought at Bosworth, for at the funeral of Henry VII. 
he appears as a yeoman of the guard and is given a livery of 
black cloth. At Stamford he prospered, being three times mayor 
and three times member of parliament for the borough, and he 
served as sheriff of Northamptonshire in 1532-1533. Remaining 
in the service of Henry VIII. he was advanced to be yeoman 
of the chamber and sergeant-at-arms, being rewarded with several 
profitable leases and offices. His first wife was the daughter of 
a Stamford alderman, and his second the already twice widowed 
heir of a Lincolnshire squire. By the first marriage David CeGil 
left at his death in 1536 a son and heir, Richard Cecil, who enjoyed 
a place at court as yeoman of the king's wardrobe under Henry 
VIII. and Edward VI. A gentleman of the privy chamber and 
sometime sheriff of Rutland, Richard Cecil had his share at the 
distribution of abbey lands, St Michael's priory in Stamford being 
among the grants made to him. William Cecil, only son of 
Richard, was born, by his own account, in 1520, at Bourne in 
Lincolnshire. He advanced himself first in the service of the 
protector Somerset, after whose fall, his great abilities being 
necessary to the council, he was made a secretary of state and 
sworn of the privy council. In 1 571 he was created Lord Burghley, 
and from 1572, when he was given the Garter, he was lord 
high treasurer and principal minister to Queen Elizabeth. By 
his first wife, Mary Cheke, sister of the scholar Sir John Cheke, 
tutor to Edward VI., he was father to Thomas, first earl of 
Exeter. By a second wife, Mildred Cooke, the most learned lady 
of her time, he had an only surviving son, Robert Cecil, ancestor of 
the house of Salisbury. 

Created earl of Exeter by James I., the second Lord Burghley 
was more soldier than statesman, and from his death to the 
present day the elder line of the Cecils has taken small part in 
public affairs. William Cecil, 2nd earl of Exeter, took as his 
first wife the Lady Roos, daughter and heir of the 3rd earl of 
Rutland of the Manners family. The son of this marriage in- 
herited the barony of Roos as heir general, and died as a Roman 
Catholic at Naples in 1618 leaving no issue. A third son of the 
1st earl was Edward Cecil, a somewhat incompetent military 
commander, created in 1625 Lord Cecil of Putney and Viscount 
Wimbledon, titles that died with him in 1638, although he was 
thrice married. In 1801 a marquessate was given to the 10th 
earl of Exeter, the story of whose marriage with Sarah Hoggins, 
daughter of a Shropshire husbandman, . has been refined by 
Tennyson into the romance of " The Lord of Burleigh." This 
elder line is still seated at Burghley, the great mansion built 
by their ancestor, the first lord. 

The younger or Hatfield line was founded by Robert Cecil, 
the only surviving son of the great Burghley's second marriage. 
As a secretary of state he followed in his father's steps, and on 
the death of Elizabeth he may be said to have secured the 
accession of King James, who created him Lord Cecil of Essendine 
(1603), Viscount Cranborne (1604), and earl of Salisbury (1605). 
Forcedbytheking to exchange his house of Theobalds for Hatfield, 
he died in 161 2, worn out with incessant labour, before he could 
inhabit the house which he built upon his new Hertfordshire 
estate. Of Burghley and his son Salisbury, "great ministers 
of state in the eyes of Christendom," Clarendon writes that 
" their wisdom and virtues died with them." The 2nd earl of 
Salisbury, " a man of no words, except in hunting and hawking," 
was at first remarked for his obsequiousness to the court party, 
but taking no part in the Civil War came at last to sit in the 
Protector's parliament. After the Restoration, Pepys saw him, 
old and discredited, at Hatfield, and notes him as " my simple 
Lord Salisbury." The 7th earl was created marquess of Salisbury 
in 1789. 

Hatfield House, a great Jacobean mansion which has suffered 
much from restoration and rebuilding, contains in its library 
the famous series of state papers which passed through the hands 
of Burghley and his son Salisbury, invaluable sources for the 
history of their period. (O. Ba.) 

CECILIA, SAINT, in the Catholic Church the patron saint of 
music and of the blind. Her festival falls on the 22nd of Novem'- 
ber. It was long supposed that she was a noble lady of Rome 



594 



CEGROPIA^CEDAR 



who, with her husband and other friends whom she had con- : 
verted, suffered martydom, c. 230, under the emperor Alexander 
Severus. The researches of de Rossi, however {Rom. sott. 
ii. 147), go to confirm the statement of Fortunatus, bishop of 
Poitiers (d. 600), that she perished in Sicily under Marcus 
Aurelius between 176 and 180. A church in her honour existed 
in Rome from about the 4th century, and was rebuilt with much 
splendour by Pope Paschal I. about the year 820, and again by 
Cardinal Sfondrati in 1 599. It is situated in the Trastevere near 
the Ripa Grande quay, where in earlier days the Ghetto was 
located, and gives a " title " to a cardinal priest. Cecilia, whose 
musical fame rests on a passing notice in her legend that she 
praised God by instrumental as well as vocal music, has inspired 
many a masterpiece in art, including the Raphael at Bologna, 
the Rubens in Berlin, the Domenichino in Paris, and in literature, 
where she is commemorated especially by Chaucer's " Seconde 
Nonnes Tale," and by Dryden's famous ode, set to music by 
Handel in 1736, and later by Sir Hubert Parry (1889). 

Another St Cecilia, who suffered in Africa in the persecution 
of Diocletian (303-304), is commemorated on the nth of 
February. 

See U. Chevalier, Repertoire des sources historigues (1905), i. 826 f. 

CECROPIA, inbotany,agenusof trees (natural order MorSceae), 
native of tropical America. They are of very rapid growth, 
affording a light wood used for making floats. C. peltata is the 
trumpet tree, so-called from the use made of its hollow stems 
by the Uaupe Indians as a musical instrument. It is a tree 
reaching about 50 ft. in height with a large spreading head, and 
deeply lobed leaves 12 in. or more in diameter. The hollows 
of the stem and branches are inhabited by ants, which in return 
for the shelter thus afforded, and food in the form of succulent 
growths on the base of the leaf-stalks, repel the attacks of leaf- 
cutting ants which would otherwise strip the tree of its leaves. 
This is an instance of " myrmecophily," i.e. a living together for, 
mutual benefit of the ants and the plant. 

CECROPS (KkpoiA), traditionally the first king of Attica, 
and the founder of its political life (Pausanias ix. 33). He was 
said to have divided the inhabitants into twelve communities, 
to have instituted the laws of marriage and property, and a 
new form of worship. The introduction of bloodless sacrifice, 
the burial of the dead, and the invention of writing were also 
attributed to him. He is said to have acted as umpire during 
the dispute of Poseidon and Athena for the possession of Attica. 
He decided in favour of the goddess,who planted the firstolivetree, 
which he adjudged to be more useful than the horse (or water) 
which Poseidon caused to spring forth from the Acropolis rock 
with a blow of his trident (Herodotus viii. 55 ; Apollodorus iii. 14). 
As one of the autochthones of Attica, Cecrops is represented as 
human in the upper part of his body, while the lower part is 
shaped like a dragon (hence he is sometimes called Sufrvhs or 
geminus, Diod. Sic. i. 28; Ovid, Metam. ii. 555). Miss J. E. 
Harrison (in Classical Review, January 1895) endeavours to show 
that Cecrops is the husband of Athene, identical with the snake- 
like Zeus Soter or Sosipolis, and the father of Erechtheus- 
Erichthonius. 

CEDAR (Lat. cedrus, Gr. KeSpot), a name applied to several 
members of the natural order Coniferae. The word has been 
derived from the Arabic Kedr, worth or value, or from Kedrat, 
strong, and has been supposed by some to have taken its origin 
from the brook Kedron, in Judaea. 

Cedrus Libani, the far-famed Cedar of Lebanon, is a tree 
which, on account of its beauty, stateliness and strength, has 
always been a favourite with poets and painters, and which, in 
the ' figurative language of prophecy, is frequently employed in 
the Scriptures as a symbol of power, prosperity and longevity. 
It grows to a vertical height of , from 50 to 80 ft. — " exalted 
above all trees of the field " — and at an elevation of about 6000 
ft. above sea-level. In the young, tree, the bole is straight and 
upright, and one or two leading branches rise above the rest. As 
the tree increases in size, however, the upper branches become 
mingled together, and the tree is then clump^headed. Numerous 
lateral ramifying branches spread out from the main trunk in a I 



horizontal direction, tier upon tier, coverings compass of ground 
the diameter of which is often greater than the height of the tree. 
William Gilpin, in his Forest Scenery, describes a cedar which, at 
an age of about 118 years, had attained to a height of 53 ft. and 
had a horizontal expanse of 96 ft. The branchlets of the cedar 
take the same direction as the branches, and the foliage is very 
dense. The tree, as with the rest of the fir-tribe, except the 
larch, is evergreen; new leaves are developed every spring, but 
their fall is gradual. In shape the leaves are straight, tapering, 
cylindrical and pointed; they are about 1 in. long and of a dark 
green colour, and grow in alternate tufts of about thirty in 
number. The male and female flowers grow on the same tree, 
but are separate. The cones, which are on the upper side of the 
branches, are flattened at the ends and are 4 to 5 in. in length 
and 2 in. wide; they take two years to come to perfection and 
while growing exude much resin. The scales are close pressed 
to one another and are reddish in colour. The seeds are provided 
with a long membranous Wing. The root of the tree is very 
strong and ramifying. The cedar flourishes best on sandy, 
loamy soils. It still grows on Lebanon, though for several 
centuries it was believed to be restricted to a small grove in- the 
Kadisha valley at 6000 ft. elevation, about 15 m. from Beyrout. 
The number of trees in this grove has been gradually diminishing, 
and as no young trees or seedlings occur, the grove will probably 
become extinct in course of time. Cedars are now known to occur 
in great numbers on Mt. Lebanon, chiefly on the western slopes, 
not forming a continuous forest, but in groves, some of which 
contain several thousands of trees. There are also large forests 
on the higher slopes of the Taurus and Anti-Taurus mountains. 
Lamartine tells us that the Arabs regard the trees as endowed 
with the principles of continual existence, and with reasoning 
and prescient powers, which enable them to prepare for the 
changes of the seasons. 

The wood of the cedar of Lebanon is fragrant, though not so 
strongly scented as that of the juniper or red-cedar of America. 
The wood is generally reddish-brown, light and of a coarse grain 
and spongy texture, easy to work, but liable to shrink and warp. 
Mountain-grown wood is harder, stronger, less liable to warp and 
more durable; 

The cedar of Lebanon is cultivated in Europe for ornament 
only. It can be grown in parks and gardens, and thrives well; 
but the young plants are unable to bear great variations of 
temperature. The cedar is not mentioned in Evelyn's Silva 
(1664), but it must have been introduced shortly afterwards. 
The famous Enfield cedar was planted by Dr Robert Uvedale, 
(1642-17 2 2)., a noted schoolmaster and horticulturist, between 
1662-1670, and an old cedar at Bretby Park in Derbyshire is 
known to have been planted in 1676. Some very old cedars 
exist also at Syon House, Woburn Abbey, Warwick Castle and 
elsewhere, which presumably date from the 17th century. The 
first cedars in Scotland were planted at Hopetoun House in 1740; 
and the first one said to have been introduced into France was 
brought from England by Bernard de Jussieu in 1734, and placed 
in the Jardin des Plantes. Cedar-wood is earliest noticed in 
Leviticus xiv. 4, 6, where it is prescribed among the materials to 
be used for the cleansing of leprosy ; but the wood there spoken 
of was probably that of the juniper. The term Eres (cedar) of 
Scripture does not apply strictly to one kind of plant, but was 
used indefinitely in ancient times, as is the word cedar at present. 
The term arz is applied by the Arabs to the cedar of Lebanon, to 
the common pine-tree, and to the juniper; and certainly the 
" cedars " for masts, mentioned in Ezek. xxvii. 5, must have been 
pine-trees. It seems very probable that the fourscore thousand 
hewers employed by Solomon for cutting timber did not confine 
their queries simply to what would now be termed cedars and
fir-trees. Dr John Lindley considered that some of the cedar- 
trees sent by Hiram, king of Tyre, to Jerusalem might have been 
procured from Mount Atlas, and have been identical with 
Callitris.quadrivalvis, or arar-tree, the wood of which is hard and 
durable, and was much in request in former times for the building 
of temples. The timber-work of the roof of Cordova cathedral, 
built eleven centuries ago, is composed of it. In the time> of 



CEDAR CREEK— CEFALU 



595 



Vitruvius " cedars " were growing in Crete, Africa and Syria. 
Pliny says that their wood was everlasting, and therefore images 
of the gods were made of it; he makes mention also of the oil of 
cedar, or cedrium, distilled from the wood, and used by the 
ancients for preserving their books from moths and damp; 
papyri anointed or rubbed with cedrium were on this account 
called ced ati libri. Drawers of cedar or chips of the wood are 
now employed to protect furs and woollen stuffs from injury by 
moths. Cedar-wood, however, is said to be injurious to natural 
history objects, and to instruments placed in cabinets made of it, 
as the resinous matter of the wood becomes deposited upon them. 
Cedria, or cedar resin, is a substance similar to mastic, that flows 
from incisions in the tree; and cedar manna is a sweet exudation 
from its branches. 

The genus Cedrus contains two other species closely allied to 
C. Libani— Cedrus Deodar a, the deodar, or " god tree " of the 
Himalayas, and Cedrus aUantica, of the Atlas range, North 
Africa. The deodar forms forests on the mountains of Afghan- 
istan, North Beluchistan and the north-west Himalayas, flourish- 
ing in all the higher mountains from Nepal up to Kashmir, 
at an elevation of from 5500 to 12,000 ft.; on the peaks to the 
northern side of theBoorung Pass it grows to a height of 60 to 
70 ft. before branching. The wood is close-grained, long-fibred, 
perfumed -and highly resinous, and resists the action of water. 
The foliage is of a paler green, the leaves are slender and longer, 
and the twigs are thinner than those of C. Libani. The tree is 
employed for a variety of useful purposes, especially in building. 
It is now much cultivated in England as an ornamental plant. 
C. aUantica, the Atlas cedar, has shorter and denser leaves than 
C. Libani; the leaves are glaucous, sometimes of a silvery 
whiteness, and the cones smaller than in the other two forms; its 
wood also is hard, and more rapid in growth than is that of the 
ordinary cedar. It is found at an altitude above the sea of from 
4000 to 6000 ft. 

The name cedar is applied to a variety of trees, including 
species of several genera of Conifers, Juniperus, Thuja, Libocedrus 
and Cupressus. Thuja gigantea of western North America is 
known in the United States as White (or Yellow) cedar, and the 
same name is applied to Cupressus Lawsoniana, the Port Orford 
or Oregon cedar, a native of the north-west States, and one of the 
most valuable juniper trees of North America. The Bermuda 
cedar {Juniperus bermudiana) and the red or American cedar 
(/. virginiana) are both much used in joinery and in the manu- 
facture of pencils; though other woods are now superseding them 
for pencil-making. The Japanese cedar (Cryptomeria japonica) 
is a kind of cypress, the wood of which is very durable. Another 
species of cypress (Cupressus thyoides, also known as Chamae- 
typaris thyoides or sphaeroidea), found in swamps in the south of 
Ohio and Massachusetts, is known as the American white cedar. 
It has small leaves and fibrous bark, the wood is light, soft and 
easily-worked, and very durable in contact with the soil, and is 
much used for boat-building and for making fences and coopers' 
staves. The Spanish cedar is a name applied to Juniperus 
tkurifera, a native of the western Mediterranean region, and also 
to another speties, /. Oxy cedrus, a common plant in the Mediter- 
ranean region, forming a shrub or low tree with spreading 
branches and short, stiff, prickly leaves. The latter was much 
used by the Greeks for making images; and its empyreumatic 
oil, Huile de Cade, is used medicinally for skin-diseases. A 
species of cypress, Cupressus lusitanica, which has been naturalized 
in the neighbourhood of Cintra is known as the cedar of Goa. 
The genus Widdringtonia of tropical and South Africa is also 
known locally as cedar. W. juniperoides is the characteristic 
tree of the Cederberg range in Cape Colony, while W. Whytei, 
recently discovered in Nyasaland and Rhodesia (the Mlanje 
cedar) is a fine tree reaching 150 ft. in height, and yielding an 
ornamental light yellow-brown wood, suitable for building. 
The order Cedrelaceae (which is entirely distinct from the 
Conifers) includes, along with the mahoganies and other valuable 
timber- trees, the Jamaica and the Australian red cedars, Cedrela 
odorata, and C. Toona respectively. The cedar-wood of Guiana, 
used for making canoes, is a species of the natural order Bur- 



seraceae, Idea alHssima. It is a large tree, reaching 100 ft. in 
height, the wood is easily worked, fragrant and durable. 

See Gordon's Pinetum; Loiseleur-Deslongchamps, Histoire du 
cedre du Liban (Paris, 1838) ; Loudon, Arboretum Britannicum, 
vol. iv. pp. 2404-2432 (London, 1839) ; Marquis de Chambray, 
Traite pratique des arbres resineux coniferes (Paris, 1845); J- D- 
Hooker, Nat. Hist. Review (January, 1862), pp. 11-18; Brandis, 
Forest Flora of North-west and Central India, pp. 516-525 (London, 
1874) ; Veitch, Manual of Coniferae (2nd ed., London, 1900). 

CEDAR CREEK, a small branch of the North Fork of the 
Shenandoah river, Virginia, U.S.A. It is known in American 
history as the scene of a memorable battle, which took place on 
the 19th of October 1864, between the Union army under Major- 
General P. H. Sheridan and the Confederates under Lieut.- General 
J. A. Early. (See Shenandoah Valley Campaigns.) 

CEDAR FALLS, a city of Black Hawk county, Iowa, U.S.A., 
on the Cedar river, about 100 m. W. of Dubuque. Pop. (1890) 
3459; (i9°°) 53*9; (190S, state census) 5329 (872 being foreign- 
born); (1910) 5012. It is served by the Chicago, Rock Island & 
Pacific, the Illinois Central, the Chicago Great Western, and the 
Waterloo, Cedar Falls & Northern railways. Its manufactures 
include flour, ground feed, other cereal preparations, hardware 
specialties, canned vegetables (especially Indian corn), and plan- 
ing-mill products. It is the seat of the state normal school 
(1876), and has a public library. The settlement of the place, 
the oldest in the county, was begun in 1847; it was laid out 
as a town in 185 1, incorporated as a village in 1857, chartered as 
a city in 1865, and for a short time in 1853 was the county-seat. 

CEDAR RAPIDS, a city of Linn county, Iowa, U.S.A., on the 
Cedar river, in the east central part of the state. Pop. (1896) 
18,020; (1900) 25,656, of whom 4478 were foreign-born, an 
unusually large and influential part being Bohemians; (1910 
census) 32,811. It is served by the Chicago, Milwaukee & Saint 
Paul, the Chicago & North- Western, the Chicago, Rock Island 
& Pacific (which has repair shops here), and the Illinois 
Central railways, and by interurban electric lines. The city 
has an air of substantial prosperity; its principal streets are 
from 80 ft. to 1 20 ft. wide, paved with brick and asphalt, and well 
shaded. Prominent among its buildings are the federal building, 
the auditorium, the public library and the Masonic library, which 
contains one of the best collections of Masonic literature in the 
world. The city has two well-equipped hospitals, a home for 
aged women, a home for the friendless, and four parks. The 
grounds of the Cedar Rapids country club comprise 180 acres. 
Cedar Rapids is in a rich agricultural country. The name of 
the city was suggested from the rapids in the river, which afford 
abundant water power and have enabled the city to take first 
rank in Iowa (1905) as a manufacturing centre. From 1900 to 
1905 there was an increase in the value of its manufactured 
products from $11,135,435 to $16,279,706, or 46-2%. More than 
one-fourth of the value of its manufactures is in Quaker Oats 
and other food preparations; among those of less importance 
are lumber and planing-mill products, foundry and machine- 
shop products, furniture, patent medicines, pumps, carriages and 
waggons, packed meats and agricultural implements. Cedar 
Rapids has also a large grain trade and a large jobbing business, 
especially in dry goods, millinery, groceries, paper and drugs. 
At Cedar Rapids are Coe College (co-educational; Presbyterian), 
which grew out of the Cedar Rapids Collegiate Institute (1851), 
was named in honour of Daniel Coe, a benefactor, and was 
chartered under its present name and opened in 1881; the 
Interstate Correspondence schools, and the Cedar Rapids 
business college. The first settlers came in 1838; but the city's 
early growth was slow, and it was not incorporated until 1856. 
It has been governed by commission since 1908. 

CEFALU (anc. Cephaloedium) , a seaport and episcopal see 
of the province of Palermo, Sicily, 42 m. E. of Palermo by rail. 
Pop. (1901)13,273. The ancient town (of Sicel origin, probably, 
despite its Greek name) takes its name from the headland 
(Kt<t>a\ii, head) upon which it stood (1233 ft.); its fortifications 
extended to the shore, on the side where the modern town now is, 
in the form of two long walls protecting the port. There are 
remains of a wall of massive rectangular blocks of stone at the 



596 



CEHEGIN— CELEBES 



modern Porta Garibaldi on the south. It does not appear in 
history before 396 B.C., and seems to have owed its importance 
mainly to its naturally strong position. The only ancient remains 
on the mountain are those of a small building in good polygonal 
work (a style of construction very rare in Sicily), consisting of 
a passage on each side of which a chamber opens. The doorways 
are of finely-cut stone, and of Greek type, and the date, though 
uncertain, cannot, from the careful jointing of the blocks, be very 
early. On the summit of the promontory are extensive remains 
of a Saracenic castle. The new town was founded at the foot of 
the mountain, by the shore, by Roger II. in 1131, and the 
cathedral was begun in the same year. The exterior is well 
preserved, and is largely decorated with interlacing pointed 
arches; the windows also are pointed. On each side of the 
facade is a massive tower of four storeys. The round-headed 
Norman portal is worthy of note. The interior was restored in 
1559, though the pointed arches of the nave, borne by ancient 
granite columns, are still visible: and the only mosaics preserved 
are those of the apse and the last bay of the choir: they are 
remarkably fine specimens of the art of the period (1148) and, 
though restored in 1859-1862, have suffered much less than those 
at Palermo and Monreale from the process. The figure of the 
Saviourisespecially fine. The groined vaulting of the roof isvisible 
in the choir and the right transept, while, the rest of the church 
has a wooden roof. Fine cloisters, coeval with the cathedral, 
adjoin it. (See G. Hubbard in Journal of the R.I.B.A. xv. SS3 
sqq., 1908.) The harbour is comparatively small. (T. As.) 

CEHEGiN, a town of south-eastern Spain, in the province of 
Murcia, on the right bank of the river Caravaca, a small tributary 
Of the Segura. Pop. (1900) 11,601. Cehegin has a thriving 
trade in farm produce, especially wine, olive oil and hemp; and 
various kinds of marble are obtained from quarries near the town. 
Some of the older houses, however, as well as the parish church 
and the convent of San Francisco, which still has well-defined 
Roman inscriptions on its walls, are built of stone from the ruins 
of Begastri, a Roman colony which stood on a small adjacent 
hill known as the Cabecico de Roenas. The name Cehegin is 
sometimes connected by Spanish antiquaries with that of the 
Zenaga, Senhaja or Senajeh, a North African tribe, which invaded 
Spain in the nth century. 

CEILING (from a verb " to ceil," i.e. to line or cover; of 
disputed etymology, but apparently connected with Fr. del, 
Lat. caelum, sky), in architecture, the upper covering of a church, 
hall or room. Ceilings are now usually formed of plaster, but 
in former times they were commonly either boarded (of which 
St Albans cathedral is perhaps the earliest example), or showed 
the beams and joists, which in England were moulded and 
carved, and in France and Italy were richly painted and gilded. 
Sometimes the ceilings were horizontal, sometimes canted on 
two sides, and sometimes they take the form of a barrel-vault. 
Ribs are sometimes planted on the boarding to divide up the 
surface, and their intersections are enriched with bosses. About 
the middle of the 16th century the ceilings were formed in 
plaster with projecting ribs, interlaced ornament and pendants, 
and the characteristics of the Elizabethan style. At Bramall 
Hall, Broughton Castle, Hatfield, Knowle, Sizergh and Levens 
in Westmorland, and Dorfold in Cheshire, are numerous 
examples, some with pendants. In Italy, at the same period, 
the plaster ceilings were based on the forms taken by vaulting; 
they were of infinite variety and were richly decorated with sunk 
panels containing the Roman conventional foliage. Raphael, 
about 152°, reproduced in the Vatican some of the stucco-duro 
ornament which he had studied in the Golden House of Nero, 
excavated under his directions. Later, about the middle of the 
1 6th century, great coves were formed round the room, which 
were decorated with cartouches and figures in relief, garlands 
and swags. The great halls of the Ducal Palace at Venice and 
the galleries of the Pitti Palace at Florence were ceiled in this 
way. These coved ceilings were introduced into England in the 
middle of the 17th century. In Holyrood Palace at Edinburgh 
there is a fine ceiling of 1671, with figures (probably executed 
by Italian craftsmen) and floral wreaths. 



At Coleshill, Berkshire, a ceiling by Inigo Jones (1650) shows a 
type which became more or less universal for a century, viz. 
deeply sunk panels with modillions round, and bands enriched 
with foliage, fruit, &c, in bold relief. Wren, Nicholas Hawks- 
moor, James Gibbs, John Webb and other architects continued 
on the same lines, and in 1760 Robert Adam introduced his type 
of ceiling, sometimes horizontal, and sometimes segmental, in 
which panels are suggested only, with slight projecting lines and 
rings of leaves, swags and arabesque work, which, like Raphael's, 
was found on the ceilings of the Roman tombs and baths in 
Rome and Pompeii. George Richardson followed with similar 
work, and Sir W. Chambers, in the rooms originally occupied by 
the Royal Academy and the learned societies in Somerset House, 
designed many admirable ceilings. The moulds of all the orna- 
mental devices of Robert Adam are preserved and are still 
utilized for many modern ceilings. (R. P. S.) 

CEILLIER, REMY (1688-1761), Benedictine monk of the 
Lorraine congregation of St Vannes. He was the compiler of an 
immense Patrology, Histoire genirale des auteurs sacris et 
eccltsiastiques (23 vols., Paris, 17 29-1 763), being a history and 
analysis of the writings of all the ecclesiastical writers of the first 
thirteen centuries. He put infinite trouble and time into the 
work, and many portions of it are exceedingly well done. A later 
and improved edition was produced in Paris, 1858, in 14 vols. 
Ceillier's other work, Apologie de la morale des peres de Viglise 
(Paris, 1718), also won some celebrity. 

CELAENAE, an ancient city of Phrygia, situated on the 
great trade route to the East. Its acropolis long held out 
against Alexander in 333 and surrendered to him at last by 
arrangement. His successor, Eumenes, made it for some time 
his headquarters, as did Antigonus until 301. From Lysi- 
machus it passed to Seleucus, whose son Antiochus, seeing its 
geographical importance, refounded it on a more open site as 
Apamea (q.v.). West of the acropolis were the palace of Xerxes 
and the Agora, in or near which is the cavern whence the Marsyas, 
one of the sources of the Maeander, issues. According to 
Xenophon, Cyrus had a palace and large park full of wild 
animals at Celaenae. 

See G. Weber, Dineir-Celenes (1892). 

CELANDINE, Chelidonium majus, a member of the poppy 
family, an erect branched herb from 1 to 2 ft. high with a yellow 
juice, much divided leaves, and yellow flowers nearly an inch 
across, succeeded by a narrow thin pod opening by a pair of 
thin valves, separating upwards. The plant grows in waste 
places and hedgerows, and is probably an escape from cultiva- 
tion. The lesser celandine is a species of Ranunculus (R. Ficaria) , 
a small low-growing herb with smooth heart-shaped leaves and 
bright yellow flowers about an inch across, borne each on a stout 
stalk springing from a leaf-axil. It flowers in early spring, in 
pastures and waste-places. 

CELANO, a town of the.Abruzzi, Italy, in the province of 
Aquila, 73 m. E. of Rome by rail. Pop. (1901) 9725. It is finely 
situated on a hill above the Lago Fucino, and is dominated by a 
square castle, with round towers at the angles, erected in its 
present form in 1450. It contains three churches with 13th 
century facades in the style of those of Aquila. The origin of the 
town goes back to Lombard times. A count of Celano is first 
mentioned in n 78. It was the birthplace of Thomas of Celano, 
the author of the Dies Irae. 

CELEBES, 1 one of the four Great Sunda Islands in the Dutch 
East Indies. Its general outline is extremely irregular, and has 
been compared to that of a starfish with the rays torn off from 
one side, corresponding to the west side of the island. It consists 
of four great peninsulas, extending from a comparatively small 
nucleus towards the north-east, east, south-east and south, 
and separated by the three large gulfs of Tomini or Gorontalo, 
Tolo or Tomaiki, and Boni. Of these gulfs the first is by far the 
largest, the other two having much wider entrances and not 
extending so far inwards. Most important among the smaller 
inlets are the bays of Amurang, Kwandang and Tontoli on the 
1 The second syllable is accented. 



CELEBES 



597 



north coast, Palos and Pare-Pare on the west, and Kendari or 
Vosmaer on the east. Of the numerous considerable islands 
which lie north-east, east and south of Celebes (those off the 
west coast are few and small), the chief are prolongations of the 
four great peninsulas — the Sangir and Talaut islands off the 
north-east, the Banggai and Sula off the east, Wuna and Buton 
off the south-east, and Saleyer off the south. Including the 
adjacent islands, the area of Celebes is estimated at 77,855 
sq. m., and the population at 2,000,000; without them the area 
is 69,255 sq. m. and the population 1,250,000. 

The scenery in Celebes is most varied and picturesque. " No- 
where in the archipelago," wrote A. R. Wallace, " have I seen 
such gorges, chasms and precipices as abound in the district 
of Maros " (in the southern peninsula) ; " in many parts there 
are vertical or even overhanging precipices five or six hundred 
feet high, yet completely clothed with a tapestry of vegetation." 
Much of the country, especially round the Gulf of Tolo, is 
covered with primeval forests and thickets, traversed by scarcely 
perceptible paths, or broken with a few clearings and villages. 
A considerable part of the island has been little explored, but 
the general character seems to be mountainous. Well-defined 
ranges prolong themselves through each of the peninsulas, 
rising in many places to a considerable elevation. Naturally 
there are no great river-basins or extensive plains, but one of 
the features of the island is the frequent occurrence, not only 
along the coasts, but at various heights inland, of beautiful 
stretches of level ground often covered with the richest pastures. 
Minahassa, the north-eastern extremity, consists of a plateau 
divided into sections by volcanoes (Klabat, 6620 ft., being the 
highest). Sulphur springs occur here. In the west of the 
northern peninsula the interior consists in part of plateaus of 
considerable extent enclosed by the coast ranges. Near Lake 
Posso, in the centre of the island, the mountains are higher; 
the Tampiko massif has a height of nearly 5000 ft., the chains 
south and west of the lake have a general altitude of about 5450 
ft., with peaks still loftier. In the southern peninsula two 
chains stretch parallel with the west and east coasts; the former 
is the higher, with a general altitude of 3200 ft. In the south it 
joins the Peak of Bonthain, or Lompo-battang, a great volcanic 
mass 10,088 ft. high. In the east central part of the island the 
mountain Koruve exceeds 10,000 ft., and is supposed to be the 
highest in the island. An alluvial coast plain, 7 to 9 m. wide, 
stretches along the foot of the western chain, and between the 
two chains is the basin of the Walannae river, draining northward 
into Lake Tempe. Little is known of the orography of the 
eastern peninsula. At the base of the south-eastern there is 
another large lake, Tovieti. In this peninsula there are parallel 
ranges on the east and west flanks. The trench between them is 
partly occupied by the vast swamp of Lake Opa. 

The rivers of the narrow mountainous peninsulas form many 
rapids and cataracts; as the Tondano, draining the lake of the 
same name to the north-west coast of' Minahassa at Menado; 
the Rano-i-Apo, flowing over the plateau of Mongondo to the 
Gulf of Amurang; the Poigar, issuing from a little-known 
lake of that plateau; the Lombagin, traversing narrow canons; 
and the river of Boni, which has its outfall in the plain of Goron- 
talo, near the mouth of the Bolango or Tapa, the latter connected 
by a canal with the Lake of Limbotto. All these rivers are 
navigable by praus or rafts for only a few miles above the mouth. 
In central Celebes, the Kodina flows into Lake Posso, and the 
Kalaena discharges to the Gulf of Boni; the Posso, navigable 
by blottos (canoes formed of hollowed tree-trunks), is the only 
river flowing from the lake to the Gulf of Tomini. The rivers of 
the southern peninsula, owing to the relief of the surface, are 
navigable to a somewhat greater extent. The Walannae flows 
into Lake Tempe, and, continued by the Jenrana (Tienrana), 
which discharges into the Gulf of Boni, is navigable for small 
boats; the Sadang, with many affluents, flows to the west coast, 
and is navigable by sanpans. The Jenemaja is a broad river, 
navigable far from the mouth. The coasts of Celebes are often 
fertile and well populated; but, as shown by the marine charts, 
many sand, mud and stone banks lie near the shore, and con- 



sequently there are few accessible or. natural ports or good 
roadsteads. 

Geology. — The geological observations on Celebes are too scattered 
to reveal its structure. The greater part of the island seems to be 
formed of gneiss and other crystalline rocks. These are overlaid 
by conglomerates, limestones and clay slates of very doubtful age, 
the most interesting being a radiolarian clay which occurs on the 
south side of the Matinang Mountains, at the north end of Lake 
Posso, &c. ; it may correspond with the radiolarian cherts of Borneo. 
Tertiary beds are found, especially near the coast. The Eocene 
includes a series of sandstones and marls with lignite, and these are 
overlaid by nummulite limestones. The Miocene contains an 
Orbitoides limestone. Intrusive and volcanic rocks of great variety 
and of various ages occur. Peridotite and gabbro form much of the 
eastern peninsula (Banggai). Leucite and nepheline rocks have 
been found in various parts of the island, especially in the south-west. 
In Minahassa, at the northern extremity, there is a large area of 
tuffs and agglomerates consisting chiefly of augite andesite, and 
in this area there are many recent volcanic cones. Eruptions still 
take place at intervals, but the volcanoes for the most part seem 
to have reached the solfataric stage. 

Climate. — The climate of the island, everywhere accessible to 
the influence of the sea, is maritime-tropical, the temperature 
ranging generally between 77 and 8o° F., the extremes being 
about 90 and 70 F., only on the higher mountains falling 
during the night to 54° or 55 F. The rainfall in the northern 
peninsula (north of the equator) differs from that of the southern; 
the former has rains (not caused by the monsoon), and of smaller 
amount, 102 in. annually; the latter has a greater rainfall, 
157 in., brought by the north-western monsoon, and of which the 
west coast receives a much larger share than the east. 

Fauna and Flora. — In spite of its situation in the centre of the 
archipelago, Celebes possesses a fauna of a very distinctive 
kind. The number of species is small, but in many cases they 
are peculiar to the island. Of land birds, for example, about 
160 species are known, and of these not less than about 90 are 
peculiar, the majority of the remainder being Asiatic in distinction 
from Australian. Mammals are few in species, but remarkable, 
especially Macacus niger, an ape found nowhere else but in 
Bachian; Anoa depressicornis, a small ox-like quadruped 
which inhabits the mountainous districts; and the babirusa 
or pig-deer of the Malays. Some of the animals are probably 
descendants of specimens introduced by man; others are allied 
in species, but not identical, with mammals of Java and Borneo; 
others again, including the three just mentioned, are wholly 
or practically confined to Celebes. There are no large beasts 
of prey, and neither the elephant, the rhinoceros nor the tapir 
is represented. Wild-buffaloes, swine and goats are pretty 
common; and most of the usual domestic animals are kept. 
The horses are in high repute in the archipelago; formerly 
about 700 were yearly exported to Java, but the supply has 
considerably diminished. 

The same peculiarity of species holds in regard to the insects 
of the Celebes (so far as they are known) as to the mammals 
and birds. Out of 118 species of butterflies, belonging to four 
important classes, no fewer than 86 are peculiar; while among 
the rose-chafers or Cetoniinae the same is the case in 19 out of 
30. Equally remarkable with this presence of peculiar species 
is the absence of many kinds that are common in the rest of 
the archipelago; and these facts have been considered to indicate 
connexion with a larger land-mass at a very distant geological 
epoch, and the subsequent continuous isolation of Celebes. 
This view, however, has been controverted. It is held that in 
the Miocene and Pliocene periods there were land connexions 
with the Philippines, Java and the Moluccas, and through the 
last with Australasian lands to the east and south-east. Migration 
of species took place along these lines in both directions. Those 
immigrants which remained in what is now Celebes may have 
developed new species. Moreover, while Celebes has species 
which are peculiar to itself and one other of the islands just 
mentioned, it has none which it shares exclusively with Borneo, 
and thus the importance of the Macassar Strait as a biological 
division is indicated. 

Vegetation is extremely rich; but there are fewer large trees 
than in the other islands of the archipelago. Of plants that 



59* 



CELEBES 



furnish food for man the most important are rice, maize and 
millet, coffee, the coco-nut tree, sago-palm, the obi or 
native potato, the bread-fruit and the tamarind; with lemons, 
oranges, mangosteens, wild-plums, Spanish pepper, beans, 
melons and sugar-cane. The shaddock is to be found only in 
the lower plains. Indigo, cotton and tobacco are grown; the 
bamboo and the ratan-palm are common in the woods; and 
among the larger trees are sandal-wood, ebony, sapan and teak. 
The palm, Arenga saccharifera, furnishes gemuti fibres for ropes; 
its juice is manufactured into sugar and a beverage called 
sagueir; and intoxicating drinks are prepared from several 
other palms. 

Products. — As in natural vegeta- 
tion and fauna, so in cultivated 
products, Celebes, apart from its 
peculiarities, presents the transi- 
tional link between the Asiatic 
and the Australian regions of the 
Malayan province. For example, 
rice is produced here in smaller 
quantity and of inferior quality to that in the western part 
of the archipelago, but superior to that in the eastern section, 
where sago and sorghum form the staple articles of food. The 
products of the forests supply about half the total exports. 
The fisheries include trepang, turtle and pearl oysters. Gold is 
worked under European direction in the district of Gorontalo, 
but with only partial success; the search for coal in the 
southern peninsula has yielded no satisfactory results; tin, iron 
and copper, found in the eastern peninsula and elsewhere, are 
utilized only for native industries. 

Natives. — The native population of the island is all of Malayan 
stock. The three most important peoples are the Bugis (q.v.) 
the Macassars and the Mandars. The medley of other Malayan 
tribes, of a more or less savage type, living in the island, are 
known under the collective name of Alfuros (q.v.). The Macassars 
are well-built and muscular, and have in general a dark-brown 
complexion, a broad and expressive face, black and sparkling 
eyes, a high forehead, a flattish nose, a large mouth and long 
black soft hair. The women are sprightly, clever and amiable. 
The men are brave and not treacherous, but ambitious, jealous 
and extremely revengeful. Drunkenness is rare, but they are 
passionate, and running amuck is frequent among them. In all 
sorts of bodily exercises, as swinging, wrestling, dancing, riding 
and hunting, they take great pleasure. Though they call them- 
selves Mahommedans, their religion is largely mingled with 
pagan superstitions; they worship animals, and a certain divinity 
called Karaeng Love, who has power over their fortune and 
health. Except where Dutch influence has made itself felt, 
little attention has been paid by the native races to agriculture; 
and their manufacturing industries are few and limited. The 
weaving of cotton cloth is principally carried on by women; 
and the process, at least for the finer description, is tedious in 
the extreme. The houses are built of wood and bamboo; and 
as the use of diagonal struts is not practised, the walls soon lean 
over from the force of the winds. The Macassar language, 
which belongs to the Malayo- Javanese group, is spoken in many 
parts of the southern peninsula; but it has a much smaller 
area than the Buginese, which is the language of Boni. It is 
deficient in generalizations; thus, for example, it has words for 
the idea of carrying in the hand, carrying on the head, carrying on 
the shoulder, and so on, but has no word for carrying simply. 
It has adopted a certain number of vocables from Sanskrit, 
Malay, Javanese and Portuguese, but on the whole is remark- 
ably pure, and has undergone comparatively few recent changes. 
It is written in a peculiar character, which has displaced, and 
probably been corrupted from, an old form employed as late as 
the 1 7 th century. Neither bears any trace of derivation from the 
Sanskrit alphabet. % The priests affect the use of the Arabic 
letters. The literature is poor, and consists largely of romantic 
stories from the Malay, and religious treatises from the Arabic. 
Of the few original pieces the most important are the early 
histories of Goa, Tello and some other states of Celebes, and 



the Rapang, or collection of the decrees and maxims of the old 
princes and sages. The more modern productions are letters, 
laws and poems, many of the last of considerable beauty. 

Divisions, Towns, Population. — Celebes is divided by the 
Dutch, for administrative purposes, into the government of 
Celebes with dependencies (south-eastern and southern peninsulas 
and all west coast), and the residency of Menado (north-eastern 
peninsula and coast of Gulf of Tomini) . The eastern peninsula 
and coast of the Gulf of Tolo belong politically to the residency 
of Ternate (q.v.). The following table shows approximately the 
distribution and composition of the population: — 





Europeans. 


Chinese. 


Arabs. 


Other 

Oriental 

Foreigners. 


Natives. 


Total. 


Government of Celebes 
' and Dependencies . 
Residency of Menado— 
Minahassa 
Gorontalo 


1414 

836 
115 


,3738 

3574 
505 


554 

286 
133 


54 
16 


409.739 
\ 430,941 


415,499 
436,406 



The Government of Celebes and Dependencies is subdivided into 
the government territory, the vassal states (Boni, q.v., and Ternate), 
and the federal countries. The density of population for the whole 
government is estimated as 3-7 or 4 per sq. m., varying from 2-2 
in the vassal and federated states to 14-7 to 18-4 for Macassar and 
the districts directly governed by the Dutch. The density of 
population in districts outside the influence of European govern- 
ment sinks to I and less per sq. m. As in the case of Minahassa, the 
difference must be explained by physical and moral conditions. Two- 
thirds of the natives live by agriculture, and one-third by trade, 
navigation, shipbuilding and other industries. In agreement with 
these principal occupations, the centres of population are found in 
southern Celebes, on the Coast (not in the interior plains or on the 
lake, as in Menado). Palos (3000), with good port; Pare- Pare, 
connected by road with Lake Tempe; and Macassar (17,925), the 
seat of the governor and the centre of trade for the eastern part of the 
archipelago. On the south coast must also be named Bonthain 
(4000); on the east coast, Balong-Nipa; and Buton and Saleyer, 
seats of administration and ports of call on the island groups of the 
same names. 

The Residency of Menado comprises three districts: Minahassa, 
the little states along the north coast west of Minahassa, and Goron- 
talo, including the other states of the northern peninsula lying 
along the Gulf of Tomini. The density of population being calculated 
at about 2-7 to 3 per sq. m. for Celebes, is 16-2 for Minahassa, but 
only 1-5 to 2 for the Residency of Menado. Centres of population 
in Menado are Amurang (3000), the seat of a Dutch controller, and 
a calling place for the steamers of the Indian Packet Company; 
Menado (10,000), the chief town of the residency, the principal 
station of the Dutch missionaries, with a fair amount of trade, but 
an unsafe roadstead; Tondano (12,000), near the lake and river of 
the same name, at an altitude of nearly 2000 ft., and one of the chief 
centres; Gorontalo, one of the most important towns of Celebes, 
carrying on direct trade with Singapore and Europe. All the other 
coast places have some importance as chief villages of the little 
states and as ports of call for the vessels of the steam packet com- 
pany, but have only from 500 to 1000 inhabitants. 

History. — Celebes was first discovered by the Portuguese in 
the early part of the 16th century, the exact date assigned by 
some authorities being 1512. The name is not used by the 
natives, and is apparently of foreign origin, but has been variously 
derived, e.g. from the mountain of Klabat or Kalabat, or from 
Seli Besi, an iron kris carried by the natives, of whom those who 
were first asked for the name of the island were conceived, 
according to this theory, to have misunderstood their questioners. 
At the time of the Portuguese discovery, the Macassars were the 
most powerful people in the island, having successfully defended 
themselves against the king of the Moluccas and the sultan of 
Ternate. In 1609 the British attempted to gain a footing; 
At what time the Dutch first arrived is not certainly known, 
but it was probably in the end of the 16th or beginning of the 
17th century, since in 1607 they formed a connexion with 
Macassar. In 161 1 the Dutch East Indian Company obtained 
the monopoly of trade on the island of Buton; and in 1618 an 
insurrection in Macassar gave them an opportunity of obtaining 
a definite establishment there. In 1660 the kingdom was sub- 
jugated, but in 1666 the war broke out anew. It was brought 
to an end in the following year, and the treaty of Bonga or Banga 
was signed, by which the Dutch were recognized as protectors. 



CELERY^CELESTINE 



599 



In 1683 the north-eastern part of the island was conquered by 
Robert Paddenburg and placed under the command of the 
governor of the Moluccas. In 1 703 a fort was erected at Menado. 
The kingdom of Boni was successfully attacked in 1824, and in 
August of that year the Bonga treaty was renewed in a greatly 
modified form. Since then the principal military event is the 
Boni insurrection which was quelled in 1850, but this was far 
from pacifying the country permanently. A series of revolts 
of various chiefs in 1905-6 was not arrested without considerable 
fighting, but after this the whole island was brought under 
Dutch authority, even where native rule survived. 

Bibliography. — ■ In P.J. Veth's Woordenboek van Nederlandsch 
Indie there will be found an extensive bibliography of Celebes 
drawn up by H. C. Millies. For additional bibliography and data 
for the island and its population, see C. M. Kan, " Celebes," in the 
Encyclopaedic van Nederlandsch Indie, ed. by P. A. van der Lith and 
A. H. Spaan (The Hague, 1895), &c, vol. i. p. 314. See P. and 
F. Sarasin (who have carried out extensive explorations in the 
island), " Berichte aus Celebes," Zeitschr. der Ges. f. Erdk. xxix. 
351 ; Enlwurf einer geographisch-geologischen Beschreibung der Insel 
Celebes (Wiesbaden, 1901); Reisen in Celebes, 1893-1896, 1902—1903 
(Wiesbaden, 1905); Versuch einer Anthropologic der Insel Celebes 
(Wiesbaden, 1906) ; C. van der Hart, Reize rondon^ het Eiland 
Celebes (The Hague, 1853); Capt. R. Mundy, Narrative of Events 
in Borneo and Celebes (London, 1848) ; P. J. Veth, Een Nederlandsch 
reiziger op Zuid Celebes (Amsterdam, 1875); J. G. F. Riedel, Het 
landschap Boeool, Noord Selebes (1872); and "Die Landschaften 
Holontalo, Limoeto," &c, in Zeitschr. fur Ethnologie (1871); H. 
Bucking, " Beitrage zur Geologie von Celebes," Samml. geol. Reichs- 
mus. Leiden, vol. vii. pp. 29-205 (1902), pp. 221-224 ( I 9°4)j and 
various articles in Tijdschrift v. h. Aardrijkskundig Genootschap and 
Tijdsch. v. h. Batavian. Gen. 

CELERY (Apium graveolens), a biennial plant belonging to the 
natural order Umbelliferae, which, in its wild state, occurs in 
England by the sides of ditches and in marshy places, especially 
near the sea, producing a furrowed stalk and compound leaves 
with wedge-shaped leaflets, the whole plant having a coarse, 
rank taste and a peculiar smell. It is also widely distributed in 
the north temperate region of the Old World. By cultivation and 
blanching the stalks lose their acrid qualities and assume the 
mild sweetish aromatic taste peculiar to celery as a salad plant. 
The plants are raised from seed, sown either in a hot bed or in 
the open garden, according to the season of the year, and after 
one or two thinnings out and transplantings, they are; on attain- 
ing a height of 6 or 8 in., planted out in deep trenches for con- 
venience of blanching, which is effected by earthing up and so 
excluding the stems from the influence of light. A large number 
of varieties are cultivated by gardeners, which are ranged under 
two classes, white and red, — the white varieties being generally 
the best flavoured and most crisp and tender. As a salad plant, 
celery, especially if at all " stringy, " is difficult of digestion. Both 
blanched and green it is stewed and used in soups, the seeds also 
being used as a flavouring ingredient. In the south of Europe 
celery is seldom blanched, but is much used in its natural 
condition. 

Celeriac, or turnip-rooted celery (Apium graveolens var. 
rapaceum), is a variety cultivated more on account of its roots 
than for the stalks, although both are edible and are used for 
salads and in soups. It is chiefly grown in the north of Europe. 
As the tops are not required, trenching is unnecessary, otherwise 
the cultivation is the same as for celery. 

CELESTE, MADAME (1815-1882), French dancer and actress, 
was born in Paris on the 16th of August 181 5. As a little girl 
she was a pupil in the ballet class at the Opera. When fifteen, 
she had an offer from the United States, and made her debut at 
the Bowery theatre, New York. Returning to England, she 
appeared at Liverpool as Fenella in Masaniello, and also in London 
(1831). In 1834 she aroused such enthusiasm in America that 
her admirers carried her on their shoulders and took the horses 
out of her carriage in order to pull it themselves. It is even said 
that President Jackson introduced her to his cabinet as an 
adopted citizen of the Union. Having made a large fortune, she 
returned to England in 1837. She now gave up dancing, and 
appeared as an actress, first at Drury Lane and then at the 
Haymarket. In 1844 she joined Benjamin Webster in the manage- 
ment of the Adelphi, and afterwards took the sole management 



of the Lyceum all 1861; She made a third visit to the United 
States from 1865 to 1868, and retired in 1870. Her favourite 
part was Miami in Buckstone's Green Bushes. She died in Paris 
on the 1 2th of February 1882. 

CELESTINA, LA, the popular alternative title attached from 
1 519 (or earlier) to the anonymous Comedia de Caliste y Melibea, 
a Spanish novel in dialogue which was celebrated throughout 
Europe during the 16th century. In the two earliest known 
editions (Burgos, 1499, and Seville, 1501) the Comedia consists 
of sixteen acts; the reprints issued after 1501 are entitled 
Tragicomedia de Calisto y Melibea, and contain twenty-one acts. 
Three of these reprints include a twenty-second act which is 
admittedly spurious, and the authenticity of Acts xvn.-xxi. is 
disputed. The authorship of the Celestina and the date of its 
composition are doubtful. An anonymous prefatory letter in 
the editions subsequent to 1501 attributes the book to Juan de 
Mena or RodrigoCota, but this ascription is universally rejected. 
The prevailing opinion is that the author of the twenty-one acts 
was Fernando de Rojas, apparently a Spanish Jew resident at 
the Puebla de Montalban in the province of Toledo; R. Foulche- 
Delbose, however, maintains that the original sixteen acts are 
by an unknown writer who had no part in the five supplementary 
acts. Some scholars give 1483 as the date of composition; 
others hold that the book was written in 1497. These questions 
are still unsettled. Though profoundly original in treatment, 
the Celestina has points of analogy with the work of earlier 
writers, such as Juan Ruiz (q.v.), the archpriest of Hita; his 
rapid sketches of Trota-conventas, Melon and Endrina no doubt 
suggested the finished portraits of Celestina, Calisto and Melibea, 
and the closing scene in the Celestina recalls the suicide in Diego 
Fernandez de San Pedro's Cdrcel de Amor. Allowing for these 
and other debts of the same kind, it cannot be denied that the 
Celestina excels all earlier Spanish works in tragic force, in im- 
pressive conception, and in the realistic rendering of characters 
drawn from all classes of society. It passed through innumerable 
editions in Spain, and was the first Spanish book to find accept* 
ance ' throughout western Europe. At least twenty works by 
well-known Spanish authors are derived from it; it was adapted 
for the English stage as early as 1 525-1 530, and was translated 
into Italian (1505), French (1527) and other European languages. 
A Latin version by Caspar Barth was issued under the title of 
Pornoboscodidascalus latinus (1624) with all the critical apparatus 
of a recognized classic. James Mabbe's English rendering ( 1 63 1 ) 
is one of the best translations ever published. The original 
edition of 1499 has been reprinted by R. Foulche-Delbose in the 
Bibliotheca Hispanica (1902), vol. xii. 

Bibliography. — R. Foulche-Delbose, " Observations sur la Celes- 
tine ",in the Revue hispanique (Paris, 1900), vol. yii. pp. 28-80 and 
(Paris, 1902) vol. ix. pp. 171-199; K. Haebler, " Bemerkungen zur 
Celestina " in the Revue hispanique (Paris, 1902), vol. ix. pp. 139-176; 
and M. Menendez y Pelayo's introduction to the Celestina (Vigo, 
1899-1900). (J. F.-K.) 

CELESTINE (Caelestinus), the name of five popes. 

Celestine I., pope from 422 to 432. At his accession the 
dissensions caused by the faction of Eulalius (see Boniface I.) 
had not yet abated. He, however, triumphed over them, and 
his episcopate was peaceful. When the doctrines of Nestorius 
were denounced to him, he instructed Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, 
to follow up the matter. The emperor Theodosius II. convoked 
an ecumenical council at Ephesus, to which Celestine sent his 
legates. He had some difficulties with the bishops in Africa on 
the question of appeals to Rome, and with the bishops of Prov- 
ence with regard to the doctrines of St Augustine. To expedite 
the extirpation of Pelagianism, he sent to Britain a deacon called 
Palladius, at whose instigation St Germanus of Auxerre crossed 
the English Channel, as delegate of the pope and bishops of Gaul, 
to inculcate orthodox principles upon the clergy of Britain. He 
also commissioned Palladius to preach the gospel in Ireland 
which was beginning to rally to Christianity. Celestine was the 
first pope who is known to have taken a direct interest in the 
churches of Britain and Ireland. (L. D.*) 

Celestine II., pope in 1143-1144. Guido of Citta di Castello 
(Tiferno), born of noble Tuscan family, able and learned, studied 



6oo 



CELESTINE— CELESTINES 



under Abelard and became a cardinal priest. Elected the suc- 
cessor of Innocent II. on the 26th of September 1143, he died 
on the 8th of March following. He removed the interdict which 
Innocent had employed against Louis VII. of France. At the 
time of his death he was on the verge of a controversy with 
Roger of Sicily. 

See A. Certini, Vita (Foligno, 1716); M. Bouquet, Recueil des 
historiens des Gaules (Paris, 1738 ff.), tome 15, 408-411; Migne, 
Patrologiae cursus computus, 179, 765-820; P. Jaffe, Regesta Pontifi- 
cum Romanorum, 2nd ed. vol. ii. (Lipsiae, 1888), 1 ff. ; Wetzer und 
Welte, Kirchenlexihon, 2nd ed. vol. iii. (Freiburg, 1884), 578 ff.; 
Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopadie, 3rd ed. vol. iv. (Leipzig, 1898), 
201. 

Celestine III. (Giacinto Bobo), pope from n 91 to 11 98, was 
cardinal deacon of Santa Maria in Cosmedin as early as 1144, and 
had reached the age of eighty-five when chosen on the 30th of 
March 1 191 to succeed Clement III. The first pope of the house 
of the Orsini, his policy was marked by mildness and indecision. 
Henry VI. of Germany at once forced the pontiff to crown him 
emperor, and three or four years later took possession of the 
Norman kingdom of Sicily; he refused tribute and the oath of 
allegiance, and even appointed bishops subject to his own juris- 
diction; moreover, he gave his brother in fief the estates which 
had belonged to the countess Matilda of Tuscany. Celestine did 
not dare so much as to threaten him with excommunication. 
It was Celes tine's purpose to lay England under the interdict; 
but Prince John and the barons still refused to recognize the 
papal legate, the bishop of Ely. Richard I. had been set free 
before the dilatory pope put Leopold of Austria under the ban. 
In his last sickness Celestine wished to resign his office, but the 
cardinals protested. Death released him from his perplexities 
on the 8th of January n 98. 

See " Epistolae Coelestini III. Papae," in M. Bouquet, Receuil 
des historiens des Gaules et de la France, tome 19 (Paris, 1738 ff.); 
J. P. Migne, Patrologiae cursus computus, tome 206 (Paris, 
1855), 867 ff. ; further sources in Neues Archiv fiir die altere 
Deutsche Geschichtskunde, 2. 218; 11. 398 f. ; 12. 411-414; P. Jaffe, 
Regesta Pontificum Romanorum, vol. ii. (2nd ed., Leipzig, 1S88), 
577 ff- (W. W. R.*) 

Celestine IV. (Godfrey Castiglione) , pope in 1241, son of a 
sister of Urban III. (1185-1187), was archpriest and chancellor 
at Milan. After Urban's death he entered the Cistercian monas- 
tery at Hautecombe in Savoy. In 1227 Gregory IX. created him 
cardinal priest of St Mark's, and in 1 233 made him cardinal bishop 
of Sabina. Elected to succeed Gregory on the 25th of October 
1241, he died on the iothof November, before consecration, and 
was buried in St Peter's. 

See A. Potthast, Regesta Pontificum Romanorum, vol. i. (Berlin, 
1874), 940 f. 

Celestine V. (St Peter Celestine), pope in 1294, was born of 
poor parents at Isernia about 121 5, and early entered the 
Benedictine order. Living as a hermit on Monte Morrone 
near Sulmone in the Abruzzi, he attracted other ascetics about 
him and organized them into a congregation of the Benedictines 
which was later called the Celestines (q.v.). The assistance of a 
vicar enabled him to escape from the growing administrative 
cares and devote himself solely to asceticism, apparently the 
only field of human activity in which he excelled. His Opuscula, 
published by Telera at Naples in 1640, are probably not genuine; 
he was indoctus libris. A fight between the Colonna and the 
Orsini, as well as hopeless dissensions among the cardinals, 
prevented a papal election for two years and three months after 
the death of Nicholas IV. Charles II. of Naples, needing a pope 
in order that he might regain Sicily, brought about a conclave. 
As the election of any cardinal seemed impossible, on the 5th of 
July 1294 the Sacred College united on Pietro di Morrone; the 
cardinals expected to rule in the name of the celebrated but 
incapable ascetic. Apocalyptic notions then current doubtless 
aided his election, for Joachim of Floris and his school looked to 
monasticism to furnish deliverance to the church and to the 
world. Multitudes came to Celestine's coronation at Aquila, 
and he began his reign the idol of visionaries, of extremists and 
of the populace. But the pope was in the power of Charles II. 
of Naples, and became his tool against Aragon. The king's son 



Louis, a layman of twenty-one, was made archbishop of Lyons. 
The cardinals, scarcely consulted at all, were discontented. 
The pope, who wanted more time for his devotions, offered to 
leave three cardinals in charge of affairs; but his proposition 
was rejected. He then wished to abdicate, and at length Bene- 
detto Gaetano, destined to succeed him as Boniface VIII. , 
removed all scruples against this unheard-of procedure by finding 
a precedent in the case of Clement I. Celestine abdicated on the 
13th of December 1 294. There is no sufficient ground for finding 
an allusion to this act in the noted line of Dante, " Che fece per 
viltate il gran rifiuto " (" who made from cowardice the great 
refusal," Inferno, 3, 60). Boniface at length put him in prison 
for safe keeping; he died in a monastic cell in the castle of 
Fumone near Anagni on the 1 9th of May 1 296. He was canonized 
by Clement V. in 13 13. 

See Wetzer und Welte and Herzog-Hauck (with excellent biblio- 
graphy) as above; Jean Aurelien, Superieur de la Congregation 
des Celestins, La Vie admirable de ■ . ■ Saint Pierre Celestin (Bar-lc 
Due, 1873) ; H. Finke, Aus den Tagen Bonifaz VIII. (Miinster, 
1902), pp. 24-43. (W. W. R.*) 

CELESTINE, or Celestite, a name applied to native strontium 
sulphate (SrS04), having been suggested by the celestial blue 
colour which it occasionally presents. This colour has been 
referred to a trace of iron phosphate, but in some cases such an 
explanation appears doubtful. The mineral is usually colourless, 
or has only a delicate shade of blue. Celestine crystallizes in the 
orthorhombic system, being isomorphous with barytes (q.v.). 
The angle between the prism faces is 76 17'. The cleavage is 
perfect parallel to the basal pinacoid, and less marked parallel to 
the prism. Although celestine much resembles barytes in its 
physical properties, having for example the same degree of hard- 
ness (3), it is less dense, its specific gravity being 3-9. Celestine 
is a less abundant mineral than barytes. It is, however, much 
more soluble, and occurs frequently in mineral waters. W. W. 
Stoddart showed that many plants growing on Keuper marls 
containing celestine near Bristol appropriated the strontium 
salt, and the metal could be detected spectroscopically in their 
ashes. 

Celestine occurs in the Triassic rocks of Britain, especially in 
veins and geodes in the Keuper marl in the neighbourhood of 
Bristol. At Wickwar and Yate in Gloucestershire it is worked for 
industrial purposes. Colourless crystals, of great beauty, occurin 
association with calcite and native sulphur in the sulphur deposits 
of Sicily, as at Girgenti. Fine blue crystals are yielded by the 
copper mines of Herrengrund, in Hungary; a dark blue fibrous 
form is known from Jena; and small crystals occur in flint at 
Meudon near Paris. Very large tabular crystals are found in 
limestone on Strontian Island in Lake Erie; and a blue fibrous 
variety from near Frankstown, Blair Co., Penn., is notable as 
having been the original celestine on which the species was 
founded by A. G. Werner in 1798. 

Celestine is much used for the preparation of strontium 
hydrate, which is employed in refining beetroot sugar in Germany. 
The mineral is used also as a source of various salts of strontium 
such as the nitrate, which finds application in pyrotechny for the 
production of red fire. (F. W. R.*) 

CELESTINES, a religious order founded about 1260 by Peter 
of Morrone, afterwards Pope Celestine V. (1294). It was an 
attempt to unite the eremitical and cenobitical modes of life. 
Peter's first disciples lived as hermits on Mount Majella in the 
Abruzzi. The Benedictine rule was taken as the basis of the 
life, but was supplemented by regulations notably increasing 
the austerities practised. The form of government was borrowed 
largely from those prevailing in the mendicant orders. Indeed, 
though the Celestines are reckoned as a branch of the Benedic- 
tines, there is little in common between them. For all that, 
St Celestine, during his brief tenure of the papacy, tried to 
spread his ideas among the Benedictines, and induced the monks 
of Monte Cassino to adopt his idea of the monastic life instead of 
St Benedict's; for this purpose fifty Celestine monks were intro- 
duced into Monte Cassino, but on Celestine's abdication of the 
papacy the project fortunately was at once abandoned. During 
the founder's lifetime the order spread rapidly, and eventually 



CELIBACY 



601 



there were about 150 monasteries in Italy, and others in France, 
Bohemia and the Netherlands. The French houses, twenty-one 
in number, formed a separate congregation, the head-house being 
in Paris. The French Revolution and those of the 19th century 
destroyed their houses, and the Celestine order seems no longer 
to exist. 

Peter of Morrone was in close contact with the Franciscan 
Spirituals of the extreme type (see Franciscans), and he 
endeavoured to form an amalgamation between them and his 
hermits, under the title " Poor Hermits of Celestine." On his 
abdication the amalgamation was dissolved, and the Franciscan 
element fled to the East and was finally suppressed by Boniface 
VIII. and compelled to re-enter the Franciscan order. The 
habit of the Celestines was black. 

See Helyot, Histoire des ordres religieux (1792), vi. c. 23; Max 
Heimbucher, Orden und Kongregationen (1896), i. § 22, p. 134; the 
art. " Colestiner " in Wetzer und Welte, Kirchenlexicon (ed. 2), and 
Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopddie (ed. 3). (E. C. B.) 

CELIBACY (Lat. caelibatus, from caelebs, unmarried), the state 
of being unmarried, a term now commonly used in the sense of 
complete abstinence from marriage; it originally included the 
state of widowhood also, and any one was strictly a caelebs 
who had no existing spouse. Physicians and physiologists have 
frequently discussed celibacy from their professional point of 
view; but it will be sufficient to note here the results of statistical 
inquiries. It has been established by the calculations of actuaries 
that married persons — women in a considerable, but men in a 
much greater degree — -have at all periods of life a greater prob- 
ability of living than the single. From the point of view of public 
utility, the state has sometimes attempted to discourage celibacy. 
The best-known enactment of this kind is that of the emperor 
Augustus, best known as Lex Julia et Papia Poppaea. This 
disabled caelibes from receiving an inheritance unless the testator 
were related to them within the sixth degree; it limited the 
amount which a wife could take by a husband's will, or the 
husband by the wife's, unless they had children; and preference 
was given to candidates for office in proportion to the number of 
their children. 1 Ecclesiastical legislators, on the other hand, 
have frequently favoured the unmarried state; and celibacy, 
partial or complete, has been more or less stringently enforced 
upon the ministers of different religions; many instances are 
quoted by H. C. Lea. The best known, of course, are the Roman 
Vestals; though here even the great honours and privileges 
accorded to these maidens were often insufficient to keep the ranks 
filled. In the East, however, this and other forms of asceticism 
have always flourished more freely; and the Buddhist monastic 
system is not only far older than that of Christendom, but also 
proportionately more extensive. 2 In early Judaism, chastity 
was indeed enjoined upon the priests at certain solemn seasons; 
but there was no attempt to enforce celibacy" upon the sacerdotal 
caste. On the contrary, all priests were the sons of priests, 
and the case of Elizabeth shows that here, as throughout the 
Jewish people, barrenness was considered a disgrace. But 
Alexander's conquests brought the Jews into contact with 
Hindu and Greek mysticism; and this probably explains the 
growth of the ascetic Essenes some two centuries before the 
Christian era. The adherents of this sect, unlike the Pharisees 
and Sadducees, were never denounced by Christ, who seems on 
the contrary to have had real sympathy with the voluntary 
celibacy of an exceptional few (Matt. xix. 12). St Paul's utterances 
on this subject, though they go somewhat further, amount only 
to the assertion that a struggling missionary body will find more 
freedom in its work in the absence of wives and children. At 
the same time, St Paul claimed emphatically for himself and the 
other apostles the right of leading about a wife; and he names 

1 W. Smith, Diet, of Greek and Roman Antiquities (3rd ed.), vol. ii. 
p. 44. 

2 " In the 14th century, the city of Ilchi, in Chinese Tartary, pos- 
sessed 14 monasteries, averaging 3000 devotees in each; while in 
Tibet, at the present time, there are in the vicinity of Lhassa 12 

C;at monasteries, containing a population of 18,500 lamas. In 
dak the proportion of lamas to the laity is as I to 13, in Spiti 
I to 7, and in Burmah 1 to 30 " (Lea i. 103). 



among the qualifications for a bishop, an elder and a deacon, 
that he should be " the husband of one wife." Indeed it was 
freely admitted by the most learned men of the middle ages and 
Renaissance that celibacy had been no rule of the apostolic 
church; and, though writers of ability have attempted to main- 
tain the contrary even in modern times, their contentions are 
unhesitatingly rejected by the latest Roman Catholic authority. 3 

The gradual growth of clerical celibacy, first as a custom and 
then as a rule of discipline, can be traced clearly enough even 
through the scanty records of the first few centuries. The most 
ascetic Christians began to question the legality of second 
marriages on the part of either sex, as even paganism had often 
reprobated second marriages of women. Though these extremists 
were presently branded as heretics for their eccentric ultra- 
ascetic tenets (Montanists, Cathari), yet as early as Tertullian's 
time (c. a.d. 220) the right of second marriages was theoretically 
denied to the priesthood. This was logically followed by a 
revival of the old Levitical rule which required that priests should 
marry none but virgins (Lev. xxi. 7, 13). Both these rules, how- 
ever, proved difficult of enforcement and seem to have rested only 
on a vague basis of public opinion; twice-married men (digami) 
were admitted to the priesthood by Pope Calixtus I. (219-222), 
and even as late as the beginning of the 5th century we find 
husbands of widows consecrated to the episcopate. The so- 
called Apostolical Constitutions and Canons, the latter of which 
were compiled in the 4th century, give us the first clear and 
fairly general rules on the subject. Here we find " bishops and 
priests allowed to retain the wives whom they may have had 
before ordination, but not to marry in orders; the lower grades, 
deacons, subdeacons, &c, allowed to marry after entering the 
church; but all were to be husbands of but one wife, who must be 
neither a widow, a divorced woman nor a concubine " (Lea i. 28). 
Many causes, however, were already at work to carry public 
feeling beyond this stage. Quite apart from the few enthusiasts 
who would have given a literal interpretation to the text in Matt, 
xix. 12, vows of virginity became more and more frequent as the 
virtue itself was lauded by ecclesiastical writers in language 
of increasing fervour. These vows were at first purely voluntary 
and temporary; but public opinion naturally grew less and 
less tolerant of those who, having once formed and published 
so solemn a resolution, broke it afterwards. Again not only was 
the church doctrine itself more or less consciously influenced by 
the Manichaean tenet of the diabolical origin of all matter, includ- 
ing the human body, but churchmen were also naturally tempted 
to compete in asceticism with the many heretics who held this 
tenet, and whose abstinence brought them so much popular 
consideration. Moreover, in proportion as the clergy, no longer 
mere ringleaders of a despised and persecuted sect, became 
beneficiaries and administrators of rich endowments — and this 
at a time when the external safeguards against embezzlement 
were comparatively weak — a strong feeling grew up among the 
laity that church revenues should not go to support the priest's 
family.' 4 Lastly, such partial attempts as we have already 
described to enforce upon the clergy a special rule of continence, 
by their very failure, suggested more heroic measures. Therefore, 
side by side with the evidence for difficult enforcement of the 
old rules, we find an equally constant series of new and more 
stringent enactments. 

The first church council which definitely forbade marriage 
to the higher clergy was the local Spanish synod of Elvira 
(a.d. 305). A similar interpretation has sometimes been claimed 
for the third canon of that general council of Nicaea to which we 

s 1 Cor. vii. 25 sq., ix. 5; I Tim. iii. 2, n, 12; Titus i. 6; E. 
Vacandard in Diet, de Thiol. Cath., s.v. " Celibat." 

4 This was a natural argument for the defenders of clerical celibacy 
even in far later times. St Bonaventura (d. 1274) P uts this very 
strongly: " For if archbishops and bishops now had children, they 
would rob and plunder all the goods of the Church so that little or 
nothing would be left for the poor. For since they now heap up 
wealth and enrich nephews removed from them by almost incal- 
culable degrees of affinity, what would they do if they had legi- 
timate children? . . .Therefore the Holy Ghost in His providence 
hath removed this stumbling-block," &c. &c. (In Sent. lib. iv. 
dist. xxxvii art. i. quaest. 3). 



6o2 



CELIBACY 



owe the Nicene creed (325), but this is now abandoned by the 
best authorities on all sides. 'There can be no doubt, however, 
that the 4th century opened a wide breach in this respect between 
the Eastern and Western churches. The modern Greek custom 
is " (a) that most candidates for Holy Orders are dismissed from 
the episcopal seminaries shortly before being ordained deacons, 
in order that they may marry (their partners being in fact 
mostly daughters of clergymen), and after their marriage, 
return to the seminaries in order to take the higher orders; (b) 
that, as priests, they still continue the marriages thus contracted, 
but may not remarry on the death of their wife; and (c) that the 
Greek bishops, who may not continue their married life, are com- 
monly not chosen out of the ranks of the married secular clergy, 
but from among the monks." J The Eastern Church, therefore, still 
adheres fairly closely to the rules laid down by the Apostolical 
Canons in the 4th century. In the West, however, a decisive 
forward step was taken by Popes Damasus and Siricius during 
the last quarter of that century. The famous decretal of Siricius , 
(385) not only enjoined strict celibacy on bishops, priests and 
deacons, but insisted on the instant separation of those who had 
already married, and prescribed the punishment of expulsion 
for disobedience (Siric. Ep. i. c. 7; Migne, P.L. xiii. col. 1138). 
Although we find Siricius a year later writing to the African 
Church on this same subject in tones rather of persuasion than 
of command, yet the beginning of compulsory sacerdotal 
celibacy in the Western Church may be conveniently dated 
from his decretal of a.d. 385. Leo the Great (d. 461) and 
Gregory the Great (d. 604) further extended the rule of celibacy 
to subdeacons. 

For the next three or four centuries there is little to note but 
the continual evidence of open or secret resistance to these 
decrees, and the parallel frequency and stringency of ecclesi- 
astical legislation, which by its very monotony bears witness 
to its own want of success. At least seven episcopal constitutions 
of' the £th and 9th centuries forbade the priesf to have even his 
mother or his sister in the house. 2 Nor did the only difficulty 
lie in such secret breaches of the law; in many districts the 
priesthood tended to become a mere hereditary caste, to the dis- 
advantage of church and state alike. In northern and southern 
Italy public clerical marriages were extremely frequent, whether 
with or without regular forms. 3 The see of Rouen was held for 
more than a century (942-1054) by three successive bishops who 
were family men and two of whom were openly married. 4 In 
England St Swithun (d. 862) was married, though very likely by 
special papal dispensation; and the married clergy were appar- 
ently predominant in Alfred's time. In spite of Dunstan's 
reforms at the end of the 10th century, the Norman Lanfranc 
found so many wedded priests that he dared not decree their 
separation; and when his successor St Anselm attempted to go 
further, this seemed a perilous novelty even to so distinguished 
an ecclesiastic as Henry of Huntingdon, who wrote: " About 
Michaelmas of this same year (1102) Archbishop Ahselm held a 
council in London, wherein he forbade wives to the English 
priesthood, heretofore not forbidden; which seemed to some a 
matter of great purity, but to others a perilous thing, lest the 
clergy, in striving after a purity too great for human strength, 
should fall into horrible impurity, to the extreme dishonour of 
the Christian name" (lib. vii.; Migne, P.L. cxcv. col. 944). 
Yet this was at a time when the decisive and continued action of 
two great popes ought to have left no possible doubt as to the 
law of the church. ' 

The growing tendency of the clergy to look upon their endow? 

1 Hefele, Beitrage zur Kirchengesch. u.s.w. i. 139. 

2 See the quotations in Lea i. 156. These prohibitions were re- 
newed in the 13th and 14th centuries {ibid. i. 410). 

3 Ratherius, Itinerarium, c. 5 (Migne, P.L. cxxxvi; cql. 585). 
Gulielmus Apulus writes of southern Italy in 1059: "In these parts 
priests, deacons and the .whole clergy were publicly married " 
(De Normann. lib. ii.). . 

4 Dom Pommeraye, S. Rotomag. Eccl. Concilia, pp. 56, 65 ; cf . 
similar instances on p. 31 5 of Dr A. Dresdner's Kultur-und Siltey,- 
geschichte d. italienischen Geistlichkeit im 10. und 11. Jhdt. (Breslau, 
1890). 



ments as hereditary fiefs, their consequent worldliness and (it 
must be added) their vices, aroused the indignation of two 
very remarkable men in the latter half of the nth century. 
St Pietro Damiani (988-1072) was a scholar, hermit and re- 
former, who did more perhaps than any. one else to combat the 
open marriages of the clergy. He complained that exhortation 
was wasted even on the bishops, " because they despair of 
attaining to the pinnacle of chastity, and have no fear of con- 
demnation in open synod for the vice of lechery. ... If this evil 
were secret [he adds], it might perhaps be borne." 6 His Liber 
Gomorrhianus, addressed to and approved by St Leo IX., is 
sufficient in itself to explain the vehemence of his crusade, 
though it emphasizes even more strongly the impolicy of pro- 
ceeding more severely against the open marriages of the clergy 
than against. concubinage and other less public vices. 6 Damiani 
found a powerful ally in the equally ascetic but far more im- 
perious and statesmanlike Hildebrand, afterwards Pope Gregory 
VII. Under the influence of these two men, five successive 
popes between 1045 and 1073 attempted a radical reform; 
and when, in this latter year, Hildebrand himself became pope, 
he took measures so stringent that he has sometimes been 
erroneously represented not merely as the most uncompromising 
champion, but actually as the author of the strict rule of celibacy 
for all clerics- in sacred orders. His mind, strongly imbued with 
the theocratic ideal, saw more clearly than any other the enormous 
increase of influence which would accrue to a strictly celibate 
body of clergy, separated by their very ordination from the 
strongest earthly ties; and no statesman has ever pursued with 
greater energy and resolution a plan once formulated. In order 
to break down the desperate, and in many places organized, 
resistance of the clergy, he did not shrink from the perilous 
course, so contrary to his general policy, of subjecting them to 
the judgment of the laity. Not only were concubinary priests — 
a term which was now made to include also those who had 
openly married — forbidden to serve at the altar and threatened 
with actual deposition in cases of contumacy, but the laity were 
warned against attending mass said by " any priest certainly 
known to keep a concubine or subintroducta." ? 

But these heroic measures soon caused serious embarrassment. 
If the laity were to stand aloof from all incontinent priests, 
while (as the most orthodox churchmen constantly complained) 
many priests were still incontinent, then this could only result in 
estranging large bodies of the laity from the sacraments of the 
church. It became necessary, therefore, to soften a policy 
which to the lay mind might imply that the virtue of a sacrament 
was weakened by the vices of its ministers; and, whereas Peter 
Lombard (d. ri6o) concludes that no excommunicated priest 
can effect transubstantiation, St Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) 
agrees with all the later Schoolmen in granting him that power, 
though to the peril of his own soul. 8 For, by the last quarter of 
the 13th century, the struggle had entered upon a new phase. 
The severest rneasures had been tried, especially against the 
priests' unhappy partners. As early as the council of Augsburg 
(952) these were condemned to be scourged, while Leo II. and 
Urban II., at the councils of Rome and Amalfi (1051, 1089), 

5 Opusc. xvii. praef. The saint's evidence is carefully weighed 
by Dresdner (I.e.), especially oh pp. 309 ff. and 321 ff. 

6 Even Pope Innocent III: Was compelled to decide that priests 
who had kept two or more concubines, successively or simultaneously, 
did not thereby incur the disabilities which attended digamists; 
or, in other words, that a layman who had contracted two lawful 
marriages and then proceeded to ordination on the death of his 
second wife, could be absolved only by the pope; whereas the 
concubinary priest, " as a man branded with simple fornication," 
might, receive a valid dispensation from his own bishop (Letter to 
archbishop of Lund in 1212. Re gest. lib. xvi. ep. 118; Migne, 
P.L. CCxvi. col. 914). As the great canonist Gratian remarked on 
a similar decretal of Pope Pelagius, " Here is a case where lechery has 
more rights at law than has chastity " (Decret. p. i. dist. xxxiv. 
c. vii. note a). 

7 The actual originator of this policy was Nicholas II., probably 
at Hildebrand's suggestion; but the decree remained practically 
a dead letter until Gregory's accession. 

S Peter Lombard, Sentent. lib. iv. dist. 13; Aquinas, Stimma 
Theol. pars iii. Q. lxxxiii. art. 7, 9. 



CELIBAGY u ) 



603 



adjudged them to actual slavery. 1 Such enactments naturally- 
defeated their own purpose More was done by the gentkr 
missionary zeal of the Franciscans and Dominicans in the early 
13th century; but St Thomas Aquinas had seen half a century 
of that reform and had recognized its limitations; he therefore 
attenuated as much as possible the decree of Nicholas II. His 
contemporary St Bonaventura complained publicly that he 
himself and his fellow-friars were often compelled to hold their 
tongues about the evil clergy; partly because, even if one were 
expelled, another equally worthless would probably take his 
place, but " perhaps principally lest, if the people altogether lost 
faith in the clergy, heretics should arise and draw the people to 
themselves as sheep that have no shepherd, and make heretics of 
them, boasting that, as it were by our own testimony, the clergy 
were so vile that none need obey them or care for their teaching." 2 
In other passages of his works St Bonaventura tells us plainly 
how little : had as yet been gained by suppressing clerical 
marriages; and the evidence of orthodox and distinguished 
churchmen for the next three centuries is equally decisive. 
Alvarez Pelayo, a Spanish bishop and papal penitentiary, wrote 
in 1332, " The clergy sin commonly in these following ways ... 
fourthly, in that they live very incontinently, and would that 
they had never promised continence ! especially in Spain and 
southern Italy, in which provinces the sons of the laity are 
scarcely more numerous than those of the clergy." Cardinal 
Pierre d'Ailly pleaded before the council of Constance in 1415 
for the reform of " that most scandalous custom, or rather abuse, 
whereby many [clergy] fear not to keep concubines in public." 3 
Meanwhile, as has been said above, the custom of open 
marriage among clergy in holy orders (priests, deacons and 
subdeacons) was gradually stamped out. A series of synods, 
from the early 12th century onwards, declared such marriages 
to be not only unlawful, but null and void in themselves. Yet 
the custom lingered sporadically in Germany and England until 
the last few years of the 13 th century, though it seems to have 
died out earlier in France and Italy. There was also a short- 
lived attempt to declare that even a clerk in lower orders should 
lose his clerical privileges on his marriage; but Boniface VIII. 
in 1300 definitely permitted such marriages under the already- 
quoted conditions of the Apostolic Canons; in these cases, 
however, a bishop's licence was required to enable the cleric 
to officiate in church, and the episcopal registers show that the 
diocesans frequently insisted on the celibacy of parish-clerks. 
As the middle ages drew to a close, earnest churchmen were 
compelled to ask themselves whether it would not be better to 
let the priests marry than, to continue a system under which 
concubinage was even licensed in some districts. 4 Serious pro- 
posals were made to reintroduce clerical marriage at the great 

1 Labbe-Mansi, ConciUa, vol. xix. col. 796 and xx. col. 724. Dr Lea 
is probably right in suggesting that it was a confused recollection. of 
.these decrees which prompted one of Cranmer's judges to assure 
him that " his children were bondmen to the see of Canterbury." 
Strype, Memorials of Cranmer, bk iii. c. 28 (ed. 1812, vol. i. p. 601). 

2 Bonaventura, Libell. Apologet. quaest. i.; cf. his parallel treatise 
Quare Fratres Minores praedicent. ■ The firsft visitation of his friend 
Odo Rigaldi, archbishop of Rouen, shows that about 15 % of the 
parish clergy in that.diocese were notoriously incontinent (Regestrum 
Visitationum, ed. Bonnin, Rouen, 1852, pp. 17 ff.). Vacandard 
(J.oc. cit. p. 2087) appeals rather misleadingly to this record as proving 
the progress made during the half-century before Odo's time. It 
is probable that there were many more offenders than these 15 % 
known to the archbishop. 

3 Alvarus Pelagius, De Planctu Ecclesiae, ed. 1517, f. 131a, col. 2; 
cf. f. 102b, col. 2 ; Hermann von der Hardt, Constantiensis Concilii, 
&c. vol. i. pars. viii. col. 428. 

4 This more or less regular sale of licences by bishops and arch- 
deacons flourished from the days of Gregory VII. to the 16th century ; 
see index to Lea, s.v. "Licences." Dr Lea has, however, omitted 
the most striking' authority of all. Gascoigne, the most distinguished 
Oxford chancellor of his day, writing about 1450 of John de la Bere, 
then bishop of St David's, says that he had refused to separate the 
clergy of his diocese from their concubines, giving publicly as his 
reason, " for then I your bishop should lose the 400 marks which I 
receive yearly in my diocese for the priests' lemans '' (Gascoigne, 
Lib. Ver. ed. Rogers, p. 36). Even Sir Thomas More, in'jhis polemic 
against the Reformers, admitted that this concubinage was too often 
tolerated in Wales (English Works, ed. 1557, p. 231, cf. 619). 



ref6rming councils of Constance (1415) and Basel (143 i); but 
the overwhelming majority of orthodox churchmen were un- 
willing to abandon a rule for which the saints had fought during 
so many centuries,, and to which many of them probably attri- 
buted an apostolic origin. 6 This conservative attitude was 
inevitably strengthened by the attacks first of Lollard and then, 
of Lutheran heretics; and Sir Thomas More was driven to 
declare, in answer to Tyndale, that the marriage of priests, 
being essentially null and void, " defile th the priest more than 
double or treble whoredom." It is well known that this became 
one of the most violently disputed questions at the Reformation, 
and that for eight years it was felony in England to defend 
sacerdotal marriage as permissible by the law of God .(Statute 
of the Six Articles, 31 Hen. VIII. c. 14). The diversity of practice 
on this point drew one of the sharpest lines between reformers 
and orthodox, until the disorders introduced by these religious 
wars tempted the -latter to imitate in considerable numbers the 
licence of their rivals. 6 This moved the emperor Charles V. to 
obtain from Paul III. dispensations for married priests in his 
dominions; and his successor Ferdinand, with the equally 
Catholic sovereigns of France, Bavaria and Poland, pleaded 
strongly at the council of Trent (1545) for permissive marriage. 
The council, after some hesitation, took the contrary course, 
and in the 9th canon of its 24th session it erected sacerdotal 
celibacy practically, if not formally, into an article of faith. 
In spite of this, the emperor Joseph II. reopened the question 
in 1783. In France the revolutionary constitution of 1791 
abolished all restrictions on marriage, and during the Terror 
celibacy often exposed a priest to suspicion as an enemy to the 
Republic; but the better part of the clergy steadily resisted 
this innovation, and it js estimated that only about 2 % were 
married. The Old Catholics adopted the principle of sacerdotal 
marriage in 1875. 

The working of the system in modern times is perhaps too 
controversial a question to be discussed here; but one or two 
points may be noted on which all fairly well informed writers 
would probably agree. It can scarcely be denied that the Roman 
Catholic clergy have always owed much of their influence to 
their celibacy, and that in. many cases this influence has been 
most justly earned by the celibate's devotion to an unworldly 
ideal. Again, the most adverse critics would admit that much 
was done by the counter-Reformation, and that modern ecclesi- 
astical discipline on this point is considerably superior to that 
qf the middle ages; while, on the other hand, many authorities 
of undoubted orthodoxy are ready to confess that it is not free 
from serious risks even in these days of easy publicity and 
stringent civil discipline. 7 Lastly, statistical research has 
shown that the children of the married British clergy have been 
distinguished far beyond their mere numerical proportion. 8 

Authorities.— Henry Charles Lea, History of Sacerdotal Celibacy 
(3rd ed., 1907, 2 vols ), is by far the fullest and best work on this 
subject, though a good deal qf important matter omitted by Dr Lea 
may be found in Die E'infiihrung der erzwungenen Ehelosigkeit by 
the brothers Johann Anton and Augustin Theiner, which was put 
on the Roman Index, though Augustin afterwards became archivist 
at the Vatican (Altenburg, 1828, 2 vols.). The history of monastic 
celibacy has not yet been fully treated anywhere; the most im- 
portant evidence of the episcopal registers is either still in MS. or 
has been published only in comparatively recent years. The most 
learned work on clerical celibacy from the strictly conservative point 
of view is that of Francesco Antonio Zaccaria, Storia Polemica del 
celibato sacro (Rome, 17.74); but many of his most important 



s One of Dr Lea's few serious mistakes is his acceptance of the 
spurious pamphlet infavour of priestly marriage which was attributed 
in the nth century to St Ulrich of Augsburg (i. 171). 

8 Janssen, Gesch. d. diutschen Volkes, 13th ed., vol. viii. pp. 423, 
4, 9; 434; Lea ii. 195, 204 ft. _ . ■ ' 

' Lea (ii. 339.ff.) gives a long series of quotations to this effect from 
church synods "and orthodox disciplinary writers of modern times. 

8 Havelock Ellis, A Study of British Genius (London, 1904, p. 80), 
" Even if we compare the church with the other professions with 
which it is most usually classed, we find that the eminent children 
of the clergy considerably outnumber those of lawyers, doctors 
and army officers put together." Mr Ellis points out, however, that 
" the clerical profession . . . also produces more idiots than any other 
class." ' 



604 



CELL— CELLINI 



conclusions are set aside by the abbe E. Vacandard in his contribu- 
tion to the Dictionnaire de theologie catholique (vol. ii. art. " Ceiibat 
ecclesiastique ")• (G.G.Co.) 

CELL (from Lat. cella, probably from an Indo-European kal 
— seen in Lat. celare, to hide; another suggestion connects the 
word with Lat. cera, wax, taking the original meaning to refer 
to the honeycomb), in its earliest application a small detached 
room in a building, particularly a small monastic house (see 
Abbey), generally in the country, belonging to large conventual 
buildings, and intended for change of air for the monks, as well 
as places to reside in to look after the lands, vassals, &c. Thus 
Tynemouth was a cell to St Albans; Ashwell, Herts, to West- 
minster Abbey. The term was also used of the small sleeping 
apartments of the monks, or a small apartment used by the 
anchorite or hermit. This use still survives in the application to 
the small separate chambers in a prison (q.v.) in which prisoners 
are confined. The word is applied to various small compartments 
which build up a compound structure such as a honeycomb, 
to the minute compartments in a tissue, &c. More particularly 
the word is used, in electrical science, of the single constituent 
compartments of a voltaic battery (q.v.), and in biology of the 
living units of protoplasm of which plants and animals are 
composed (see Cytology). 

CELLA, in architecture, the Latin name for the sanctuary of 
a Roman temple, corresponding with the naos of the Greek 
temple. In the Etruscan temples, according to Vitruvius, there 
were three cellas, side by side; and in the temple of Venus 
built by Hadrian at Rome there were two cellas, both enclosed, 
however, in a single peristyle. 

CELLARET (i.e. little cellar), strictly that portion of a 
sideboard which is used for holding bottles and decanters, so 
called from a cellar (which in general may be any underground 
unlighted apartment) being commonly used for keeping wine. 
Sometimes it is a drawer, divided into compartments lined with 
zinc, and sometimes a cupboard, but still an integral part of 
the sideboard. In the latter part of the 18th century, when the 
sideboard was in process of evolution from a side-table with 
drawers into the large and important piece of furniture which 
it eventually became, the cellaret was a detached receptacle. It 
was most commonly of mahogany or rosewood, many-sided or 
even octagonal, and occasionally oval, bound with broad bands 
of brass and lined with zinc partitions to hold the ice for cooling 
wine. Sometimes a tap was fixed in'the lower part for drawing off 
the water from the melted ice. Cellarets were usually placed 
under the sideboard, and were, as a rule, handsome and well- 
proportioned; but as the artistic impulse which created the 
great 18th-century English school of furniture died away, 
their form grew debased, and under the influence of the English 
Empire fashion, which drew its inspiration from a bastard 
classicism, they assumed the shape of sarcophagi incongruously 
mounted with lions' heads and claw-feet. Hepplewhite called 
them " gardes du vin "; they are now nearly always known as 
" wine-coolers." 

CELLE, a town of Germany, in the Prussian province of 
Hanover, on the left bank of the navigable Aller, near its junction 
with the Fuse and the Lachte, 23 m. N.E. of Hanover, on the 
main Lehrte-Hamburg railway. Pop. (1905) 21,400. The town 
has a Roman Catholic and five Protestant churches, among the 
latter the town-church with the burial vault of the dukes of 
Luneburg-Celle. Here rest the remains of Sophia Dorothea, 
wife of the elector George of Hanover, afterwards George I. of 
England, and those of Caroline Matilda, the divorced wife of 
Christian VII. of Denmark and sister of George III. of England, 
who resided here from 1772 until her death in 1775. The most 
interesting building in Celle is the former ducal .palace, begun 
in 1485 in Late Gothic style, but with extensive Renaissance 
additions of the close of the 17th century. The building of the 
court of appeal (Oberlandesgericht) , with a valuable library of 
60,000 volumes and many MSS., including a priceless copy of 
the Sachsenspiegel, the museum and the hall of the estates 
(Landschaftshaus) are also worthy of notice. There are manu- 
factures of woollen yarn, tobacco, biscuits, umbrellas and printers' 



ink, and a lively trade is carried on in wax, honey, wool and 
timber. Celle is the seat of the court of appeal from the superior 
courts of Aurich, Detmold, Gottingen, Hanover, Hildesheim, 
Luneburg, Osnabruck, Stade and Verden. Founded in 1292, 
the town was the residence of the dukes of Luneburg-Celle, 
a cadet branch of the ducal house of Brunswick, from the 14th 
century until 1705. 

See Dehning, Geschichte der Stadt Celle (Celle, 1891). 
CELLIER, ALFRED (1844-1891), English musical composer, 
was born at Hackney on the 1st of December 1844. From 1855 
to i860 he was a chorister at the Chapel Royal, St James's, 
under the Rev. Thomas Helmore, where Arthur Sullivan was 
one of his youthful colleagues. His first appointment was that 
of organist at All Saints' church, Blackheath (1862). In 1866 
he succeeded Dr Chipp as director of the Ulster Hall concerts, 
Belfast, at the same time acting as conductor of the Belfast 
Philharmonic Society. In 1868 he returned to London as 
organist of St Alban's, Holborn. From 1871 to 1875 he was 
conductor at the Prince's theatre, Manchester; and from 1877 
to 1879 at various London theatres. During this period he com- 
posed many comic operas and operettas, of which the most 
successful was The Sultan of Mocha, which was produced at 
Manchester in 1874, in London at the St James's theatre in 
1876, and revived at the Strand theatre in 1887. In 1880 Cellier 
visited America, producing a musical version of Longfellow's 
Masque of Pandora at Boston (1881). In 1883 his setting of 
Gray's Elegy in the form of a cantata was produced at the Leeds 
Festival. In 1886 he won the great success of his life in Dorothy, 
a comic opera written to a libretto by B. C. Stephenson, which 
was produced at the Gaiety theatre on the 25 th of September 
1886, and, transferred first to the Prince of Wales theatre and 
subsequently to the Lyric theatre, ran until April 1889. Doris 
(1889), and The Mountebanks, which was produced in January 
1892, a few days after the composer's death, were less successful. 
Cellier owed much to the influence of Sir Arthur Sullivan. He 
had little of the latter's humour and vivacity, but he was a fertile 
melodist, and his writing is invariably distinguished by elegance 
and refinement. He died in London on the 28th of December 
1891. 

CELLINI, BENVENUTO (1500-1571), Italian artist, metal 
worker and sculptor, was born in Florence, where his family, 
originally landowners in the Val d'Ambra, had for three genera- 
tions been settled. His father, Giovanni Cellini, was a musician 
and artificer of musical instruments; he married Maria Lisabetta 
Granacci, and eighteen years elapsed before they had any 
progeny. Benvenuto (meaning " Welcome ") was the third 
child. The father destined him for the same profession as 
himself, and endeavoured to thwart his inclination for design 
and metal work. When he had reached the age of fifteen his 
youthful predilection had become too strong to be resisted, 
and his father reluctantly gave consent to his being apprenticed 
to a goldsmith, Antonio di Sandro, named Marcone. He had 
already attracted some notice in his native place, when, being 
implicated in a fray with some of his companions, he was banished 
for six months to Siena, where he worked for Francesco Castoro, 
a goldsmith; from thence he removed to Bologna, where he 
became a more accomplished flute-player and made progress in 
the goldsmith's art. After visiting Pisa, and after twice resettling 
for a while in Florence (where he was visited by the sculptor 
Torrigiano, who unsuccessfully suggested his accompanying 
him to England), he decamped to Rome, aged nineteen. His 
first attempt at his craft here was a silver casket, followed by 
some silver candlesticks, and later by a vase for the bishop oi 
Salamanca, which introduced him to the favourable notice oi 
Pope Clement VII. ; likewise at a later date one of his celebrated 
works, the gold medallion of " Leda and the Swan," — the head 
and torso of Leda cut in hard stone — executed for Gonfaloniere 
Gabbriello Cesarino, which is now in the Vienna museum; he 
also reverted to music, practised flute-playing, and was appointed 
one of the pope's court-musicians. In the attack upon Rome by 
the constable de Bourbon, which occurred immediately after, in 
1527, the bravery and address of Cellini proved of signal service 



CELLINI 



005 



to the pontiff; if we may believe his own accounts, his was the 
very hand which shot the Bourbon dead, and he afterwards killed 
Philibert, prince of Orange. His exploits paved the way for a 
reconciliation with the Florentine magistrates, and his return 
shortly after to his native place. Here he assiduously devoted 
himself to the execution of medals, the most famous of which 
(executed a short while later) are " Hercules and the Nemean 
Lion," in gold repousse work, and " Atlas supporting the Sphere," 
in chased gold, the latter eventually falling into the possession of 
Francis I. From Florence he went to the court of the duke of 
Mantua, and thence again to Florence and to Rome, where he 
was employed not only in the working of jewelry, but also in 
the execution of dies for private medals and for the papal mint. 
Here in 1529 he avenged a brother's death by slaying the slayer; 
and shortly afterwards had to flee to Naples to shelter himself 
from the consequences of an affray with a notary, Ser Benedetto, 
whom he wounded. Through the influence of several of the 
cardinals he obtained a pardon; and on the elevation of Paul 
III. to the pontifical throne he was reinstated in his former 
position of favour, notwithstanding a fresh homicide of a gold- 
smith which he had committed more by accident than of malice 
prepense in the interregnum. Once more the plots of Pierluigi 
Farnese, a natural son of Paul III., led to his retreat from Rome 
to Florence and Venice, and once more he was restored with 
greater honour than before. On returning from a visit to the 
court of Francis I., being now aged thirty-seven, he was im- 
prisoned oh a charge (apparently false) of having embezzled 
during the war the gems of the pontifical tiara; he remained 
some while confined in the castle of Sant' Angelo, escaped, was 
recaptured, and treated with great severity, and was in daily 
expectation of death on the scaffold. At last, however, he was 
released at the intercession of Pierluigi's wife, and more especi- 
ally of the Cardinal d' Este of Ferrara, to whom he presented a 
splendid cup. For a while after this he worked at the court of 
Francis I. at Fontainebleau and in Paris; but he considered the 
duchesse d'Etampes to be set against him, and the intrigues of 
the king's favourites, whom he would not stoop to conciliate 
and could not venture to silence by the sword, as he had silenced 
his enemies in Rome, led him, after about five years of laborious 
and sumptuous work, and of continually-recurring jealousies and 
violences, to retire in 1545 in disgust to Florence, where he 
employed his time in works of art, and exasperated his temper 
in rivalries with the uneasy-natured sculptor Baccio Bandinelli. 
The first collision between the two had occurred several years 
before when Pope Clement VII. commissioned Cellini to mint 
his coinage. Now, in an altercation before Duke Cosimo, 
Bandinelli insultingly stigmatized Beivenuto as guilty of gross 
immorality; in his autobiography Cellini rather repels than 
denies the charge, but he certainly repels it with demonstrative 
and grotesque vivacity. Two somewhat similar charges had 
been made ere this: one in Paris, which he braved out in court 
— the other, in Florence, was a mere private quarrel, and perhaps 
undeserving of attention. During the war with Siena Cellini 
was appointed to strengthen the defences of his native city, 
and, though rather shabbily treated by his ducal patrons, he 
continued to gain the admiration of his fellow-citizens by the 
magnificent works which he produced. He died in Florence in 
1571, unmarried, and leaving no posterity, and was buried with 
great pomp in the church of the Annunziata. He had supported 
in Florence a widowed sister and her six daughters. 

Besides the works in gold and silver which have been adverted 
to, Cellini executed several pieces of sculpture on a grander scale. 
The most distinguished of these is the bronze group of " Perseus 
holding the head of Medusa," a work (first suggested by Duke 
Cosimo de' Medici) now in the Loggia dei Lanzi at Florence, full 
of the fire of genius and the grandeur of a terrible beauty, one 
of the most typical and unforgettable monuments of the Italian 
Renaissance. The casting of this great work gave Cellini the 
utmost trouble and anxiety; and its completion was hailed with 
rapturous homage from all parts of Italy. The original relief 
from the foot of the pedestal — -Perseus and Andromeda — is in 
the Bargello, and replaced by a cast. 



Not less characteristic of its splendidly gifted and barbarically 
untameable author are the autobiographical memoirs which he 
composed, beginning them in Florence in 1558, — a production 
of the utmost energy, directness and racy animation, setting forth 
one of the most singular careers in all the annals of fine art. 
His amours and hatreds, his passions and delights, his love of 
the sumptuous and the exquisite in art, his self -applause and self- 
assertion, running now and again into extravagances which it is 
impossible to credit, and difficult to set down as strictly conscious 
falsehoods, make this one of the most singular and fascinating 
books in existence. Here we read, not only of the strange and 
varied adventures of which we have presented a hasty sketch, 
but of the devout complacency with which Cellini could con- 
template a satisfactorily achieved homicide; of the legion of 
devils which he and a conjuror evoked in the Colosseum, after one 
of his not innumerous mistresses had been spirited away from 
him by her mother; of the marvellous halo of light which he 
found surrounding his head at dawn and twilight after his Roman 
imprisonment, and his supernatural visions and angelic protection 
during that adversity; and of his being poisoned on two several 
occasions. If he is unmeasured in abusing some people, he is 
also unlimited in praising others. The autobiography has been 
translated into English by Thomas Roscoe, by J. A. Symonds, 
and by A. Macdonald. Cellini also wrote treatises on the gold- 
smith's art, on sculpture, and on design (translated by C. R. 
Ashbee, 1899). 

Among his works of art not already mentioned, many of which 
have perished, were a colossal Mars for a fountain at Fontaine- 
bleau and the bronzes of the doorway, coins for the Papal and 
Florentine states, a Jupiter in silver of life size, and a bronze 
bust of Bindo Altoviti. The works of decorative art are, speaking 
broadly, rather florid than chastened in style. 

In addition to the bronze statue of Perseus and the medallions 
already referred to, the works of art in existence to-day executed 
by him are the celebrated salt-cellar made for Francis I. at Vienna; 
a medallion of Clement VII. in commemoration of the peace 
between the Christian princes, 1530, with a bust of the pope on 
the reverse and a figure- of Peace setting fire to a heap of arms 
in front of the temple of Janus, signed with the artist's name; 
a medal of Francis I. with his portrait, also signed; and a medal 
of Cardinal Pietro Bembo. Cellini, while employed at the papal 
mint at Rome during the papacy of Clement VII. and later of 
Paul III., executed the dies of several coins and medals, some 
of which still survive at this now defunct mint. He was also 
in the service of Alessandro de' Medici, first duke of Florence, 
for whom he executed in 1535 a forty-soldi piece with a bust 
of the duke on one side and standing figures of the saints Cosmo 
and Damian on the other. Some connoisseurs attribute to his 
hand several plaques, " Jupiter crushing the Giants," " Fight 
between Perseus and Phinaeus," a Dog, &c. 

The important works which have perished include the uncom- 
pleted chalice intended for Clement VII.; a gold cover for a 
prayer-book as a gift from Pope Paul III. to Charles V., — both 
described at length in his autobiography; large silver statues of 
Jupiter, Vulcan and Mars, wrought for Francis I. during his 
sojourn in Paris; a bust of Julius Caesar; and a silver cup for 
the cardinal of Ferrara. The magnificent gold " button," or 
morse, made by Cellini for the cope of Clement VII., the com- 
petition for which is so graphically described in his autobiography, 
appears to have been sacrificed by Pius VI., with many other 
priceless specimens of the goldsmith's art, in furnishing the 
indemnity of 30,000,000 francs demanded by Napoleon at the 
conclusion of the campaign against the States of the Church in 
1797. According to the terms of the treaty, the pope was per- 
mitted to pay a third of that sum in plate and jewels. Fortunately 
there are in the print room of the British Museum three water- 
colour drawings of this splendid morse by F. Bertoli, done at the 
instance of an Englishman named Talman in the first half of the 
18th century. The obverse and reverse, as well as the rim, 
are drawn full size, and moreover the morse with the precious 
stones set therein, including a diamond then considered the 
second largest in the world, is fully described. 



6o6 



CELLULOSE 



Bibliography. — The autobiography already . named is the 
foundation ef most of the works written concerning Cellini's life. 
See also Cellini, His Times and Contemporaries, by " the Author 
of the Life of Sir Kenelm Digby " (1899); L. Dimier, Cellini a la 
cour de France (1898) ; Eugene Plon, Cellini, orfevre, medailleur, 
&c. (1883); Bolzenthal, Skizzen zur KunStgeschichte der modernen 
Medaillen-Arbeit ,1429-1840 (Berlin, 1840); A. Armand, Les 
Medailleurs italiens des XV' el XVI e siecles (3 vols., Paris, 1883- 
1887) ; Dr Francesco Tassi, Vitadi Benvenuto Cellini (Firenze, 1829), 
Vita di Benvemito Cellini scritta da lui medisimo (1832) ; E. Babelon, 
La Gravure en pierres fines (Paris, 1894) ; A. Heiss, Les Medailleurs 
florentins (Paris, 1887) ; J. Friedlander, Die italienischen Schau- 
munzen des funfzehnten Jahrhunderts (Berlin, 1880-1882) ; N. Rondot, 
Les Medailleurs lyonnais (Macon, 1897) ; Dr Julius Cann, Medaillen 
und Plaketten der Sammlung W. P. Metzler (Frankfort-on-Main, 
1898); Molinier, Les Plaquettes ; I. B. Supino, II Medagliere Mediceo 
nel R. Museo Nazionale di Firenze (Florence, 1899) ; L'Arte di 
Benvenuto Cellini (Florence, 1901); C. von Fabriczy, Medaillen der 
italienischen Renaissance (Leipzig) ; L. Forrer, Biographical Diction- 
ary of Medallists, &c. (London, 1904), &C. (W. M. R. ; E. A. J.) 

1 CELLULOSE, the name given to both an individual— cellulose 
proper, in the restricted sense of a chemical individual — and to 
a group of substances, the celluloses or cellulose group, which 
constitute in infinitely varied forms the containing envelope of 
the plant cell. They are complex carbohydrates, or " saccharo- 
colloids " (Tollens), and are resolved by ultimate hydrolysis 
into monoses. The typical cellulose is represented by the 
empirical formula CeHioOs, identical with that of starch, with 
which it has many chemical analogies as well as physiological 
correlations. The representative " cellulose " is the main con- 
stituent of the ' cotton fibre substance, and is obtainable by 
treating the raw fibre with boiling dilute alkalis, followed by 
chlorine gas or bromine water, or simply by alkaline oxidants. 
The cellulose thus purified is further treated with dilute acids, 
and then exhaustively with alcohol and ether. Chemical 
filter-paper (Swedish) is practically pure cellulose, the final 
purification consisting in exhaustive treatment with hydro- 
fluoric acid to remove silicious inorganic residues. The " cellu- 
lose " group, however, comprises a series of substances which; 
while presenting the characters generally similar to those of 
cotton cellulose, also exhibit marked divergences. The re- 
semblances are maintained in their synthetical reactions; but 
reactions involving the decomposition of the complex show many 
variations. For example, cotton cellulose is difficultly hydrolysed; 
other celluloses are more or less readily split up by dilute acids, 
the extreme members readily yielding sugars: the hexoses— 
dextrose, mannose and galactose; and the pentoses— xylose 
and arabinose; these less resistant cell- wall constituents are 
termed hemi-celluloses. 

The celluloses proper are essentially non-nitrogenous, though 
originating in the cell protoplasm. The cell-walls of the lower 
cryptogams, similarly purified, retain a notable proportion 
— 2-o-4-o% — of constitutional nitrogen. When hydrolysed 
these fungoid celluloses yield, in addition to monoses, glucosamine 
and acetic acid. The celluloses of the phanerogams are generally 
associated, in a degree ranging from physical mixture to chemical 
union, with other complicated substances, constituting the 
" compound celluloses." The nature of the associated groups 
affords a convenient classification 
into pecto-celluloses, ligno-cellu- 
loses and cuto-celluloses. Pecto- 
celluloses are so named because 
the associated substances — carbo- 
hydrates, together with their oxi- 
dation products, i.e. containing 
either two carbonyls (CO) in the 
unit group or carboxyl (CO-OH) 
groups in a complex — are readily 
hydrolysed by weak acids to the 
gelatinous " pectic acids " or their 
salts. Ligno-celluloses are the 
substances of lignified tissue, the 
iaon-cellulose constituents of which 
are characterized by the presence 
ofrbenzenoid and furfuroid groups; 
and although essentially complex, 



they may be regarded as homogeneous, and are conveniently 
grouped under the name lignone, The lignone complex reacts, 
by its unsaturated groups, with the halogens. It is a complex 
containing but little hydroxyl; and is of relatively high 
carbon percentage (55-0-5 7-0%). Cuto-celluloses predominate 
in the protective coatings of plant organs, and are character- 
ized by constituent groups, the decomposition products of 
which are compounds of the fatty series, and also wax alcohols, 
acids, cholesterols, &c. 

The typical pecto-cellulose is the flax fibre, i.e. the bast fibre 
of the flax plant (Linum usitatissimum) , as it occurs in the 
plant, or as the commercial textile fibre in its raw state. Rhea, 
or ramie, is another leading textile fibre in which the cellulose 
occurs associated with alkali-soluble colloidal carbohydrates. 
Pecto-celluloses are found in the stems of the Gramineae (cereal 
straws, esparto), and in the fibro-vascular bundles of monocotyle- 
dons used as textile and rope-making fibres. They are the chief 
constituents of the fleshy parenchyma of fruits, tubers, rhizomes. 
Ligno-celluloses find their chemical representative in the jute 
fibre. They constitute the woods, ' and are therefore of the 
widest distribution and the highest industrial utility. It is 
important to note that a complex having all the chemical 
characteristics of a ligno-cellulose occurs in a soluble colloidal 
form in the juice of the white currant. The formation of ligno- 
cellulose is the chemical equivalent of the morphological change 
of the plant cell known as " lignification." The typical cuto- 
celluloses are the epidermal tissues of all growing plants or 
organs^ which are easily detached from the underlying tissues 
which it is their function to protect. To subserve this function, 
they are extremely resistant to the attack of reagents. The 
associated groups are mostly of the normal saturated series, and 
of very high molecular weight. 

CelluloseandBotanicalScience. — Theelaborationof cellulose, i.e. 
of the cell walls, and its morphological and physiological aspects 
are discussed in the articles Plants: Physiology, Anatomy: 
and Cytology; while in the article Coal the part played by 
cellulose in the formation of these deposits receives treatment: 
here we may deal with its general relation to agriculture. In the 
analysis of fodder plants and other vegetable produce, the 
residue obtained after successive acid and alkaline hydrolysis is 
the " crude fibre " of the agricultural chemist, and is generally 
taken as a measure of the actual cellulose contents of the raw 
material. We give in tabular form the average percentage of 
crude fibre in typical food-stuffs and agricultural produce: — 

Seeds 





Per cent of 


Leguminous and 


Per cent of 


Seeds of Cereals. 


Fibre. 


Oil Seeds. 


Fibre. 


^ Wheat 


2-8 


Rape . 


6-4 


Barley 


6-3 


Cotton 


7-5 


Oats . 


9-0 


Beans . 


10-0 


Maize . . . 


5-2 


Peas 


10-0 


Rye . , : 


8-o 


Lentils 


IO-O 


Rice 


2-5 


Vetches 


7-2 



Fodder Crops 



Stems and Foliage 


Per cent of 




Per cent of 




Per cent of 


of Root Crops. 


Fibre. 


Fodder Crops. 


Fibre. 1 


Cereal Straws. 


Fibre. 


White Turnip 


3-9 


Grasses 


32-0 


Oats . . . 


60-68 






Meadow ) 

Hay \ . . 


25-8 


Wheat . . . 


7577 






Barley 


71-74 


Swedish „ 


4-2 


Clover and \ 
Trefoil J 








Carrot 


3-1 


2 3-5 






Mangel . 


2-6 


Vetches . 


25-9 






Parsnip . 


2-6 


Lucerne . 
Sainfoin . 


267 

287 









Leguminous. 


Oil Seeds. 


Stems and 

Foliage of 

Root Crops 


Fodder 
Crops. 


Cereal 
Straws. 


Average % of water 


H 


7 


87 


70-80 


15 



'This percentage is calculated on airdry-produce containing 15% of water. 



CELLULOSE 



607 



The above figures have a purely empirical value, since they 
represent a complicated mixture of various residues derived from 
the celluloses and compound celluloses. This mixture may be 
further resolved, and by special quantitative methods the pro- 
portions of actual cellulose, ligno-cellulose and cuto-celluloses 
estimated (J. Konig, Ber., 1906, 39, p. 3564). The figures are 
taken as an inverse measure of digestibility; at the same time 
it has been established that this group of relatively indigestible 
food constituents are more or less digestible and assimilable 
as flesh and fat producers. The percentage or coefficient of 
digestibility of the celluloses of the more important food-stuffs — 
green fodder, hay, straw and grains — varies from 20 to 75 Vo- 
lt has also been established that their physiological efficiency is, 
under certain conditions, quite equal to that of starch. 

It must also be borne in mind that the indigestible food resi- 
dues, as finally voided by the animal, have played an important 
mechanical part as an aid to digestion of those constituents 
more readily attacked in the digestive tract of animals. They 
are further an important factor of the agricultural cycle. Re- 
turned ,to the soil as " farm-yard manure," mixed with other 
cellulosic matter which has served as litter, they add " fibre " 
to the soil and, as a mechanical diluent of the mineral soil 
components, maintain this in a more open condition, penetrable 
by the atmospheric gases, and promoting distribution of moisture, 
further by breaking down, with production of " humus," a 
complex of colloidal " unsaturated " bodies of acid function, 
they fulfil important chemical functions by interaction with the 
mineral soil constituents. 

Chemistry of Cellulose. — Purified cotton cellulose, which is the 
definitive prototype of the cellulose group or series, is a complex 
of monoses or their " residues." It is resolved by solution in 
sulphuric acid and subsequent hydrolysis of the esters thus 
produced into dextrose. This fundamental fact with its ele- 
mentary composition, most simply expressed by the formula 
C 6 HioO s , has caused it to be regarded as a polyanhydride of 
dextrose. Forming, as it does, simple esters in the ratio of the 
reacting hydroxyls 30H: C 6 H 10 O5, and taking into account its 
direct converson into co-brom-methyl furfural (Fenton) a 
constitutional formula has been proposed by A. G. Green (Zeit. 
Farb. Textil Chetn. 3, pp. 97 and 309 (1904)), which is a useful 
generalization of its reactions, and its ultimate relations to the 

CH(OH)-CH-CH(OH) 
simpler carbohydrates, viz., I >0 >0 Green con- 

CH(OH)-CH-CH 2 
siders, moreover, that a group thus formulated may consistently 
represent the actual dimensions of the reacting unit, but that 
unit of larger dimensions, if postulated, is easily derived from the 
above by oxygen linkings. 

From another point of view the unit group has been formu- 
/CH(OH)-CH(OH) 
lated as CO > CH 2 , the main linking of such units in the 

NTH (OH) -CH (OH) 

complex taking place as between their respective CO and CH 2 
groups in the alternative enolic form CH — C (OH) . This view gives 
expression to the genetic relations of the celluloses to the ligno- 
celluloses, to the tendency to carbon condensation as in the 
formation of coals, and pseudo-carbons, to the relative resistance 
of cellulose to hydrolysis, and its other points of differentiation 
from starch, and more particularly to the ketonic character of its 
carbonyl (CO) groups, which is also more in harmony with the 
experimental facts established by Fenton as to the production of 
methyl furfural. 

The probability, however, is that no simple molecular formula 
adequately represents the constitution of cellulose as it actually 
exists or indeed reacts. On the other hand, it has been suggested 
that cellulose is to be regarded as representing a condition of 
matter analogous to that of a saline electrolyte in solution, i.e. 
as a complex of molecular aggregates, and of residues (of monose 
groups) having distinct and opposite polarities; such a complex 
is essentially labile and its configuration will change progressively 
under reaction. The exposition of this view is the subject of 
a publication by Cross and Bevan {Researches on Cellulose, ii. 
1906). The main purpose is to give full effect to the colloidal 



characteristics of cellulose and its derivatives, with reference to 
the modern theory of the colloidal state as involving a particular 
internal equilibrium of amphoteric electrolytes. 

The typical cellulose is a white fibrous substance familiar to 
us in the various forms of bleached cotton. Other fibrous cellu- 
loses are equally characteristic as to form and appearance, e.g. 
bleached flax, hemp, ramie. It is hygroscopic, absorbing 6 to 
7% its weight of moisture from the air. When dry, it is an 
electrical insulator, and has a specific inductive capacity of 
about 7: when wetted it is a conductor, and manifests electro- 
lytic phenomena. 1 It is insoluble in water and in the ordinary 
solvents; it dissolves, however, in a 40-50% solution of zinc 
chloride, and in ammoniacal solutions of copper oxide (3% 
CuO, 15% NH 3 ): from these solutions it is obtained as a highly 
hydrated, gelatinous precipitate, from the former by dilution or 
addition of alcohol, from the latter by acidification; these solu- 
tions have important industrial application. Projected or drawn 
into a precipitating solution they may be solidified continuously 
to threads of various, but controlled dimensions: the regenerated 
cellulose, now amorphous, in its finer dimensions is known as 
artificial silk or lustra-cellulose. These forms of cellulose retain 
the general characters of the original fibrous and " natural " 
celluloses. In composition they differ somewhat by combination 
with water (of hydration), which they retain in the air-dry con- 
dition. They also further combine with an increased proportion 
of atmospheric moisture, viz. up to 10-11% of their weight. 

Derivatives. — Important derivatives are the esters or ethereal 
salts of both inorganic and organic acids, cellulose behaving as an 
alcohol, the highest esters indicating that it reacts as a trihydric 
alcohol of the formula «[C6H 7 2 (OH)3]. The nitrates result by 
the action of concentrated nitric acid, either alone or in the 
presence of sulphuric acid: the normal dinitrate represents a 
definite stage in the series of nitrates, and the ester at this point 
manifests the important property of solubility in various alco- 
holic solvents, notably ether-alcohol. Such nitrates are the 
basis of collodion, of artificial silk by the processes of Chardonnet 
and Lehner, and of celluloid or xylonite. Higher nitrates are 
also obtainable-up to the limit of the trinitrate, which is insoluble 
in ether or alcohol, but is soluble in nitroglycerin, nitrobenzene 
and other solvents. These higher nitrates are the basis of the 
most important modern explosives. 

Cellulose reacts directly with acetic anhydride to form low 
esters; in the presence of sulphuric acid the reaction proceeds 
to higher limits; the triacetate is soluble in chloroform. The 
acid sulphuric ester, C6H803(S0 4 H)2, is obtained by the action of 
sulphuric acid, but its relation to the original cellulose is doubt- 
ful. The monobenzoate and dibenzoate are formed by benzoyl 
chloride reacting on alkali-cellulose (see below). Cellulose 
xanthates are obtained from carbon bisulphide and alkali- 
cellulose; these are water soluble derivatives and the basis of 
" viscose," and of important industries. Mixed esters- — aceto- 
sulphate, aceto-benzoate, nitrobenzoyl nitrates, aceto-nitro- 
sulphates — have also been investigated. 

Cellulose (cotton), when treated with a 15-20% caustic 
soda solution, gives the compound C6H 10 O5-H 2 O-2NaOH, 
alkali-cellulose, the original riband-like form with reticulated 
walls of the .cellulose being transformed into a smooth- walled 
cylinder. The structural changes in the ultimate fibre deter- 
mine very considerable changes in the dimensions of fabrics so 
treated. The reactions and structural changes were investigated 
by J. Mercer, and are known generally as " mercerization." In 
recent years a very large industry in " mercerized " fabrics 
(cotton) has resulted from the observation that if the shrinkages 
of the yarns and fabrics be antagonized by mechanical means, 
a very high lustre is developed. 

Similar, but less definite compounds, are formed with the 
oxides of lead, manganese, barium, iron, aluminium and 
chromium. These derivatives, which also find industrial applica- 
tions in the dyeing and printing of fabrics, differ but little in 

1 C. F. Cross and E. J. Bevan, Jour. Chem. Soc, 1895, 67, p. 449; 
C. R. Darling, Jour. Faraday Soc. 1904; A. Campbell, Trans. Roy. 
Soc. 1906. 



6o8 



CELLULOSE 



appearance from the original cellulose, and are without influence 
on its essential characteristics. 

Decompositions. — Hydrolysis: — By solution in sulphuric acid 
followed by dilution and boiling the diluted solution cellulose 
hydrolyses to fermentable sugars; this reaction is utilized 
industrially in the manufacture of glucose from rags. Hydro- 
chloric acid produces a friable mass of " hydrocellulose," 
probably C12H22O11, insoluble in water, but readily attacked 
by alkalis, with the production of soluble derivatives; some 
dextrose is formed in the original reaction. Hydrobromic acid 
in ethereal solution gives furfurane derivatives. Cold dilute 
acids have no perceptible action on cellulose. The actions of 
such acids are an important auxiliary to bleaching, dyeing 
and printing processes, but they require careful limitation in 
respect of concentration and temperature. Cellulose is extremely 
resistant to the action of dilute alkalis: a 1-2% solution of 
sodium hydrate having little action at temperatures up to 150 ; 
hence the use of caustic soda, soda ash and sodium silicate in 
bleaching processes, i.e. for the elimination of the non -cellulose 
components of the raw fibres. Oxidation in acid solutions 
gives compounds classed as " oxycelluloses," insoluble in water, 
but more or less soluble in alkalis; continued oxidation gives 
formic, acetic and carbonic acids. Oxidation in alkaline solution 
is more easily controlled and limited; solutions of bleaching 
powder, or more generally of alkaline hydrochlorites, receive 
industrial application in oxidizing the coloured impurities of the 
fibre, or residues left after more or less severe alkali treatments, 
leaving the cellulose practically unaffected. This, however, 
is obviously a question of conditions: this group of oxidants 
also oxidize to oxycellulose, and under more severe conditions 
to acid products, e.g. oxalic and carbonic acids. Certain bacteria 
also induce decompositions which are resolutions into ultimate 
products of the lowest molecular dimensions, as hydrogen, 
carbon dioxide, methane, acetic acid and butyric acid (Omeliansky) 
(Handb. Techn. Mykologie [F. Lafar] pp. 245-268), but generally 
the cellulose complex is extremely resistant to the organic 
ferments. Cellulose burns with a luminous flame to carbon 
dioxide and water; dry distillation gives a complicated mixture 
of gaseous and liquid products and a residue of charcoal or 
pseudo-carbon. Chromic acid in sulphuric acid solutions effects 
a complete oxidation, i.e. combustion to water and carbonic acid. 

Ligno-celluloses. — These compounds have many of the 
characteristics of the cellulose esters; they are in effect ethereal 
compounds of cellulose and the quinonoid lignone complex, 
and the combination resists hydrolysis by weak alkalis or acids. 
The cellulose varies in amount from 80 to 50%, and the lignone 
varies inversely as the degree of lignification, that is, from the 
lignified bast fibre of annuals, of which jute is a type, to the dense 
tissues of the perennial dicotyledonous woods, typified by the 
beech. The empirical formula of the lignone complex varies 
from C19H22O9 (jute) to CjeHsAo (pine wood). In certain 
reactions the non-cellulose or lignone constituents are selectively 
converted into soluble derivatives, and may be separated as 
such from the cellulose which is left; for example, chlorination 
gives products soluble in sodium sulphite solution, by the com- 
bination of unsaturated groups of the lignone with the halogen, 
while digestion with bisulphite solutions at elevated tempera- 
tures (i40°-i6o°) gives soluble sulphonated derivatives. This 
last reaction is employed industriaDy in the preparation of cellu- 
lose for paper-making from coniferous woods. These reactions 
are " quantitative " since they depend upon well-defined con- 
stitutional features of the lignone complex, and the resolution 
of the ligno-cellulose takes place with no further change in the 
lignone than the synthetical combination with the substituting 
groups. The constituent groups of the lignone specifically 

HC 

reacting are of benzenoid type of the probable form ^ q\ |^q> 



CO 
deduced from the similarity of the chlorinated derivatives 
to mairogallol, the product of the action of chlorine on 
pyrogallol in acetic acid solution (A. Hantzsch, Ber. 20, p. 2033). 



The complex contains methoxy (OCH 3 ) groups. There is also 
present a residue which is readily broken down by oxidizing 
agents, and indeed by simple hydrolysis, to acetic acid. 
Another important group of actual constituents are pentosanes 
— partially isolated as " wood gum " by solution in alkalis 
— and furfural derivatives (hydroxy furfurals) derived from 
these. The actual constitutional relationships of these main 
groups, as well as the localization of the methoxy groups, are 
still problematical. 

Certain colour reactions are characteristic, though they are 
in some cases reactions of certain constituents invariably present 
in the natural forms of the ligno-cellulose; which may be re- 
moved without affecting the essential character of the lignone 
complex. Aniline salts generally give a yellow coloration, 
dimethyl-para-phenylenediamine gives a deep red coloration, 
phloroglucin in hydrochloric acid gives a crimson coloration. 
Reactions more definitely characteristic of the lignone are: — 
ferric ferrocyanide, which is taken up and transformed into 
Prussian blue throughout the fibre, without affecting its structure, 
although there may be as much as a 50% gain in weight; iodine 
in potassium iodide solution gives a deep brown colour due to 
absorption of the halogen, a reaction which admits of quantitative 
application, i.e. as a measure of the proportion of ligno-cellulose 
in a fibrous mixture; nitric acid gives a deep orange yellow 
coloration; digested with the dilute acid (5-10% HN0 3 ) at 50 
the ligno-celluloses are entirely resolved, the lignone complex 
being attacked and dissolved in the form of nitroso-ketonic 
acids, which, on continued heating, are finally resolved to 
oxalic, acetic, formic and carbonic acids. 

Derivatives of Ligno-cellulose. — By reaction with chlorine 
jute yields the derivative C19H18CL.O9, soluble in alcohol, and in 
acetic acid; this derivative has the reactions of a quinone 
chloride. By reaction with sodium sulphite it is converted into 
a hydroquinone sulphonate of deep purple colour. The reaction 
of the ligno-celluloses (pine wood) with the bisulphites yields 
the soluble derivatives of the general formula Cas^CySOaH 
(containing two 0-CH 3 groups). Jute reacts with nitric acid in 
presence of sulphuric acid to form nitrates; and with acetic 
anhydride to form low acetates. It reacts with alkaline hydrates 
with structural changes similar to those obtained with cotton; 
and by the further action of benzoyl chloride and of carbon 
bisulphide upon the resulting compounds there result the cor- 
responding benzoates and xanthates respectively. But these 
synthetical derivatives are mixtures of cellulose and lignone 
derivatives, and so far of merely theoretical interest. 

Decompositions of Ligno-cellulose. — In addition to the specific 
resolutions above described which depend upon the distinctive 
chemical characters of the cellulose and lignone respectively, 
the following may be noted: to simple hydrolytic agents the 
two groups are equally resistant, therefore by boiling with dilute 
acids or alkalis the groups are attacked pari passu. Weak 
oxidants may also be used as bleaching agents to remove coloured 
by-products without seriously attacking the ligno-cellulose, 
which is obtained in its bleached form. Nitric acid of all strengths 
effects complete resolution. Chromic acid in dilute solutions 
combines with the lignone complex, but in presence of hydro- 
lysing acids total oxidation of the lignone is determined. The 
principal products are oxalic, carbonic, formic and acetic acids. 
This reaction is an index of constitution. Generally, the lignone 
is attacked under many conditions and by many reagents which 
are without action upon cellulose, by virtue of its unsaturated 
constitution, and its acid and aldehydic residues. 

Cuto-cellulose. — A typical cuto-cellulose is the cuticle (peel) of 
the apple which, when purified by repeated hydrolytic treatment 
and finally by alcohol and ether, gives a product of the composi- 
tion C = 75-66%,' H=n-37%, = 14-97%. Hydrolysis by 
strong alkalis gives stearo-cutic acid, C28H48O4, and oleo-cutic 
acid, C14H20O4 (Fremy). Cork is a complex mixture containing 
various compound celluloses: extraction with alcohol removes 
certain fatty alcohols and acids, and aromatic derivatives related 
to tannic acid; the residue is probably a mixture of cellulose, 
ligno-cellulose, cerin, C20H32O and suberin; the latter yields 



CELSIUS— CELSUS 



609 



stearic acid, CisHseOj, and the acid C22H42O3. The cuto- 
celluloses have been only superficially investigated, and, with 
the exception of cork, are of but little direct industrial importance. 

Industrial Uses of Cellulose. — The applications of cellulose to 
the necessities of human life, infinitely varied in kind as they are 
colossal in magnitude, depend upon two groups of qualities or 
properties, (1) structural, (2) chemical. The manufactures of 
vegetable textiles and of paper are based upon the fibrous forms 
of the naturally occurring celluloses, together with such structural 
qualities as are expressed in the terms strength, elasticity, 
specific gravity. As regards chemical properties, those which 
come into play are chiefly the negative quality of resistance to 
chemical change; this is obviously a primary factor of value in 
enabling fabrics to withstand wear and tear, contact with 
atmospheric oxygen and water, and such chemical treatments as 
laundrying; positive chemical properties are brought into play 
in the auxiliary processes of dyeing, printing, and the treatment 
and preparation in connexion with these. Staple textiles of 
this group are cotton, flax, hemp and jute; other fibres are used 
in rope-making and brush-making industries. These subjects 
are treated in special articles under their own headings and in 
the article Fibres. The course of industrial development in the 
19th century has been one of enormous expansion in use and 
considerable refinement in methods of preparation and manu- 
facture. Efforts to introduce new forms of cellulose have had 
little result. Rhea or ramie has been a favourite subject of 
investigation; the industry has been introduced into England, 
and doubtless its development is only a question of time, 
as on the continent of Europe the production of rhea yarns 
is well established, though it is still only a relatively small 
trade — probably two or three tons a day total production. The 
paper trade has required to seek new sources of cellulose, in 
consequence of the enormous expansion of the uses of paper. 
Important phases of development were: (1) in the period of i860 to 
1870, the introduction of esparto, which has risen to a consump- 
tion of 250,000 tons a year in the United Kingdom, at which 
figure it remains fairly steady; (2) the decade 1870 to 1880, 
which saw the development of the manufacture of cellulose from 
coniferous woods, and this industry n*w furnishes a staple of 
world-wide consumption, though the industry is necessarily 
localized in countries where the coniferous woods are available 
in large quantities. As a development of the paper industry we 
must mention the manufacture of paper textiles, based upon the 
production of pulp yarns. Paper pulps are worked into flat 
strips, which are then rolled into cylindrical form, and by a final 
twisting process a yarn is produced sufficiently strong to be 
employed in weaving. 

What we may call the special cellulose industries depend upon 
specific chemical properties of cellulose, partly intrinsic, partly 
belonging to the derivatives such as the esters. Thus the cellu- 
lose nitrates are the bases of our modern high explosives, as well 
as those now used for military purposes. Their use has been 
steadily developed and perfected since the middle of the 19th 
century. The industries in celluloid, xylonite, &c, also depend 
upon the nitric esters of cellulose, and the plastic state which 
they assume when treated with solvent liquids, such as alcohol, 
amyl acetate, camphor and other auxiliaries, in which state 
they can be readily moulded and fashioned at will. They have 
taken an important place as structural materials both in useful 
and artistic applications. The acetates of cellulose have recently 
been perfected, and are used in coating fine wires for electrical 
purposes, especially in instrument-making; this use depends 
upon their electrical properties of high insulation and low in- 
ductive capacity. Hydrated forms 01 Cellulose, which result 
from treatment with various reagents, ate the bases of the 
following industries: vegetable parchment results from the 
action of sulphuric acid upon cellulose (cotton) in the form of 
paper, followed by that of water, which precipitates the partially 
colloidalized cellulose. This industry is carried out- on " con- 
tinuous " machinery, the cellulose, in the form of paper, being 
treated in rolls. Vulcanized fibre is produced by similar pro- 
cesses, as for instance by treating paper with zinc chloride 
v. 20 



solvents and cementing together a number of sheets when in the 
colloidal hydrated state; the goods are exhaustively washed to 
remove) last traces of soluble electrolytes; this is necessary, as 
the product is used for electrical insulation. The solvent action 
of cupro-ammonium is used in treating cellulose goods, cotton 
and paper, the action being allowed to proceed sufficiently to 
attack the constituent fibres and convert them into colloidal 
cupro-ammonium compounds, which are then dried, producing 
a characteristic green-coloured finish of colloidal cellulose and 
rendering the goods impervious to water. The important in- 
dustry of mercerization has been mentioned above; this is 
carried out on both yarns and cloth of cotton goods chiefly 
composed of Egyptian cottons. A high lustrous finish is 
produced, giving the goods very much the appearance of silk. 

Of special importance are the more recent developments in 
the production of artificial fibres of all dimensions, by spinning 
or drawing the solutions of cellulose or derivatives. Three such 
processes are in course of evolution. (1) The first is based on the 
nitrates of cellulose which are dissolved in ether-alcohol, and 
spun through fine glass jets into air or water, the unit threads 
being afterwards twisted together to constitute the thread used 
for weaving (process of Chardonnet and Lehner). These pro- 
cesses were developed in the period~i883 to 1897, at which later 
date they had assumed serious industrial proportions. (2) The 
cupro-ammonium solution of cellulose is similarly employed, 
the solution being spun or drawn into a strong acid bath which 
instantly regenerates cellulose hydrate in continuous length. 
(3) Still more recently the " viscose " solution of cellulose, i.e. 
of the cellulose xanthogenic acid, has been perfected for the 
production of artificial silk or lustra-cellulose; the alkaline 
solution of the cellulose derivative being drawn either into 
concentrated ammonium salt solutions or into acid baths. 
This product, known as artificial silk, prepared by the three 
competing processes, was in 1908 an established textile with a 
total production in Europe of about 5000 tons a year, a quantity 
which bids fair to be very largely increased by the advent of the 
viscose process, Which will effect a very considerable lowering 
in the cost of production. The viscose solution of cellulose is 
also used for a number of industrial effects in connexion with 
paper-sizing, paper-coating, textile finishes, and the production 
of book cloth and leather cloth, and, solidified in solid masses, 
is used in preparing structural solids which can be moulded, 
turned and fashioned. 

For the special literature of cellulose treated from the general 
point of view of this article, the reader may consult the following 
works by C. F. Cross and E. J. Bevan: Cellulose (1895, 2nd ed. 
1903), Researches on Cellulose, i. (1901), Researches on Cellulose, ii. 
(1906). (C. F. C.) 

CELSIUS, ANDERS (1701-1744), Swedish astronomer, was 
born at Upsala on the 27th of November 1701. He occupied 
the chair of astronomy in the university of his native town 
from 1730 to 1744, but travelled during 1732 and some subse- 
quent years in Germany, Italy and France. At Nuremberg he 
published in 1733 a collection of 316 observations of the aurora 
borealis made by himself and others 1716-1732. In Paris he 
advocated the measurement of an arc of the meridian in Lapland, 
and took part, in 1736, in the expedition organized for the 
purpose by the French Academy. Six years later he described 
the centigrade thermometer in a paper read before the Swedish 
Academy of Sciences (see Thermometry). His death occurred 
at Upsala on the 25th of April 1744. He wrote: Nova Methodus 
dislantiam solis a terra determinandi (1730); De observationibus 
pro figura telluris determinanda (1738); besides many less 
important works. 

See W. Ostwald's Klassiker der exacten Wissenschaften, No. 57 
(Leipzig, 1904), where Celsius's memoir on the thermometric scale 
is given in German with critical and biographical notes (p. 132) ; 
Marie, Histoire des sciences, viii. 30; Poggendorff's Biog.-literarisches 
Handwbrterbuch. 

CELSUS (c. a.d. 178), a 2nd-century opponent of Christianity, 
known to us mainly through the reputation of his literary work, 
The True Word (or Account; aXijdris Xoyos), published by 
Origen in 248, seventy years after its composition. In that year, 
though the Church was under no direct threat of attack, owing 

11 



6io 



CELSUS 



to the inertia of the emperor Philip the Arabian, the atmosphere 
was full of conflict. The empire was celebrating the ioooth 
anniversary of its birth, and imperial aspirations and ideas were 
naturally prominent. Over against the state and the worship 
of the Caesar stood as usual the Christian ideal of a rule and a 
citizenship not of this world, to which a thousand years were 
but as a day. A supernatural pride was blended with a natural 
anxiety, and it was at this juncture that Origen brought to light 
again a book written in the days of Marcus Aurelius, which 
but for the great Alexandrian might have been lost for ever. 
Sometimes quoting, sometimes paraphrasing, sometimes merely 
referring, he reproduces and replies to all Celsusi arguments. 
His work shows many signs of haste, but he more than compen- 
sates for this by the way in which he thus preserves a singularly 
interesting memorial of the 2nd century. When we remember 
that only about one-tenth of the True Word is really lost and that 
about three-quarters of what we have is verbatim text, it would 
be ungracious to carp at the method. 

Celsus opens the way for his own attack by rehearsing the taunts 
levelled at the Christians by the Jews. Jesus was born in adultery 
y Ae and nurtured on the wisdom of Egypt. His assertion of 

argument, divine dignity is disproved by his poverty and his miser- 
able end. Christians have no standing in the Old Testa- 
ment prophecies, and their talk of a resurrection that was only 
revealed to some of their own adherents is foolishness. Celsus 
indeed says that the Jews are almost as ridiculous as the foes 
they attack; the latter said the saviour from Heaven had come, 
the former still looked for his coming. However, the Jews have 
the advantage of being an ancient nation with an ancient faith. 
The idea of an Incarnation of God is absurd; why should the human 
race think itself so superior to bees, ants and elephants as to be put 
in this unique relation to its maker? And why should God choose 
to come to men as a Jew ? The Christian idea of a special providence 
is nonsense, an insult to the deity. Christians are like a council of 
frogs in a marsh or a synod of worms on a dunghill, croaking and 
squeaking, " For our sakes was the world created." It is much 
more reasonable to believe that each part of the world has its own 
special deity; prophets and supernatural messengers had forsooth 
appeared in more places than one. Besides being bad philosophy 
based on fictitious history, Christianity is not respectable. Celsus 
does not indeed repeat the Thyestean charges so frequently brought 
against Christians by their calumniators, but he says the Christian 
teachers who are mainly weavers and cobblers have no power over 
men of education. The qualifications for conversion are ignorance 
and childish timidity. Like all quacks they gather a crowd of slaves, 
children, women and idlers. " I speak bitterly about this," says 
Celsus, " because I feel bitterly. When we are invited to the Mys- 
teries the masters use another tone. They say, ' Come to us ye 
who are of clean hands and pure speech, ye who are unstained by 
crime, who have a good conscience towards God, who have done 
justly and lived uprightly.' The Jews say, ' Come to us ye who are 
sinners, ye who are fools or children, ye who are miserable, and ye 
shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven.' The rogue, the thief, the 
burglar, the poisoner, the spoiler of temples and tombs, these are 
their proselytes. Jesus, they say, was sent to save sinners; was 
he not sent to help those who have kept themselves free from sin? 
They pretend that God will save the unjust man if he repents and 
humbles himself. The just man who has held steady from the 
cradle in the ways of virtue He will not look upon." He pours scorn 
upon the exorcists — who were clearly in league with the demons them- 
selves — and upon the excesses of the itinerant and undisciplined 
" prophets " who roam through cities and camps and commit to 
everlasting fire cities and lands and their inhabitants. Above all 
Christians are disloyal, and every church is an illicit collegium, an 
insinuation deadly at any time, but especially so under Marcus 
Aurelius. Why cannot Christians attach themselves to the great 
philosophic and political authorities of the world? A properly 
understood worship of gods and demons is quite compatible with 
a purified monotheism, and they might as well give up the mad 
idea of winning the authorities over to their faith, or of hoping to 
attain anything like universal agreement on divine things. 

Celsus and Porphyry (q.v.) are the two early literary opponents 
of Christianity who have most claim to consideration, and it is 
The worth noticing that, while they agree alike in high 

phiio- aims, in skilful address and in devoted toil, their 
B °Phy of religious standpoints are widely dissimilar. Porphyry 
is above all a pure philosopher, but also a man of deep 
religious feeling, whose quest and goal are the knowledge of 
God; Celsus, the friend of Lucian, though sometimes called 
Epicurean and sometimes Platonist, is not a professed philosopher 
at all, but a man of the world, really at heart an agnostic, like 
Caecilius in Minucius Felix (q.v.), whose religion is nothing more 



or less than the Empire. He is keen, positive, logical; combining 
with curious dashes of scepticism many genuine moral convicT 
tions and a good knowledge of the various national religions and 
mythologies whose relative value he is able to appreciate. " His 
manner of thought is under the overpowering influence of the 
eclectic Platonism of the time, and not of the doctrine of the 
Epicurean school. He is a man of the world, of philosophic cul- 
ture, who accepts much of the influential Platonism of the time 
but has absorbed little of its positive religious sentiment. In 
his antipathy to Christianity, which appears to him barbaric, 
and superstitious, he gives himself up to the scepticism and 
satire of a man of the world through which he comes in contact 
with Epicurean tendencies." He quotes approvingly from the 
Timaeus of Plato: " It is a hard thing to find out the Maker and 
Father of this universe, and after having found him it is im- 
possible to make him known to all." Philosophy can at best 
impart to the fit some notion of him which the elect soul must 
itself develop. The Christian on the contrary maintained that 
God is known to us as far as need be in Christ, and He is accessible 
to all. Another sharp antithesis was the problem of evil. Celsus 
made evil constant in amount as being the correlative of matter. 
Hence his scorn of the doctrine of the resurrection of the body 
held then in a very crude form, and his ridicule of any attempt 
to raise the vulgar masses from their degradation. The real root 
of the difficulty to Platonist as to Gnostic was his sharp antithesis 
of form as good and matter as evil. 

Opinion at one time inclined to the view that the True Word 
was written in Rome, but the evidence (wholly internal) points 
much more decisively to an Egyptian, and in particular 
an Alexandrian origin. Not only do the many intimate ^te.""^ 
references to Egyptian history and customs support 
this position, but it is clear that the Jews of Celsus are 
not Western or Roman Jews, but belong to the Orient, and 
especially to that circle of Judaism which had received and 
assimilated the idea of the Logos. 

The date also is clearly defined. Besides the general indication 
that the Empire was passing through a military crisis, which 
points to the long struggle waged by Marcus Aurelius against the 
Marcomanni and other* Germanic tribes, there is a reference 
[Contra Celsum, viii. 69) to the rescript of that emperor impressing 
on governors and magistrates the duty of keeping a strict watch 
on extravagances in religion. This edict dates from 176-177, 
and inaugurated the persecution which lasted from that time 
till the death of Marcus Aurelius in 180. During these years 
Commodus was associated with Marcus in the imperium, and 
Celsus has a reference to this joint rule (viii. 71). 

Celsus shows himself familiar with the story of Jewish origins. 
Any pagan who wished to understand and criticize Christianity 
intimately had to begin by learning from the Jews, value la 
and this accounts for the opening chapters of his argu- the history 
rae.nl. He has a good knowledge of Genesis and oichris- 
Exodus, refers to the stories of Jonah, Daniel (vii. 53) tlaa,t y- 
and Enoch (v. 52), but does not make much use of the 
Prophets or the Psalter. As regards the New Testament his 
position is closely in agreement with that reflected in the con- 
temporary A cts of the Martyrs of Scili. He speaks of a Christian 
collection of writings, and knew and used the gospels, but was 
influenced less by the fourth than by the Synoptics. There is 
more evidence of Pauline ideas than of Pauline letters. 

The gnostic sects and their writings were well known to him 
(viii. 15 and vi. 25), and so was the work of Marcion. There are 
indications, too, of an acquaintance with Justin Martyr and the 
Sibylline literature (vii. 53, cp. v. 61). " He is perfectly aware 
of the internal differences between Christians, and he is familiar 
with the various stages of development in the history of their 
religion. These are cleverly employed in order to heighten the 
impression of its instability. He plays off the sects against the 
Catholic Church, the primitive age against the present, Christ 
against the apostles, the various revisions of the Bible against 
the trustworthiness of the text and so forth, though he admits 
that everything was not really so bad at first as it is at present." 
The True Word had very little influence either on the mutual 



CELT 



6n 



relations of Church and State, or on classical literature. Echoes 
of it are found in Tertullian and in Minucius Felix, and then it 
lay forgotten until Origen gave it new life. A good deal of the 
neo-Platonic polemic naturally went back to Celsus, and both 
the ideas and phrases of the True Word are found in Porphyry 
and Julian, though the closing of the New Testament canon in 
the meantime somewhat changed the method of attack for these 
writers. 

Of more importance than these matters is the light which the 
book sheds on the strength of the Church about the year 180. 
It is of course easy to see that Celsus had no apprehension of 
the spiritual needs even of his own day which it was the Christian 
purpose to satisfy, that he could not grasp anything of the new 
life enjoyed by the poor in spirit, and that he underrated the signi- 
ficance of the Church, regarding it simply as one of a number of 
warring sections (mostly Gnostic), and so seeing only a mark 
Of weakness. And yet, there is all through an undercurrent which 
runs hard against his surface verdicts, and here and there comes 
to expression. He is bound to admit that Christianity has been 
stated reasonably; against the moral teaching of Jesus he can 
only bring the lame charge of plagiarism, and with the Christian 
assertion that the Logos is the Son of God he completely accords. 
Most suggestive, however, is his closing appeal to the Christians. 
" Come," he says, " don't hold aloof from the common regime. 
Take your place by the emperor's side. Don't claim for yourselves 
another empire, or any special position." It is an overture for 
peace. " If all were to follow your example and abstain from 
politics, the affairs of the world would fall into the hands of 
wild and lawless barbarians " (viii. 68). Forced to admit that 
Christians are not infrucluosi in negotiis, he wants them to be 
good citizens, to retain their own belief but conform to the state 
religion. It is an earnest and striking appeal on behalf of the 
Empire, which was clearly in great danger, and it shows the terms 
offered to the Church, as well as the strength of the Church at the 
time. Numerically, Christians may have formed perhaps a tenth 
of the population, i.e. in Alexandria there would be fifty or sixty 
thousand, but their power in a community was out of all pro- 
portion to their mere numbers. 

Literature. — Th. Keim, Celsus' Wahres Wort (1873); Pelagaud, 
Atude sur Celse (1878); K. J. Neumann's edition in Scriptores 
Graeci qui Christianam impugnaverunt religionem, and article in 
Hauck-Herzog's Realencyk. fitr prot. Theol., where a very full biblio- 
graphy is given. See also W. Moeller, Hist, of the Chr. Church, i. 
169 ff. ; A. Harnack, Expansion of Christianity, ii. 129 ff. ; J. A. 
Froude, Short Studies, iv. 

CELT, or Kelt, the generic name of an ancient people, the bulk 
of whom inhabited the central and western parts of Europe. 
(For the sense of a primitive stone tool, see the separate article, 
later.) Much confusion has arisen from the inaccurate use of 
the terms " Celt " and " Celtic." It is the practice to speak of 
the dark-complexioned people of France, Great Britain and 
Ireland as " black Celts," although the ancient writers never 
applied the term " Celt " to any dark-complexioned person. To 
them great stature, fair hair, and blue or grey eyes were the 
characteristics of the Celt. The philologists have added to the 
confusion by classing as "Celtic" the speeches of the dark- 
complexioned races of the west of Scotland and the west of 
Ireland. But, though usage has made it convenient in this work 
to employ the term, " Celtic " cannot be properly applied to 
what is really " Gaelic." 

. The ancient writers regarded as homogeneous all the fair- 
haired peoples dwelling north of the Alps, the Greeks terming them 
all Keltoi. Physically they fall into two loosely-divided groups, 
which shade off into each other. The first of these is restricted 
to north-western Europe, having its chief seat in Scandinavia. 
It is distinguished by a long head, a long face, a narrow aquiline 
nose, blue eyes, very light hair and great stature. Those are the 
peoples usually termed Teutonic by modern writers. The other 
group is marked by a round head, a broad face, a nose often 
rather broad and heavy, hazel-grey eyes, light chestnut hair; 
they are thick-set and of medium height. This race is often 
termed " Celtic " or " Alpine " from the fact of its occurrence 
all along the great mountain chain from south-west France, in 



Savoy, in Switzerland, the Po valley and Tirol, as well as in 
Auvergne, Brittany, Normandy, Burgundy, the Ardennes and 
the Vosges. It thus stands midway not only geographically but 
also in physical features between the " Teutonic " type of Scandi- 
navian and the so-called " Mediterranean race " with its long head, 
long face, its rather broad nose, dark brown or black hair, dark 
eyes, and slender form of medium height. The " Alpine race " 
is commonly supposed to be Mongoloid in origin and to have come 
from Asia, the home of round-skulled races. But it is far more 
probable that they are the same in origin as the dark race south 
of them and the tall fair race north of them, and that the broad- 
ness of their skulls is simply due to their having been long 
domiciled in mountainous regions. Thus the " Celtic " ox 
(Bos longifrons), from remote ages the common type in the 
Alpine regions, is characterized by the height of its forehead 
above the orbits, by its highly-developed occipital region, and its 
small horns. Not only do animals change their physical character- 
istics in new environment, but modern peoples when settled in 
new surroundings for even one or two centuries, e.g. the American 
of New England and the Boer of South Africa, prove that man 
is no less readily affected by his surroundings. 

The northern race has ever kept pressing down on the broad- 
skulled, brown-complexioned men of the Alps, and intermixing 
with them, and at times has swept right over the great mountain 
chain into the tempting regions of the south, producing such 
races as the Celto-Ligyes, Celtiberians, Celtillyrians, Celto- 
Thracians and Celto-Scythians. In its turn the Alpine race has 
pressed down upon their darker and less warlike kindred of the 
south, either driven down before the tall sons of the north or 
swelling the hosts of the latter as they swept down south. 

As the natives of the southern peninsula came into contact 
with these mixed people, who though differing in the shape of the 
skull nevertheless varied little from each other in speech and 
colour of their hair and eyes, the ancient writers termed them all 
" Keltoi." But as the most dreaded of these Celtic tribes came 
down from the shores of the Baltic and Northern Ocean, the 
ancients applied the name Celt to those peoples who are spoken 
of as Teutonic in modern parlance. The Teutons, whose name is 
generic for Germans, appear in history along with the Cimbri, 
universally held to be Celts, but coming from the same region as 
the Guttones (Goths) by the shores of the Baltic and North Sea. 
Again, the Germani themselves first appear in the Celtic host 
destroyed by Marcellus at Clastidium in 225 B.C. All the true 
Celtae or Galatae in France had come across the Rhine; the 
Belgic tribes in northern France were Cimbri, who also had crossed 
the Rhine- in Caesar's day the Germans were still constantly 
crossing that river, and so-called Gauls who lived near the 
Germans, e.g. the Treveri, closely resembled the latter in their 
habits, while in later times were to come Goths and Franks from 
beyond the great river. It is then not strange that the Gallic 
name for a henchman (ambactus) is the same as the Gothic 
iambahts). 

The earliest invaders, under the name of Celtae, had occupied 
all central Gaul, doubtless mixing with the aboriginal Ligurians 
and Iberians, who, however, maintained themselves respectively 
in the later Provence and in Aquitania. The Celts had firmly 
established themselves by the 7th century B.C. and we know not 
how long before, the Bituriges . (whose name survives in Berri) 
being the dominant tribe. In the Alps and the Danube valley 
some of the Celts had dwelt from the Stone Age; there they had 
developed the working of copper, discovered bronze (an alloy of 
copper and tin), and the art of smelting iron (see Hallstatt). 
The Umbrians, who were part of the Alpine Celts, had been 
pressing down into Italy from the Bronze Age, though checked 
completely by the rise of the Etruscan power in the 10th century 
B.C. The invention of iron weapons made the Celts henceforth 
irresistible. One of the earliest movements after this discovery 
was probably that of the Achaeans of Homer, who about 1450 
B.C. invaded Greece (see Achaeans), bringing with them the 
use of iron and brooches, the practice of cremating the dead, 
and the style of ornament known as Geometric. Later the 
Cimmerians (see Scythia and Cimmerii) passed down from the 



6l2 



CELT 



[CELTIC LANGUAGES 



Cimbric Chersonese, doubtless following the amber routes, and 
then turned east along the Danube, some of their tribes, e.g. the 
Treres, settling in Thrace, and crossing into Asia; others 
settled in southern Russia, leaving their name in the Crimea; 
then when hard pressed by the Scythians most of them passed 
round the east end of the Euxine into Asia Minor, probably 
being the people known as Gimirri on Assyrian monuments, 
and ravaged that region, the relics of the race finally settling at 
Sinope. 

At the beginning of the 6th century B.C. the Celts of France 
had grown very powerful under the Biturigian king Ambigatus. 
They appear to have spread southwards into Spain, occupying 
most of that country as far south as Gades (Cadiz), some tribes, 
e.g. Turdentani and Turduli, forming permanent settlements 
and being still powerful there in Roman times; and in northern 
central Spain, from the mixture of Celts with the native Iberians, 
the population henceforward was called Celtiberian. About 
this time also took place a great invasion of Italy; Segovisus 
and Bellovisus, the nephews of Ambigatus, led armies through 
Switzerland, and over the Brenner, and by the Maritime Alps, 
respectively (Livy v. 34). The tribes who sent some of their 
numbers to invade Italy and settle there were the Bituriges, 
Arverni, Senones, Aedui, Ambarri, Carnuti and Aulerci. 

Certain material remains found in north Italy, e.g. at Sesto 
Calende, may belong to this invasion. The next great wave of 
Celts recorded was that which swept down on north Italy 
shortly before 400 B.C. These invaders broke up in a few years 
the Etruscan power, and even occupied Rome herself after the 
disaster on the Allia (390 B.C.). Bought off by gold they with- 
drew from Rome, but they continued to hold a great part of 
northern Italy, extending as far south as Sena Gallica (Sini- 
gaglia), and henceforward they were a standing source of danger 
to Rome, especially in the Samnite Wars, until at last they were 
either subdued or expelled, e.g. the Boii from the plains of the 
Po. At the same time as the invasion of Italy they had made 
fresh descents into the Danube valley and the upper Balkan, 
and perhaps may have pushed into southern Russia, but at this 
time they never made their way into Greece, though the Athenian 
ladies copied the style of hair and dress of the Cimbrian women. 
About 280 B.C. the Celts gathered a great host at the head of the 
Adriatic, and accompanied by the Illyrian tribe of Autariatae, 
they overthrew the Macedonians, overran Thessaly, and invaded 
Phocis in order to sack Delphi, but they were finally repulsed, 
chiefly by the efforts of the Aetolians (279 B.C.). The remnant 
of those who returned from Greece joined that part of their army 
which had remained in Thrace, and marched for the Hellespont. 
Here some of their number settled near Byzantium, having 
conquered the native Thracians, and made Tyle their capital. 
The Byzantines had to pay them a yearly tribute of 80 talents, 
until on the death of the Gallic king Cavarus (some time after 
220 B.C.) they were annihilated by the Thracians. The main 
body of the Gauls who had marched to the Hellespont crossed it 
under the leadership of Leonnorius and Lutarius. Straightway 
they overran the greater part of Asia Minor, and laid under 
tribute all west of Taurus, even the Seleucid kings. At last 
Attila, king of Pergamum, defeated them in a series of battles 
commemorated on the Pergamene sculptures, and henceforth 
they were confined to a strip of land in the interior of Asia Minor, 
the Galatia of history. Their three tribes — Trocmi, Tolisto- 
bogians and Tectosages — submitted to Rome (189 B.C.), but they 
remained autonomous till the death of their king Amyntas, 
when Augustus erected Galatia into a province. Their descend- 
ants were probably the " foolish Galatians " to whom St Paul 
wrote (see Galatia). 

Ancient writers spoke of all these Gauls as Cimbri, and identi- 
fied them with the Cimmerians of earlier date, who in Homeric 
times dwelt on the ocean next to the Laestrygones, in a region 
of wintry gloom, but where the sun set not in summer. Nor was 
it only towards the south and the Hellespont that the Celtic 
tide ever set. They passed eastward to the Danube mouth and 
into southern Russia, as far as the Sea of Azov, mingling with 
the Scythians, as is proved by the name Celto-scyths. Mithra- 



dates VI. of Pontus seems to have negotiated with them to gain 
their aid against Rome, and Bituitus, a Gallic mercenary, was 
with him at his death. 

The Celts had continually moved westwards also. The B elgae, 
who were Cimbric in origin, had spread across the Rhine and 
given their name to all northern France and Belgium (Gallia 
Belgica). Many of these tribes sent colonies over into south- 
eastern Britain, where they had been masters for some two 
centuries when Caesar invaded the island (see Britain). But 
there is evidence that from the Bronze Age there had been settlers 
in northern Britain who were broad-skulled and cremated their 
dead, a practice which had arisen in south Germany in the early 
Bronze Age or still earlier. It is not unlikely that, as tradition 
states, there were incursions of Celts from central Gaul into 
Ireland during the general Celtic unrest in the 6th century B.C. 
It is certain that at a later period invaders from the continent, 
bringing with them the later Iron Age culture, commonly called 
La Tene, which had succeeded that of Hallstatt, had settled in 
Ireland. Not only are relics of La Tene culture found in Ireland, 
but the oldest Irish epics celebrate tall, fair-haired, grey-eyed 
heroes, armed and clad in Gallic fashion, who had come from the 
continent. The Celts in Italy, in the Balkan, in France and in 
Britain, overspread the Indo-European peoples, who differed 
from themselves but slightly in speech. The Celts represented 
Indo-European q by p, whilst the Greeks, Illyrians, Thracians, 
Ligurians, and aborigines of France, Britain and Ireland 
represented it by k, c or qu. The Umbrian-Sabellian tribes had 
the same phonetic peculiarity as the Celts. Thus Gallic petor 
(petor-ritum, " four-wheeler "), Umbrian petur, Homeric iriovpes, 
Boeotian (Achaean) irerrapes, Welsh pedwar; but Gaelic cethir, 
Lat. quatuor. The Celts are thus clearly distinguished from 
the Gaelic-speaking dark race of Britain and Ireland, and in spite 
of usage it must be understood that it is strictly misleading 
to apply the term Celtic to the latter language. 

See also Ridgeway, Early Age of Greece, vol. i., and Oldest Irish 
Epic ; Ripley, The Races of Europe ; Sergi, The Mediterranean Race. 

(W. Rl.) 

Celtic Languages 

Introduction. — The Celtic languages form one group of the 
Indo-European family of languages. As might be expected from 
their geographical distribution, they hold a position between 
the Italic and Teutonic groups. They are distinguished from 
these and other branches of the family by certain well-marked 
characteristics, the most notable of which are the loss of initial 
and inter- vocalic p, cf. Ir. athair with Lat. pater; Ir. Ian, 
" full," Welsh llawn, Breton leun, with Lat. plenus; Gaulish 
are-, " beside," Ir. ar. Welsh, Breton ar, with Gr. -repi, irapa; 
and the change of I. E. e to i, cf. Ir. fir, " true," Welsh gwir, 
Breton gwir, Lat. verus. We may further mention that the I. E. 
labialized velar gv is represented by b, e.g. Ir. bo, " cow," Welsh 
buwch, Gr. flovs, Sanskr. gaus; Ir. ben, " woman," Gr. ywfi, 
whilst the medial aspirates bh, dh, gh result in simple voiced 
stops. I. E. sonant r and / become ri, li. Other distinctive 
features of the modern dialects are not found in Gaulish, partly 
owing to the character of the monuments. Such are the -ss- 
preterite and the fusion of simple prepositions with pronominal 
elements, e.g. Ir. fri-umm, " against me," Welsh wrth-yf, Breton 
ouz-inn. The initial mutations which are so characteristic of 
the living languages did not arise until after the Romans had 
left Britain. The Celtic languages betray a surprising affinity 
with the Italic dialects. Indeed, these two groups seem to stand 
in a much closer relationship to one another than any other pair. 
As features common to both Celtic and Italic we may mention: 
(1) the gen. sing, ending -1 of masc. and neut. stems in o ; (2) 
verbal nouns in -Hon; (3) the b- future; (4) the passive forma- 
tion in -r. 

The various Celtic dialects may be divided as follows: — (1) 
Gaulish; (2) Goidelic, including Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx ; 
(3) Brythonic, including Welsh, Breton and Cornish. Gaulish 
and Brythonic, like Oscan and Umbrian among the Italic 
dialects, change the I. E. labialized velar guttural qv to p, whilst 
the Goidelic dialects retain the qv which later gives up the labial 



CELTIC LANGUAGES] 



CELT 



613 



element and becomes k, e.g. Gaulish petor-, " four," Ir. cethir, 
Welsh petguar, Breton pevar, Lat. quattuor; Ir. cia, " who," 
Welsh pwy, Lat. quis; Gaulish epo-, " horse," Welsh eb-ol, 
Breton eb-eul, Ir. ech, Lat. equus. Several attempts have been 
made to prove the existence of Celtic dialects with qv on the 
continent. Forms containing p occur in the Coligny calendar, 
discovered in 1897, by the side of others with qv, a state of affairs 
not yet satisfactorily accounted for. The Rom tablets, dis- 
covered in 1898, have not been interpreted as yet, but p forms 
are found on them exclusively. In an excursus we shall deal 
with the language of the Picts. 

No comprehensive handbook of the Celtic languages on the lines 
of Grober's Grundriss der romanischen Philologie or Paul's Grundriss 
der germanischen Philologie was available in 1909. The reader may 
refer to Windisch's article " Keltische Sprachen " in Ersch und 
Gruber's Allgemeine Encyklopddie der Wissenschaj ten und Kiinste, and 
V. Tourneur, Esquisse d'une histoire des etudes celtiques (Liege, 1905; 
vol. ii. with full bibliography). Also H. Zimmer, " Die kelt. Littera- 
turen " in Die Kultur d. Gegenwart, T. i. Abh. xi. 1 , Berlin and Leipzig, 
1909. The materials for the study of the older forms of the languages 
are to be found in Zeuss's Grammatica Celtica as revised by Ebel. 
A comparative grammar of the Celtic dialects has been prepared by H. 
Pedersen (Gottingen, 1908). See also Whitley Stokes and A. Bezzen^ 
berger, Wortschatz der keltischen Spracheinheit (Gottingen, 1894). 

I. Gaulish. — Celtic place-names are found as far east as 
the Dniester and Dobrudja, and as far north as Westphalia. 
The language of the Galatians in Asia Minor must have stood 
in a very close relation to Gaulish. Indeed few traces of dialect- 
ical differences are to be observed in continental Celtic. Unfor- 
tunately no literary ^monuments written in the ancient speech of 
Gaul have come down to us, though Caesar makes mention of 
religious poems orally transmitted by the Druids, and we also 
hear of bardi and vales. But a large number of personal and 
place-names have been preserved. The classical writers have, 
moreover, recorded a certain number of Gaulish words which can 
generally be identified without difficulty by comparing them with 
words still living in the modern dialects, e.g. pempedula, " cinque- 
foil," cf. Welsh pump, "five," and deilen, "leaf"; ambactus, 
Welsh amaeth; pelorritum, " four-wheeled chariot," cf. Welsh 
pedwar, " four," and Ir. roth, " wheel," or rith, " course." We 
have further between thirty and forty inscriptions (three in 
north Italy) which we may without hesitation ascribe to the Gauls. 
These inscriptions are written in either N. Etruscan or Greek 
or Latin characters. We are thus in a position to reconstruct 
much of the old system of declension, which resembles Latin very 
closely on the one hand, and on the other represents the forms 
which are postulated by the O. Ir. paradigms. Hence Gaulish 
is particularly valuable as preserving the final vowels which 
have disappeared in early Irish and Welsh. The few verb-forms 
which occur in the remains of Gaulish are quite obscure and 
have not hitherto admitted of a satisfactory explanation. The 
statements of ancient authors with regard to the Belgae are 
conflicting, but there cannot be much doubt that the language of 
the latter was substantially the same as Gaulish. Caesar observes 
that there was little difference between the speech of the Gauls 
and the Britons in his day, and we may regard Gaulish as 
closely akin to the ancestor of the Brythonic dialects. It is 
difficult to say when Gaulish finally became extinct. It dis- 
appeared very rapidly in the south of France, but lingered on, 
possibly till the 6th century, in the northern districts, and it 
seems unnecessary to discredit Jeronte's statement that the 
speech of the Galatians in Asia Minor bore a strong resemblance 
to the language he had heard spoken in the neighbourhood of 
Trier. There is no evidence that Breton has been influenced 
by continental Celtic. The number of Gaulish words which have 
come down in the Romance languages is remarkably small, 
and though at first sight the sound-changes of French and 
Welsh seem to bear a strong likeness to one another, any influence 
of Gaulish pronunciation on French is largely discounted when 
we find the same changes occurring in other dialects where there 
is little or no question of Celtic influence. 

The proper names occurring in classical writers, on inscriptions 
and coins, have been collected by A. Holder in his monumental 
Altceltischer Sprachschatz (Leipzig, 1896-1908). The inscriptions 
have been most recently treated by J. Rhys in the Proceedings of 



the British Academy, vol. ii.- See also a paper in this volume entitled 
" Celtae and Galli " by the same author for the text of the Coligny and 
Rom inscriptions. The value of Gaulish for grammatical pur- 
poses is set forth by Whitley Stokes in a paper on " Celtic Declen- 
sion " in the Proceedings of the London Philological Society (1885- 
1886). For the extent over which Gaulish was spoken, its relation 
to Latin and its influence on Romance, see E. Windisch's article on 
" Keltische Sprache " in the section " Die vorromanischen Volks- 
sprachen " in Grober's Grundriss der romanischen Philologie*, vol. i. 
PP- 373 A- Cf. further the introduction to J. Loth's Chrestomathie 
bretonne (Paris, 1890); G. Dottin, Manuel pour servir A I' etude des 
antiquites celtiques (Paris, 1906) ; R. Thurneysen, Keltoromanisches 
(Halle, 1884). 

II. Goidelic and Brythonic. — When the monuments of the 
Celtic dialects of the British Islands begin to appear, we find a 
wide divergence between the two groups. We can only mention 
some of the more important cases'here. The Brythonic dialects 
have gone very much farther in giving up inflectional endings than 
Goidelic. In Irish all final syllables in general disappear except 
long vowels folio wed by s or r and u<o preceded byi. But these 
reservations do not hold good for Brythonic. Thus, whilst 
O. Irish possesses five cases the Brythonic dialects have only 
one, and they have further lost the neuter gender and the dual 
number in substantives. In phonology there are also very 
striking differences, apart from the treatment of the labialized 
velar qv already mentioned. The sonant n appears in Brythonic 
as an, whereas in Goidelic the nasal disappears before k, t with 
compensatory lengthening of the vowel, e.g. I. E. *kmtom, Ir. 
ctt, " hundred," W. cant, Bret, kant; Prim. Celt. *jovnko-, 
O. Ir. dac, Mod. Ir. 6g, " young," W. ieuanc, Bret, iaouank. 
t, k standing after a vowel and preceding I, n (and also r if k 
precede) disappear in Goidelic with compensatory lengthening 
of the vowel, e.g. Prim. Celt. *stdtld-, Ir. sdl, " heel," W. sawdl; 
Prim. Celt. *petno-, Ir. in, " bird," O. W. etn, Mod. W. edn. 
Similarly b, d,g disappear in Goidelic when standing after a vowel 
and preceding /, r, n with compensatory lengthening of the 
vowel, but in Welsh they produce a vowel forming a diphthong 
with the preceding vowel, e.g. Prim. Celt. *neblo-, Ir. nil, " cloud," 
W. niwl; Prim. Celt. *ogno-, cf. Lat. agnus, Ir. uan, " lamb," 
from *on, W. oen; Prim. Celt. *vegno-, cf. Ger. Wagen, Ir. 
fin, " wagon," O. W. guein, Mod. W. givain. The Goidelic 
dialects have preserved the vowels of accented syllables on the 
whole better than Brythonic. Thus Brythonic has changed 
Prim. Celt, a ( = I. E. a, 0) to ( W. aw, Bret, eu) ; and Prim. Celt. 
u to i, e.g. Ir. brdthir, " brother," W. brawd, Bret, brew; 
Gaulish dunum, Ir. dun, " fort," W. din. Already in Gaulish 
the I. E. diphthongs show a tendency to become simple long 
vowels and the latter are treated differently by Goidelic and 
Brythonic. In early times I. E. eu, ou both became 6 and I. E. 
ei gave e. In Goidelic 0, e, in accented syllables were diphthong- 
ized in the early part of the 8th century to ua, ia if the next 
syllable did not contain the vowels e or i, whereas in Brythonic 
gave & (written u) and e became in W. ui (wy), and in Bret. 
oe (oue), e.g. Gaulish Teuto-, Toutius, Ir. tuath, " people," W., 
Bret, tud; Brythonic Lelo-cetum, Ir. Hath, " grey," W. llwyd, 
Bret, loued. Similarly in loan-words, Ir. ciir,fial, W. civyr, O.Corn. 
guil, from Lat. cera, velum. Further I. E. ai, oi are preserved in 
Irish as ai (ae), oi (oe), Mod. Ir. ao, but in Welsh I. E. ai gave 
either ai or oe, whilst oi changed to U (written u), Ir. toeb, " side," 
W., Bret, tu; I. E. *oinos, Ir. den, " one," W., Bret, un; Prim. 
Celt. *saitlo-, cf. Lat. saeculum, W. hoedl, " age," Bret. hoal. 
In Goidelic accented e changes to i before i, u in the following 
syllable, cf. Ir. fid, " wood," gen. sing, fedo, 0. H. G. witu, and 
i changes to e before a or under similar conditions. In like 
manner u becomes before a or 0, whilst changes to u before 
i, u, cf. Ir. muir, " sea," Prim. Celt. *mori, gen. sing. mora. 
Of Brythonic finals which disappear, d,,i, (0), j alone influence 
preceding vowels, whilst an i (y) which received the stress in 
O. W. was also able to modify vowels which went before it. In 
Goidelic the combinations sqv, sv appear respectively as sc, s 
(medially/), but in Brythonic they both give chw; Prim. Celt. 
*sqvetlon, Ir. seel, " story," W. chwedl; Prim. Celt. *svesor, 
Ir. siur, " sister," but mo fiur, " my sister " (whence Scottish 
piuthar by false de-aspiration), W. chwaer, Bret, c'hoar. In 



614 



CELT 



Brythonic initial s becomes h in the 7th century, but this is 
unknown in Goidelic, e.g. Ir. salann, " salt," W. Men, Cornish 
haloin, Bret, holenn; Lat. se-men, Ir. sil, " seed," W.-M. Initial 
v gives / in Goidelic in the course of the 7th century, whereas 
in Brythonic it appears as gu, gw, cf. Lat. verus, It. fir, W., Bret. 
gwir. We may also mention that in Goidelic initial j and medial 
v disappear, e.g. Gaulish Jovincillus, W. ieuanc, " young," 
Bret, iouank, Ir. 6ac, 6c; W. bywyd, " food," Ir. biad. Post- 
consonantic j in Brythonic sometimes gives -id (Mod. W. -ydd, 
Mod. Bret, -ez), e.g. Gaulish nevio-, novio-, O. Bret, nowid, W. 
newydd, Bret, nevez, Ir. title. I. E. -kt and -pt both appear in 
Goidelic as -cht but in Brythonic as -ith, cf. Lat. septem, 0. Ir. 
secht, W. seith, Bret. seiz. 

We unfortunately know very little about the position of the 
stress in ancient Gaulish. According to Meyer-Lubke in place- 
names the penult was accented if the vowel was long, otherwise 
the stress lay on the preceding syllable, e.g. Augustodunum, 
O. Fr. Ostedun, now Autun; Cataldunos (Chalons), Tricasses 
(Fr. Troyes), Bititriges (Fr. Bourges). In Goidelic the stress, 
which is strongly expiratory, is always placed on the first syllable 
except in certain cases in verbs compounded with prepositional 
prefixes. In Old Welsh and Old Breton, on the other hand, the 
final syllable, i.e. the primitive penult, received the stress, but 
in both languages the stress was shifted in the middle period 
to the penultimate. The Goidelic dialects, like the Slavonic, 
distinguish between palatalized and nonpalatalizeii consonants, 
according as the consonant was originally followed by a front 
(e, i) or back vowel {a, 0, u), a phenomenon which is entirely 
unknown to Brythonic. 

Finally, the two groups differ radically in the matter of initial 
mutation or, as it is often called, aspiration. These mutations 
are by no means confined to initial consonants, as precisely the 
same changes have taken place under similar conditions in the 
interior of words. The Goidelic changes included under this head 
probably took place for the most part between the 5th and 7th 
centuries, whilst in Brythonic the process seems to have begun 
and continued later. It is easier to fix the date of the changes in 
Brythonic than in Goidelic, as a number of British names are 
preserved in lives of saints, and it is possible to draw conclusions 
from the shape that British place-names assumed in the mouths 
of the Anglo-Saxons. In Goidelic, we find two mutations, the 
vocalic and the nasal. Initial mutation only takes place between 
words which belong together syntactically, and which form one 
single stress-group, thus between article, numeral, possessive 
pronoun or preposition, and a following substantive; between 
a verbal prefix and the verb itself. 

1. When the word causing mutation ended in a vowel we get the 
vocalic mutation, called by Irish grammarians aspiration. The 
sounds affected are the tenues k (c), t, p; the mediae g, d, b; the 
liquids and nasals m, n, r, I; s, and Prim. Celt.u (Ir. /, W. gw). At 
the present dav the results of this mutation in Irish and Welsh may 
be tabulated as follows. Where the sound is at variance with the 
traditional orthography, the latter is given in brackets. In the case 



Original ) 
sound J 


k 


t 


P 


g 


d 


b 


m 


Irish 


x(ch) 


h(th) 


f(ph) 


3(gh) 


3(dh) 


v,w(bh) 


v,w(mh) 


Welsh . 


g 


d 


b 


nil 


S(dd) 


v(f) 


. v(f) 



of n, r, I in Goidelic we get a different variety of n, r, I sound. In 
Welsh in the case of r, I, the absolute initial is a voiceless r, I written 
rh, 11, which on mutation become voiced and are written r, I. In 
Irish 5 becomes h written sh and the mutation of / is written fh, 
which, however, is now silent. Examples: — Irish, cu, "hound," 
do chu, " thy hound "; Welsh ci, dy gi {do, dy represent a Prim. 
Celt. *tovo) ; Irish mdthair, " mother," an mhdthair, " the mother," 
Weish mam, y fam (the feminine of the article was originally *sentd, 
sendd) . 

, 2. When the word causing mutation originally ended in a nasal, 
we get the nasal mutation called by Irish grammarians eclipse. 
The sounds affected are k (c), t, p; g, d, b; Prim. Celt, v (Ir. /, W. 
gw). In mod. Irish and mod. Welsh the results are tabulated below. 
Irish / becomes w written bh, whilst W. gw gives ngw. Examples :— 
Irish bliadhna, " year," seacht m-bliadhna, " seven years," cf. Latin 
septem, Welsh blynedd, saith' mlynedd ; Irish tir, " country," i d-tir, 



" in a country, 
Latin in. 

3. In Welsh h 



[CELTIC LANGUAGES 
Welsh tref, " town," yn nhref, " in a town," cf. 
(c), t, p undergo a further change When the word 



Original Sound 


k 


t 


P 


g 


d 


b 


Irish 


g 


d 


b 


ng 


n 


m 


Welsh . 


ngh 


nh 


mh 


n g 


n 


m 



causing mutation originally ended in 5. There is nothing correspond- 
ing to this consonantal mutation in Goidelic. In this case k (c), t, p 
become the spirants x (ch), th, f (ph), e.g. lad, " father," ei thad, " her 
father," ei represents a primitive *esids. In the interior of words in 
Brythonic, cc, pp, tt give the same result as initial k, t, p by this 
mutation. 

The relation in which the other Celtic dialects stand to this 
system will be mentioned below in dealing with the various 
languages. It will be noted from what has been said above that, 
with the exception of the different treatment of the labialized 
velar qv, and the nasal sonant v, the features which differentiate 
the Brythonic from the Goidelic dialects first appear for the 
most part after the Romans had left Britain. At the beginning 
of the Christian era the difference between the two groups can 
only have been very slight. And Strachan has shown recently 
that Old Irish and Old Welsh agree in a very striking manner 
in the use of the verbal particle ro and in other syntactical 
peculiarities connected with the verb. 

(i.) Goidelic. — The term Goidelic is used to embrace the Celtic 
dialects of Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man. In each case 
the national name for the speech is Gaelic (Ir. Gaedhlig, Scottish 
Gaidhlig, Manx Gailck), from Ir. Scottish Gaodhal, Gaedheal, 
Mid. Ir. Goedel, W. Gwyddel, " a Gael, inhabitant of Ireland or 
Scotland." Old Irish may be regarded as the ancestor of Scottish 
and Manx Gaelic, as the forms of these dialects can be traced 
back to Old Irish, and there are practically no monuments of 
Scottish and Manx in the oldest period. Scottish and Irish may 
be regarded as standing to one another in much the same relation 
as broad Scottish and southern English. The divergences of 
Scottish and Manx from Irish will be mentioned below. The 
language of the Ogam inscriptions is the oldest form of Goidelic 
with which we are acquainted. Some 300 inscriptions have up 
to the present been discovered in this alphabet, the majority of 
them hailing from the south-west of Ireland (Kerry and Cork). 
In Scotland 22 are known, whilst in England and Wales about 30 
have turned up. Most of the latter are in. South Wales, but odd 
ones have been found in North Wales, Devon and Cornwall, 
and one has occurred as far east as Hampshire. The Isle of 
Man also possesses two. The letters in the oldest inscriptions are 
formed by strokes or notches scored on either side of the edge 
of an upright stone. Thus we obtain the following alphabet: — 



■ / ///// //// ///// 
m g ng z 1 



This system, which was eked out with other signs, would seem 
to have been framed in the south-west of Ireland by a person 
or persons who were familiar with the Latin alphabet. Some of 
the inscriptions probably go back to the 5th century and may 
even be earlier. As illustrations of the simplest forms of Ogam 
inscriptions we may mention the following: Doveti maqqi 
Cattini, i.e. "(the stone) of Dovetos son of Cattinos "; Trenagusu 
Maqi Maqi-Treni is rendered in Latin Trenegussi Fill Macu- 
treni hie jacit; Sagramni Maqi Cunatami, " (the stone) of 
Sagramnos son of Cunotamos"; Ovanos avi Ivacattos, "(the 
stone) of Ovanus descendant of Ivacattus." It will be seen that 
in the oldest of these inscriptions q is still kept apart from k (c), 
and that the final syllables have not disappeared (cf. maqqi, 
O. Ir. maicc), but it appears certain that in Ogamic writing 
stereotyped forms were used long after they had disappeared in 
ordinary speech. Several stones contain bilingual inscriptions, 
but .the key to the Ogam alphabet is supplied by a treatise on 
Ogamic writing contained in the Book of Ballymote, a manuscript 
of the late 14th century. It should be mentioned that the Welsh 



IRISH LANGUAGE] 



CELT 



615 



stones are early whilst the Scottish ones are almost without 
exception late, and several of the latter have so far defied 
interpretation. In addition to the Irish Ogams there are a 
number of Christian inscriptions in Latin character, but, with 
one exception, they are not older than the 8th century. 

See R. R. Brash, The Ogam Inscribed Monuments of the Gaedhil 
(London, 1879); R. A. Stewart Macalister, Studies in Irish Epi- 
graphy (London), vol. i. (1897), vol. ii. 1902, vol. iii. 1907. The Welsh 
inscriptions are contained in J. Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology ,2 
(London, 1879). The Scottish stones have also been treated by Rhys 
in the Proceedings of the Scottish Society of A ntiquaries (Edinburgh, 
1892). See also G. M. Atkinson for the tract in the Book of Bally- 
mote, Kilkenny Journal of Archaeology (1874). The Irish Christian 
inscriptions were published by Margaret Stokes as the annual volumes 
of the Roy. Hist, and Archaeol. Association of Ireland (1870- 
1877), and have been republished by R. A. Stewart Macalister. 

(a) Irish. — We are able to trace the history of the Irish 
language continuously for a period of 1200 years, and from the 
time that the literary documents begin we are better supplied 
with linguistic material for the study of the language than is the 
case with any other Celtic dialect. At the same time that form 
of Irish which is to be found in the oldest documents has preserved 
a number of features which have entirely, or almost entirely, 
disappeared from the Brythonic languages. For this reason 
scholars have largely occupied themselves with Irish, which for 
purposes of comparative philology may be regarded as the classic 
Celtic language. 

The history of Irish is divided into three periods: — Old Irish 
(700-1100), the documents mainly representing the language of 
the 8th and 9th centuries; Middle Irish, extending roughly from 
1100 to 1550; Modern Irish from 1550 to the present day. These 
periods merge into one another to such an extent that no firm division 
can be made. The language of some manuscripts of the 14th century 
contains forms which are really Old Irish, and Middle Irish ortho- 
graphy was partly employed by historians and antiquarians in the 
middle of the 17th century. Old Irish, as compared with Brythonic, 
preserves a wealth of inflectional forms in declension and conjugation, 
but many of these tend to disappear very early. In the modern 
dialects of Ireland and Scotland there is a rigid rule of orthography 
that a palatalized, or, as it is termed, slender consonant in medial 
or final position, must be preceded by a palatal vowel (i), and a non- 
palatalized consonant by a non-palatal or broad vowel (a, 0, u). This 
is the famous rule of the grammarians known as caol le cool agus 
leathan le leathan (" slender to slender and broad to broad "), but 
it is not so strictly adhered to in the spoken language as is commonly 
stated. In the older language the quality of medial and final con- 
sonants is only denoted very imperfectly, thus non-palatalized final 
consonants are regularly not denoted as such, e.g. O. and Mid. Ir. 
fir, Mod. lr.fior. In Old and Mid. Irish the initial mutations are only 
regularly denoted in the case of the vocalic mutation of c, p, t, s, f, 
and the nasal mutation of b, d, g. The vocalic mutation of c, p, I, s,f 
was denoted by writing ch, ph, th, sh, fh, the first three symbols of 
which were derived from the Latin alphabet. Another method of 
denoting the mutation was to write a dot over the letter, originally 
the punctum delens, which was justified in the case of mutated /as 
the latter early became silent. But no such devices were ready at hand 
in the case of the medial b, d, g, and the mutated forms of these con- 
sonants were consequently not represented at all in the orthography. 
The same remark holds good in the case of the nasal mutation 
(eclipse) of the tenues. But it is easy to demonstrate that the same 
condition of affairs as we find in the modern language must have 
obtained in Old Irish. This insufficiency of symbols renders the 
orthography of the early stages of the language very complicated. 
We find that b, d, g were used initially to denote the voiced stops, 
but medially and finally they represent spirants, the voiced stops in 
this case being denoted by c, p, t. It is not until much later times 
that the h in the mutated forms of the tenues, or the use of the dot, 
was extended to the mediae. Thus in Mid. Irish we find do bochtaib in 
choimded(Mod.lr.dobhochtaibh) ,Mid.lr.ro-gab = Mod.lr.do ghabh. The 
nasalmutation oic,p,t was first denoted by writing these sounds double 
and finally in the 18th century by writing gc, bp, dl. The spirants 
arising out of Prim. Celt, g, d, b came in Old Irish to be confused with 
those which developed out of Prim. Celt, p, t, k, in other than initial 
positions. In final positions in polysyllables we commonly find d 
and b written but medially th and ph, e.g. didnad, " consolation," 
gen. sing, dithnatha. For the ending -ad cp. Lat. -atu-. On the other 
hand we find g written medially and ch finally. These rules, however, 
are not yet applied in the oldest documents. 

When we turn to the inflections we find that most of the old ter- 
minations have disappeared, but that their influence on preceding 
consonants is still felt and serves to distinguish one form from 
another; thus in the declension of fer, "man, nom. sing, fer, gen. 
sing, fir, dat. sing, fiur, ace. sing, /er n-, nom. pi. fir, gen. pi. fer n-, 
corresponding to Prim. Celt. (Gaulish) viros, viri, viro, mron, viri, 
viron, the influence of the following sound still differentiates the 
cases from one another. In the later language the initial mutations 



come more and more to be used for this purpose. In Middle Irish 
the declensions and conjugations are much, simplified and the neuter 
gender is given up in substantives. In the verb the athematic conjuga- 
tion has disappeared and the distinction of primary and secondary 
endings is not observed. On the other hand Irish has developed a 
peculiar system of absolute and conjoint inflection with different sets of 
endings. The conjoint endings are always used in the case of compound 
verbs, and in simple verbs they are employed after certain proclitics, 
e.g. the negative particles. Thus berid, " he bears," is an absolute 
form; do-beir, " he gives," ni beir, " he does not bear," are conjoint 
forms. Further, the verb system is partly dominated by the various 
devices employed to express relatival function. There are three 
main types of conjugation in Old Irish corresponding to the Latin 
first, third and fourth conjugations, the Latin types moneo and 
audio being difficult to distinguish in Irish. In the modern language 
there is in reality but one conjugation. The old Irish verb system 
comprises present and imperfect indicative, imperative, pres. sub- 
junctive in -a- or -j- with corresponding past subjunctive, future in 
-/- or -s- or, -e- or with reduplication along with corresponding second- 
ary future, -s- preterite, -t- preterite, reduplicated preterite, a 
preterite containing a long stem- vowel, together with deponential and 
passive forms in -rd. This system is eked out with the verbal prefix ro, 
which among other functions changes a preterite into a perfect or 
a present into a perfect. Such a cumbrous system was bound to fall 
to pieces. A number of isolated forms have come down, but the only 
tenses which have survived into the modern period are the present 
and imperfect indicative, the imperative, the present subjunctive, 
the -s- preterite, the -b- and -e- future with corresponding secondary 
forms, and some of the passive forms in -r. At the same, time in the 
modern language there is an increasing tendency to use analytical 
forms. Two noteworthy features of the Irish verb remain to be 
mentioned. The one is the use of pronouns as objects infixed between 
particle and verb, or in a verb compounded with a preposition be- 
tween preposition and verb. There are two sets of forms according as 
to whether the verb occurs in a relative clause or not. Thus -m- is the 
ordinary infixed pronoun of the 1st pers, sing., whilst -dom- is the 
corresponding relative form. In the 3rd pers. sing, aspiration 
may be employed, e.g. ni ceil, " he does not hide," ni cheil, " he does 
not hide it." This has been given up in the modern language. 
Secondly in verbs compounded with prepositions the accent of the 
verb varies according as to whether the verb is used encliticatly 
or not— thus after the negative morin the infinitive and imperative. 
Hence we have do-b&ir, " he gives," by the side of ni tdbair, " he does 
not give," infin. tabairt; do-gniu, " I do," ni dinim, " I do not do," 
infin. dinum. The changes caused by this alternation in addition to 
others due to the working of the Irish accent and to the initial and 
internal mutations have played havoc with the verb system and 
render it exceedingly difficult to reconstruct the paradigms. In the 
later periods of the language analogy naturally plays a great part, 
and many of the complicated forms are done away with, but even 
in the modern dialects the alternation between enclitic and ortho- 
tonic forms still survives in the commonest verbs, e.g. Irish bheir sS 
" he gives," ni thabhair se, " he does not give, " infin. tabhairt; 
Scottish bheir e, cha toir, toirt; Manx ver eh, cha der, coyrt; Irish, ni 
sS, " he does," ni dheanann se, " he does not do," infin, deanamh; 
Scottish nle, " he does," cha dean e, " he will not do," infin. deanafnH; 
Manx nee eh, cha jean eh, jannoo. 

In the early period Irish borrowed a number of words from Latin. 
These are mainly connected with the church or with articles of 
civilization which would be imported from Roman Britain. Some 
of these show traces of British pronunciation, e.g. O. Ir. trindoit, from 
Latin trinitatem with o for a. In others again Lat. p is repre- 
sented in Ir. by c, which may be due to the substitution of q as 
being the nearest Irish sound to the foreign p. Thus we find Ir. 
corcur, ' ' purple, ' ' case, ' ' Easter " ; cenciges, ' Whitsuntide ' ' ; cruimther, 
" presbyter." In addition to these several loans were received from 
Norse. In the Mid. Irish period many French words' came in, and 
during the middle and modern periods the number of English words 
introduced is legion. Pedersen has tried to show in his Vergl. 
Grdmm. that a considerable number of words were borrowed from 
Brythonic (Welsh) at an early date. 

[For the Latin loan-words, see J. Vendryes, De hibernicis vocabulis 
quae a latina lingua originem duxerunt (Paris, 1902) ; Kuno Meyer 
has collected a number of loan-words from Norse, Anglo-Saxon, 
Early English, Latin and Early French in Revue celtique, xii. 460 
and xiii. 505. See also Whitley Stokes, Bezzenberger' s Beitrage, xviii. 
56 ff. For Celtic names in Norse see W. Stokes, Revue celtique, iii. 
186 ff., and W. A. Craigie, Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. i. 439 ff.] 

With regard to the dialects of Irish, there is a well-known rhyme 
which states the peculiarities of the speech of the four provinces, 
and dialectical differences must have existed at an early period, 
though they do not make their appearance in the literary language 
until the 18th century. At the present day the Irish of Lemster 
has vanished entirely, and we have unfortunately no records of it. 
But in the other three provinces the vernacular still lives, and we 
find the Irish of Munster, Connaught and Ulster marked off from 
one another by well-defined peculiarities. In general it may be 
stated that the south of Ireland is more conservative than the north. 
In Munster there is a tendency to shift the word-stress from the 
initial syllable to a heavy derivative syllable, e.g. -an. This does 



6i6 



CELT 



[SCOTTISH GAELIC 



not take place in Connaught, whilst in Ulster the tendency is to 
shorten the vowel. Again in monosyllables ending in 11, nn, m, and 
under certain other conditions a short vowel becomes a diphthong 
in the south, in Connaught it is merely lengthened, but in Ulster the 
original length is retained, e.g. Ulster ball, " member, limb," Con- 
naught ball, Munster baull. Final dh, gh in Munster are sounded as 
g. In certain cases the north prefers the vocalic mutation where 
the west and south have the nasal, thus notably in the dative singular 
after preposition and article, e.g. Munster-Connaught do'n bhfear, 
" to the man," Ulster do'n fhear. In the south synthetic verb- 
forms are employed to a much larger extent than in the north. 

In the early part of the 19th century Irish was still the speech of 
more than half the inhabitants of Ireland. A German traveller 
reckoned that out of a total population of seven millions in 1835 
four millions spoke Irish as their mother-tongue. The famine of 
1846-1847 was felt most in those districts that were purely Irish, and 
these were the parts that were and still are chiefly affected by the 
tide of emigration. Add to this the fact that the influence of 
O'Connell and his satellites, and above all that of the Roman Catholic 
clergy, was against the language. In spite of the efforts of the 
Gaelic League (founded 1893), which have met with considerable 
success, the language is rapidly dying of internal decay. The 
speakers of Irish are chiefly confined to the following counties, 
where over 20 % of the population speak Gaelic : — Waterford, Cork, 
Kerry, Clare, Galway, Mayo, Sligo, Donegal. The following figures 
will illustrate the decay of the language since the famine : — 

Year. Monoglots. Bilinguists. 

1851 .... 319,602 1,204,684 

1861 .... 163,275 942,261 

1871 .... 103,562 7!4.3i3 

1881 .... 64,167 885,765 

1891 .... 38,192 642,053 

1901 .... 20,953 620,189 

According to the 1901 census report the speakers of Irish were dis- 
tributed as follows: — Leinster, 26,436; Munster, 276,268; Con- 
naught, 245,580; Ulster, 92,858. The Gaelic movement, which 
has thriven largely on account of its anti-English character, would 
have a much better chance of galvanizing the ancient language of 
Ireland if it were not for the supreme difficulties of Irish spelling 
and phonetics. Of the hundreds of thousands of persons who attend 
the classes of the League not more than one or two per cent, at the 
outside arrive at any state of proficiency. Presbyterian Gaels in 
Scotland are taught to read the Bible but Irish Catholics are not 
encouraged to do so. The result of this is seen in the fact that, whilst 
many, if not all, of the local Nationalist newspapers under the 
pressure of the League publish badly-printed and little-read columns 
in Irish, there are only two regularly appearing periodicals which 
contain any large amount of Irish. Half the contents — and those 
the most important — of the weekly organ of the league, An Claid- 
heamh Soluis (" the flaming sword "), are in English. The latter 
was started in 1898 under the title of Fdinne an Lae (" the ring of 
day," i.e. the dawn). The other periodical is the monthly Gaelic 
Journal {Irisleabhar na Gaedhilge), a. would-be literary magazine 
of very inferior quality which has led a precarious existence since 
1882. In 1898 it was decided to hold a festival called the Oireachtas 
(" hosting, gathering ") on the lines of the Welsh Eisteddfod. The 
venture was a great success and similar meetings have been held 
every year since, whilst each province and many of the counties 
have their annual local Gaelic feis (festival). The literary output 
of the movement has been prodigious, consisting in the main of a 
number of short stories and dramas (mostly propagandist), but 
nothing of any particular merit has as yet been forthcoming. The 
best-known writers are Dr Douglas Hyde (collector of folk-stories — 
Beside the Fire, 1890, An Sgeulaidke Gaedhealach, 1895 (reprinted 
from vol. x. of the Annates de Bretagne), Love Songs of Connaught, 
1893, Religious Songs of Connaught, 1 905) ; P. O'Leary (author of 
two lengthy stories, Seadna, 1904, Niamh, 1907) ; P. Dinneen 
(author of an historical tale, Cormac Ua Connaill, 1901) ; P. O'Shea, 
better known as "Conan Maol," author of acollection of short stories 
entitled An Buaiceas, 1903. 

Authorities on Irish Language. — For the study of Old Irish 
— Zeuss, Grammatica Celtica 2 (Berlin, 1871); B. Guterbock and 
R. Thurneysen, Indices to the Irish words treated in Zeuss (Leipzig, 
1881); E. Windisch published the first grammar of Old Irish in 1879 
(trans, by N. Moore, Pitt Press, 1882), but Windisch's treatment of 
the verb was rendered obsolete by the discovery of the laws of the 
Irish accent by H. Zimmer, Keltische Studien (Berlin, 1884), and 
R. Thurneysen, Revue celtique, vi. 309, J. Vendryes, Grammaire 
du Vieil-Irlandais (Paris, 1 908) ; R. Thurneysen, Handbuch des Alt- 
Irischen (Heidelberg, 1909). Mention should also be made of J. 
Strachan, Selections from the Old Irish Glosses (Dublin, 1904) ; and the 
same writer's Old Irish Paradigms (Dublin, 1 905), Stories from the Tdin 
(Dublin, 1908). See also various papers on the Irish verb in the 
Transactions of the London Philological Society by Strachan (1895- 
1902); H. Pedersen, Aspirationen i Irsk (Copenhagen, 1898); 
C. Sarauw, Irske Studier (Copenhagen, 1901); G. J. Ascoli, Archivio 
glottologico italiano, vols. v. and vi. For the study of Middle Irish — 
E. Windisch, Irische Texte mit Worterbuch (Leipzig, 1880). (Other 
volumes in conjunction with W. Stokes.) 



. Editions of texts by W. Stokes, Kuno Meyer and others in the 
Revue celtique, Zeitschrift fiir celtische Philologie, Eriu. K. Meyer 
has issued an exhaustive Mid. Irish glossary (A-D) as a supplement 
to the Archiv fiir celtische Lexikographie. The remainder is being 
published under the auspices of the Royal Irish Academy. The 
first grammar of Modern Irish was published by Francis Molloy in 
1677 at Rome under the title of Grammatica Latino-Hibernica. 
Molloy was followed by Jeremiah Curtin in 1728 with a book called 
Elements of the Irish Language. Numerous other grammars were 
published towards the end of the 1 8th and at the beginning of the 
19th century, but few of them have any value. The more important 
of them are enumerated in the introduction to O'Donovan's Grammar 
and to Windisch's Kurzgefasste irische Grammatik, and in Pedersen's 
Aspirationen i Irsk, pp. 29-47. We may mention W. Neilson's 
Grammar (1808) as it is important for the Irish of E. Ulster. But the 

Greatest native grammarian was John O' Donovan, who traversed 
reland in connexion with the Ordnance Survey, and published in 
1854 a comprehensive grammar noting the differences between the 
various dialects. A little grammar published by Molloy in 1867 is 
instructive on account of the author's peculiar point of view. The 
most useful books for the study of the living language are the series 
of booklets (five) published by Father O'Growney, one of the chief 
promoters of the present movement. Mention should also be made 
of J. P. Henry's Handbook of Modern Irish, pts. i.-iv., and of the 
grammars by P. W- Joyce (Dublin, 1896) and the Christian Brothers 
(Dublin, 1901). For the northern form of Irish J. P. Craig's 
Grammar of Modern Irish is useful ( 2 Dublin, 1904). The phonetics 
of a Munster dialect have been investigated by R. Henebry, A 
Contribution to the Phonology of Desi Irish (Greifswald, 1901). The 
dialect of the Aran Islands off the coast of Galway has been described 
by F. N. Finck, Die Araner Mundart, i. Lautlehre und Grammatik, ii. 
Worterbuch (Marburg, 1899). G. Dottin has given an account of a 
dialect of North Connaught (Mayo) in the Revue celtique, xiv. pp. 
97-137. A study of the speech of the north was published by E. C. 
Quiggin under the title of A Dialect of Donegal, Phonology and Texts 
(Cambridge, 1906). For an account of the decay of Irish see 
H. Zimmer, " Die keltische Bewegung in Irland," Premssische Jahr- 
bucher for 1898, vol. 93, p. 59 ff., and the last chapter of Douglas 
Hyde's Literary History of Ireland (London, 1901). 

The work of the earlier compilers of glosses will be mentioned 
in the literature section below. The first dictionary of the modern 
language of any importance was that published by J. O'Brien in 
1768. Next came E. O'Reilly with his Irish-English Dictionary 
(Dublin, 1817). This book contains a vast store of words gathered on 
no principle whatever from all manner of sources, and has therefore 
to be used with caution, but even at the present day it renders con- 
siderable service. A second edition with a supplement by O' Donovan 
was published after the latter's death in 1864. The first trustworthy 
dictionary of the modern language was published under the auspices 
of the Irish Texts Society by P. J. Dinneen (London, 1904). English- 
Irish dictionaries have been compiled by D. Foley (Dublin, 1855) ; 
E. E. Fournier (Dublin, 1903) ; T. O'Neill Lane (Dublin, 1904). 

(b) Scottish Gaelic. — Scottish Gaelic is the form of Goidelic 
speech which was introduced into Scotland by the Dalriadic 
Scots who came over from Ireland in the early centuries of our 
era. We possess practically no early monuments of the language. 
We have one or two inscriptions in Latin characters, such as that 
at St Vigeans and the Ogams mentioned above, which have not 
yet been solved. In the Book of Deir there is a colophon of a 
few lines probably written by an Irish scribe in the 9th century, 
and as the language of these lines differs in no wise from the Irish 
of the period, we do not know if they accurately represent the 
Gaelic of Scotland or if they may not be pure Irish. In the 
same MS. there are further Gaelic scraps belonging to the nth 
and 1 2th centuries. The word-forme in these entries are identical 
with those current at the time in Ireland, but the historical 
orthography seems to show more signs of decay than is the case 
in Irish. The medieval Scottish MSS. in the Advocates' Library 
at Edinburgh are only just being published, but they seem either 
to hail from Ireland or to be written in pure Irish. The end of 
the 15th century brought a change. The Lordship of the Isles, 
the great bond between Ireland and Scotland, was broken up. 
The Gaels of Scotland, thrown on their" own resources, advanced 
their own dialect to the position of a literary language and tried 
to discard the Irish orthography. The Book of the Dean of 
Lismore, compiled about 1500, is written in a kind of phonetic 
orthography which has not as yet been sufficiently investigated. 
The language of those poems which are not directly ascribed to 
Irish poets, and which may therefore be regarded as representing 
the literary language of the Highlands at the time, seems to 
occupy a position midway between Irish and Scottish Gaelic. 
But until the beginning of the 18th century the Highlands were 



MANX LANGUAGE] 



GELT 



617 



under the literary dominion of Ireland, so much so that Bedell's 
Irish version of the Scriptures was circulated in Scotland with a 
glossary from 1690 to 1767, and Bishop Carsewell's version of 
Knox's Prayer-book (1567) is pure Irish. The language of the 
people is poorly represented in the 16th and 17 th centuries, and 
the orthography is not fixed until we reach the 18th century. 

Irish and Scottish Gaelic differ considerably in point of voca- 
bulary, but there are also important divergences in phonetics and 
inflections. In the first place, Scottish Gaelic as written has entirely 
given up the nasal mutation (eclipse), e.g. Scottish ar bo, " our cow," 
Irish ar m-bo; Scottish nan tir, " of the countries," Irish na d-tir. 
It should, however, be observed that in Skye and the Outer Isles 
the nasal mutation has been partly restored and in some places 
there are even parallels to the Welsh nasal mutation of c, p, t to ngh, 
mh, nh. Secondly, post-vocalic c, p, t are commonly preceded by £ 
breathed sound not represented in writing, thus mac " son," is 
pronounced mahk; slat, " rod," as slaht. Again there is a tendency 
to insert a sibilant in the group rt, thus ceart, " right," is sounded 
kearst, and the distinction between palatalized and non-palatalized 
sounds is not so rigidly observed as in Irish. The group cht is in 
Scotland pronounced as if chk. We may also mention that Scottish 
Gaelic preserves an old e in a number of words where Irish now has a, 
thus, Old Ir.fer, Scottish G.fer, Irish far, but in both cases the spell- 
ing is fear fin this respect Scottish Gaelic goes hand in hand with 
Manx and the almost extinct Irish of Down). Similarly, we find that 
in Scottish Gaelic and Manx stressed vowels preceding a palatalized 
consonant have not undergone palatalization to the same extent 
as in Irish, e.g. in Ireland duine, " man," <*dunjo-, is pronounced 
din'a, but in Scotland dun'3 (in Manx written dooinney). A further 
peculiarity of Scottish Gaelic is that it substitutes lenes or voiceless 
mediae for the voiced stops, and even I, r, n sounds show a great 
tendency to give up the voice. Scottish Gaelic goes farther even 
than Irish in the confusion of vowel-sounds, e.g. Lat. coxa, Ir. cos, 
" foot," Sc. cas ; Ir. codal, Sc. cadal. When we turn to the inflections 
we find that analogy has here played a much greater part than in 
Irish. There is a tendency to make the plural of all substantives 
except masculine monosyllables end in -an. In the conjugation 
the synthetic forms have with one or two exceptions entirely dis- 
appeared and the present forms have become momentary in force. 
Hence in ordinary grammars it is stated that the present has become 
a future, thus ni mi means " I shall do." The past participle chiefly 
ends in -te as against Irish -the, -te, or -tha, -ta, according to the 
quality of the preceding sound. The present (future) and past 
subjunctive (conditional, representing both the imperfect indie, 
and secondary future of Irish) supply the place of the Irish consue- 
tudinal forms. In idiom also Scottish has diverged very consider- 
ably from Irish, e.g. in the use of tha (Ir. ta) for is. 

It seems now to be agreed that the various dialects of Scottish 
Gaelic fall into two main divisions — northern and southern. 
Mackinnon states that the boundary between the two passes roughly 
up the Firth of Lome to Loch Leven, then across country from Balla- 
chulish to the Grampians. The country covered by the northern 
dialect was of old the country of the Northern Picts, whilst the 
portion of Argyllshire south of the boundary line, together with 
Bute and Arran, made up the kingdom of Dalriada. The Gaelic 
district south of the Grampians belonged to the Southern Picts. 
The southern dialect is commonly regarded as the literary language. 
It approaches more nearly to Irish and preserves the inflections much 
better than the speech of the north. 

The following characteristics of the northern dialects may be 
mentioned : — (1) The diphthongization of open e to ia is carried much 
farther in the north than in the south. (2) The vowel ao in the north 
is more regularly the high-back-narrow-unrounded vowel-sound, 
whereas the south in many cases has a low-front-wide-round sound. 
(3) The north has str in initial position where the south prefers sr. 
Further, the northern dialects go very far in dropping unaccented 
final vowels. It may be remarked that in the reduction of derivative 
endings containing long vowels Scotland goes hand-in-hand with 
Ulster Irish, thus Connaught aran, " bread," is in Ulster and Scot- 
land aran. Again, Scottish agrees with North Irish in the loss of 
synthetic verb-forms and in using as negative cha, Mid. Ir. nico, 
nocha. But, on the other hand, Scotland, with the exception of 
South Argyll and some of the Isles, diphthongizes accented a, 0, e, in 
monosyllables, before 11, nn, m, thus resembling the speech of 
Munster. In South Argyll the original short vowel ishalf lengthened. 

As to the southern limits of Gaelic speech in Scotland, the boundary 
between Gaelic and English in medieval times was the so-called 
Highland line, and at the War of Independence it is probable that 
it extended to Stirling, Perth and the Ochil and Sidlaw Hills, the 
Inglis being limited to a very narrow strip along the coast. Dr 
J. A. H. Murray traced the linguistic frontier in 1869-1870 with the 
following results. The line started about 3 m. west of the town of 
Nairn on the Moray Firth and- ran in a south-east direction to the 
Dee, 4 m. above Ballater. On the other side of the Dee it began 
4 m. above Balmoral and followed the boundary of Perth and Forfar 
as far as Glen Shee, where it went off to the south-west as far as 
Dunkeld. After passing Birnam Hill it turned due west until the 
upper part of Glen Almond was reached, where it bent to the south- 



ward, passing through Comrie and along the braes of Doune to the 
Teith, 3 or 4 m. below Callander. Thence it ran along the north 
shore of Lake Monteith to Gartmore, and from there to Rowar- 
dennan on the east side of Loch Lomond. On the west side it 
passed through Glen Douglas down Loch Long and the Firth of 
Clyde, leaving Bute and Arran to the west. At the present day this 
boundary has probably receded to the extent of several miles, and 
even in 1870 there were districts such as Bute and the region round 
Dunoon where Gaelic was only spoken by the oldest natives and 
the immigrant population. The language is not found in the north- 
east of Caithness, the boundary running, according to Murray, 
roughly from a little north-east of Lybster to the mouth of the Forss. 
Celtic was driven out of Shetland and Orkney by Scandinavian some 
time during the middle ages. (See further J. A. H. Murray, The 
Dialect of the Southern Counties of Scotland, London, 1875; Revue 
celtique, vol. ii. pp. 180-187.) 

Until the 1 8th century Gaelic was spoken in Galloway and on the 
uplands of Ayr and Lanark. The following figures from the census 
returns illustrate the decrease in the number of persons who speak 
Gaelic: — 

Monolinguists. Bilinguists. 
1881 . . .No return 231,594 

(this includes 
' Gaelic monolinguists) 

1891 . . . . 43,738 210,677 

1901 . . . 28,106 202,700 

In the last-mentioned year it appears that nearly one-half of the 
speakers of Gaelic are reported from the counties of Inverness and 
Ross (23,893 monolinguists and 82,573 bilinguists). From about 
1300 we find Scottish emigrants filtering into the glens of Antrim, 
where the Gaelic that is spoken is still unmistakably Scottish. There 
have long been local societies of Highlanders for the cultivation 
of their native tongue, the most important one being An Comunn 
G&idhealach (founded 1 891). This society holds an annual gathering 
called the Mod ( = Eng. "moot ") on the lines of the Welsh Eisteddfod, 
and recently the Scottish Education Department has countenanced 
the teaching of Gaelic in Highland schools. But the political 
element plays little or no part in the language movement in Scot- 
land, and the latter is not likely to assume the proportions of the 
Gaelic League in Ireland. As a rule, however, Highlanders are better 
able to read their own language than Irish Gaels, for, the majority 
being Protestants, they are encouraged to read their Bibles. There are 
only two periodicals which devote half their space to Gaelic. The 
one is A n Deo-Greine (" the sunbeam"), founded October 1905; and 
the other is the Catholic propagandist quarterly Guth na Bliadhna 
(" the voice of the year "), started in 1904. Up to 1905 a fortnightly 
newspaper printed wholly in Gaelic appeared in Prince Edward 
Island, under the title of An Mac-talla (" the echo "), and efforts 
have been made to revive it. A weekly newspaper wholly in Gaelic 
was started in 1908 by R. Stuart Erskine under the title of Alba. 

Authorities on Scottish Gaelic. — The first grammar of Scottish 
Gaelic was compiled by W. Shaw {An Analysis of the Galic Language, 
1778). The most useful one was that published by Alexander 
Stewart, Elements of Gaelic Grammar (Edinburgh, 1801). A revised 
edition of this work with many additions and corrections was pub- 
lished by H. C. Gillies, London, 1902. This book is rather spoilt 
by the author's attitude, and requires to be supplemented and cor- 
rected. G. Henderson and C. W. Robertson have published im- 
portant papers on the modern dialects in the Zeitschrift fur celtische 
Philologie, the Celtic Review and the Transactions of the Gaelic Society 
of Inverness. The most useful work on Gaelic philology is Alexander 
Macbain's Etymological Gaelic Dictionary (Inverness, 1896) (a later 
edition by W. J. Watson). The chief dictionaries are Dictionarium 
Scoto^Celticum, published by the Highland Society of Scotland 
(Edinburgh, 1828) ; R. A. Armstrong, Gaelic Dictionary in two parts 
(London, 1825); N. McAlpine, Pronouncing Gaelic Dictionary 
(Edinburgh, 1847) (this book gives the pronunciation of I slay) ; 
Macleod and Dewar, Gaelic and English Dictionary (latest edition, 
Edinburgh, 1901); Faclair Gdidhlig, published by E. Macdonald, 
Heme Bay, appearing in parts since 1902. 

(c) Manx. — Our sources of information with regard to the 
language of the Isle of Man are even more scanty in the early 
period than they are in the case of Scotland. There are a number 
of references to the island in Irish literature, but the earliest 
monument of the vernacular we possess is the version of the Book 
of Common Prayer made by Bishop Phillips in 1610. In this 
translation the traditional Irish orthography is not followed. 
The spelling resembles the orthography which was employed in 
Scotland by the compiler of the Book of the Dean of Lismore. 
How far this system was used is a question which it is difficult 
to decide. In Scotland the Irish orthography has prevailed in a 
slightly modified form, but Manx writers adhered to a mode of 
spelling which was as phonetic as any system based on English, 
or, probably more correctly Anglo-Scottish, orthography could 
be. This fact, combined with the rapid phonetic decay of the 



6i8 



CELT 



[WELSH LANGUAGE 



language, makes it extremely difficult to discover what "sound- 
values are to be attached to the various symbols. At the 
beginning of the 18th century English was not understood by 
two-thirds of the natives, and in 1764 the S.P.C.K. issued a 
paper containing this statement: " The population of the Isle is 
20,000, of whom the far greater number are ignorant of English." 
But from this time English gradually crept in. The last edition 
of the Manx Bible was issued in 18 19, and of the New Testament 
in 1840. The present writer's great-grandmother refused to 
speak English, his grandfather (b. 181 5) preached in Manx and 
English, and his father (b. r844) only spoke English. The 
following figures illustrate the rapid decline of the language: — 

Monolinguists. Bilinguists. 
1875 .... 190 12,340 

(out of a population 
of 41,084 exclusive 
of Douglas) 
1901 .... None 4,419 

Manx stands in a much closer relation to Scottish Gaelic than 
Irish, and fishermen state that they could understand a good deal 
of what is said in South Argyll, though they are quite at a loss at 
Kinsale. Manx exhibits the same tendency as Scottish to use ana- 
lytical and periphrastic forms in the verb, thus jannoo, " to do," is 
used like Scottish deanamh with an infinitive to express the past and 
future. The present has acquired a momentary (future) signification, 
and the past participle ends in -it (Scottish -te). The negative is cha 
as in Scotland and Ulster. Manx goes as far as northern Scottish in 
dropping unstressed final vowels, e.g. chiarn, " lord," Irish, tighearna; 
-yn is the favourite plural ending in substantives. The nasal muta- 
tion has been partly given up. Old Irish stressed e is frequently 
retained, e.g. fir, " man," Irish far (spelt fear), and the vowels and & 
are confused as in Scottish, e.g. Manx cass, " foot," Scottish cas, 
Irish cos. Manx is divided in itself about the treatment of short 
accented vowels before //,, nn, m. According to Rhys the south side 
lengthens, whilst the north side diphthongizes; e.g. Irish crann, 
"tree," clann, "offspring," S. Manx, kron, klon, N. Manx, kroun, 
kloun (written croan, cloan). In the matter of stress Manx is quite 
original, going farther even than the dialects of the south of Ireland. 
Not only does it shift the stress in the case of heavy derivative 
suffixes like -an and reduce the preceding vowel, e.g. Ir. fuaran, 
Sc. fuaran, Manx fran, " spring,' but even in cases like caghlda, 
"variety," Sc. Ir. caochladh, O. Ir. coimmchloud ; coraa, "voice," 
Ir. comhradh. The Mid. English stress on the final is further retained 
in words from the French such as ashoon, " nation," livrey, " deliver." 

As other features peculiar to Manx we may mention the following. 
An intervocalic s or sh shows a tendency to become lisped and 
voiced to d. In monosyllables post-vocalic final m, n, are often 
preceded by an intrusive i, d respectively, thus ben " woman," may 
be heard as bedn. Ir. a becomes more palatal and is often a. Ir. 
sc becomes st, sht, e.g. Ir. fescor, " evening," Manx fastyr; Ir. uisce, 
" water," Manx ushtey. 

Authorities on Manx. — The place and personal names of the 
Isle of Man have been collected by A. W. Moore in Manx Names' 2 
(London, 1903) (33% of the proper names are Scandinavian). The 
chief source of information about the spoken language is J. Rhys, 
The Outlines of the Phonology of Manx Gaelic (London, 1895) (the 
book has unfortunately no index and no texts). The only serious 
attempt to represent spoken Manx graphically is the transcription 
of a song by J. Strachan in the Zeitschr.fiir celtische Philologie, vol. i. 
p. 54. The native grammarian is J. Kelly, who in 1803 published 
A Practical Grammar of the Ancient Gaelic or Language of the Isle 
of Man, usually called Manks. This book was republished by W. Gill 
for the Manx Society in 1859, and a facsimile reprint of this latter 
was made for Quaritch, London, 1870. A useful little book entitled, 
First Lessons in Manx was published by Edwin Goodwin (Dublin, 
1901). There are two dictionaries, one by A. Cregeen, Douglas 
'835, which is now being reprinted for An Cheshaght Gailckagh, a 
Douglas society which is endeavouring to encourage the use of 
Manx and to get it introduced into the schools. The other dictionary 
is by J. Kelly in two parts — (1) Manx and English, (2) English and 
Manx, published by the Manx Society in 1866. Kelly also prepared 
a Triglot of Manx, Irish and Gaelic, based upon English, which has 
never been published. A useful paper on the language appeared in 
the Transactions of the London Philological Society for 1875 by 
H. Jenner, " The Manx Language: Its Grammar, Literature and 
Present State." (E. C. Q.) 

(ii). Brythonic. The term Brythonic is used to denote the 
Celtic dialects of Wales, Brittany and Cornwall. Unlike the 
Goidels the Brythonic peoples have no common name for their 
language. Forms of Brythonic speech were doubtless current 
throughout England and Wales and the Lowlands of Scotland 
at the time of the Saxon invasion. The S.E. of Britain may 
have been extensively Romanized, and it is not impossible that 



remnants of Goidelic speech may have lingered on in out-of-the- 
way corners. No literary documents dating from this period 
have been preserved, but some idea of the character of Brythonic 
may be gathered from the numerous inscriptions which have 
come to light. In the middle of the 6th century Brythonic was 
confined to the western half of Britain south of the Clyde and 
Forth. The colonization of Britannia minor or Armorican 
Brittany during the 5th and 6th centuries will be described later. 
In the latter part of the 6th century the W. Saxons pushed their 
conquests as far as the estuary of the Severn, and from that time 
the Brythons of S.W. Britain were cut off from their kinsmen in 
Wales. Early in the 7th century the Brythons of Strathclyde 
were similarly isolated by the battle of Chester (613). The 
kingdom of Strathclyde maintained a separate existence until the 
10th century, and it is generally stated that Brythonic speech did 
not die out there until the 1 2th century. The question as to how 
far Brythonic names and words have survived in these districts 
has never been properly investigated. Certain it is that Bry- 
thonic numerals survived amongst shepherds in Cumberland, 
Westmorland and N.W. Yorkshire down to the second half of the 
19th century, just as herrings are still counted in Manx by Manx 
fishermen otherwise quite innocent of the language. Accordingly, 
from the 7 th century onwards Brythonic became gradually 
limited in Great Britain to three districts — Strathclyde, Wales, 
and Cornwall and Devon. During the 7th century the Brythons 
of Wales and Strathclyde often fought side by side against the 
Angles, and it is from this period that the name by which the 
Welsh call themselves is supposed to date, Cymro<*Combrox, 
pi. Cymry<*Combroges, i.e. "fellow-countrymen" as opposed 
to W. allfro, Gaul. Allobroges, " foreigners." We have no means 
of determining when Celtic speech became extinct in the 
petty states of the north which retained their independence 
longest. 

The chief features which distinguish the Brythonic from the 
Goidelic dialects have already been enumerated. In the course 
of the 6th and 7th centuries final short vowels disappeared. 
In compound names the final vowel remains in the first com- 
ponent until the 7 th century. Short vowels in other than initial 
syllables when immediately preceding the stress (on the historical 
penultimate) disappear, whilst long ones are shortened, e.g. 
Welsh cardawt from Lat. caritdtem. O.ther vowels in unstressed 
position are apt to be reduced, thus d, 6, give i in O. W. (Mid. 
W. y). A marked characteristic of Welsh as distinguished from 
Cornish and Breton is the treatment of 0, under the influence of 
a following i. In Welsh the result is ei, in Corn, and Bret, e, 
e.g. Welsh seint, " saints," Bret, sent, sing. sant. The mutations 
seem to have started in the second half of the 6th century in 
the case of the tenues. 

See J. Loth, Les Mots latins dans les langues Brittoniques (Paris, 
1892); J. Loth, Chrestomathie bretonne (Paris, 1890). 

(a) Welsh (Cymraeg). — It is usual to divide the history of the 
Welsh language into three periods — Old, Middle and Modern. 
To the oldest period belong the collections of glosses, the earliest 
of which go back to about 800. The middle period extends from 
1 100 to 1500. 

As a rule the medial mutation of the tenues and mediae is not 
denoted in O. Welsh. Intervocalic g is sometimes retained but 
generally it has disappeared, whilst after r and / it is still written. 
In the course of the 9th century initial w (v) becomes gu (later gw). 
As the O. Welsh documents consist almost entirely of isolated words, 
we know scarcely anything about the morphology of the language 
during this period. To the middle period belong the ancient poems 
from the Black Book of Carmarthen, but the language of these com- 
positions is evidently much older than the date of the manuscript 
(t2th century), as it preserves a number of very archaic features. 
Other important sources of information for this period are the O. 
Welsh Laws contained in a MS. of the 12th century. To a somewhat 
later date belong the Mabinogion (14th century MS.), and the prose 
versions of French romances published by R.Williams (15th century). 
In Middle Welsh the consonant mutations are in general denoted 
in writing, though not consistently, and from this period dates the 
introduction of w and y (O. W. u, i) to denote vowel sounds. The 
symbol 11 to denote a voiceless / was already employed in M5d. W. 
but rh ( — voiceless r), dd ( = £ng. th in " thou ") and/ (=») either 
do not appear or only become regular during the modern period 
In Mod. W. the orthography is regularized and does not differ 



WELSH LANGUAGE] 



CELT 



619 



and 
extent. 



materially from that of the late medieval documents. In O.W. the 
old stress on the final syllable (the historical penult) appears to have 
been preserved, but during the middle period the accent was shifted 
to the penult. In consequence of this change aw (<&) in final 
syllables is reduced to in Mod. W., e.g. Mid. W. pechawt <Lat. 
peccatum, Mod. W. pechod. 

The comparative wealth of inflection preserved by O. Ir. has almost 
entirely disappeared in Welsh. There are only the faintest traces of 
the case forms, the dual and the neuter gender. Compared with 
the Irish nominal declension according to -0- (-jo-), -a-, -i-, -u-, -s-, 
guttural, dental and nasal stems, Welsh only distinguishes the nom. 
sing, and plur., the latter sometimes retaining an old formation. 
Thus masc. -0- stems show palatal modification, e.g. corn, " horn," 
plur. cyrn < *korm ; the plural ending of -u- stems, O. Gaulish -oves. 
gives O.W. -ou, Mid. W. -eu. Mod. W. -au, e.g. penneu, " heads." 
The termination -ones of the -n- stems appears as -on. The infixation 
of pronominal objects between a verbal particle and the verb itself 
continues in use down to the present day as in Breton. In the third 
person sing, of the pres. ind. there are instances in the oldest Welsh 
of the peculiar alternation between orthotonic and absolute forms 
which characterize the Irish paradigms, e.g. pereid, " it endures," 
but ny phara. The several types of conjugation represented in Irish 
have become obscured, traces remaining only in the endings of the 
third sing, of the pres. ind., the pret. ind. (Mid. W. -as, -es. -is) and 
the pret. passive (Mid. W. -at, -et, -it). The verb system of Welsh 
comprises the following tenses: indie, present (also used as future), 
imperative, imperfect, preterite (in Mid. W. forms with .s have 
become prevalent as in Irish, but forms corresponding to the Irish 
preterites in / or with reduplication or unreduplicated with long 
vowel are not infrequent in the early poetry), pluperfect (a new 
formation), pres. and pret. passive. In the subj. early W. dis- 
tinguishes pres. and past, but the latter comes to be replaced by the 
pluperfect indicative. The sign of the subj. is -h- <s, which reminds 
one of the Irish s-subj., though the formation is somewhat different. 
There are also traces of a future formation containing h<s. (See 
also under Wales.) 

We have seen already that Wales began to exist as a separate 
entity roughly at the end of the 6th and beginning of the 7th cen- 
„. turies. In the second half of the 8th century the Welsh 

n story were confined in pretty much their present limits by 
Offa, king of Mercia, who constructed the Dyke going by 
his name, which has approximately remained the political 
boundary between England and Wales ever since. From this time " 
onwards the bitter feeling against England which we find expressed 
in the fervid compositions of Iolo Goch and other political bards 
served to prevent any serious inroads of English on Welsh-speaking 
territory. With the advent of the Tudors, however, there came a 
great change. Henry VII. owed his throne in large measure to the 
support he had received from Wales and he prided himself on his 
Welsh ancestry. A consequence of this was that throughout the 
16th century Wales received exceptionally favourable treatment at 
the hands of the English sovereign and parliament. In 1562 a 
decree was issued ordering a translation of the Bible to be made into 
Welsh. All this could naturally not be without effect on the attitude 
of the leaders of the people towards England. The change is already 
apparent in the poems of Lewis Glyn Cothi and others. And the 
striking difference in the manner in which the Reformation was 
regarded in Ireland and Wales is worthy of remark. During the 
Stuart wars the Welsh nobles fought invariably on the Royalist side, 
and there is plenty of other evidence that the aristocracy of Wales 
was becoming thoroughly anglicized both in sentiment and language. 
At the same time the practice of the Tudors was reversed in many 
particulars. Thus it became the custom to appoint Englishmen 
ignorant of the national language to the Welsh bishoprics. In this 
manner it is not a matter for surprise that a feeling of estrangement 
should grow up between the bulk of the population, who only knew 
Welsh, and the clergy and nobles, their intellectual leaders. The 
neglect of the national language is evident from the large number of 
English words which have even crept into such classical works as 
Prichard's Canwyll y Cymry and Ellis Wynn's Gweledigaethau y 
Bardd Cwsg. It is stated that, of the 269 works published by Welsh- 
men between 1546 and 1644, 44 were in Latin, 184 in English and 
only 41 in Welsh, and of these 37 consist of works of piety. Thus 
at the beginning of the 18th century there seemed a fair chance that 
Welsh would soon become extinct like Cornish. 

An extraordinary change was brought about by the Methodist 
movement in Wales. The preachers, in order to get hold of the 
masses, addressed them in the vernacular, and their efforts were 
crowned with enormous success. At the same time a minister of 
the Established Church, Griffith Jones, went about Wales establish- 
ing lay. schools to which young and old might come to learn to read 
the Welsh Bible. Between 1737 and 1 761 3395 such schools sprang 
up, at which no fewer than 158,238 persons of all ages learned to read 
their native language. After Griffith Jones's death this work was 
carried on by others, notably by Charles of Bala (1755-1814), who 
passed over to Calvinistic Methodism and whose schools were trans- 
formed after the model of the Sunday schools instituted in 1782 by 
Robert Raikes. Charles of Bala was largely instrumental in the 
founding of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and Wales was 
provided with 100,000 copies of the Bible and Testament at very 



moderate prices. Bishop's Morgan's version of the Scriptures 
made in 1588 (final revision 1620) represents the speech of North 
Wales which had remained more or less free from English influence, 
so that the language of the Welsh Bible is rightly regarded as the 
literary model. Three-fourths of the inhabitants of Wales belong 
to the various Nonconformist sects, and therefore pass almost without 
exception through the Sunday school, where they are drilled in its 
sole object of study, the Welsh Bible. 

With the increasing employment of Welsh owing to the Non- 
conformist movement there was also awakened a new interest in the 
past history of the principality. A society calling itself the Cym- 
deithas y Cymmrodorion was founded in London in 1751, and during 
the succeeding half-century two periodicals exclusively in Welsh 
were started, the one, Trysorfa y Gwybodaeth, in 1770, the other, 
Cylchgrawn Cymraeg, in 1793. The year 1792 witnessed the creation 
of an important society, the Cymdeithas y Cymreigyddion, in London, 
in which the moving spirits were William Owen (Pughe), Owen Jones 
and Edward Williams. The results of their indefatigable search for 
ancient Welsh manuscripts were published in three volumes under 
the title Myvyrian Archaiology (London, 1801-1807). Owen further 
published an edition of the greatest medieval Welsh poet Dafydd ap 
Gwilym, and also the first copious dictionary. But this was not all. 
In Goronwy Owen (1722-1769) a poet had arisen whose works could 
stand comparison with the compositions of the medieval writers, and 
it was owing to the efforts of the three men above mentioned that 
the national Eisteddfod ( = session, from eistedd, "to sit") was 
revived. The origin of these literary festivals is shrouded in 
obscurity. It is recorded that a S. . Welsh prince, Gruffydd ap 
Rhys, held a festival lasting forty days in 1 135 to commemorate a 
victorious campaign at which poets and minstrels competed for 
gifts and other rewards. Gruffydd's son Rhys ap Gruffydd is re- 
ported to have instituted a similar contest in 11 76, at which the 
successful competitors received a chair whilst the others were given 
presents. It would seem that after the loss of Welsh independence 
a carefully graded order and a system of jealously guarded rules 
came into existence. Similar national festivals were held under 
royal patronage under Henry VIII. in 1523 and again under Eliza- 
beth in 1568. From 1568 until 1819 no general eisteddfod for all 
Wales was held. Since 1819 the national festival has been held 
annually and every little town has its own local celebration. Hence 
the Nonconformist Sunday school, the pulpit and the eisteddfod 
may be regarded as the most potent factors in resisting the inroads 
of English. The whole question of the vitality of Welsh and what 
may be called the political and social history of the language is 
treated in great detail by H. Zimmer, " Der Pan-Keltismus in Gross- 
britannien und Irland," i., in Preussische Jahrbucher, vol. xcii. (1898). 
In elementary schools in Wales the use of Welsh has been permitted 
since 1893. 

With regard to the extent over which Welsh is spoken a detailed 
map is given in J. E. Southall's Welsh Language Census of l8gi 
(Newport, 1895). A line drawn from the southern end of the estuary 
of the Dee about 2 m.W. of Connah's Quay to Aberthaw in Glamorgan 
would practically include all those districts where Welsh is spoken 
by 60 % of the population, and considerable deductions would have 
to be made for parts of Flint, Montgomery, most of Radnor and the 
N. part of Brecon. Little is spoken in the southern half of the Gower 
peninsula or in S. Pembrokeshire. Over much of Anglesey 97 J% 
of the population spoke Welsh and in parts of Cardiganshire 98-3 %. 
Of a total population in 1901 of 2,012,876, 929,824 were returned 
as speakers of Welsh, of whom 280,905 were monoglots. That Welsh 
is a very living language may be gathered from the following statistics. 
Between 1 801 and 1898 no fewer than 8425 volumes were published 
in the vernacular, whilst in 1895 there were appearing regularly 
2 quarterlies, 2 bi-monthlies, 28 religious and literary monthlies 
and 25 weekly papers. In 1909 the number was probably greater. 
The danger for Welsh lies rather in the direction of internal decay. 
The speech of the people is saturated with English words and idiom, 
and modern writers like Daniel Owen submit to the same influence 
instead of returning to the classical models of the ,17th century. 

Much remains to be done as regards the classification of the 
modern Welsh dialects. It is usual to divide them into four groups — 
(1) Powys (N.E.); (2) Gwynedd (N.W.) ; (3) Dyfed (S.W.) ; (4) 
Gwent (S.E.). One of the chief points on which N. and S. diverge 
is the pronunciation of the vowels i, u, y, which in the S. all tend to 
become i. The difference between N. and S. was noticeable as early 
as the time of Giraldus Cambrensis. See M. Nettlau, Beitrage zur 
cymrischen Grammatik (Leipzig, 1887), also Rev. celt. ix. pp. 64 ff., 
1 13 ff. ; T. Darlington, " Some Dialectal Boundaries in Mid-Wales," 
Trans, of the Hon. Soc. of Cymmrodorion, 1900-1901. The only 
scientific description of a living dialect is " Spoken N. Welsh," 
by H. Sweet, Trans, of the London Phil. Soc, 1882-1884. 

Authorities on Welsh Language. — For the study of older 
Welsh: — J. C. Zeuss, Grammatica Celtica (Berlin 2 , 1871) — an index 
to the O. Welsh glosses cited in this work was compiled by V. 
Tourneur, Archiv f. celt. Lexikographie, iii. 109-137; J. Strachan, 
An Introduction to Early Welsh, with a Reader (Manchester, 1909); 
J. Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology (London 2 , 1879). Editions 
of texts- — The Black Book of Carmarthen, facsimile edition by J, 
Gwenogvryn Evans (Pwllheli, 1906) ; J. Rhys and J. Gwenogvryn 
Evans, The Text of the Mabinogion (Oxford, 1887); The Myvyrian 



620 



CELT 



[BRETON LANGUAGE 



Archaiology of Wales (1801-1807; reprinted Denbigh, 1870); W. F. 
Skene, The Four Ancient Books of Wales (2 vols., Edinburgh, 1868) ; 
Aneurin Owen, Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales (London, 1841) ; 
facsimile edition by A. W. Wade-Evans, Welsh Medieval Law 
(Oxford, 1909) ; K. Meyer, Peredur ap Efrawc with glossary (Leipzig, 
1887); R. Williams, Selections from the Hengwrt Manuscripts 
(London, 1876-1892) ; J. E. Southall, Wales and Her Language 
(Newport, 1892). The earliest Welsh grammar was published as 
long ago as 1567 in Milan by Griffiths Roberts, reprinted in facsimile 
as supplement to the Revue celtique (Paris, 1883). An account of 
the language was prefixed to Owen Pughe's Dictionary (1803). 
During the 19th century many manuals of indifferent value saw the 
light of day. The most authoritative works are: — T. Rowland, A 
Grammar of the Welsh Language (Wrexham, 1853 1 , 1876 4 ), (still the 
most complete work), the same author also published a companion 
volume of Welsh Exercises (Wrexham, n.d.) ; W. Spurrell, A Grammar 
of the Welsh Language (Carmarthen 3 , 1870); E. Anwyl, A Welsh 
Grammar for Schools, (i.) Accidence,^ (ii.) Syntax (London 2 , 1898). 
Other useful manuals for the beginner:— T. Jones, A Guide to 
Welsh, pts. i. ii. new ed. (Wrexham, n.d.) ; S. J. Evans, The Elements 
of Welsh Grammar (Newport 3 , 1903). Dictionaries: — The first 
Welsh dictionary was compiled by William Salesbury (London, 
1547; facsimile reprint, London, 1877); W. Owen Pughe, A Dic- 
tionary of the Welsh Language (2 vols., London, 1803; reprinted 
Denbigh, 1870); W. Spurrell, Welsh-English and English-Welsh 
Dictionary (Carmarthen 6 , 1904) ; a smaller one by W. Richards in 
2 vols. (Wrexham, n.d.), and many others. A dictionary on a large 
scale was planned by D. Silvan Evans and subsidized by the govern- 
ment. Only A-Dd has, however, appeared (Carmarthen, 1893- 
1906), cp. J. Loth in Archiv f. celt. Lex. vol. i. for additions and 
corrections. A survey of Welsh periodical literature is contained 
in T. M. Jones's Llenyddiaeth fy Ngwlad (Treffynnon, 1893). For 
Welsh folklore see J. Rhys, Celtic Folklore, Welsh and Manx (Ox- 
ford, 1901). H. H. Vaughan, Welsh Proverbs (London, 1889), also 
Rev. celt. iii. 419 ff. See also G. Dottin, Revue de synthese hislorique, 
vi. 317 ff. ; H. Zimmer and L. C. Stern in Kultur der Gegenwart, 
Teil 1, Abt. xi. 1. (E. C. Q.) 

(b) Breton. — Breton (Brezonek) is the name given to the 
language spoken by those Britons who fled from the south-west 
of England to Armorica (see Brittany) in the 5th and 6th 
centuries of our era to avoid being harassed by the Saxons. 
The first migration probably took place about 450. The 
Dumnonii and Cornovii founded small states in Brittany, or 
Britannia Minor, as it was termed, and were followed in the 
second half of the 6th and into the 7th century by a long stream 
of refugees (cf. J. Loth, L' Emigration bretonne, Paris, 1883; 
A. de la Borderie, Histoire de la Bretagne 2 , vol. i.,1905). 

In the earliest stages it is difficult to distinguish Breton from 
Welsh. The history of the language may be divided into Old Breton 
from the 7th to the nth centuries, Middle Breton from the nth 
to the 17th centuries, and Modern Breton. In Old Breton the only- 
material we possess consists of glosses and names occurring in lives 
of saints, Frankish authors, and charters. However, we find a few 
characteristics which serve to show that the old glosses are really 
Breton and not Welsh. Thus, an original a never becomes a diphthong 
(au, aw) in Old Breton, but remains 0. In Bret, gn becomes gr. 
Further, in O. W. pretonic u is weakened to an indeterminate sound 
written * and later y, a phenomenon which does not occur in Breton, 
e.g. Lat. culcita appears in O. W. as cilcet, but in O. Br. as colcet. 
A marked characteristic of Breton is the confusion of I and e, e.g. 
Ir. lis, " court," W. llys, Br. les. In Old Breton as in Old Welsh 
neither the initial nor the medial mutations are expressed in writing, 
whilst in Middle Breton only the latter are regularly denoted. In 
this period the language diverges very rapidly from Welsh. As 
prominent features we may mention the following. Stressed 
(=Prim. Celt, and Ir. o) becomes eu, in unstressed syllables e; thus 
the suffix -aco becomes -euc and later -ec, but in Welsh -auc and later 
-oc, -og. Postvocalic -tr, -tl become -dr, -dl as in Welsh, but in Middle 
Breton they pass into -zr, -zl, which in the modern language appear as 
-er, -el; e.g. Mid. Br. lazr, Mod. Br. laer, " robber," W. lleidr, Lat. 
latro. Further, -It becomes -ot, -ut, e.g. Br. aot, aout, " cliff," W. 
allt; Br. autrou, " lord," Ir. altram, W. alltraw, athraw, Corn, altrou; 
and, more important still, th, ot (W. dd) become s, z, e.g. Mid. Br. 
clezeff, " sword," Mod. Br. kleze, W. cleddyf. The orthography 
only followed the pronunciation very slowly, and it is not until 1659 
that we find any attempt made to reform the spelling. In this year 
a Jesuit priest, Julien Maunoir (Br. Maner), published a manual 
in which a new spelling is employed, and it is usual to date Modern 
Breton from the appearance of this book, although in reality it 
marks no new epoch in the history of the language. It is only now 
that the initial mutations are consistently denoted in writing (medi- 
ally they are already written in the;i ith century), and the differences 
between the dialects first come into view at this time. As in Welsh 
the accent is withdrawn during the middle period from the final to 
the penultimate (except in the Vannes dialect), which causes the 
modern unstressed vowel to be reduced in many cases. Again, in 
OldWelsh andOldBreton a short stressed vowel inwordsofonesyllable 



was lengthened, e.g.W. tad, "father," pi. t&dau, but in Modern Breton 
the accent tends to lengthen all stressed vowels. Breton has gone 
its own way in the matter of initial mutation. The nasal mutation 
has been entirely given up in the initial position, whilst a new 
mutation, called medial provection, has arisen in the case of b, d, g, 
which become p, k, t after a few words which originally ended for 
the most part in z or ch. The vocalic mutation of initial g in Breton 
is c'h. We may also make mention of one or two other points 
on which Breton differs widely from Welsh. Breton has given up 
the combination ng, e.g. Mid. Br. moe, Mod. Br. moue, " mane," 
W.mwng, Ir. mong. The language betrays a fondness for nasalized 
vowels.and in this connexion it may be noted that v representing 
an original m (W. /, Ir. mh), though generally written ff in Middle 
Breton, now frequently appears as nv ; Mid. Br. claff, Mod. Br. klanv, 
" sick, ill," W. claf, M. Ir. clam. Final g after r and / and sometimes 
in monosyllables after a vowel is represented in Breton by c'h, whilst 
in Welsh in the one case we find a vowel and in the other nil, e.g. 
Br. erc'h, " snow," W. eiry, eira; Br. lee h, " place," W. lie. In 
Welsh mb, nd immediately preceding the stress appear in the modern 
language as mm, nn, but in Breton we find mp, nt, e.g. Br. kantol, 
"candle," W.'cannwyll, Lat. candela; Br. kemper, "confluence" 
(in place names), W. cymmer, Ir. combor. 

With regard to the extent of country over which Breton is spoken 
we shall do well to note the seats of the old Breton bishoprics. These 
were Quimper, St Pol de Leon, Treguier, St Brieuc, St Malo, Dol and 
Vannes. Under Count Nominoe the Bretons succeeded in throwing 
off the Frankish yoke (841-845) and founded an independent state. 
At this time of greatest political expansion the language boundary 
was formed by a line which started roughly a little to the west of 
Mont St Michel at the mouth of the Couesnon, and stretched to the 
mouth of the Loire. During the next three centuries, however, in 
consequence of political events which cannot be enumerated here, * 
we find French encroaching rapidly on Breton, and the old dioceses 
of Dol, St Malo, St Brieuc, and in part Vannes became Romance- 
speaking (cp. J. Loth, Revue celtique, xxviii. 374-403). So that 
since the 13th and 14th centuries the boundary between French 
and Breton begins in the north about Plouha (west of St Brieuc Bay), 
and stretches to the mouth of the Vilaine in the south. That is to 
say, the Breton speakers are confined to the department of Finistere 
and the west of the departments Cotes-du-Nord and Morbihan. 
Lower Brittany contains a population of 1,360,000, of whom roughly 
1,250,000 speak Breton. The number of monoglot Bretons is stated 
to have been 768,000 in 1878, 679,000 in 1885, and over 500,000 in 
1898. There is an infinity of dialects and subdialects in Brittany, 
but it is usual to divide them into four groups. These are the 
dialects of (1) Leon in Finistere; (2) Cornouailles in Finistere, the 
C6tes-du-Nord and a part of Morbihan; (3) Treguier in the C6tes- 
du-Nord and Finistere; (4) Vannes in Morbihan and a portion of 
the C6tes-du-Nord. The first three resemble one another fairly 
closely, but the speech of Vannes has gone its own way entirely. The 
dialect of Leon is regarded as the literary dialect, thanks to 
Legonidec. 

The modern language is unfortunately saturated with words 
borrowed from French which form at least a quarter of the whole 
vocabulary. The living speech is further characterized by innumer- 
able cases of consonantal metathesis and by parasitic nasalization. 
Loth gives specimens of the most important varieties of Breton in 
his Chrestomathie bretonne, pp. 363-380, but here we must confine 
ourselves to pointing out the two most salient differences between 
the speech of Vannes and the rest of Brittany. In Vannes the stress 
has not been shifted from the final syllable. In Haute-Cornouailles 
and Goelo there is a tendency to withdraw the stress on to the 
antepenultimate, whilst in Treguier certain enclitics attract the 
accent to the final, s, z of the other dialects representing Welsh th 
become h in Vannes, e.g. W. caeth, Br. keaz, kez, " poor, miserable," 
Vannes keah, keh. This phenomenon occurs sporadically in other 
dialects. It may also be mentioned that Prim. Celt, non-initial d, 
W. dd, is retained as 2 in Leon but disappears when final or standing 
between vowels in the other dialects, e.g. O. Br. fid, W. ffydi, 
" faith," Leon feiz, in Cornouailles, Treguier and Vannes /£. It is 
doubtful if the most serious differences between the dialects are 
older than the 16th century. 

In the middle ages the language of the Breton aristocracy was 
French. Upper Brittany was politically more important than the 
western portion. The consequence was that no patronage was ex- 
tended to the vernacular, and Breton sank to the level of a patois 
with no unity for literary purposes. But a new era dawned with 
the beginning of the 19th century. The national consciousness was 
awakened at the time of the Revolution, when the Bretons became 
aware of the difference between themselves and their French neigh- 
bours. It may be mentioned by the way that the Breton language 
was regarded with suspicion by the leaders of the First Republic 
and attempts were made to suppress it. A Breton named Legonidec 
had to flee to England for fighting against the Republic. He came 
under the influence of the movement in Wales, and on his return 
sought to create a Breton literary language. He published an 
excellent grammar (Grammaire celto-bretonne, Paris, 1807) and a 
dictionary (Dictionnaire breton-frangais, Paris, 1821), from which 
he omitted the numerous French words which had crept into the 
language and for which native terms already existed. Legonidec's 



CORNISH LANGUAGE] 



CELT 



621 



example fired a number of writers with zeal for their native tongue 
and the clergy became interested. Under their auspices manuals 
of Breton were published and the language was utilized in a number 
of schools. A society called the Association Bretonne was founded 
in the year 1844. But under the Second Empire, for reasons which 
are not easy to discover, this Breton awakening was declared to be 
contrary to the interests of the state, and all the means at the 
disposal of a highly centralized government like that of France 
were employed to throttle the movement. Down to the present 
day the use of Breton is strictly forbidden in all the state schools, 
and the influence of the Roman Catholic clergy has for the most 
part been hostile to the language. However, the attitude of the 
government aroused considerable dissatisfaction in the early 'nineties, 
and in 1896 the Association Bretonne (disbanded in 1859 and re- 
constructed in 1873) appointed a permanent committee with the 
object of preserving and propagating the national language. At the 
same time some of the clergy headed by Abbe Bulton began to move, 
and Breton was introduced into many of the schools not under state 
control. In 1898 was founded the Union Regionaliste Bretonne, the 
most important section of which endeavours to foster the native 
speech in conjunction with the Comiti. de preservation du breton 
(founded 1896). In 1899 the annual meeting of the U.R.B. was 
modelled on the lines of the Irish Oireachtas, the Welsh Eisteddfod 
and the Scottish Mod, and festivals of this kind have been held ever 
since. Many Breton newspapers publish columns in Breton, thus 
Ar Bobl (a weekly newspaper founded in 1904 and published at 
Carhaix) frequently devotes half its columns to the language. But 
there is also a weekly four-page newspaper which is wholly in Breton. 
This is Kroaz ar Vretoned, edited by F. Vallee and published at 
St Brieuc. In addition to this there are three monthly magazines 
wholly in Breton. The first is Ar Vro, edited by the poet Jaffrennou, 
and in 1908 in its fifth year. The second is Dihunamb, written in 
the dialect of Vannes and started in 1905. The third is Feiz ha 
Breiz, started 1899. 

Authorities for Breton. — For the external history of Breton 
see H. Zimmer, " Die keltische Bewegung in der Bretagne," Preus- 
sische Jahrbucher for 1899, xcix. 454-497. For Old and Middle 
Breton, J. Loth, Chrestomathie bretonne (Paris, 1890), and the 
same writer's Vocabulaire vieux-breton (Paris, 1884). Loth and 
E. Ernault have been indefatigable in investigating the history 
of the language. Their numerous contributions are mainly to be 
found scattered through the Revue celtique, Zeitschrift fur celtische 
Philologie and the Annates de Bretagne. Ernault has also published 
Glossaire moyen-breton in 2 vols. (Paris, 1895-1896) ; Dictionnaire 
elymologique du moyen-breton (Paris, 1888). Another etymological 
dictionary was published by V. Henry (Paris, 1900). Grammars, 
&c. : — Dialect of Leon : Legonidec, Grammaire celto-bretonne (Paris, 
1807, 1838 2 , also contained in H. de la Villemarque's edition of 
Legonidec's Dictionary) ; F. Vallee, Lecons elementaires de grammaire 
bretonne (St Brieuc, 1902) ; E. Ernault, Petite Grammaire bretonne 
(St Brieuc, 1897, the latter also takes account of the dialects of 
Treguier and Cornouailles). Dialect of Treguier: L. le Clerc, 
Grammaire bretonne (St Brieuc, 1908) ; J. Hingant, Aliments de 
la grammaire bretonne (Treguier, 1868); P. le Roux, "Muta- 
tions et assimilations de consonnes dans le dialecte armoricain de 
Pleubian," Annates de Bretagne, xii. 3-31. Dialect of Vannes: A. 
Guillevic and P. le Goff, Grammaire bretonne du dialecte de Vannes 
(Vannes, 1902) ; Exercises sur la grammaire bretonne (Vannes, 1903) ; 
H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, " Etude phonetique sur le dialecte 
breton de Vannes," Revue celtique, i. 85 ff. 211 ff . ; E. Ernault, 
" Le Dialecte vannetais de Sarzeau," Rev. celt. iii. 47 ff., 232 ff . ; 
J. Guillome, Grammaire francaise-bretonne (Vannes, 1836). As a 
curiosity we mention P. Treasure, An Introduction to Breton Grammar 
(Carmarthen, 1903). Dictionaries: Legonidec, Dictionnaire fran- 
cais-breton (St Brieuc, 1847), Breton- Francais (St Brieuc, 
1850), both republished by de la Villemarque and representing the 
Leon dialect ; A. Troude, Nouveau Dictionnaire pratique francais et 
breton du dialecte de Leon avec les acceptations diverses dans les dia- 
lectes de Vannes, de Treguier, et de Cornouailles (Brest, 1869), and 
Nouveau Dictionnaire pratique breton-francais (Brest, 1876); E. 
Ernault, " Supplement aux dictionnaires bretons-francais," Revue 
celtique, iv. 145-170. The Breton words in Gallo, the French 
patois of Upper Brittany, were collected by E. Ernault, Revue 
celtique, v. 218 ff. 

(c) Cornish. — The ancient language of Cornwall (Kern&ak, 
Carnoack) stood in a much closer relation to Breton than to 
Welsh, 1 though in some respects it sides with the latter against 
the former. 

It agrees with Breton on the following points: — It has given up 
the nasal mutation of initials but provects the mediae. Prim. Celt. 
a is not diphthongized, but becomes e, e.g. Corn, ler, " floor," Br. 
leur, W. llawr, Ir. lar. Ng is lost as in Breton, e.g. toy, " to swear," 
Br. toui, W. tyngu, Ir. tongu; nd becomes nt before the stress and 
not nn as in Welsh, e.g. Corn. Br. hanter, "half," W. hanner. Cornish 
like Breton does not prefix a vowel to words beginning with s -(-con- 
sonant, e.g. Corn, spirit, later spyrys, Br. spered, W. yspryd. 

1 J. Loth gives it as his opinion that as late as 1400-1600 a Cornish- 
man and a Breton might have been able to understand one another. 



On the other hand, O. Cornish does not confuse i and $ to the same 
extent as Bret., e.g. W. helyg, " willow," O. Cornish heligen, Br. halek. 
Further, Cornish does not change th, $to s, z as in Breton, e.g. beth, 
" grave," Br. bez, W. bedd, and initial g disappears in the vocalic 
mutation as in Welsh. Peculiar to Cornish is the change of non- 
initial /, d to s, z. This occurs in the oldest Cornish after n, I, e.g. 
O. Corn, nans, " valley," W. nant; Corn. Ids, " father," W. tad. 
A feature of later Cornish is the introduction of a d before post- 
vocalic m, n, e.g. pedn, " head," W. pen. In later Cornish the accent 
seems to have fallen on the penultimate as in Modern Welsh and 
Breton. 

In 936 the " Welsh " were driven out of Exeter by ^Ethelstan, 
and from that time the Tamar appears to have formed a general 
boundary between English and Cornish, though there seems to be 
evidence that even as late as the reign of Elizabeth Cornish was 
spoken in a few places to the east of that river. The decay of Cornish 
has been largely attributed to the Reformation. Neither the Prayer- 
book nor the Scriptures were translated into the vernacular, and we 
find the same apathy on the part of the Church of England in Cornwall 
as in Wales and Ireland. Unfortunately the Methodist movement 
came at a time when it was too late to save the language. By 1600 
Cornish had been driven into the western parts of the duchy and in 
1662 we are informed by John Ray that few of the children could 
speak it. Lhuyd gives a list of the parishes in which Cornish was 
spoken, but goes on to state that every one speaks English. In 1735 
there were only a few people along the coast between Penzance and 
Land's End who understood Cornish, and Dolly Pentreath of Mouse- 
hole, who died in 1777, is commonly stated to have been the last 
person who spoke it, though Jenner seems to show that there were 
others who lived until well into the 19th century who were able to 
converse in the dialect. However, the modern English speech of 
West Cornwall is full of Celtic words, and nine-tenths of the places 
and people from the Tamar to Land's End bear Cornish names. 
Celtic words still in use are to be found in Jago's Dialect of Cornwall 
(Truro, 1882) ; thus the name for the dog-fish is morgy, " sea-dog." 
Authorities for Cornish. — A mass of details about Cornish is 
collected in H. Jenner's Handbook of the Cornish Language (London, 
1904). (Cf. J. Loth's review in the Revue celtique, xxvii. 93.) 
Lhuyd's Archaeologica Britannica (1707) contains a grammar of the 
language as spoken in his day, and a Sketch of Cornish Grammar is 
to be found as an appendix to Norris's Ancient Cornish Drama. A 
dictionary was published by R. Williams entitled Lexicon Cornu- 
Britannicum (Landovery, 1865), to which W. Stokes published a 
supplement of about 2000 words in the Transactions of the London 
Philological Society for 1 868-1 869. We may also mention the 
English-Cornish Dictionary, by F. W. P. Jago (Plymouth, 1887), 
and a Glossary of Cornish Names, by J. Bannister (Truro, 1871). 
W. Stokes published a Glossary to Beunans Meriasek in the Archiv 
filr celtische Lexikographie, i. 101, and important articles by J. Loth 
have appeared in the Revue celtique, vols, xviii. to xxiv. W. S. 
Lach-Szyrma, " Les Derniers Echos de la langue cornique," Revue 
celtique, iii. 239 ff. H. Jenner, " Some Rough Notes on the Present 
Pronunciation of Cornish Names," Rev. celt. xxiv. 300-305. 

III. The Language or the Ancient Picts. — The evidence 
from which we can draw any conclusions as to the affinities of 
the language of the Picts is so extremely scanty that the question 
has been the subject of great controversy. The Picts are first 
mentioned by Eumenius (a.d. 297), who regarded them as 
having inhabited Britain in the time of Caesar. In the year 368 
they are described by Ammianus Marcellinus as invading the 
Roman province of Britain in conjunction with the Irish Scots. 
In Columba's time we find the whole of Scotland east of 
Drumalban and north of the Forth divided into two kingdoms- 
north and south Pictland — and it is reasonable to identify the 
Picts, at any rate in part, with the Caledonians of the classical 
authors. Galloway and Co. Down were also inhabited by Picts. 
Bede in enumerating the languages of Britain mentions those of 
the Britons, Picts, Scots and the English. The names by which 
the Picts are known in history have aroused considerable dis- 
cussion. It seems natural to connect Lat. Picti with the Pictones 
and Pictavi of Gaul, but in Irish they are known as Cruithne, 
which appears in Welsh as Prydyn, "Pict"; cp. Prydein, 
" Britain," forms corresponding to the earliest Greek name for 
these islands, vtjcol YLperavixai. 

Three conflicting theories have been held as to the character 
of the Pictish language. Rhys, relying on the strange character 
of the Scottish Ogam inscriptions, pronounces it to be non- 
Celtic and non-Indo-European. In this he has been followed 
by Zimmer, who bases his argument on the Pictish rule of suc- 
cession. Skene maintained that the Picts spoke a language 
nearly allied to Goidelic, whilst Stokes, Loth, Macbain, D'Arbois 
and Meyer are of opinion that Pictish was more closely related 



622 



CELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE. 



to Brythonic. Of personal names mentioned by classical writers' 
we have Calgacus and Argentocoxus, both of which are certainly 
Celtic. The names occurring in Ptolemy's description of Scotland 
have a decidedly Celtic character, and they seem, moreover, 
to bear a greater resemblance to Brythonic than to Goidelic, 
witness such tribal designations as Epidii, Cornavii, Damnonii, 
Decantae, Novantae. In the case of all these names, however, 
it should be borne in mind that they probably reached the 
writers of antiquity through Brythonic channels. Bede mentions 
that the east end of the Antonine Wall terminated at a place 
called in Pictish Pean-fahel, and in Saxon Penneltun. Pean re- 
sembles Old Welsh penn, " head," Old Irish cenn, and the second 
element may possibly be connected with Gaelic fdl, Welsh gwawl, 
" rampart." The names of the kings in the Pictish chronicles 
are not an absolutely trustworthy guide, as owing to the Pictish 
rule of succession the bearers of the names may in many cases 
have been Brythons. The names of some of them occur in one 
source in a Goidelic, in another in a Brythonic form. It is of 
course possible that the southern part of Pictish territory was 
divided between Goidels and Brythons, the population being 
very much mixed. On the other hand there are a number of 
elements in place-names on Pictish ground which do not occur 
in Wales or Ireland. Such are pet, pit, " farm " (?), for, f other, 
fetter, foder, " lower " (?). Aber, " confluence," on the contrary, 
is pure Brythonic (Gaelic inver) . Though the majority of scholars 
are of opinion that Pictish was nearly akin to the Brythonic 
dialects, we are entirely in the dark as to the manner in which 
that language was ousted by the Goidelic speech of the Dalriadic 
Scots. In view of the comparatively unimportant part played 
for a considerable period in Scottish affairs by the colony from 
Ireland, it is well-nigh incredible that Pictish should have been 
supplanted by Gaelic. 

Authorities. — J. Rhys, Celtic Britain (London 2 , 1905), The 
Welsh People (London 3 , 1902), " The Language and Inscriptions of 
the Northern Picts," in Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries 
of Scotland (1892); H. Zimmer, " Das Mutterrecht der Pikten," in 
Savignys Zeitschrift (1895); also trans, by G. Henderson in Leabhar 
nan Gleann (Inverness, 1898); W. F. Skene, Celtic Scotland (Edin- 
burgh, 1876) ; A. Macbain in appendix to reprint of Skene's High- 
landers of Scotland (Stirling, 1902) ; A. Macbain, " Ptolemy's 
Geography of Scotland," in Transactions of the Gaelic Society of 
Inverness, xviii. 267-288; W; Stokes, Bezzenbergers Beitrage, xviii. 
267 ff. ; H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, Les Druides et les dieux celtiques 
a forme d'animaux (Paris, 1906). The various theories have been 
recently reviewed and criticized by T. Rice Holmes in an appendix 
to his Caesar's Invasion of Britain (London, 1907). 

IV. History of Celtic Philology. — For many centuries 
the affinities of the Celtic languages were the subject of great 
dispute. The languages were in turn regarded as descended from 
Hebrew, Teutonic and Scythian. The first attempt to treat the 
dialects comparatively was made by Edward Lhuyd in his 
Archaeologia Britannica (Oxford, 1707), but the work of this 
scholar seems to have remained unnoticed. A century later 
Adelung in Germany divided the dialects into true Celtic 
(= Goidelic) and Celtic influenced by Teutonic ( = Brythonic). 
But it took scholars a long time to recognize that these languages 
belonged to the Indo-European family. Thus they were excluded 
by Bopp in his comparative grammar, though he did not fail 
to notice certain resemblances between Celtic and Sanskrit. 
James Pritchard was the first to demonstrate the true relationship 
of the group in his Eastern Origin of the Celtic Nations (London, 
1831), but his conclusions were not accepted. As late as 1836 
Pott denied the Indo-European connexion. A year later Pictet 
resumed Pritchard's arguments, and Bopp himself in 1838 
admitted the languages into the charmed circle, showing in an 
able paper entitled tfber die keltischen Sprachen that the initial 
mutations were due to the influence of terminations now lost. 
But it was reserved to a Bavarian historian, J. C. Zeuss (1806- 
1856), to demonstrate conclusively the Indo-European origin of 
the Celtic dialects. Zeuss, who may worthily rank with Grimm 
and Diez among the greatest German philologists, rediscovered 
the Old Irish glosses on the continent, and on them he reared the 
magnificent structure which goes by his name. The Grammatica 
Celtica was first published in 1853. The material contained in 



this monumental work was greatly extended by a series of 
important publications by Whitley Stokes and Hermann Ebel, 
so much so that the latter was commissioned to prepare a second 
edition, which appeared in 1 8 7 1 . Stokes has rendered the greatest 
service to the cause of Celtic studies by the publication of count- 
less texts in Irish, Cornish and Breton. In 1870 the Revue 
celtique (vol. xxviii. in 1908) was founded by Henri Gaidoz, whose 
mantle later fell upon H. d'Arbois de Jubainville. In 1879 
E. Windisch facilitated the study of Irish by publishing a 
grammar of Old Irish, and a year later a volume of important 
Middle Irish texts with an exhaustive glossary, the first of its 
kind. Since then Windisch and Stokes have collaborated to 
bring out some of the greatest monuments of Irish literature 
in the series of Irische Texte. The text of the Wiirzburg glosses 
was published by Zimmer (1881) and by Stokes (1887), and that 
of the Milan glosses by Ascoli. An important step forward was 
the discovery of the laws of the Irish accent made simultaneously 
by Zimmer and Thurneysen. This discovery led to a thorough 
investigation of the difficult verb system of Old Irish — a task 
which has largely occupied the attention of Strachan in England, 
Thurneysen and Zimmer in Germany, and Pedersen and Sarauw 
in Denmark. In a sense the publication of the Thesaurus 
Palacohibernicus (Cambridge, 1901-1903) may be regarded as 
marking the close of this epoch. The older stages of Irish have 
hitherto so monopolized the energies of scholars that other 
departments of Celtic philology save Breton have been left 
in large measure unworked. J. Strachan had begun to tap the 
mine of the Old Welsh poems when his career was cut short by 
death. J. Loth and E. Ernault have concentrated their attention 
on Breton, andean claim that the development of the speech of 
Brittany has been more thoroughly investigated than that of 
any other Celtic language. The number of periodicals devoted 
entirely to Celtic studies has increased considerably of recent 
years. In 1896 K. Meyer and L. C. Stern founded the Zeitschrift 
fiir celtische Philologie (now in its 7th volume), and in 1897 the 
Archiv fiir celtische Lexikographie began to appear under the 
direction of K. Meyer and W. Stokes. As a supplement to the 
latter Meyer has been publishing his invaluable contributions to 
Middle Irish lexicography. In Ireland a new periodical styled 
&riu was started by the Irish School of Learning in 1904. The 
Scottish Celtic Review, dealing more particularly with Scottish 
and Irish Gaelic, began to appear in 1903, and the Transactions 
of the Gaelic Society of Inverness are in the 26th volume. For 
Wales we have Y Cymmrodor since 1877, and the Transactions 
of the Hon. Society of Cymmrodorion since 1892, and for Brittany 
the Annates de Bretagne, published by the Faculty of Letters at 
Rennes (founded 1886). 

See V. Toumeur, Esquisse d'une histoire des itudes celtiques (Liege, 
1905). (E. C. Q.) 

Celtic Literature 

1. Irish Literature. — In the absence of a native coinage it 
is extremely difficult to say when the use of letters was introduced 
into Ireland. It is probable that the Latin alphabet 
first came in with Christianity. With the exception inscrip- 
of the one bilingual Ogam inscription as yet discovered tloas. 
in Ireland (that at Killeen Cormac) all the inscriptions 
in Roman letters are certainly later than 500. Indeed, apart from 
the stone reading " LIE LUGUAEDON MACCI MENUEH," 
they are all contemporary with or later than the Old Irish 
glosses. With regard to the Ogam inscriptions we cannot make 
any confident assertions. Owing to the lack of criteria for dating 
certain Irish sound-changes accurately it is impossible to assign 
chronological limits for the earlier stones. The latter cannot 
be later than the 5th century, but there is nothing to show 
whether they are Christian or not, and if pagan they may be 
a century or two earlier. It is true that the heroes and druids 
of the older epics are represented in the stories as making constant 
use of Ogam letters on wood and stone, and as the state of 
civilization described in the oldest versions of the Ulster sagas 
seems largely to go back to the beginning of the Christian era, 
it is not impossible that this peculiar system of writing had been 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



623 



Old Irish 
MSS. 



Hymns. 



framed by them. The Ogam system is certainly based on the 
Latin and not the Greek alphabet, and was probably invented 
by some person from the south of Ireland who received his 
knowledge of the Roman letters from traders from the mouth 
of the Loire. It may, however, be regarded as certain that the 
Ogam script was never employed in early times for literary 
purposes. We are told that the Gaulish druids disdained to 
commit their lore to writing, although they were familiar with 
the use of Greek letters, and their Irish confreres probably 
resembled them in this respect. Tradition connects the codifica- 
tion of the Brehon Laws with the name of Patrick, and there is 
reason for believing, as we shall see later, that the greatest 
Irish epic was first committed to writing in the 7th century. 

The great bulk of Irish literature is contained in MSS. belonging 
to the Middle Irish period (1100-1550), and in order to be able 
to treat this literature as a whole it will be convenient 
for us to deal first with those documents which are 
termed Old Irish, especially as the contemporary 
remains of the literature of the earlier period are almost ex- 
clusively of a religious nature. Most of the Old Irish documents 
have been printed by Stokes and Strachan in the Thesaurus 
Palaeohibernicus, and where no reference is given the reader 
is referred to that monumental work. The extraordinary outburst 
of intellectual activity in Ireland from the 6th to the 9th centuries 
and the compositions of Irishmen in the Latin language, belong 
to the history of medieval European literature and fall outside 
the scope of this article. For the Confession of St Patrick and 
his " Letter to the Subjects of Coroticus " see Patrick. The 
only Irish document ascribed to the saint is the strange so-called 
" Hymn," the fdeth fiada, more properly f6id fiada, " the cry of 
the deer." This is a rhythmical incantation which is said 
to have rendered the saint and his companions in- 
visible to King Loigaire and his druids. The Trinity 
and powers of nature are invoked to help him to resist spells of 
women and smiths and wizards. The hymn, which contains a 
number of strange grammatical forms, is undoubtedly referred to 
in the Book of Armagh, and may very well go back to the 5th 
century. The Latin hymns contained in two MSS. dating from the 
end of the 1 1 th or beginning of the 1 2th century, a Trinity College, 
Dublin, MS., and a MS. belonging to the Franciscan monastery 
in Dublin, are of interest to us as exhibiting the influence of the 
native metrical system. Quantity and elision are ignored, and 
rhymes, assonances, alliterations and harmonies abound in true 
Irish fashion. The line consists of two units which commonly 
contain either seven or eight syllables apiece. The earliest and 
best-known of these religious poems are the Hymn of Secundinus 
(Sechnall d. 447) on St Patrick, and the two hymns attributed to 
St Columba (d. 597) beginning " Noli pater " and "Altusprosator," 
the latter of which exhibits some of the peculiarities of the so- 
called Hibernian Latin of the Hisperica Famina and the Lorica 
of Gildas. The date of the Irish hymns in the Liber Hymnorum 
ranges, according to Stokes and Strachan, from the 7th to the 
nth centuries. Ultan's hymn on St Brigit beginning " Brigit be 
bithmaith," which is by far the most artistic of the collection, 
was perhaps composed in the 7th century. Definite metrical 
laws had evidently been elaborated when this poem was written. 
The beat is iambic, but the natural accent of the words is rigidly 
observed. The long line consists of two units of five syllables each. 
The rhymes are dissyllabic and perfect. Alliteration is always 
observed in the latter half of each line and assonances are found 
knitting up the half-lines. The short prayer ascribed to Ninine 
or to Fiacc is a highly alliterative piece without rhyme, the date 
of which cannot be fixed. The well-known hymn on St Patrick 
traditionally ascribed to Fiacc, bishop of Sletty, and the piece 
beginning " Sen De," traditionally ascribed to Colman, are 
assigned on linguistic grounds to the beginning of the 9th century. 
The lines going by the name of " Sanctan's Hymn " probably 
belong to the same century, whilst the metrical catalogue of 
marvels performed by St Brigit contains such a medley of older 
and later forms, probably due to interpolation, that it is impossible 
to determine its age. The few lines entitled " Mael-Isu's Hymn " 
are the most recent of all and probably belong to the nth century 



Earliest 
prose. 



(Mael-Isud. 1086). The Patrician documents by MuirchuMaccu 
Machtheni, who professed to write at the command of Bishop 
Aed of Sletty (d. 698), and by Tirechan, who is said to have 
received his information from Bishop Ultan (d. 656) , are contained 
in the Book of Armagh, a MS. compiled by Ferdomnach in 807. 
These documents, like the Life of St Columba by Adamnan, the 
MS. of which was written by Dorbbene, abbot of Hi (d. 713), 
contain a number of names and forms of great importance for the 
study of the language.' 

The earliest pieces of connected prose in Irish are three :— 
(1) the Cambray Homily, contained in an 8th-century codex 
at Cambray copied by a continental hand from a MS. 
in the Irish character ; the language is very archaic and 
dates from the second half of the 7th or the beginning 
of the 8th century; (2) the additions to the notes of Tirechan on 
the life of St Patrick in the Book of Armagh; these seem to go 
back to the early 8th century; (3) the tract on the Mass in the 
Stowe Missal, which is in all probability nearly as old as the 
Cambray Homily, though contained in a 10th or 1 ith century MS. 
Of especial interest are the spells and poems found in the Stowe 
Missal and two continental MSS. The Stowe MS. (now deposited 
in the Royal Irish Academy) contains three rather badly preserved 
spells for a sore eye, a thorn and disease of the urine. A St Gall 
codex has preserved four Irish incantations of the 8th and 9th 
centuries. These are respectively against a thorn, urinary 
disease, headache and various ailments. Another charm, which 
is partly obscure, occurs in the 9th-century codex preserved at 
the monastery of St Paul in Carinthia. The same MS. also 
contains (1) a humorous poem treating of the doings of a 
bookish writer and his favourite cat Pangur Ban; (2) a riddling 
poem ascribed to Suibne Geilt, a king who is said to have lost his 
reason at the battle of Moira (a.d. 637) ; (3) verses extracted from 
a poem ascribed to St Moling (d. 697), who may very well have 
been the actual author; (4) a poem in praise of some Leinster 
princeling called Aed. 

For our knowledge of the older language, however, we have to 
rely mainly on the numerous glosses scattered about in a large 
number of MSS., which it is impossible to enumerate 
here. Indeed, such an enumeration is now rendered 
superfluous owing to the publication of the Thesaurus 
Palaeohibernicus, in which all the various glosses have been 
collected. For our purpose it will be sufficient to mention the 
three most important codices containing Old Irish glosses. 
These are as follows: — (1) The Codex Paulinus at Wiirzburg, 
which contains the thirteen epistles of St Paul, and the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, with a great mass of explanatory glosses, partly 
in Latin, partly in Irish, partly mixed. The chief source of the 
commentary is the commentary of Pelagius, who is often cited 
by name. The date of this highly important MS. is much dis- 
puted; part of the Irish glosses seem to date from about 700, 
whilst the rest may be placed a little before 800. (2) The Codex 
Ambrosianus, formerly at Bobbio, now at Milan, which contains 
a commentary on the psalter with a large number of Irish 
glosses. In their present state these glosses were copied in the 
first half of the 9th century. (3) Glosses on Priscian contained 
in four MSS., of which the most important is the Codex Sangal- 
lensis, dating from the middle of the 9th century. Apart from 
the biblical glosses and scholia the other chief texts or authors 
provided with Irish glosses are Augustine, Bede, the Canons, the 
Computus, Eutychius, Juvencus, Philargyrius, Prudentius and 
Servius. 

The Milan and the St Gall codices just mentioned both contain 
several short poems in Irish. In two stanzas in the Swiss MS. 
we find expressed for the first time that keen sympathy with 
nature in all her moods which is so marked a feature of Irish and 
Welsh verse. , 

Two ponderous religious poems have now to be noticed. To 
Oengus the Culdee is attributed the lengthy Felire or Calendar 
of Church Festivals, consisting of 365 quatrains in rinnard metre, 
one for each day in the year. The language of this dry compila- 
tion, which is heavily glossed and annotated, points to 800 
as the date of composition, and Oengus, who is stated to have 



Old 

glosses. 



624 



CELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



lived about that time, may well have been the author. This 
calendar has been twice edited by W. Stokes with an English 
translation, the first time for the Royal Irish Academy (Dublin, 
1880), and again for the Bradshaw Society (London, 1905). 

It may perhaps be as well to enumerate here the later Irish 
rnartyrologies. (1) The Martyrology of Tallaght (Tamlacht), 
founded on an 8th-century calendar, but containing additions 
down to 900 (ed. D. H. Kelly, Dublin, 1857). (2) The metrical 
Martyrology of O'Gorman, c. 1166-1174, edited by Stokes for 
the Bradshaw Society (London, 1895). (3) The Martyrology of 
Donegal, an important compilation in prose made by Michael 
O'Clery in 1630, edited by J. H. Todd (Dublin, 1864). A 
composition which is wrongly assigned to Oengus the Culdee is 
the Saltair na Rann or Psalter in Quatrains, contained in an 
Oxford MS. (Rawlinson B 502) and published without a transla- 
tion by Stokes (Oxford, 1883). The work proper consists of 
1 50 poems corresponding to the number of Psalms in the psalter, 
but 12 poems have been added, and in all it contains 2098 
quatrains, chiefly in deibide metre of seven syllables. The poems 
are mainly based on biblical (Old Testament) history, but they 
preserve a large measure of medieval sacred lore and cosmogony. 
The psalter received additions as late as 998, and the Oxford MS. 
belongs to the 12 th century. We should perhaps also mention 
here the famous Antra or Eulogy of St Columba, commonly 
attributed to Dalian Forgaill, a contemporary of the saint, but 
Stokes takes the view that it was written in the 9th century, 
and is intentionally obscure. The oldest but not the best copy 
of the Antra is preserved in the Trinity College, Dublin, MS. of 
the Liber Hymnorum, but it also occurs in LU. and elsewhere. 
It invariably appears heavily gloss-laden, and the glosses and 
commentary added thereto are out of all proportion to the text. 
This piece, which is not extant in its integrity, was probably 
intended as artificial alliterative prose, but, as we have it, it is 
a medley of isolated phrases and irrelevant comment. 

During the 9th and 10th centuries Ireland was harassed by the 
Vikings, and a host of scholars seem to have fled to the continent, 

carrying with them their precious books, many of 
collectors, which are preserved in Italy, Switzerland, Germany 

and elsewhere. Hence very few early Irish MSS. are 
preserved in Ireland itself. When the fury of the storm was past, 
Irish scholars showed increased interest in the old literary 
documents, and copied all that they could lay hands on into 
miscellaneous codices. The earliest of these collections, such as 
the Cin of Druim Snechta, the Yellow Book of Slane, the Book of 
Dubdaleithe, the Psalter of Cashel, exist no longer, though their 
names have come down and certain of them were known in the 
17th century. However, copies of a goodly portion of the 
contents of these old books are preserved to us in one form or 
another, but mainly in a series of huge miscellaneous codices 

ranging in date from the 12th to the 16th century. 
the Dun ^ ne oldest is Lebor na h-uidre, or Book of the Dun 
Cow. Cow, preserved in the Royal Irish Academy and 

published in facsimile (Dublin, 1870). This MS. was 
compiled in part in the monastery of Clonmacnoise by Moelmuire 
MacCelechair, who was slain in 1106. The Book of the Dun 
Cow (where necessary we shall abbreviate as LU.) derives its 
name from a legend that Ciaran of Clonmacnoise (d. 544) took 
down the story of the Tdin Bo Cualnge on a parchment made 
from the hide of his favourite cow. The name seems to have 
been wrongly applied to the 1 2th-century MS. in the 1 5th century. 
LU. is almost entirely devoted to romance, the stories which 
_ it contains belonging mainly to the Ulster cycle. The 

Leinster. next ^^. m P omt °f a S e is the Book of Leinster 

(abbreviated LL.) now in Trinity College, Dublin. It 
was transcribed by Finn, son of Gorman, -bishop of Kildare 
(d. 1 160). LL. also contains a large numb«r of romances in 
addition to other important matter, mainly historical and 

genealogical, bearing more particularly on the affairs of 
BooTot Leinster. The Yellow Book of Lecan (YBL.), also in 
Lecan. Trinity College, Dublin, was written at different times 

by the MacFirbis family, but chiefly by Gilla Isa, son of 
Donnchad M6r MacFirbis about 1391. The MacFirbises were 



hereditary scribes and genealogists to the O'Dowds, chiefs of 
the Hy Fiachrach (Co. Sligo). YBL. contains a vast amount of 
romance, and is indispensable as supplementing and checking 
the contents of LU. and LL. The most extensive 
collection of all is the Book of Ballymote (BB.), now 



Book of 
Ballymote. 



belonging to the Royal Irish Academy, which was 
compiled about the beginning of the 15th century by various 
scribes. The book was in the possession of the chiefs of Bally- 
mote for more than a century. In 1522 it was purchased by the 
O'Donnells for 140 milch cows. BB. only contains little romantic 
matter, but it has preserved much valuable historical and 
genealogical material. The contents of the Leabhar 
Breac (LB .) , or Speckled Book, now in the Royal Irish j^* /e< ' 
Academy, are chiefly ecclesiastical and religious. LB. 
seems to have been compiled in large measure before 1 544. All 
these five codices have been published in facsimile by the Royal 
Irish Academy with a description of their contents. Two im- 
portant Mid. Ir. MSS. in the Bodleian (Rawlinson B 512 and 
Laud 610), containing a good deal of romantic material, are also 
published in facsimile by Henry Frowde. 

Other MSS. which require special mention are (1) The Great 
Book of Lecan, compiled in the year 141 7 by Gilla Isa M6r Mac- 
Firbis, in the Royal Irish Academy ;(2)The Book of Lis- 
more, the property of the duke of Devonshire atLismore ^JS r 
Castle. This codex was compiled in the latter half of material. 
the 1 5th century from the lost book of Monasterboice 
and other MSS. Its contents are described in the introduction to 
Stokes's Lives of Saints from the Book of Lismore (Oxford, 1890). 
(3) The Book of Fermoy in the Royal Irish Academy. The con- 
tents are described in the introduction to O'Beirne Crowe's 
edition of the Tdin B6 Fraich (Dublin, 1870). (4) The Book of 
Hy Maine recently acquired by the Royal Irish Academy. The 
scribe who wrote it died in 1372. O'Curry, O'Longan and 
O'Beirne Crowe drew up a MS. catalogue of the Irish MSS. in the 
Royal Irish Academy, and O'Donovan performed the same 
service for the Trinity College, Dublin, collection. A briefer 
account of the Irish MSS. in TCD. will be found in Abbott's 
Catalogue of the MSS. in that library. O'Curry also drew up a 
list of the Irish MSS. in the British Museum, and S.H.O'Grady 
has printed part i. of a descriptive catalogue of this collection 
(London, 1901), part ii. by T. O'Maille. The twenty-six MSS. in 
the Franciscan monastery in Dublin are described by J. T. 
Gilbert in the Fourth Report of the Royal Commission on Historical 
MSS. W. F. Skene catalogued the collection of MSS. in the 
Advocates' Library, Edinburgh, a printed catalogue of which 
has been issued by D. Mackinnon (Edinburgh, 1909; see also 
Trans. Gaelic Soc. of Inverness, xvi. 285-309). 

In order to give some idea of the enormous extent of Irish MS. 
material we may quote some calculations made by O'Curry, 
who states that if the five oldest vellum MSS. were printed the 
result would be 9400 quarto pages. Other vellum MSS. ranging 
in date from 1300 to 1600 would fill 9000 pages of the same size, 
whilst the innumerable paper MSS. belonging chiefly to the early 
1 8th century would cover no less than 30,000 pages. The well- 
known French scholar, D'Arbois de Jubainville, published in 
1883 a tentative catalogue of Irish epic literature. His work is 
by no means complete, but his figures are instructive. He 
mentions 953 Irish MSS. containing epic matter preserved in 
Irish and English libraries. To these have to be added another 
56 in continental libraries. Of this mass of material 133 Irish 
and British MSS. and 35 continental MSS. were written before 
1600. It should, however, be stated that the same subject is 
treated over and over again, and much of the later material is 
absolutely valueless. 

Before we pass on to the consideration of the literature itself, 
it will be well to make a few preliminary observations on the 
nature of the language in which the pieces are written 
and on the status of the poet in medieval Ireland. „*^^l r 
The language in which the huge miscellaneous codices Irish. 
enumerated above are contained is called by the general 
name of Middle Irish, which is a very wide term. Irish scribes 
often copied their original somewhat mechanically, without 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



625 



The 
"fill. 



being tempted to change the language to that of their own time. 
Thus in many parts of LU. we find a thin Middle Irish veneer 
on what is largely Old Irish of the 8th or 9th century. Hence 
such a MS. often preserves forms which had been current several 
centuries before, and it may even happen that a 14th or 15th 
century MS. such as YBL. contains much older forms than a 
corresponding passage in LL. Of recent years several scholars — 
notably Strachan — have devoted much attention to the Old Irish 
verb-forms, so that we have now safe criteria for establishing 
with some degree of certainty the age of recensions of stories 
and poems preserved in late MSS. In this way a number of 
compositions have been assigned to the 9th, 10th and nth 
centuries, though actual written documents belonging to this 
period are comparatively rare. 

It remains for us to say a few words about the fili, the pro- 
fessional literary man in Ireland. The fili (from the stem vel-, 
" to see," Welsh, Breton, gwelet, " to see ") appears to 
have been originally a diviner and magician, and corre- 
sponds to the vates, ovartis, of the ancient Gauls men- 
tioned by classical writers. In Ireland he is represented as sole 
possessor of three methods of divination: the imbas forosnai, 
teinm Uida and dichetal di chennaib cndime. The first two of 
these were forbidden by Patrick, but they seem to have survived 
as late as the 10th century. Part of the tremendous influence 
exercised by the fili was due to the belief in his powers of satire. 
By reciting a satirical poem or incantation he was able to raise 
blotches on the face of and so disfigure any person who aroused 
his displeasure. Numerous cases of this occur in Irish literature. 
The origin of the science of the fili is sometimes traced back to 
the Dagda, one of the figures of the Irish pantheon, and they 
were held in such esteem that the annalists give the obituaries 
of the head-ollams as if they were so many princes. With the 
introduction of Christianity they seem to have gradually super- 
seded the druid, and their functions are therefore very wide. 
We are told that they acted in three capacities: (1) as story- 
tellers (fer comgne or scelaige); (2) as judges {brithem), including 
the professions of arbiters, legislators and lawyers; (3) as poets 
proper (fercerte). We are here only concerned with the fili in 
his capacity of story-teller and poet. In accordance with the 
minute classification of the various ranks of society in early 
Ireland, the social status of the literary man was very carefully 
defined. The degrees vary slightly in different documents, but 
the following list of ten from the Senchus M6r is very instructive : 
(1) The highest degree is the ollam (ollave), who knows 350 
stories; (2) the dnruth, 175 stories; (3) the clii, 80 stories; (4) 
the carta, 60 stories; (5) the doss, 50 stories; (6) the macfuirmid, 
40 stories; (7) the fochlocon, 30 stories; (8) the drisac, 20 stories; 
(9) the taman, 10 stories; (10) the oblaire, 7 stories. In LL. we 
are told that the stories {scil) are divided into primary and 
secondary, and that the latter are only obligatory on the first 
four of the grades enumerated. Again, certain styles of com- 
position seem to have been the monopoly of certain grades. 
Thus the poem which was most highly rewarded and demanded 
the highest technical skill was called the anomain, and was the 
exclusive right of the ollam. A notable instance of this kind of 
composition is the Antra of Columba, attributed to Dalian 
Forgaill. The higher grades were allowed a number of attend- 
ants, whom the kings had to support along with the poet himself. 
Thus the fochlocon had two and the doss four attendants. In 
the 6th century Dalian Forgaill, the chief fili of Ireland, claimed 
the right to be attended by thirty filid, which was the number of 
the train allowed to the supreme king. The reigning monarch, 
Aed MacAinmirech, weary of the pretensions of the poets, 
attempted to banish them, which led to the famous assembly of 
Druim Ceta, where Columba intervened and reduced the number 
to twenty-four (the train of a provincial king). In the plan of 
the hall of Tara, preserved in LL. and YBL., the sui littre or 
doctor in theology has the seat of honour opposite the king. 
The ollam brithem or supreme judge or lawyer ranks with the 
highest rank of nobility, whilst the ollam fili is on a footing with 
the nobleman of the second degree. 
We have already stated that the stories which formed the 



stock-in-trade of the poets were divided into primary and 
secondary stories. Of the latter there were 100, but little is 
known of them. However, several more or less complete lists 
of the primary stories have come down to us. The oldest 
catalogue (contained in LL.) gives the titles of 187 of these tales 
arranged under the following heads — destructions, cow-spoils, 
courtships, battles, caves, navigations, violent deaths, expedi- 
tions, elopements and conflagrations; together with the follow- 
ing, which also reckon as prime-stories — irruptions, visions, 
loves, hostings and migrations. Of these stories sixty-eight have 
been preserved in a more or less complete form. The tales 
enumerated in these catalogues, which in their substance doubt- 
less go back to the 8th or even to the 7 th century, fall into four 
main categories: (1) the mythological cycle, (2) the Cuchulinn 
cycle, (3) the Finn cycle, (4) pieces relating to events of the 5th, 
6th and 7th centuries. Meyer has estimated that of the 550 
titles of epic tales in D'Arbois's Catalogue about 400 are known 
to us, though many of them only occur in a very fragmentary 
state; and about 100 others have since been discovered which 
were not known in 1883. 

The course of training undergone by the fili was a very lengthy 
one. It is commonly stated to have extended over twelve years, 
at the end of which time the student was thoroughly versed in 
all the legendary, legal, historical and topographical lore of his 
native country, in the use of the innumerable and excessively 
complicated Irish metres, in Ogam writing and Irish grammar. 
The instruction in the schools of poetry seems to have been 
entirely oral, and the course consisted largely in learning by 
heart the verses in which the native lore was enshrined. These 
schools of learning existed in one form or another down to the 
1 7 th century. In the early days the fili is represented as employ- 
ing a mysterious archaic form of speech — doubtless full of obscure 
kennings — which was only intelligible to the initiated. An 
instance of this birla jiine, as it was termed, is the piece entitled 
Acallam an Dd Shuad (Colloquy of the Two Sages, Rev. celt. 
xxvi. 4 ff.). In this piece two filid of the 1st century a.d. are 
represented as contending in this dialect for the office of chief 
ollam of Ireland, much to the chagrin of King Conchobar, to 
whom their speeches were unintelligible. It was in consequence 
of this that Conchobar ruled that the office of fili should no 
longer carry with it of necessity the office of judge {brithem). 
It ought to be observed that the church never showed itself 
hostile to the filid, as it did to the druids. Dubthach, chief 
fili of Ireland in the time of St Patrick, is represented as the 
saint's constant companion, and the famous Flann Mainistrech 
(d. 1056), though a layman and fili, was head of the monastery 
school at Monasterboice. 

Before leaving the subject of the literary classes, we must notice 
an inferior grade of poet — the bard. Like the official filid, the 
bards were divided into grades. There were both The bard 
patrician and plebeian bards, each subdivided into 
eight degrees, having their own peculiar metres. Like the fili 
the bard had to go through a long course of study, and he was 
generally attached to the house of some chieftain whose praises 
he had to sing. In course of time the office of fili became extinct, 
owing to a variety of causes, and from the 13th to the 16th 
century we find the hitherto despised family bard stepping into 
the place of the most influential literary man in Ireland. His 
importance was fully realized by the English government, which 
did its best to suppress the order. 

The medieval romances form by far the most attractive 
part of Irish literature, and it is to them that we shall first 
turn our attention. Two main groups of stories have 
to be distinguished. The one is the Ulster cycle, with ro mances . 
Conchobar and Cuchulinn as central figures. The other 
is the Southern or Leinster-Munster cycle, revolving round Finn 
and Ossian. Further stories dealing with mythological and 
historical personages will be mentioned in their turn. 

The Ulster cycle may be regarded as Ireland's most important 
contribution to the world's literature. The chief and at the 
same time the lengthiest romance in which the heroes of 
this group figure is the great epic, the Tdin B6 Cualnge or the 



626 



GELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



Ulster 
cycle. 



The 
"Tdin." 



Cattle-raid of Cooley (Co. Louth). Here we find ourselves in 
a world of barbaric splendour, and we are constantly reminded 
of the Iliad, though the Irish epic from a purely 
literary point of view cannot bear comparison with 
the work of Homer. The main actors in the drama 
are Conchobar, king of Ulster, the great warrior Cuchulinn (see 
Cuchulinn), Ailill and Medb, king and queen of Connaught, 
and Fergus, Conchobar's predecessor as king of Ulster, 
now in exile in Connaught. These persons may or may 
not have actually lived, but the Irish annalists and 
synchronists agree in placing them about the beginning of the 
Christian era. And there cannot be any doubt as to the antiquity 
of the state of civilization disclosed in this great saga. It has 
been repeatedly pointed out that the Irish heroes are equipped 
and conduct themselves in the same manner as the Gauls described 
by the Greek traveller Posidonius, and Prof. W. Ridgeway has 
shown recently that several articles of dress andarmour correspond 
exactly to the La Tene types of the continent. To mention a 
few primitive traits among many — the Irish champions of the 
Tain still fight in chariots, war-dogs are employed, whilst the 
heads of the slain are carried off in triumph and slung round 
the necks of the horses. It may also be mentioned that Emain 
Macha, Conchobar's residence, is reported by the annalists to 
have been destroyed in a.d. 323, and that portions of Meath, 
which is stated to have been made into a separate province in 
the 2nd century a.d., are in the Tdin regarded as forming part 
of Ulster. Noteworthy is the exalted position occupied by the 
druid in the Ulster sagas, showing how little the romances were 
influenced by Christianity. No Roman soldier ever set foot in 
Ireland, and this early epic literature is of supreme value as a 
monument of primitive Celtic civilization. Ireland has always 
been a pastoral country. In early times no native coins were in 
circulation: the land belonged to the tribe. Consequently a 
man's property consisted mainly of cattle. Cattle-raids were an 
event of daily occurrence, and Sir Walter Scott has made us 
familiar with similar expeditions on the part of the Scottish 
Highlanders in the 18th century. Hence it is not a matter for 
surprise that the theme of the greatest Irish epic is a cattle-raid. 
At the time there were two wonderful bulls in Ireland, the Dond 
or Brown Bull of Cualnge, and the Findbennach or White-horn, 
belonging to Medb. These two animals are of no ordinary nature. 
Other stories represent them as having existed under many 
different forms before they were reborn as bulls. First they 
appear as swineherds belonging to the supernatural people of 
the sid of fairy mounds; then they are metamorphosed suc- 
cessively as ravens, warriors, sea-monsters and insects. It was 
Queen Medb's ambition to gain possession of the Brown Bull of 
Cualnge, and for this purpose she collected the united hosts of 
Ireland to raid the province of Ulster and carry him off. Medb 
chooses the season when she knows the Ulstermen are all in- 
capacitated as the result of a curse laid upon them by a fairy 
woman. Cuchulinn alone is exempt from this debility. 

The story is divided into a number of sections, and has been 
summarized by Miss Hull as follows:— (1) the prologue, relating, 
in the form of a night dialogue between Ailill and Medb, the 
dispute between them which brought about the raid; (2) the 
collecting of Medb's hosts and the preliminary movements of 
the army, during which period she first became aware of the 
presence and powers of Cuchulinn. Her inquiry of Fergus as 
to who this formidable foe is leads to a long section called (3) 
Cuchulinn's boy-deeds, in which Fergus relates the remarkable 
prodigies of Cuchulinn's youth, and warns Medb that, though the 
hero is but a beardless youth of seventeen, he will be more than a 
match for all her forces. (4) A long series of single combats, of 
which the first part of the tale is made up; they are at first gay 
and bombastic in character, but become more grave as they 
proceed, and culminate in the combat of Cuchulinn with his old 
companion, Fer Diad. This section contains the account of 
Cuchulinn's "distortion" or frenzy, which always occurred before 
any great output of the hero's energy, and of the rout of the hosts 
of Medb which followed it. (5) The general awakening of the 
warriors of Ulster from their lethargy, and their gathering by 



septs upon the Hill of Slane, clan by clan being described as it 
comes up in order. (6) The final Battle of Gairech and Ilgairech, 
followed (7) by the rout of Medb's army and (8) the tragic death 
of the bulls. 

The text of the Tain has come down to us as a whole or in part 
in nearly a score of MSS., most of which, however, are modern. 
The most important MSS. containing the story are LU., LL. 
and YBL. Of these LU. and YBL. are substantially the same, 
whilst LL. contains a longer and fuller text later in both style 
and language. LL. attempts to give a complete and consistent 
narrative in more polished form. In ancient times there were 
doubtless other versions now lost, but from the middle of the 
12th century the scribes seem to have taken few liberties with 
the text, whilst previously the filid were constantly transforming 
the material and adding fresh matter. The YBL. version 
preserves a number of forms as old as the O. Ir. glosses (i.e. 
8th century or earlier), and a curious story contained in LL. 
seems to point to the fact that the Tdin was first committed 
to writing in the 7th century. Senchan Torpeist, who lived in 
the first half of the 7th century and succeeded Dalian Forgaill 
as chief ollam of Ireland, summoned the filid to inquire which of 
them knew the Tdin in its entirety. As they were only familiar 
with fragments he despatched them to discover it. One of them 
seated himself at the grave of Fergus MacRoig, who appeared to 
him in a mist and dictated the whole story to him in three days 
and three nights. 

At this point it will be well to say a few words about the form 
of the Tdin. The old Irish epic is invariably in prose with 
poems of varying length interspersed. The narrative and 
descriptive portions are in prose and are frequently followed by a 
brief epitome in verse. Dialogues, eulogies and laments also 
appear in metrical form. The oldest poems, termed rhetoric, 
which are best represented in LU., seem to be declamatory 
passages in rhythmical prose, not unlike the poetical passages in 
the Old Testament, and the original Tdin may have consisted of 
such rhetorics bound together with short connecting pieces of 
prose. At a later date poems were inserted in the metres of the 
filid (particularly the quatrain of four heptasyllabic lines) which 
Thurneysen and Windisch consider to have been developed out 
of medieval Latin verse. When in course of time the old rhetorics 
became unintelligible they were often omitted altogether or new 
poems substituted. Thus the LL. version contains a larger 
number of poems than the LU.-YBL. copy, whilst LU. preserves 
a number of rhetorics which do not appear in the later MS. The 
prose portions in LU. are very poor from a literary point of view. 
These passages are abrupt, condensed and frequently obscure, 
with no striving after literary effect such as we find in LL. The 
form in which many episodes are cast is not unlike a mnemonic, 
leaving the story-teller to fill in the details himself. In the nth 
century certain portions of the theme possessing great human 
interest were vastly extended, new poems were added, and in 
this manner such episodes come to form sagas complete in them- 
selves. The most notable instance of this is the " Fight with 
Fer Diad," which is not contained in LU. The genesis of the 
Tdin may thus be briefly summarized as follows. The story was 
first committed to writing in the 7th or 8th century, after which 
it was worked up by the filid. Extended versions existing in the 
10th or nth century form the basis of the copies we now possess. 

Though the sagas of the Ulster cycle are eminently Irish and 
pagan in character and origin, it cannot be denied that traces of 
foreign influence are to be observed. A number of Latin and 
Norse loan-words occur in them, and there can be little doubt 
that the monkish scribes consciously thrust the supernatural 
element into the background. However, although figures of 
Vikings are unmistakable in a few cases, and in one story Cuchu- 
linn is made to fight with Hercules, such foreign elements can 
easily be detected in the older tales. They only affect minor 
details, and do not influence the body of the romances. 

From what we have already said it will be plain that the Irish 
epic is in a fluid state. The Tdin is of interest in che history of 
literature as representing the preliminary stage through which 
the great verse epics of other nations have had to pass, but its 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



627 



value as a work of art is limited by its form. We must now say a 
few words about the character and style of these romances. As 
already stated, the atmosphere is frankly pagan and barbaric, 
with none of that courtly element which we find in the Arthurian 
epics. The two features which strike one most forcibly in the 
medieval Irish romances are dramatic force and humour. The 
unexpected and weird is always happening, the effect of which is 
considerably heightened by the grim nature of the actors. In 
particular the dialogues are remarkably brilliant and clever, and 
it is a matter for surprise that this gifted race never developed a 
drama of its own. This is doubtless partly due to the political 
conditions of the island. And, moreover, we are constantly struck 
by the lack of sustained effort which prevented the filid from 
producing great epics in verse. Dramatic material is abundantly 
present in the old epics, but it has never been utilized. As one 
might expect from the vernacular literature of Ireland, these 
romances are pervaded by a keen sense of humour. We feel that 
the story-teller is continually expecting a laugh and he ex- 
aggerates in true Irish fashion, so that the stories are full of 
extravagantly grotesque passages. In the later LL. version we 
notice a tendency to linger over pathetic situations, but this is 
unknown in the earlier stage. Perhaps the most serious defect of 
all Irish literary products is the lack of any sense of proportion, 
which naturally goes hand in hand with the love of the grotesque. 
Far too much attention is paid to trivial incidents and minute 
descriptions, however valuable the latter may be to the anti- 
quarian, to the detriment of the artistic effect. Further, the 
story-teller does not know when to stop. He goes meandering on 
long after the main portion of the story is finished, with the 
result that Irish romances are apt to end in a most uninteresting 
anticlimax. Finally we are wearied with a constant repetition of 
the same epithets and similes, and with turgid descriptions; 
even the grotesque exaggerations pall when we find them to be 
stereotyped. But the early epics do not offend our sense of 
propriety in expression to the same extent as the later Finn cycle. 
The Tdin B6 Cualnge formed a kind of nucleus round which a 
number of other tales clustered. A number of these are called 
remscSla or introductory stories to the Tdin. Such are the 
" Revealing of the Tain " (already mentioned), the " Debility 
of the Ultonians " (giving the story of the curse), " The Cattle- 
Driving of Regamon, Dartaid and Flidais," " Tdin bd Regamna," 
"The Cattle-Driving of Fraech," "The Dispute of the Swine- 
herds," telling the previous history of the Bulls, " The Capture 
of the Fairy Mound," " The Dream of Mac 6c," the " Adventures 
of Nera," the " Wooing of Ferb." Other stories form a kind of 
continuation of the Tdin. Thus the " Battle of Rosnaree " 
(" Cath Ruis na Rig ") relates how Conchobar, as a result of the 
loss of the Bull, sends an army against the kings of Leinster and 
Tara, and would have been routed but for the prowess of Cuchu- 
linn. The " Great Rout of the Plain of Murthemne " and 
" Cuchulinn's Death " tell how the hero's downfall is compassed 
by a monstrous brood of ill-shapen beings whose father and 
brothers had been slain by him during the Tdin. He finally 
meets with his end at the hands of Lugaid, son of Cur6i mac 
Daire (the central hero of a Munster cycle which has not come 
down to us), and Ere, king of Tara. We are also told of the 
terrible vengeance taken on the murderers by Conall Cernach. 
Other stories deal with the " Conception of Conchobar," the 
" Conception of Cuchulinn," " The Glories of Conchobar's 
Reign," with an account of how he acquired the Throne from 
Fergus, " The Wooing of Emer and the Hero's Education in 
Scotland under Scathach," " The Siege of Howth," " Bricriu's 
Feast and the Exile of the Sons of Doel Dermait," " The Battle 
of the Boyne " (Eriu, vol. ii.), " The Deaths of Mill, Medb and 
Conall Cernach," " Destruction of Bruden Da Choca," " The 
Tragical Death of Conlaech at the hands of Cuchulinn his father," 
" The Deaths of Goll and Garbh," " The Sickbed of Cuchulinn," 
in which the hero is lured away for a time into the invisible land 
by' a fairy, Fand, wife of Manandan, " The Intoxication of the 
Ultonians," telling of a wild raid by night across the entire extent 
of the island from Dun-da-Benn near Coleraine to the fort of 
Cur6i MacDaire at Temair-Luachra in Kerry, " The Death of 



Conchobar," " The Phantom Chariot of Cuchulinn," in which 
the hero is brought up from the grave to witness before St 
Patrick and King Loigaire to the truth of the Christian doctrine. 

Four other stories in connexion with the Ulster cycle remain 
to be mentioned. The first is " Seel mucci Mate Datho " (" The 
Story of MacDatho's Pig ") . Various writers of antiquity inform 
us that at the feasts of the Gauls the champion received the best 
portion of meat, which frequently led to brawls. In this savage 
but picturesque Irish story we find the Ulstermen vaunting 
their achievements against the Connaughtmen, until at last 
the contest lies between Conall Cernach and Cet MacMagach. 
Nowhere, perhaps, is the dramatic element better brought out. 

Apart from the Tdin the greatest and at the same time the 
longest saga in which Cuchulinn figures is Fled Bricrend (Bricriu's 
Feast). Bricriu is the mischief-maker among the Ulstermen, 
and he conceives the idea of building a banqueting hall in order 
to invite Conchobar and his nobles to a feast. After much hesita- 
tion they consent. Bricriu in turn incites the three chief heroes, 
Cuchulinn, Conall Cernach and Loigaire Buadach, to claim the 
champion's portion. He does the same thing with the spouses 
of the three warriors, who declaim in obscure verse the achieve- 
ments and excellences of their several husbands in a passage 
entitled the " Women's War of Words." Loosely attached to 
this story follows a wild series of adventures in which the powers 
of the three champions are tested, Cuchulinn always proving his 
superiority. In order to decide the dispute, visits are paid to 
Medb at Rath Cruachan and to Cur6i in Kerry, and the story 
ends with the " beheading incident," which occurs in the romance 
of " Sir Gawayne and the Green Knight." Fled Bricrend 
presents a number of textual difficulties. The text of the 
oldest MS. (LU.) shows signs of contamination, and several 
versions of the story seem to have been current. 

But the story of the Ulster cycle which is better known than any 
other, is the story of the " Tragical Death of the Sons of Usnech, 
or the Life and Death of Deirdre," one of the " Three Sorrows of 
Story-telling." This is the only tale of the group which has 
survived in the minds of the common people down to the present 
day. It is foretold of Deirdre, a girl-child of great beauty, that 
she will be the cause of great misfortunes, but Conchobar, having 
lost his wife, determines to have her brought up in solitude and 
marry her himself. However, the maiden chances to see a noble 
youth'named Naisi, one of the three sons of Usnech, and persuades 
him to carry her off to Scotland, where they live for many years. 
At length they are induced to return after several of the most 
prominent Ulster warriors have gone bail for their safety. But 
Conchobar resorts to treachery, and the three sons of Usnech are 
slain, whilst the account of Deirdre's end varies. The oldest 
version of the story is found in LL., and the characters are as 
rugged and unsophisticated as those of the Tdin. But in the 
later versions the savage features are toned down. 

Before passing on, we must mention several old stories which 
are independent of the Ulster cycle, but which deal with events 
which are represented as having taken place before the Christian 
era. Few of the old romances deal directly with what we may 
call Irish mythology. The " Battle of Moytura " tells of the 
tremendous struggle between the Tuatha De Danann and their 
enemies, the Fomorian pirates. Connected with the events of 
this saga is the story of the " Tragic Deaths of the Sons of 
Tuirenn," which, though mentioned in Cormac's glossary, is not 
found in any MS. older than the 18th century. The three sons of 
Tuirenn have slain Cian, father of Lug Lamfhada, who lays upon 
them a huge eric-fine. They go through terrific ordeals and 
accomplish their task, but return home to die. This is the second 
of the " Three Sorrows of Story- telling." An old story dealing 
with Tuatha De Danann personages, but having a certain bear- 
ing on the Cuchulinn cycle, is the " Courtship of Etain," who, 
though of supernatural (sid) birth, is wedded to Eochaid Airern, 
a mortal king. In her previous existence she was the wife cf 
the supernatural personage Midir of Bri-leith, who wins back 
Etain from her mortal husband in a game of chess and carrie i 
her off to his fairy mound. 

For sake of completeness we may add the titles of two other 



628 



CELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



well-known stories here. The one is the " Story of Baile the 
Sweet-spoken," which tells of the deaths of two lovers for grief 
at the false tidings of each other's death. The other is the 
" Fate of the Children of Lir," the third of the " Three Sorrows 
of Story-telling," which is only known in a modern dress. It 
relates how the four daughters of Lir (father of the sea-god 
Manandan and the original of Shakespeare's Lear) were changed 
into swans by a cruel stepmother, and how, after goo years of 
wandering on the ocean, they at length regain their human form 
through the instrumentality of St Mochaomhog. 

A large number of sagas, which claim to be founded ©n 
historical events, present a great similarity to the tales of the 
Ulster cycle. Most of them are mentioned in the old catalogues. 
We can only name the more important here. The " Destruction 
of Dind-Rig and Exile of Labraid Loingsech " relates how the 
kingdom of Leinster was snatched by one brother from another 
in the 6th century B.C., and how the son of the murdered prince 
with the aid of a British force sacked Dind-Rig, the fortress of the 
usurper. The story of the visit of the pigmies to the court of 
Fergus MacLeite, king of Ulster in the 2nd century B.C., is only 
contained in a 15th-century MS. This tale is commonly stated 
to have given Swift the idea of his Gulliver's Travels to Lilliput. 
" Caithreim Chonghail Claringnigh," which only occurs in a 
modernized 17th-century version, deals with a revolution in the 
province of Ulster, supposed to have taken place before the 
Christian era. 

The most important Old Irish saga after the Tain is beyond 
doubt the Destruction of Dd Derga's Hostel, contained in LU. 
It deals with events in the reign of the High-King Conaire Mor, 
who is said by the annalists to have been slain in 43 B.C. after a 
reign of seventy years. Conaire, who was a descendant of the 
Etain mentioned above, was a just ruler, and had banished 
among other lawless persons his own five foster brothers. These 
latter devoted themselves to piracy and made common cause 
with one Ingcel, a son of the king of Britain, who had been out- 
lawed by his father. The high-king was returning from Co. 
Clare when he found the whole of Meath in flames. He turned 
aside into Leinster and made for Da, Derga's hostel. The 
pirates perceive this, and Ingcel is sent to spy out the hostel 
and discover the size of Conaire's force. This gives the story- 
teller a chance for one of those lengthy minute descriptions 
of persons in which his soul delighted. This catalogue 
occupies one-half of the whole story. The pirates make their 
attack, and the king and most of his followers are butchered. 

We can do no more than enumerate the titles of other historical 
tales: The " Destruction of the Hostel of MacDareo," describing 
the insurrection of the Aithech-Tuatha (1st century a.d.), " The 
Expulsion of the Deisi " and the " Battle of Mag Lemna " (2nd 
century a.d.), "Battle of Mag Mucrime" (a.d. 195 or a.d. 218), 
" Siege of Drom Damgaire " (3rd century), " Adventures of the 
Sons of Eochaid Muigmedoin, father of Niall N6igiallach " (4th 
century), "Death of Crimthann" (reigned 366-378), "Death 
of Dathi " (d. 428), " Death of Murchertach, son of Ere," and 
" Death of Diarmait, son of Cerball " (6th century) " Wooing 
of Becfola, who became the wife of Diarmait, son of Aed Slane " 
(reigned 657-664), " Battle of Mag Rath " (637), " Battle of 
Cam Conaill" ic. 648), "Death of Maelfothartaig MacRonain " 
(7th century), who was a kind of Irish Hippolytus, " Battle of 
Allen " (722). 

It will be well to deal here with another class of story in its 
various stages of development. We have seen that in the older 
romances there is a close connexion between mortals and super- 
natural beings. The latter are represented as either inhabiting 
the sid mounds or as dwelling in islands out in the ocean, which 
are pictured as abodes of bliss and variously called Mag Mell 
(Plain of Delight), Tir na n-Oc (Land of Youth) and Tir Tairngiri 
(Land of Promise). The visits of mortals to the Irish Elysium 
form the subject of three romances which we must now examine. 
The whole question has been exhaustively dealt with by Kuno 
Meyer and Alfred Nutt in the Voyage of Bran (London, 1895- 
1897). Condla Caem, son of Conn Cetchathach, was one day 
seated by his father on the hill of Usnech, when he saw a lady in 



strange attire approaching invisible to all but himself. She 
describes herself, as coming from the " land of the living," a place 
of eternal delight, and invites the prince to return with her. 
Conn invokes the assistance of his druid to drive away the strange 
visitor, who in parting throws an apple to Condla. The young 
man partakes of no food save his apple, which does not diminish, 
and he is consumed with longing. At the end of a month the 
fairy-maiden again makes her appearance. Condla can hold out 
no longer. He jumps into the damsel's skiff of glass. They sail 
away and were seen no more. This is the Imram or Adventure of 
Condla Caem, the oldest text of which is found in LU. A similar 
story is entitled Imram Brain maic Febail, contained in YBL. 
and Rawlinson B 512 (the, end also occurs in LU.), only with this 
difference that Bran, with twenty-seven companions, puts to sea 
to discover tir na mban (the land of maidens). After spending 
some time there, one of his comrades is seized with home-sickness. 
They return, and the home-sick man, on being set ashore, 
immediately turns to dust. A later story preserved in BB., 
YBL. and the Book of Fermoy, tells of the visit of Cormac, 
grandson of Conn Cetchathach, to Tir Tairngiri. These themes 
are also worked into tales belonging to the Ossianic cycle, and 
Finn and Ossian in later times become the typical warriors who 
achieve the quest of the Land of Youth. The romances we have 
just mentioned are almost entirely pagan in character, but a 
kindred class of story shows us how the old ideas were trans- 
formed under the influence of Christianity. A typical instance is 
Imram curaig Maelduin, contained in YBL. and in part in LU. 
Maelduin constructs a boat and sets out on a voyage with a 
large company to discover the murderer of his father. This 
forms the framework of the story. Numerous islands in the 
ocean are visited, each containing some great marvel. Imram 
ua Corra (Book of Fermoy) and Imram Snedgusa ocus Mac 
Riagla (YBL.) contain the same plan, but in this case the voyage 
is undertaken as an expiation for crime. In the nth century 
an unknown monkish writer compiled the Navigatio S. Brendani, 
drawing the material for his episodes from Imram curaig Mael- 
duin. This famous work only appears in an Irish dress in a 
confused and disconnected " Life of St Brendan " in the Book of 
Lismore. The same MS. contains yet another voyage, the 
" Adventure of Tadg MacCein." 

We must now turn our attention to the later heroic cycle, 
commonly called the Fenian or Ossianic. Unfortunately the 
origin of the stories and poems connected with Finn 
and his warriors is obscure, and scholars are by no ossianic* 
means agreed over the question (see Finn Mac Cool), cycle. 
In the earlier cycle the figures and the age in which 
they live are sharply drawn, and we can have no hesitation in 
assuming that the Tdin represents in the main the state of 
Ireland at the beginning of the Christian era. Finn and his 
companions are nebulous personages, and, although it is difficult 
to discover the actual starting-point of the legend, from the 
12th century onwards we are able to trace the development of 
the saga with some degree of certainty. A remarkably small 
amount of space is devoted to this cycle in the oldest MSS. Of 
the 134 pages contained inLU. only half-a-dozen deal with Finn 
as against 58 with Cuchulinn. In LL. the figures are, Ulster 
cycle 100 pp., Ossianic 25 pp., the latter being mainly made up 
of short ballads, whilst in 15th-century MSS., such as the Book 
of Lismore and Laud 610, the proportion is overwhelmingly in 
favour of the later group. Again in Urard MacCoisi's list of 
tales, which seems to go back to the 10th century, only two 
appear to deal with subjects taken from the Ossianic cycle. In 
the first instance Finn seems to have been a poet, and as such 
he appears in the 12th-century MSS., LU. and LL. Thus the 
subjects of the Ossianic cycle in the earliest MSS. appear in a 
new dress. The vehicle of the older epic is prose, but the later 
cycle is clothed in ballad form. Of these ballads about a dozen, 
apart from poems in the Dindsenchus are preserved in LU., LL. 
and YBL., and none of these poems are probably much older 
than the nth century. In the commentary to the Amra of 
Columbkille a beautiful poem on winter is attributed to Finn. 
At the same time we do find a few prose tales, e.g. " Fotha catka 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



629 



Cnucha " in LU., describing the death of Cumall, Finn's father, 
and in LL. and Rawlinson B 502, part of which Zimmer assigns 
to the 7th century, we have the first story in which Finn actually 
occurs. But it is remarkable that in no case do tales belonging 
to the Finn cycle contain any of the old rhetorics which occur in 
the oldest of the Ulster romances. Already in LL., by the side 
of Finn, Ossian, Cailte and Fergus Finnbel are represented as 
poets, and the strain of lament over the glories of the past, so 
characteristic a feature of the later developments of the legend, 
is already sounded. Hence by the 1 2th century the stories of the 
Fiann and their destruction at the battle of Gabra must have 
been fully developed, and from this time onward they appear 
gradually to have supplanted the Cuchulinn cycle in popular 
favour. Several reasons have been assigned for this. In the 
first place until the time of Brian Boroime the high-kings of 
Ireland had almost without exception been drawn from Ulster, 
and consequently the northern traditions were pre-eminent. 
This exclusiveness on the part of the north was largely broken 
down by the Viking invasions, and during the nth century the 
leading poets were attached to the court of Brian and his descend- 
ants. In this manner an opportunity was afforded to the 
Leinster-Munster Fenian cycle to develop into a national saga. 
John MacNeill has pointed out Finn's connexion with a Firbolg 
tribe, and maintains that the Fenian cycle was the property of 
the subject race. Zimmer has attempted to prove with great 
plausibility that Finn and his warriors were transformed on the 
model of the Ulster heroes. Thus one text deals with the boyish 
exploits of Finn in the manner of Cuchulinn's youthful feats 
recorded in the Tdin. And it is possible that the Siaburcharpat 
Conchulainn gave rise to the idea of connecting Ossian and 
Cailte with Patrick. As Cuchulinn was opposed to the whole of 
Ireland in the Tdin, so Finn, representing Ireland, is pitted 
against the whole world in the Battle of V entry. 

We have already stated that the form assumed by the stories 
connected with Finn in the earliest MSS. is that of the ballad, 
and this continued down to the 18th century. But here again 
the Irish poets showed themselves incapable of rising from the 
ballad to the true epic in verse, and in the 14th century we find 
the prose narrative of the older cycle interspersed with verse 
again appearing. The oldest composition of any length which 
deals with the Ossianic legends is the Acallam na Sendrach or 
Colloquy of the Old Men, which is mainly preserved in three 
15th-century MSS., the Book of Lismore, Laud 610 and Rawlin- 
son 487. In this text we have the framework common to so 
much of the later Ossianic literature. Ossian and Cailte are 
represented as surviving the battle of Gabra and as living on 
until the time of Patrick. The two warriors get on the best of 
terms with the saint, and Cailte is his constant companion on 
his journey through Ireland. Patrick inquires the significance 
of the names of the places they visit, and Cailte recounts his 
reminiscences. In this manner we are given nearly a hundred 
stories, the subjects of some of which occur in the short ballads 
in older MSS., whilst others appear later as independent tales. 
A careful comparison of the Acallam with the Cuchulinn stories, 
whether from the point of view of civilization or language or 
art, discloses that the first lengthy composition of the Ossianic 
cycle is but a feeble imitation of the older group. All that had 
become unintelligible in the Ulster stories, owing to their primi- 
tive character, is omitted, and in return for that the reminiscences 
of the Viking age play a very prominent part. 

With the 1 6th century we reach the later treatment of the 
legend in the Battle of V entry. In this tedious story Daire, the 
king of the whole world, comes to invade Ireland with all his 
forces, but is repulsed by Finn and his heroes. The Battle of 
Venlry, like all later stories, is a regular medley of incidents 
taken from the writers of antiquity and European medieval 
romance. The inflated style to which the Irishman is so prone 
is here seen at its worst, and we are treated to a nauseous heaping 
up of epithet upon epithet, e.g. we sometimes find as many as 
twenty-seven adjectives accompanying a substantive running in 
alliterating sets of three. 

Of greater literary interest are the later ballads connected with 



Finn and Ossian. The latter has become the typical mouthpiece 
of the departed glory of the Fenian warriors, and Nutt has pointed 
out that there is a striking difference in spirit between the 
Acallam na Sendrach and the isth-i6th century poems. In the 
latter Ossian is represented. as a " pagan, defiant and reckless, 
full of contempt and scorn for the howling clerics and their 
churlish low-bred deity," whilst Patrick is a sour and stupid 
fanatic, harping with wearisome monotony on the damnation of 
Finn and all his comrades. The earliest collection of these 
later Ossianic poems is that made in Scotland by James Mac- 
gregor, dean of Lismore, early in the 16th century. Another 
miscellany is the Duanaire Finn, a MS. in the Franciscan 
monastery in Dublin, compiled from earlier MSS. in 1627. This 
" song-book," which has been edited for the Irish Texts Society 
by John MacNeill (part i. 1908), contains no less than sixty-nine 
Ossianic ballads, amounting in all to some ten thousand lines. 
Other Ossianic poems of dates varying from the 15th to the 18th 
century have been published in the Transactions of the Ossianic 
Society (Dublin, 1854-1861), including amongst others "The 
Battle of Gabhra," " Lamentation of Oisin (Ossian) after the 
Fenians," " Dialogue between Oisin and Patrick," " The Battle 
of Cnoc an Air," and " The Chase of Sliabh Guilleann." These 
ballads still survive amongst the peasants at the present day. 
We further possess a number of prose romances, which in their 
present form date from the 16th to the 18th century; e.g. 
The Pursuit of Diarmaid and Grdinne, Finn and Grdinne, 
Death of Finn, The Clown in the Drab Coat, Pursuit of the Gilla 
Decair, The Enchanted Fort of the Quicken-tree, The Enchanted 
Cave of Ceis Corann, The Feast in the House of Conan. 

At the present moment it is impossible to give a complete survey 
of the other branches of medieval Irish literature. The attention 
of scholars has been largely devoted to the publication of the sagas 
to the neglect of other portions of the wide field. An excellent 
survey of the subject is given by K. Meyer, Die Kultur der Gegen- 
wart, i. xi. I. pp. 78-95 (Berlin-Leipzig, 1909). 

We have already pointed out that as early as the Old Irish; 
period nameless Irish poets were singing the praises of nature in a 
strain which sounds to our ears peculiarly modern. 
At the present time it is difficult to say how much of 
what is really poetic in Irish literature has come down 
to us. Our MSS. preserve whole reams of the learned productions 
of the filid which were so much prized in medieval Ireland, but 
it is, generally speaking, quite an accident if any of the delightful 
little lyrics entered in themargins or on blank spaces in the MSS. 
have remained. The prose romances sometimes contain beautiful 
snatches of verse, such as the descriptions of Mag Mell in Serglige 
Conculaind, Tochmarc Etdine, and the Voyage of Bran or the 
Lament of Cuchulinn over Fer Diad. Mention has also been made 
of the exquisite nature poems ascribed to Finn, which have been 
collected into a pamphlet with English renderings by Kuno 
Meyer (under the title of " Four Old Irish Songs of Summer and 
Winter," London, 1903). The same writer points out that the 
ancient treatise on Irish prosody published by Thurneysen 
contains no less than 340 quotations from poems, very few 
of which have been preserved in their entirety. To Meyer we 
also owe editions of two charming little texts which sufficiently 
illustrate the lyrical powers of the early poets. The one is a 
poem referred to the 10th century in the form of a colloquy 
between Guaire of Aidne and his brother Marban. Guaire 
inquires of his brother why he prefers to live in a hut in the 
forest, keeping the herds and swine of the king, to dwelling in 
the king's palace. The question calls forth so wonderful a 
description of the delights of nature as viewed from a shieling 
that Guaire exclaims, " I would give my glorious kingship to be 
in thy company, Marban " {King and Hermit, ed. with trans, 
by K. Meyer, London, 1901). Another text full of passionate 
emotion and tender regret ascribed to the 9th century tells of 
the parting of a young poet and poetess, who after plighting their 
troth are separated for ever (Liadain and Curithir, ed. with trans, 
by K. Meyer, London, 1902). In the Old Woman of Beare 
(publ. K. Meyer in Otia Merseiana) an old hetaira laments her 
departed youth, comparing her life to the ebbing of the tide 
(10th century). 



Nature 
poetry. 



630 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



We must now step aside from pure literature and turn our 
attention to the various productions of the professional learned 
classes of Ireland during the middle ages. The range of subjects 
coming under this heading is a very wide one, comprising history, 
genealogies, hagiology, topography, grammar, lexicography and 
metre, law and medicine. It will perhaps be as well first of 

all to deal with the learned filid whose works have 
p " >,es ' been preserved. Irish tradition preserves the names 
literatures of a number of antiquarian poets of prehistoric or 

early medieval times, such as Amergin, one of the 
Milesian band of invaders; Moran Roigne, son of Ugaine M6r, 
Adna and his successor Ferceirtne, Torna (c. 400), tutor to Niall 
Noigiallach, Dalian Forgaill, Senchan Torpeist, and Cennfaelad 
(d. 678), but the poems attributed to these writers are of much 
later date. We can only enumerate the chief of those whose 
works have been preserved. To Maelmura (d. 887) is attributed 
a poem on the Milesian migrations. About the same time lived 
Flanagan, son of Cellach, who wrote a long composition on the 
deaths of the kings of Ireland, preserved in YBL., and Flann 
MacLonain (d. 918), called by the Four Masters the Virgil of 
Ireland, eight of whose poems have survived, containing in all 
about 1000 lines. Cormacan, son of Maelbrigde (d. 946), com- 
posed a vigorous poem on the circuit of Ireland performed by 
Muirchertach, son of Niall Glundub. A poet whose poems are 
most valuable from an antiquarian point of view is Cinaed Ua 
h-Artacain (d. 975). Some 800 lines of his have been preserved 
in LL. and elsewhere. Contemporary with him is Eochaid 
O'Flainn (d. c. 1003), whose chief work is a long chronological 
poem giving a list of the kings of Ulster from Cimbaeth down 
to the destruction of Emain in 33 1 . A little later comes MacLiac 
(d. 1016), who celebrated in verse the glories of the reign of Brian 
Boroime. His best-known work is a lament over Kincora, the 
palace of Brian. Contemporary with MacLiac is MacGilla Coim 
Urard MacCoisi (d. 1023). To CuanuaLothchain(d. 1024), chief 
poet in the reign of Maelsheachlainn II., are ascribed poems on 
the antiquities of Tara. Sixteen hundred lines of his have come 
down to us. A writer who enjoyed a tremendous reputation in 
medieval Ireland was Flann Mainstrech (d. 1056), who in spite of 
his being a layman was head of the monastery school at Monaster- 
boice. He is the author of no fewer than 2000 lines in LL., and 
many other poems of his are contained in other MSS. His best- 
known work is a Book of Synchronisms of the kings of Ireland 
and those of the ancient world. We have also poems from his 
pen on the monarchs descended from Niall N6igiallach and on the 
chronology of the high-kings and provincial kings from the time 
of Loigaire. Flann's successor, Gilla Coemgin (d. 1072), gives us 
a chronological poem dealing with the annals of the world down to 
a.d. 1014. He also is the author of the Irish version of Nennius 
which contains substantial additions dealing with early Ireland. 
Minor writers of the same nature whose works have come down 
to us are Colman O'Sesnain (d. 1050), Neide ua Maelchonaire 
(d. 1136), Gilla na noem ua Duinn (d. 1160), Gilla Moduda 
O'Cassidy (1143). In the 13th century these historical poems 
become very rare. In the next century we again find anti- 
quarian poets of whom the best-known is John O'Dugan (d. 
1372). His most valuable "composition treats of the tribes of 
the northern half of Ireland at the time of the northern con- 
quest. This work, containing 1660 lines in all in debide metre, 
was completed by his younger contemporary Gilla na naem 
O'Huidhrin. From the beginning of the 13th century the official 
poets began to give way to the hereditary bards and families 
of scribes. Among the chief bardic families we may mention 
the O'Dalys, the MacWards, the O'Higinns, the MacBrodys 
and the MacDaires. We must here content ourselves with 
glancing at a few of the more prominent names. Muiredach 
Albanach (c. 1214-1240), whose real name was O'Daly, has left 
behind in addition to the religious verses a considerable number 
of poems in praise of various patrons in Ireland and Scotland. 
He is said by Skene to be the first of the Macvurrichs, bards to 
Macdonald of Clanranald. A number of his compositions are 
preserved in the Book of the Dean of Lismore. Gilla Brigde Mac- 
Conmidhe was a contemporary of the last-mentioned bard. He 



wrote a number of poems in praise of the O'Neills and O'Donnells. 
We may next mention the name of an abbot of Boyle, Donn- 
chad Mor O'Dilaig (d. 1244), a writer whose extant poems are 
usually of a religious character. Many of them are addressed to 
the Virgin. Most of them appear in late MSS., but some few are 
preserved in the Book of the Hy Maine. Donnchad Mor is said to 
be the greatest religious poet that Ireland has produced. Many 
other members of the O'Daly family belonging to the 14th and 
15th centuries have left poems behind them, but we cannot 
mention them here. Angus O'Daly, who lived in the second 
half of the 16th century, was employed by the English to satirize 
the chief Gaelic families in Ireland. Two members of the 
O'Higinn family deserve mention, Tadg mor O'Higinn (d. 1315),. 
and Tadg Og O'Higinn (d. 1448), a voluminous writer who 
eulogized the O'Neills, O'Connors and O'Kellys. Tadg Og also 
composed a number of religious poems, which enjoyed enormous 
popularity in both Ireland and Scotland. A duanaire was 
inserted into YBL., which contains some forty poems by him. 

Closely connected with the compositions of the official poets 
are the works of native topography. Most of the sagas contain a 
number of explanations of the origins of place-names. The 
Dindsenchus is a compilation of such etymologies. But its chief 
value consists in the amount of legendary matter it contains, 
adduced in support of the etymologies given. The Dindsenchus 
has come down to us in various forms both in prose and in verse. 
Irish tradition ascribes it to Amergin MacAmalgaid, who lived 
in the 6th century, but if the kernel of the work goes back as early 
as this it must have been altered considerably in the course of the 
centuries. Both prose and verse forms of it are contained in LL. 
A kindred compilation is the Cdir Anmann (Fitness of Names), 
which does for personal names what the Dindsenchus does for 
geographical names. We further possess a versified compendium 
of geography for educational purposes dealing with the three 
continents, from the pen of Airbertach MacCosse-dobrain 
(10th century). 

No people on the face of the globe have ever been more keenly 
interested in the past of their native country than the Irish. 
This will already have been patent from the com- 
positions of the filid, and now we may describe briefly 
the historical works in prose which have come down to us. 
The latter may be divided into two classes, (1) works containing 
a connected narrative, (2) annals. Closely allied to these are the 
sagas dealing with the high-kings. Even in the serious historical 
compositions we often find the manner of the sagas imitated, e.g. 
the supernatural plays a prominent part, and we are treated to 
the same exaggerated descriptions. The earliest of these histories 
is the wars of the Gael and Gall (Cogad Gaedel re Gallaib), which 
gives an account of the Viking invasions of Ireland, the career 
of Brian Boroime and the overthrow of the Norsemen at the 
battle of Clontarf. This composition, a portion of which is 
contained in LL., is often supposed to be in part the work of 
MacLiac, and it is plain from internal evidence that it must 
have been written by an eye-witness of the battle, or from 
materials supplied by a person actually present. Numerous 
shorter tracts dealing with the same period exist, but as yet few 
of them have been published. Caithreim Cellachdin Caisil treats 
of the conflicts between the Vikings and the Irish, and the 
Leabhar Oiris gives an account of Irish history from 979 to 1027. 
Compilations relating to local history are the Book of Fenagh 
and the Book of Munster. Another ancient work also partly 
preserved in LL. is the Book of Invasions (Leabhar Gabhdla). 
This deals with the five prehistoric invasions of Ireland (see 
Ireland: Early History) and the legendary history of the 
Milesians. The most complete copy of the Leabhar Gabhdla 
which has been preserved was compiled by Michael O'Clery 
about 1630. The Boroma or History of the Leinster Tribute 
contained in LL. belongs rather to romance. Another history is 
theTriumphs of Turlough 0' Brian, written about the year 1459 by 
John MacCraith, a Munster historian (edited by S. H. O'Grady, 
Camb. Press). This inflated composition is an important 
source of information on Munster history from the landing of 
the Normans to the middle of the 14th century. We also possess 



History. 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



631 



several documents in Irish concerning the doings of the O'Neills 
and O'Donnells at the close of the 16th century. A life of Hugh 
Roe O'Donnell, by Lughaidh O'Clery, has been published, and 
a contemporary history of the Flight of the Earls, by Tadhg 
O'Cianan, was being prepared in 1908. But the most celebrated 
Irish historian is certainly Geoffrey Keating (c. 15 70- 1646), 
who is at the same time the greatest master of Irish prose. 
Keating was a Munster priest educated in France, who drew down 
upon himself the displeasure of the English authorities and had 
to go into hiding. He travelled up and down Ireland examining 
all the ancient records, and compiled a history of Ireland down 
to the Norman Conquest. His work, entitled Forus Feasa ar 
Eirinn, was never published, but it circulated from end to end of 
Ireland in MS. Keating's history is anything but critical. Its 
value for the scholar lies in the fact that the author had access 
to many important sources of information now lost, and has 
preserved accounts of events independent of and differing from 
those contained in the Four Masters. In addition to the history 
and a number of poems, Keating is also the author of two theo- 
logical works in Irish, the Defence of the Mass (Eochairsgialh an 
Aifrinn) and a collection of sermons entitled the Three Shafts of 
Death ( Trl biorghaoithe an Bhdis), which are models of Irish prose. 

From the writers of historical narrative we turn to the annalists, 
the most important sources of information with regard to Irish 
history. We have already mentioned the Synchronisms of Flann 
Mainistrech. Apart from this work the earliest collection of 
annals which has come down to us is the compilation by Tigernach 
O'Braein (d. 1088), abbot of Clonmacnoise. Tigernach, whose 
work is partly in Latin, partly in Irish, states that all Irish 
history previous to 305 B.C. is uncertain. No perfect copy is 
known of this work, but several fragments are in existence. The 
Annals of Innisf alien (a monastery on an island in the Lower 
Lake of Killarney), which are also in Latin and Irish, were 
perhaps compiled about 1215, though they may have begun two 
centuries earlier. The invaluable A nnals of Ulster were compiled 
on Belle Isle on Upper Lough Erne by Cathal Maguire (d. 1498), 
and afterwards continued by two different writers down to 1604. 
This work, which deals with Irish affairs from a.d. 431, exists 
in several copies. The Annals of Loch CS (near Boyle in Ros- 
common) were copied in 1588 and deal with Irish events from 
1014 to 1636. The Annals of Connaught run from 1224 to 1562. 
The Chronicon Scotorum, one copy of which was transcribed 
about 1650 by the famous antiquary Duald MacFirbis, deals 
with Irish affairs down to 1135. The Annals of Boyle extend 
down to 1253. The Annals of Clonmacnoise, which come down 
to 1408, only exist in an English translation made by Connell 
MacGeoghegan in 1627. The most important of all these col- 
lections is the Annals of the Four Masters (so christened by 
Colgan), compiled in the Franciscan monastery of Donegal by 
Michael, Conary and Cucogry O'Clery and Ferfesa O'Mulconry. 
The O'Clerys were for a long period the hereditary ollams to 
the O'Donnells. Michael O'Clery (1 575-1643), the greatest of the 
four, was a lay brother in the order of St Francis, and devoted 
his whole life to the history of Ireland. He collected all the 
historical MSS. he could find, and was encouraged in his under- 
taking by Fergal O'Gara, prince of Coolavin, who paid all ex- 
penses. The great work, which was begun in 1632 and finished 
In 1636, begins with the arrival in Ireland of Ceasair, grand- 
daughter of Noah, and comes down to 16 16. Nearly all the 
materials from which O'Clery drew his statements are now lost. 
O'Clery is also the author of a catalogue of the kings of Ireland, 
the genealogies of the Irish saints, and the Martyrology of 
Donegal and the Book of Invasions. 

Of less interest, but every whit as important, are the lists of 
genealogies which occupy a great deal of space in LL., YBL. 
and BB., and two Trinity College, Dublin, MSS. (H. 3. 18 and H. 
2. 4). But by far the most important collection of all is that 
made by the last great shanachie Duald MacFirbis, compiled 
between 1650 and 1666 in the college of St Nicholas at Galway. 
The only portions of any considerable length which have as yet 
been published deal with two Connaught tribes, viz. the Hy 
Fiachrach from Duald mac Firbis and the Hy Maine (O'Kellys), 



and a Munster tribe, the Corcalaidhe, both from YBL. Valuable 
information with regard to early Irish history is often contained 
in the prophecies or, as they are sometimes termed, Baile 
{raptures, visions), a notable example of which is Baile in Scdil 
(Vision of the Phantom). 

When we turn from secular to religious themes we find that 
Ireland is also possessed of a very extensive Christian literature, 
which is extremely valuable for the comparative study 
of medieval literature. Apart from the martyrologies atenSire. 
already mentioned in connexion with Oengus the 
Culdee, a number of lives of saints and other ecclesiastical 
literature have come down to us. One of the most important 
documents is the Tripartite Life of St Patrick, which cannot very 
well have been composed before the 10th or nth century, as 
it is full of the extravagant miracles which occur in the later 
lives of saints. The work consists of three separate homilies, 
each complete in itself. A later version of the Tripartite Life 
was printed by Colgan in 1647. The Leabhar Breac contains a 
quantity of religious tracts, most of which have been published. 
R. Atkinson issued a number of them under the title of Passions 
and Homilies from Leabhar Breac (Dublin, 1887). These are not 
original Irish compilations, but translations from Latin lives of 
saints. Nor do they deal with the lives of any Irish saints. 
Stokes has published nine lives of Irish saints from the Book of 
Lismore, including Patrick, Brigit, Columba, Brendan, Findian 
(Clonard), Ciaran, Senan, Findchua and Mochua. They are 
written in the form of homilies preceded by short explanations of 
a text of scripture. These lives also occur in the Leabhar Breac. 
Other lives of saints have been published by O'Grady in Silva 
Gadelica. The longest life of St Columba was compiled in 1536 
at the command of Manus O'Donnell. This tedious work is a 
specimen of hagiology at its worst. The Leabhar Breac further 
contains a number of legends, such as those on the childhood 
of Christ, and scattered through many MSS. are short anecdotes 
of saints which are very instructive. 

But the most interesting Irish religious text is the Vision of 
Adamnan (preserved in LU.), which Stokes assigns to the nth 
century. The soul of Adamnan is represented as leaving his 
body for a space to visit heaven and hell under the conduct of 
an angel. The whole treatment of the theme challenges com- 
parison with Dante's great poem, but the Irish composition 
contains many ideas peculiar to the land of its origin. Later 
specimens of this kind of literature tend to develop into grotesque 
buffoonery. We may mention the Vision of Fursae, the Vision 
of Tundale (Tnugdal), published by V. Friedel and K. Meyer 
(Paris, 1907), Laisren's Vision of Hell and the Vision of Merlino. 
A further vision attributed to Adamnan contains a stern de- 
nunciation of the Irish of the nth century. Another form of 
religious composition, which was very popular in medieval Ire- 
land, was the prophecy in verse, but scarcely any specimens 
have as yet been published. Kuno Meyer edited a tract on the 
Psalter in his Hibernica M inora from a 15th century Oxford MS., 
but he holds that the text goes back to 750. A number of 
collections of monastic rules both in prose and verse have been 
edited in Eriu, and the MSS. contain numerous prayers, litanies 
and religious poems. 

In LU. are preserved two sermons, Scila na esergi (Tidings of 
Resurrection) and Scila Idi brdtha (Tidings of Doomsday) ; and a 
number of other homilies have been published, such as the 
"Two Sorrows of the Kingdom of Heaven," "The Penance of 
Adam," the "Ever-new Tongue," and one on "Mortals' Sins." 
All the homilies contained in LB. have been published by R. 
Atkinson in his Legends and Homilies from Leabhar Breac 
(Dublin, 1887), and E. Hogan, The Irish Nennius (Dublin, 1895). 
The popular " Debate of the Body and the Soul " appears in 
Ireland in the form of a homily. A collection of maxims and a 
short moral treatise have been published by K. Meyer. 

For the religious literature in general the reader may refer to 
O'Curry, Lectures on the MS. Materials of Ancient Irish History 
(PP- 339-434). an d G. Dottin, "Notes bibliographiques sur l'ancienne 
litterature chretienne de l'lrlande," in Revue d'histoire et de littera- 
ture religieuses, v. 162-167. See also Revue celtique, xi. 391-404. 
ib. xv. 79-91. 



632 



CELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



Here we may perhaps mention an extraordinary production 
entitled Aisling Meic Conglinne, the Vision- of Mac Conglinne, 
found in LB. and ascribed to the twelfth century (ed. K. Meyer, 
London, 1&92). Cathal MacFinguine, king of Munster (d. 737), 
was possessed by a demon of gluttony and is cured by the recital 
of a strange vision by a vagrant scholar named MacCongMnne. 
The composition seems to be intended as a satire on the monks, 
and in particular as a travesty of medieval hagiology. Another 
famous satire, entitled the Proceedings of the Great Bardic 
Institution, holds up the professional bards and their extortionate 
methods to ridicule. This curious work contains the story of 
how the great epic, the Tdin bo Cualnge, was recovered (see 
Transactions of the Ossianic Society, vol. v.) . 

Collections of pithy sayings in the form of proverbs and maxims 
must have been made at a very early period. Not the least 

remarkable are the so-called Triads (publ. K. Meyer, 
literature. Dublin, 1906), which illustrate every statement with 

3 examples. Over 200 such triads were brought 
together in the 9th century. There are also two documents 
attributed to ist-century personages, " The Testament of 
Morann MacMoin to his son Feradach, " which is quoted as 
early as the 8th century, and " The Instructions of Cuchulinn 
to his foster-son Lugaid." K. Meyer has published Tecosca 
Cormaic or the Precepts of Cormac MacAirt to his son Cairpre 
(Dublin, 1909). Other collections such as the Senbriathra Fithail 
still await publication. 

With that enthusiasm for the classics which is characteristic of 
the Irish, it is not strange that we should find medieval versions 

of some of the better-known authors of antiquity. 
stories. ^ * s interesting to note that only those works are 

translated that could be utilized by the professional 
story-teller. So much so, that in the ancient (10th century) 
catalogue of sagas enumerated by Urard MacCoisi we find 
mention of Togail Troi and Scela Alexandir maic Pilip. We get 
descriptions of battle weapons and clothing similar to those 
occurring in the native sagas. Togail Troi is taken from the 
medieval prose version, Historia de Excidio Troiae of Dares 
Phrygius. The oldest Irish copy is found in LL. This version 
is exceedingly valuable, as it enables us to determine the meaning 
of words and formulas in the sagas which are otherwise obscure. 
An Irish abstract of the Odyssey, following an unknown source, 
and part of the story of Theseus have been published by K. Meyer. 
Scela Alexandir is preserved in LB. and BB. Imthechta Aeniusa, 
taken from the Aeneid, is contained in BB. A number of MSS. 
contain the Cath Catharda, a version of books vi. and vii. (?) of 
Lucan's Pharsalia, which has been published by Wh. Stokes. 
There is further at least one MS. containing a version of Statius's 
Thebaid and of Heliodorus's Aethiopica. Somewhat later, the 
medieval literature of western Europe comes to be represented 
in translations. Thus we have Irish versions, amongst others of 
the Gesta Romanorum, the Historia Brittonum, the Wars of 
Charlemagne, the History of the Lombards, Sir John Maunde- 
ville's Travels (trans, by Fingin O'Mahony in 1475), the Book of 
Ser Marco Polo (abridged), Guy Earl of Warwick, Bevis of 
Southampton, the Quest of ' the Holy Grail, Octavian, the 
chronicle of Turpin, Barlaam and Josaphat, and the story of 
Fierabras. The Arthurian cycle is developed in independent 
fashion in the Adventures of the Eagle Boy and the Adventures 
of the Crop-eared Dog. For translation literature see M. Nettlau, 
Revue celtique, x. pp. 184, 460-461. 

Hand in hand with the interest of the medieval Irish scholars 
in the history of their island goes the cultivation of the native 
Philoiosy tongue. Owing to the profound changes produced by 

the working of the Irish laws of accent and initial 
mutation, it is doubtful if any other language lends itself so well 
to wild etymological speculation . By the beginning of the Middle 
Irish period a good part of the cumbrous Old Irish verb-system 
had become obsolete, and texts which were at all faithfully 
copied had to be plentifully supplied with glosses. Moreover, if, 
as is probable, all the historical and legal lore was in verse, a 
large part of it must have been unintelligible except to those 
who knew the berla fine. But even before this Cormac mac 



Cuillenain, the bishop-king of Cashel (d. 903), had compiled a 
glossary of archaic words which are accompanied by explanations, 
etymologies, and illustrative passages containing an amount of 
invaluable information concerning folk-lore and legendary 
history. This glossary has come down to us in various recensions 
all considerably later in date than the original work (the oldest 
copy is in LB.). Later collections of archaic words are 
O'Mulconry's Glossary (13th century), the Lecan Glossary (15th 
century), which draws principally from the glosses in the 
Liber Hymnorum, O'Davoren's Glossary (16th century), drawn 
principally from the Brehon Laws, a 16th century list of Latin 
and Irish names of plants employed in medicine, and O'Clery's 
Glossary (published atLouvain, 1643). BB. contains a curious 
tract on Ogamic writing. An Irish treatise on grammar, called 
Uraicept na n-eces, the Poet's Primer, traditionally ascribed to 
Cennfaelad and others, is contained in BB . and YBL. It appears 
to be a kind of medley of Donatus and the notions of the medieval 
Irish concerning the origin of their language. The St Gall glosses 
on Priscian contain Irish terms for all the nomenclature of the 
Latin grammarians, and show how extensive was the use made 
of Irish even in this department of learning. 

Thurneysen had edited from'BB., Laud 610 and a TCD. MS. 
three treatises on metric which give an account of the countless 
metres practised by the filid. It is impossible for us prosody 
here to enter into the question of Irish prosody in any 
great detail. We have seen that there is some reason for believing 
that the primitive form of Irish verse was a kind of rhythmical 
alliterative prose as contained in the oldest versions of the sagas. 
The filid early became acquainted with the metres of the Latin 
church hymns, whence rhyme was introduced into Ireland. 
(This is the view of Thurneysen and Windisch. Others like Zeuss 
have maintained that rhyme was an invention of the Irish.) In 
any case the filid evolved an intricate system of rhymes for which 
it is difficult to find a parallel. The medieval metres are called 
by the general name of Dan Direch, " Direct Metre." Some of 
the more general principles were as follows. The verses are 
grouped in stanzas of four lines, each stanza being complete in 
itself. Each line must contain a fixed number of syllables, 
whilst the different metres vary as to the employment of internal 
and end rhyme, assonance and alliteration. The Irish elaborated 
a peculiar system of consonantal correspondence which counted 
as rhyme. The consonants were divided with a considerable 
degree of phonetic accuracy into six groups, so that a voiceless 
stop (c) rhymes with another voiceless stop (t, p), a voiced stop 
(6) with another voiced stop (d, g) , and so forth. The commonest 
form of verse is the four-line stanza of seven syllables. Such a 
verse with rhymes abab and monosyllabic or dissyllabic finals 
belongs to the class rannaigecht. A similar stanza with aabb 
rhymes is the basis of the so-called debide (cut in two) metres. 
A peculiarity of the latter is that the rhyming word ending the 
second line must contain at least one syllable more than the 
rhyming word which ends the first. Another frequently employed 
metre is the rindard, consisting of lines of six syllables with 
dissyllabic endings. In the metrical treatises examples are given 
of some 200 odd metres. The result of the complicated technique 
evolved in Ireland was an inclination to sacrifice sense to musical 
harmony. See K. Meyer,^4 Primer of Irish Metrics (Dublin,i9og). 

We can conclude this survey of medieval Irish literature by 
mentioning briefly two departments of learning to which much 
attention was paid in Ireland. These are law and LaWi 

medicine. The so-called Brehon Laws (q.v.) are 
represented as having been codified and committed to writing 
in the time of St Patrick. There is doubtless some grain of truth 
in this statement, as a fillip may have been given to this codifica- 
tion by the publication of the Theodosian Code, which was 
speedily followed by the codes of the various Teutonic tribes. 
The Brehon Laws were no doubt originally transmitted from 
teacher to pupil in the form of verse, and traces of this are to be 
found in the texts which have been preserved. But the Laws 
as we have them do not go back to the 5 th century. In our texts 
isolated phrases or portions of phrases are given with a com- 
mentary, and this commentary is further explained by some 



IRISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



633 



Medicine. 



later commentators. Kuno Meyer has pointed out that in the 
commentary to one text, Crlth Gablach, there are linguistic forms 
which must go back to the 8th century, and Arbois de Jubain- 
ville, who apart from Sir Henry Maine is the only scholar who 
has dealt with the subject, has attempted to prove from internal 
evidence that part of the oldest tract, the one on Athgabdil or 
Seizure, cannot, in its present form, be later than the close of 
the 6th century. Cormac's Glossary contains a number of quota- 
tions from the commentary to Senchus Mor, which would 
therefore seem to have been in existence about 900. The Irish 
Laws were transcribed by O'Donovan and O'Curry, and have 
been published with a faulty text and translation in five volumes 
by the government commissioners originally appointed in 1852. 
A number of other law tracts must have existed in early times, 
and several which have been preserved are still unedited. Kuno 
Meyer has published the Cain Adamndin or Adamnan's Law 
from an Oxford MS. Adamnan succeeded in getting a law 
passed which forbade women to go into battle. An interesting 
but little-investigated text in prose and verse called Leabhar na 
gCeart or Book of Rights was edited with an English translation 
by O'Donovan (1847). It deals with the rights to tribute of the 
high-king and the various provincial kings. The text of the 
Book of Rights is preserved in YBL. and BB. In its present 
form it shows distinct traces of the influence of the Viking 
invasions, and cannot go back much beyond the year 1000. At 
one time it was incorporated in a larger work now lost, the Psalter 
of Cashel. We also possess a gth-century treatise on Sunday 
observance (Cdin Domnaig). 

The medical profession in Ireland was hereditary in a number 
of families, such as the O'Lees (from Irish liaig, "a leech"), 
the O'Hickeys (Irish icide, " the healer "), the O'Shiels, 
the O'Cassidys, and many others. These families each 
had their own special leech-books, some of which are still pre- 
served. In addition to these there are many others. The medical 
literature which has come down to us is contained in MSS. 
ranging from the 13th to the 18th centuries. The Irish MSS. are 
translations from the Latin with the invariable commentary, 
and they further contain additions derived from experience. 
YBL. contains four of these tracts, and amongst others we may 
mention the Book of the O'Hickeys, a translation of the Lilium 
Medicinae of Bernard Gordon (written 1303), the Book of the 
O'Lees (written in 1443), the Book of the O'Shiels, transcribed in 
1657, and the Book of MacAnlega, transcribed in 1512. Of these 
texts only two have been published as yet from MSS. in Edin- 
burgh. O'Curry drew- up a MS. catalogue of the medical MSS. 
in the Royal Irish Academy, and many more are described in 
O'Grady's catalogue of Irish MSS. in the British Museum. Some 
few MSS. deal with the subject of astronomy, but up to the 
present no description of the texts has been published. 

With the steady advance of the English power after 1600 it 
was only natural that the school of bardic poets should decline. 
But at the beginning of the 17th century for the last 
time they gave a great display of their resources. 
literature. Tadhg MacDaire, the ollam of the earl of Thomond, 
composed a poem in elaborate verse exalting the line 
of Eber (represented by the reigning families of Munster) at the 
expense of the line of Eremon (represented by the reigning 
families of the other provinces) . In a body of verse attributed to 
Torna Eces (c. 400), but obviously of more recent origin, the 
Eremonian, Niall Noigiallach, is lavishly praised, and Tadhg's 
attack takes the form of a refutation of Torna's pretensions. 
The challenge was immediately taken up by Lughaidh O'Clery. 
The recriminations of the two bards extend to nearly 3000 lines 
of verse, and naturally drew down the attention of the whole 
Irish world of letters. Soon all the hereditary poets were engaged 
in the conflict, which raged for many years, and the verses of 
both parties were collected into a volume of about 7000 lines in 
debide metre, known as the Contention of the Poets. Amongst 
the prominent poets of the period may be mentioned Tadhg 
Dall O'Higinn (d. shortly before 1617) and Eochaidh O'Hussey, 
who between them have left behind nearly 7000 lines in the 
classical metres, Bonaventura O'Hussey and Ferfesa O'Cainti. 



Later 
Irish 



The intricate classical measures gradually broke down. Dr 
Douglas Hyde gives it as his opinion that the exceedingly 
numerous metres known in Middle Irish had become restricted 
to a couple of dozen, and these nearly all heptasyllabic. Never- 
theless they continued to be employed till into the 18th century. 
However, during the 17th century we find a new school arising 
with new principles and new methods. These consisted in (1) 
the adoption of vowel rhyme in place of consonantal rhyme, 
(2) the adoption of a certain number of accents in each line in 
place of a certain number of syllables. Thus, according to what 
we have just said, the accented syllables in a line with four accents 
in one line will fall on, say, the following vowels e,u,u,e, and the 
line rhyming with it will have the same sounds in the same or a 
different sequence. (For English imitations see Hyde, A Literary 
History of Ireland, pp. 548 ff .) 

The consequences of the changed political conditions were of 
the greatest importance. The bards, having lost their patrons in 
the general upheaval, threw behind them the old classical metres 
and turned to the general public. At the same time they had 
to abandon the countless chevilles and other characteristics of 
the old bardic language, which were only understood by the 
privileged few. But to compensate for this much more freedom 
of expression and naturalness were possible for the first time in 
Irish verse. The new metres made their appearance in Ireland 
about 1600, and the learned Keating himself was one of the first 
to discard the ancient prosody. During the latter half of the 
17th century and throughout the 18th century the body of verse 
produced in Ireland voices the sorrows and aspirations of the 
whole nation, and the literary activity in almost every county 
was correspondingly great. It is only during the last few years 
that the works of any of the poets of this period have been 
published. Pierce Ferriter was the last chieftain who held out 
against Cromwell's army, and he was hanged in 1653. His 
poems have been edited by P. S. Dinneen (Dublin, 1903). The 
bard of the Williamite wars was David O'Bruadar (d. 1697- 
1698). From this period date three powerful satires on the state 
of affairs in Munster, and in particular on the Cromwellian 
settlers. They are of a coarse and savage nature, for which reason 
they have never been printed. Their titles are the Parliament 
of Clan Thomas, the Adventures of Clan Thomas, and the 
Adventures of Tadhg Dubh (by Egan O'Rahilly) . A description 
of the parliament of Clan Thomas is given by Stern in the 
Zeitschr.f. celt. Phil. v. pp. 54r ff. 

A little later we come across a band of Jacobite poets. The 
gallant figure of Charles Edward was so popular with Irish bards 
that a conventional stereotyped form arose in which the poet 
represents himself as wandering in a wood and meeting a beautiful 
lady. We are treated to a full description of all her charms, 
and the poet compares her to all the fair heroines of antiquity. 
But she replies that she is none of these. She is Erin seeking 
refuge from the insults of foreign suitors and looking for her mate. 
The idea of such poems is a beautiful one, but they become 
tedious when one has read a dozen of them only to find that 
there are scores of others in exactly the same strain. Besides 
the Visions (Aisling), as they are termed, there are several 
noteworthy war-songs, whilst other poems are valuable as 
giving a picture of the state of the country at the time. We can 
do no more than mention the names of John O'Neaghtan (d. c. 
1720; edition of his poems by A. O'Farrelly, Dublin, 1908), 
Egan O'Rahilly, who flourished between 1700 and 1726; Tadhg 
O'Naghten, Andrew MacCurtin (d. 1479), Hugh MacCurtin, 
author of a grammar and part editor of O'Begley's Dictionary; 
John Clarach MacDonnell (1691-1754), John O'Tuomy (d. 1775), 
Andrew Magrath, Tadhg Gaolach O'Sullivan (d. c. 1795), author 
of a well-known volume of religious poems, a valuable source of 
information for the Munster dialect ; and Owen Roe O'Sullivan 
(d. 1784), the cleverest of the Jacobite poets (his verses and bons 
mots are still well known in Munster) . These poets hailed mostly 
from the south, and it is chiefly the works of the Munster poets 
that have been preserved. Ulster and Connaught also produced 
a number of writers, but very little beyond the mere names has 
been preserved except in the case of the Connaught poet Raftery 



634 



CELT 



[IRISH LITERATURE 



(1784-1835), whose compositions have been rescued by Hyde 
{Abhrdin an Reachtuire, Dublin, 1903). Torlough O'CaroIan 
(1670-1738), " the last of the bards," was really a musician. 
Having become blind he was educated as a harper and won great 
fame. His poems, which were composed to suit his music, are 
mostly addressed to patrons or fair ladies. His celebrated " Ode 
to Whisky " is one of the finest bacchanalian songs in any 
language. Michael Comyn (b. c. 1688) is well known as the 
author of a version based upon older matter of " Ossian in the 
Land of Youth." This appears to be the only bit of deliberate 
creation in the later Ossianic literature. Comyn also wrote a 
prose story called " The Adventures of Torlogh, son of Starn, 
and the Adventures of his Three Sons." Brian MacGiolla 
Meidhre or Merriman (d. 1808) is the author of perhaps the 
cleverest sustained poem in the Irish language. His work, which 
is entitled the Midnight Court, contains about 1000 lines with 
four rhymes in each line. It describes a vision in which Aoibhill, 
queen of the Munster fairies, is holding a court. A handsome 
girl defends herself against an old man, and complains to the 
queen that in spite of all her charms she is in danger of dying 
unwed. Merriman's poem, which was written in 1781, has 
recently been edited with a German translation by L. C. Stern 
(Zeilschrift fur celtische Philologie, v. 193-415). Donough 
MacConmara (Macnamara) (d. c. 1814)' is best known as the 
author of a famous lyric " The Fair Hills of Holy Ireland," but 
he also wrote a mock epic describing his voyage to America 
and how the ship was chased by a French cruiser. He is carried 
off in a dream by the queen of the Munster fairies to Elysium, 
where, instead of Charon, he finds Conan, the Thersites among 
the Fenians, acting as ferryman (Eachlra Ghiolla an Amardin, 
or The Adventures of a Luckless Fellow, edited by T. Flannery, 
Dublin, 1901). 

During the first half of the 19th century nothing new was 
produced of a high order, though the peasants retained their 
love for poetry and continued to copy the MSS. in their posses- 
sion. Then came the famine and the consequent drain of 
population which gave Irish the death-blow as a living literary 
force. The modern movement has been dealt with above in the 
section on Irish language. 

It remains for us to glance briefly at the later religious literature 
and the collections of folk-tales. The translation of the New 
Testament made by William O'Donnell and published in 1603 
was first undertaken in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who sent 
over to Dublin the first fount of Irish type. Bishop Bedell, 
one of the very few Protestant clergymen who undertook to 
learn Irish, translated the remainder of the Scriptures with the 
help of a couple of natives, but the whole Bible was not translated 
and published until 1686. This version naturally never became 
popular, but it is a valuable source of information with regard 
to Modern Irish. It is perhaps of interest to note that the earliest 
specimen of printing in Irish is a ballad on Doomsday (Dublin, 
1 571). A version of the English Prayer Book was published in 
1716. 

The scholars of the various Irish colleges on the continent 
were particularly active in the production of manuals of devotion 
mainly translated from Latin. We can mention only a few of the 
more important. Sgalhdn an chrdbhaidh (The Mirror of the 
Pious), published in 1626 by Florence Conry; Sgathdn sacra- 
mente na h-Aithrighe (Mirror of the Sacrament of Penance), by 
Hugh MacCathmhaoil, published at Louvain, 1618; The Book 
of Christian Doctrine, by Theobald Stapleton (Brussels, 1639); 
Pdrrthas an Anma, or The Paradise of the Soul, by Anthony 
Gernon (Louvain, 1645) ; a book on Miracles, by Richard Mac- 
Gilla Cody (1667) ; Lochrdn na gcreidmheach, or Lucerna Fidelium, 
by Francis O'Mulloy (Louvain, 1676); O'Donlevy's Catechism 
(1742). O'Gallagher, bishop of Raphoe, published a collection 
of sermons which went through twenty editions and are still 
known at the present day. He is one of the earliest writers in 
whom the characteristics of the speech of the north are noticeable. 
The only Catholic version of any considerable portion of the 
Scriptures up till quite recently was the translation of the 
Pentateuch by Archbishop MacHale, who also turned six books 



of the Iliad into Irish. It is only within recent years that 
attention has been paid to the collection of folk-songs and 
tales in Irish, although as long ago as 1825 Crofton Croker pub- 
lished three volumes of folk-lore in the south of Ireland which 
attracted the attention of Sir Walter Scott. Nor do the classic 
stories of Carleton fall within our province. We may mention 
among others Patrick O'Leary's Sgeuluidheacht Chuige Mumhan 
(Dublin, 1895); Hyde's Beside the Fire (London, 1890) and An 
Sgeuluidhe Gaedhealach, reprinted from vol. x. of the Annates 
de Bretagne (London, 1901); Daniel O'Fogharta's Siamsa an 
Gheimhridh (Dublin, 1892); J. Lloyd's Sgealaidhe Oirghiall 
(Dublin, 1905); and Larminie's West Irish Folk-Tales (London, 
1893). The most important collections of folk-songs are Love- 
Songs of Connaught (Dublin, 1893) and Religious Songs of 
Connaught (Dublin, 1906), both published by Hyde. The most 
extensive collection of proverbs is the one entitled Seanfhocla 
Uladh by Henry Morris (Dublin, 1907) . See also T. O'Donoghue, 
Sean-fhocail na Mumhan (Dublin, 1902). 

Authorities.— In the absence of a comprehensive history, the 
best manual is Eleanor Hull's Text Book of Irish Literature (2 parts, 
London, 1904-1908; vol. 2 contains a bibliographical appendix). 

D. Hyde's larger History of Irish Literature (London, 1899) is only 
trustworthy as regards the more modern period. A full bibliography 
of all published material is contained in G. Dottin's article " La 
Iitterature gaelique de I'lrlande " {Revue de synthase historique, 
vol. iii. pp. 1 ff.).' Dottin's article has been translated into English 
and supplemented by Joseph Dunn under the title of The Gaelic 
Literature of Ireland (Washington, 1906, privately printed). The 
following are important works: — W. Stokes and J. Strachan, 
Thesaurus Palaeohibernicus (2 vols., Cambridge, 1901-1903) ; J. H. 
Bernard and R. Atkinson, Liber Hymnorum (London, 1895); 

E. O'Curry, Lectures on the MS. Materials of Ancient Irish History 
(Dublin, 1873) and Lectures on the Manners and Cus'oms of the 
Ancient Irish (3 vols., Dublin, 1873) ; P. W. Joyce, A Social History 
oUAncienl Ireland (2 vols., London, 1903) ; E. O'Reilly, Irish Writers 
(Dublin, 1 820) ; S. H. O'Grady, Catalogue of Irish MSS. in the British 
Museum (London, 1901) ; H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, Introduction d 
V etude de la Iitterature celtique (Paris, 1883), Essai d'un catalogue de la 
Iitterature epique de I'lrlande (Paris, 1 883) ,L' Epopee celtique en Irlande 
(Paris, 1892), La Civilisation des Celtes et celle del' epopee homerique 
(Paris, 1899); E. Windisch, Tain Bo Cualnge, ed. with an introd. 
and German trans. (Leipzig, 1905) ; L. Winifred Faraday, The Cattle- 
Raid of Cualnge (London, 1904) ; the Irish text according to LU. and 
YBL. has been published as a supplement to Uriu; Eleanor Hull. 
The Cuchulinn-saga (London, 1899); W. Ridgeway, "The Date 
of the First Shaping of the Cuchulinn Cycle, Proceedings of the 
British Academy, vol. ii. (London, 1907); A. Nutt, Cuchulin, the 
Irish Achilles (London, 1899); H. Zimmer, " Keltische Beitrage" 
in Zeitschrift f. deutsches Altertum, vols. 32, 33 and 35, and " Uber 
den compilatorischen Charakter der irischen Sagentexte in sogen- 
annten Lebor na hUidre," Kuhn's Zeitschr. xxviii. pp. 417-689. We 
cannot here enumerate the numerous heroic texts which have been 
edited. For texts published before 1883 see d'Arbois's Catalogue, 
and the same writer gives a complete list in Revue Celtique, vol. xxiv. 
pp. 237 ff. The series of Irische Texte, vols, i.-iv. (Leipzig, 1880- 
1901), by E. Windisch (vols, ii.-iv. in conjunction with W. Stokes), 
contains a number of important texts. Others, more particularly 
those belonging to the Ossianic cycle, are to be found in S. H. 
O'Grady's Silva Gadelica (2 vols. London, 1892). See also R. 
Thurneysen, Sagen aus dem alten Irland (Berlin, 1901) ; P. W. Joyce, 
Old Celtic Romances (London 2 , 1901). 

For the Ossianic cycle see H. Zimmer, " Keltische Beitrage III." 
in vol. 35 of the Zeitschr. f. deutsches Altertum, also Gottinger Gelehrte 
Anzeigen, 1887, pp. 153-199; A. Nutt, Ossian and the Ossianic 
Literature (London, 1899); L. C. Stern, "Die ossianischen Helden- 
lieder," in Zeitschr. f. vergleichende Litteraturgeschichte for 1895, 
trans, by J. L. Robertson in Transactions of the Inverness Gaelic 
Society, vol. xxii. ; J. MacNeill, Duanaire Finn (London, 1908); 
Book of the Dean of Lismore, ed. by T. Maclauchlan (Edinburgh, 
1862), and in vol. i. of A. Cameron's Reliquiae Celticae (Edinburgh, 
1892); Transactions of the Ossianic Society (6 vols., Dublin, 1854- 
1861) ; Miss Brooke, Reliques of Ancient Irish Poetry (Dublin, 1789). 

Keating's History was translated by John O'Mahony (New York, 
1866). The first part was edited with Eng. trans, by W. Halliday 
(Dublin, 1 81 1) and the whole work in 3 vols.for the Irish Texts Society 
by D, Comyn and P. Dinneen (London, 1901-1908). Comparatively 
few specimens have been published of the older bards. Several from 
a Copenhagen MS. were printed by Stern in the Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. 
vol. ii. ; J. Hardiman, Irish Minstrelsy (2 vols., Dublin, 1831); 
J. C. Mangan, The Poets and Poetry of Munster (Dublin 4 , no date); 
G. Sigerson, The Bards of the Gael and Gall (Dublin, 1906). Editions 
of the poems of Ferriter, Geoffrey O'Donoghue, O'Rahilly, John 
O'Tuomy, Andrew Magrath, John Claragh MacDonnell, Tadhg 
Gaolach and Owen Roe O'Sullivan by Dinneen, Gaelic League, 
Dublin, and Irish Texts Society, London, 1900-1903. (E. C. Q.) 



GAELIC LITERATURE] 



CELT 



635 



II. Scottish Gaelic Literature. — It is not until after the 
Forty-five that we find any great manifestation of originality 
in the literature of the Scottish Highlands. The reasons for 
this are not far to seek. Just as the dialects of Low German 
in the middle ages were overshadowed by the more brilliant 
literary dialect of the south, so Scotch Gaelic was from the 
outset seriously handicapped by the great activity of the pro- 
fessional literary class in Ireland. We may say that down to 
the beginning of the 18th century the literary language of the 
Highlands was the Gaelic of Ireland. During the dark days of 
the penal laws and with the extinction of the men of letters and 
their patrons in Ireland, an opportunity was given to the native 
Scottish muse to develop her powers. Another potent factor 
also made itself felt. After Culloden the causes of the clan 
feuds and animosities of the past were removed. The Highlands, 
perhaps for the first time in history, formed a compact whole 
and settled down to peace and quietude. A remarkable outburst 
of literary activity ensued, and the latter half of the 18th century 
is the period which Scottish writers love to call the golden age 
of Gaelic poetry. But before we attempt to deal with this 
period in detail, we must examine the scanty literary products 
of Gaelic Scotland prior to the 18th century. 

The earliest document containing Gaelic matter which Scotland 
can claim is the Book of Deer, now preserved in the Cambridge 
University Library. This MS. contains portions of 
"Booko tfle Q 0S p e j s ; n L a ti n written in an Irish hand with 
illuminations of the well-known Irish type. At the 
end there occurs a colophon in Irish which is certainly as old as 
the 9th century. Inserted in the margins and blank spaces are 
later notes and memoranda partly in Latin, partly in Gaelic. 
The Gaelic entries were probably made between 1000 and 11 50. 
They relate to grants of land and other privileges made from 
time to time to the monastery of Deer (Aberdeenshire). The 
most interesting portion deals with the legend of Deer and its 
traditional foundation by St Columba. The language of these 
entries shows a striking departure from the traditional ortho- 
graphy employed in contemporary Irish documents. The 
Advocates' Library in Edinburgh contains a number of MSS. 
probably written in Scotland between 1400 and 1600, but with 
one exception the language is Irish. 

The solitary exception just mentioned is the famous codex 
known as the Book of the Dean of Lismore. The pieces contained 
••Book * n tn ' s vo ' ume are written in the crabbed current 
of the Roman hand of the period, and the orthography is 
Dean of phonetic, both of which facts render the deciphering 
Lismore." f tn i s va i uaD i e MS. a task of supreme difficulty. 
The contents of this quarto volume of 311 pages are 
almost entirely verse compositions collected and written down 
by Sir James Macgregor, dean of Lismore in Argyllshire, and 
his brother Duncan, between the years 151 2 and 1526. A 
disproportionate amount of space is allotted to the compositions 
of well-known Irish bards such as Donnchadh Mor O'Daly 
(d. 1244), Muiredhach Albanach (c. 1224), Tadhg Og O'Higgin 
(d. 1448), Diarmaid O'Hiffernan, Torna O'Mulconry (d. 1468). 
But native bards are also represented. We can mention Allan 
Mac Rorie, Gillie Calum Mac an Ollav, John of Knoydart, who 
celebrates the murder of the young lord of the isles by his Irish 
harper in 1490, Finlay MacNab, and Duncan Macgregor, the 
transcriber of the greater part of the volume. The poems of the 
last-mentioned writer are in praise of the Macgregors. A few 
other poems are by Scottish authors such as Campbell, Knight 
of Glenorchy (d. 1513), the earl of Argyll and Countess Isabella. 
A number consist of satires on women. These Scottish writers 
are still under the influence of Irish metric, and regularly employ 
the four-lined stanza. They do not appear to adhere to the 
stricter Irish measures, but delight rather in the freer forms going 
by the name of dglachas. The Irish rules for alliteration and 
rhyme are not rigidly observed. 

The linguistic peculiarities of the Dean's Book await investiga- 
tion, but among the pieces which represent the Scottish ver- 
nacular of the day are the Ossianic Ballads. These, twenty -eight 
in number, extend to upwards of 2500 lines, and form by far 



" Book 0/ 
Femaig. " 



the most important part of the collection. Thus the Dean's 
Book was compiled a full hundred years before the earliest 
similar collection of heroic ballads was made in Ireland. In 
Scotland the term Ossianic is used loosely of both the Ulster 
and the Fenian cycles, and it may be as well to state that three 
of the pieces in the volume deal with Fraoch, Conlaoch and 
the Bloody Rout of Conall Cearnach. It is interesting to note 
that nine of the poems are directly attributed to Ossian, two to 
Ferghus File, one to Caoilte Mac Ronan, and one to Conall 
Cearnach, whilst others are ascribed to Allan MacRorie, Gillie 
Calum Mac an Ollav and Caoch O'Cluain, who are otherwise 
unknown. The Dean's Book was first transcribed by Ewen 
MacLachlan in 181 3. Thomas MacLauchlan published the text 
of the Ossianic ballads with modern Gaelic and English render- 
ings in 1862. In the same volume W. F. Skene gave a useful 
description of the MS. and its contents. Alexander Cameron 
revised the text of the portion printed by MacLauchlan, and his 
amended text is printed in his Reliquiae Celticae, vol. i. (See also 
L. C. Stern, Zeitschr.f. celt. Phil. i. 294-326.) 

Between the Book of the Dean and the Forty-five we find 
another great gap, which is only bridged over by a collection 
which presents many points of resemblance to Macgregor's 
compilation. The Book of Femaig, which is also written in a 
kind of phonetic script, was compiled by Duncan 
Macrae of Inveririate between 1688 and 1693. The 
MS. contains about 4200 lines of verse of different 
dates and by different authors. The contents of the collection 
are mainly political and religious, with a few poems which are 
termed didactic. As in the Dean's Book love-songs and drink- 
ing-songs are conspicuously absent, whilst the religious poetry 
forms about one-half of the contents. In state politics the 
authors are Jacobite, and in church politics Episcopalian. 
The Ossianic literature is represented by 36 lines. There are a 
number of poems by 16th-century writers, among whom is 
Bishop Carsewell. Mackinnon has pointed out that the language 
of the Book of Femaig corresponds exactly to the dialect spoken 
in Kintail at the present day. The text of the Book of Femaig 
is printed in its entirety in vol. ii. of Cameron's Reliquiae Celticae, 
and many of the poems are to be found in standard orthography 
in G. Henderson's Leabhar nan Gleann. The metres employed 
in the poems show the influence of the English system of 
versification. (See Stern, Zeitschr. f. celt. Phil. ii. pp. 566 ff.) 

Two other Highland MSS. remain to be noticed. These are 
the Red and Black Books of Clanranald, which are largely taken 
up with the histories of the families of Macdonald „ Red aa(J 
and with the achievements of Montrose, written in the Black 
ordinary Irish of the period by the Macvurichs, Books of 
hereditary bards to the Clanranald chiefs. The Red. " M „ 

Book was obtained by Macpherson in 1760 from Neil 
Macvurich, nephew of the last great bard, and it figured largely 
in the Ossianic controversy. In addition to poems in Irish by 
Neil Macvurich, who died at a great age some time after 1715, 
and other bardic matter, the MSS. now contain only three 
Ossianic poems, and these are in Irish. During the Ossianic 
controversy the Red Book of Clanranald was supposed to contain 
the originals of much of Macpherson 's famous work; but, on 
the book coming into the hands of the enthusiastic Gaels of the 
closing years of the 18th century, and on its contents being 
examined and found wanting, the MS. was tampered with. 

Mackenzie's Beauties of Gaelic Poetry contains poems written 
by a number of writers who flourished towards the end of the 17th 
century and at the beginning of the 18th. These are 
Mary Macleod, John Macdonald (Iain Lorn) , Archibald Macleod, 
Macdonald, Dorothy Brown, Cicely Macdonald, Iain 
Dubh Iain Tc. Ailein (b. c. 1665), the Aosdan Matheson (one of 
his poems was rendered in English by Sir Walter Scott under the 
title of " Farewell to Mackenzie, High Chief of Kintail "), Hector 
Maclean (also known through a translation by Scott called " War- 
song of Lachlan, High Chief of Maclean "), Lachlan Mackinnon, 
Roderick Morrison (an Clarsair Dall), and John Mackay of 
Gairloch, but we can here only notice the first two. The famous 
Mary Macleod, better known as Mairi Nighean Alastair Ruaidh 



6 3 6 



CELT 



[GAELIC LITERATURE 



••lain 
Lorn.' 



(c. 1 588-1 693), was family bard to Sir Norman Macleod of 
Bernera, and later to John " Breac " Macleod of Macleod, in 
honour of whom most of her poems were composed. Like very 
many of the Highland poets Mary had little or no education, 
and it would seem that none of the poems which have come down 
to us were composed before 1660. Her pieces are composed in 
the modern Irish metres with the characteristic vowel rhymes of 
the accented syllables. As might perhaps be expected it was 
only the Macvurichs (the professional bards of the Clanranald) 
who went on practising the classical debide metre. This they 
still continued to do during the first quarter of the 18th century. 
Mary Macleod's best-known pieces comprise a dirge on the 
drowning of Iain Garbh (MacTlle Chalum) in the Minch, a song 
"An Talla 'm bu ghnath le MacLeoid," and an ode to Sir Norman 
Macleod of Bernera, produced during her exile in Mull, which 
begins " 'S mi'mshuidhe air an tulaich." For the details of her 
career, which are the subject of some dispute, the reader may be 
referred to a paper by Alexander Mackenzie in the Transactions 
of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, vol. xxii. pp. 43-66. Mary 
Macleod is accounted one of the most musical and original of the 
Highland bards. 

John Macdonald, better known as Iain Lorn (d. c. 17 10), was a 
vigorous political poet whose verses exercised an extraordinary 
influence during his lifetime. He is said to have 
received a yearly pension from Charles II. for his 
services to the Stuart cause. His best-known poems 
are Mort na Ceapach, on the murder of the heir of Keppoch, who 
was eventually avenged through the poet's efforts, and a piece 
on the battle of Inverlochay (1645). However great the inspira- 
tion of Mary Macleod and Iain Lorn, they were after all but 
political or family bards. In succession to them there' arose a 
small band of men with loftier thoughts, a wider outlook and 
greater art. The literature of the Scottish Highlands culminates 
in the names of Alexander Macdonald, Duncan Ban Maclntyre 
and Dugald Buchanan. 

Alexander Macdonald, commonly called Alasdair MacMaighstir 
Alasdair (b. c. 1700), was the son of an Episcopalian clergyman 
in Moidart. He was sent to Glasgow University to fit 
Alexander jjj mse if f or a professional career. But an imprudent 
doaald. marriage caused him to abandon his studies, and about 
1729 he received an appointment as a Presbyterian 
teacher in his native district. He was moved from place to place, 
and from 1739 to 1745 he taught at Corryvullin on the Sound of 
Mull, the scene of some of his most beautiful lyrics. About 1 740 
he was invited to compile a Gaelic vocabulary, which was published 
in 1 74 1. Macdonald has thus the double distinction of being the 
author of the first book printed in Scotch Gaelic and of being the 
father of Highland lexicography. The news of the landing of the 
Pretender brought visions of release to the poverty-stricken poet, 
who was by this time heartily sick of teaching and farming. He 
turned Roman Catholic, and was present at the unfurling of the 
Stuart standard. He was given the rank of captain, but rendered 
greater services to the Jacobite cause with his stirring poems than 
with the sword. After Culloden he suffered great privations. 
But in 1 751 he visited Edinburgh and brought out a collection of 
his poetry, which has the honour of being the first original work 
printed in Scotch Gaelic. His volume was therefore entitled 
Ais-eiridh na Seann Chanain Albannaich (Resurrection of the 
Ancient Scottish Tongue) . Till the day of his death he led a more 
or less wandering life, as he was dependent on the generosity of 
Clanranald. Only a small part of Macdonald's compositions have 
been preserved (thirty-one in all) . These naturally fall into three 
groups — love-songs, descriptive poems and patriotic and Jacobite 
poems. In his love-songs and descriptive poems Macdonald 
struck an entirely new note in Gaelic literature. His Moladh 
Moraig undCuachag an Fhasaich (also called A' Bhanarach Dhonn) 
are his best-known compositions in the amatory style. But he is 
distinctly at his best in the descriptive poems. We have already 
seen that even as early as the 8th century the poets of Ireland 
gave expression to that intimate love of nature which is perhaps 
the most striking feature in Celtic verse. Macdonald had a 
wonderful command of his native Gaelic. His verse is always 



musical, and his skilful use of epithet, often very lavishly strewn, 
enables him to express with marvellous effect the various aspects 
of nature in her gentler and sterner moods alike. His masterpiece, 
the Birlinn of Clanranald, which is at the same time, apart from 
Ossianic ballads, the longest poem in the language, describes a 
voyage from South Uist to Carrickfergus. Here Macdonald 
excels in describing the movement of the ship and the fury of the 
storm. In Allt an t-Siucair (The Sugar Brook) we are given an 
exquisite picture of a beautiful scene in the country on a summer 
morning. Other similar poems full of melody and colour are 
Faille na Mor-thir (Hail to the Mainland), Or an an t-Samhraidh 
(Ode to Summer), and Or an an Gheamhraidk (Ode to Winter). 
When this gifted son of the muses identified himself with the 
Stuart cause he poured forth a stream of inspiring songs which 
have earned for him the title of the Tyrtaeus of the Rebellion. 
Among these we may mention Oran nam Fineachan Gaelach 
(The Song of the Clans), Brosnachadh nam Fineachan gaidh- 
ealach (A Call to the Highland Clans), and various songs to the 
prince. But incomparably the finest of all is Oran Luaighe no 
Fucaidh (Waulking Song). Here the prince is addressed as a 
young girl with flowing locks of yellow hair on her shoulders, and 
called Morag. She had gone away over the seas, and the poet 
invokes her to return with a party of maidens {i.e. soldiers) to 
dress the red cloth, in other words, to beat the English red-coats. 
The song contains forty-seven stanzas in all, with the character- 
istic refrain of the waulking-songs. Am Breacan Uallach is a 
spirited poem in praise of the kilt and plaid, which had been 
forbidden by the English government. Macdonald is also the 
author of a number of poems in MS. which have been called the 
quintessence of indecency. His works have gone through eight 
editions, the last of which is dated 1892. 

In connexion with Macdonald's Jacobite songs it will be well 
to mention here the name of a kindred spirit, John Roy Stuart 
(Iain Ruadh Stiubhart). Stuart was a gallant soldier who was 
serving in Flanders with the French against the English when 
the rebellion broke out. He hurried home and distinguished 
himself on the field of battle. After Culloden he gave vent to his 
dejection in two pathetic songs, one on the battle itself, while the 
other deals with the sad lot of the Gael. 

The only poet of nature who can claim to rival Macdonald is 
a man of a totally different stamp. Duncan Ban Maclntyre 
(Donnachadh Ban, 1724-1812) was born of poor 
parents in Glenorchy, and never learned to read and faa."" 
write or to speak English. He was present on the 
English side at the battle of Falkirk, on which he wrote a famous 
ode, and shortly afterwards he was appointed gamekeeper to the 
earl of Breadalbane in Coire Cheathaich and Ben Dorain, where 
he lived for many years until he accepted a similar appointment 
from the duke of Argyll in Buachaill-Eite. Stewart of Luss is 
credited with having taken down the 6000 lines of verse of his 
own composition which Maclntyre had carried about with him 
for many years, and his works were published in 1768. In his 
later years he was first a volunteer and afterwards a member of 
the city guard in Edinburgh. In addition to his poems de- 
scriptive of nature Maclntyre composed a number of Jacobite 
martial songs, songs of love and sentiment, and comic and 
satiric pieces. The poem Mairi bhan og addressed to his wife is, 
on account of its grace and delicate sentiment, generally held to be 
the finest love-song in the language. But it is above all as the 
poet of ben and corrie that Maclntyre is remembered. He has 
been called the Burns of the Highlands, but the bitterness and 
intellectual power of the Ayrshire poet are absent in Maclntyre. 
Duncan Ban describes fondly and tenderly the glories of his 
native mountains as only one can who spends his life in daily 
communion with them. His two great compositions are styled 
Ben Dorain and Coire Cheathaich. The former is a long poem of 
550 lines divided into eight parts, alternating with a sort of 
strophe and antistrophe, one slow called urlar in stately trochees, 
the other swift called siubhal in a kind of galloping anapaests; 
the whole ending with the crunluath or final quick motion. It is 
said to follow very accurately the lilt of a pipe-tune. The poem, 
which might be called the "Song of the Deer," has been well 



GAELIC LITERATURE\ 



CELT 



637 



done into English by J. S. Blackie. Coire Cheathaich (The Misty 
Corrie), a much shorter poem than Ben Dorain, gives a loving 
description of all the prominent features in the landscape — the 
flowers, the bushes, the stones, the hillocks with the birds and 
game, and the whirling eddies with the glistening salmon. 
Maclntyre's works went through three editions in his lifetime, 
and a twelfth was issued in 1901. 

From Duncan Ban we pass on to consider the compositions of 
two men who hailed from the outlying parts of Gaeldom. Robert 
Rob Dona. Mackay, or, as he is generally called, Rob Donn (1714- 
1778), was a native of Strathmore, Sutherlandshire, 
who, like Duncan Ban, never learned to read or write. His 
life, which was uneventful, was spent almost entirely within 
the confines of the county of his birth. He left behind a large 
number of poems which may be roughly classified as elegiac, 
love and satiric poems. His elegies are of the typical Highland 
kind. The singer is overwhelmed with sadness and despairing 
in his loss. His best-known composition in this style is " The 
Death-Song of Hugh." Having just heard of the death of 
Pelham, the prime minister, Mackay finds a poor friend of his 
dying alone amid squalor in the heart of the mountains. In 
a poem composed on the spot the poet contrasts the positions 
of the two men and reflects on the vanity of human existence. 
Among his love-poems the " Shieling Song " is deservedly 
famous. But it was above all as a satirist that Mackay excelled 
during his lifetime. Indeed he seems to have had the sharpest 
tongue of all the Highland bards. We have already seen what 
powers were attributed to satirical poets in Ireland in medieval 
times, and though bodily disfigurements were no longer feared 
in the 18th century, nothing was more dreaded, both in Ireland 
and Scotland, than the lash of the bard. Hence many of Rob 
Donn's compositions have lost their point, and opinions have 
been greatly divided as to his merits as a poet. His collected 
poems were first published in 1829, a second edition appeared 
in 1 8 7 1 , and in 1 899 two new editions were issued simultaneously, 
the one by Hew Morrison, the other by Adam Gunn and Malcolm 
Macfarlane. Another satirical poet who enjoyed a tremendous 
reputation in his own day was John MacCodrum, 
Codruta. ' a native of North Uist and a contemporary of the 
men just mentioned. It is related of MacCodrum 
that the tailors of the Long Island refused to make any 
clothes for him in consequence of a satire he had directed 
against them. He was encountered in a ragged state by the 
Macdonald, who on learning the cause of his sorry condition 
promoted him to the dignity of bard to his family. Con- 
sequently a number of his compositions are addressed to his 
patrons, but one delightful poem entitled Smedrach Chlann- 
Domhnuill (The Mavis of Clan Donald) describes in verses full 
of melody the beauties of his beloved island home. 

In the lyrical outburst which followed the Forty-five it was 
only to be expected that religious poetry should be represented. 
We have seen that much of the space in the Dean's Book and 
in the Book of Fernaig is allotted to verse of a pious order, 
though apart from the works of such Irish singers as Donnchadh 
O'Daly the poems do not reach a very high pitch of excellence. 
The first religious poem to be printed in Scotch Gaelic was a 
long hymn by David Mackellar, published in 1752. But incom- 
parably the greatest writer of hymns and sacred poems is 
Dugald Buchanan (1716-1768). Buchanan was born in 
Strathyre in Perthshire and was the son of a miller. He 
received a desultory kind of education and tried his 
hand at various trades. In 1753 he was appointed 
schoolmaster at Drumcastle near Kinloch Rannoch. 
He was selected to assist Stewart of Killin in preparing the first 
Highland version of the New Testament for the Society for 
Propagating Christian Knowledge (published 1767), and at the 
same time he issued an edition of his own poems. Of all Gaelic 
books this has been far and away the most popular, having gone 
through no less than forty editions. Buchanan seems to have 
been very susceptible to religious influences, and the stern 
Puritan doctrines of retribution and eternal damnation preached 
around him so worked on his mind that from his ninth to his 



Dugald 
Buchanan. 



twenty-sixth year he was a prey to that mental anguish so 
eloquently described by Bunyan. The awful visions which 
presented themselves to his vivid imagination find expression 
in his poems, the most notable of which are " The Majesty of 
God," " The Dream," " The Sufferings of Christ," " The Day 
of Judgment," "The Hero," "The Skull," "Winter" and 
" Prayer." In the " Day of Judgment," a poem of about 120 
stanzas, we are given in sublime verses a vivid delineation of 
the crack of doom as the archangel sounds the last trumpet. 
The poet then goes on to depict the awful scenes consequent 
upon the wreck of the elements, and pictures the gathering 
together of the whole human race before the Throne. But 
Buchanan's masterpiece is admittedly " The Skull." Traces 
of the influence of English writers have been observed in all 
the poet's writings, and it seems certain that the subject of his 
greatest poem was suggested by Shakespeare. The poet seated 
by a grave espies a skull. He takes it up and muses on its history. 
This poem in 44 stanzas concludes with a picture of the torments 
of hell and the glories of heaven. 

The writers whom we have been discussing are practically 
unknown save to those who are able to read them in the original. 
Now we have to turn our attention to a man whose 
works have never been popular in the Highlands, but M ™~ , 
who nevertheless plays a prominent part in the history i>ossian." 
of European literature. Though the precise origin of 
the Fenian cycle may remain a moot-point to all time, the 
development of the literature centring in the names of Finn and 
Ossian is at any rate clear from the nth century onwards. 
The interest taken in Celtic studies since the middle of the 19th 
century in Ireland and Scotland and elsewhere has accumulated 
a body of evidence which has settled for all time the celebrated 
dispute as to the authenticity of Macpherson's Ossian. James 
Macpherson (1 736-1 796), a native of Kingussie, showed a turn 
for versification whilst yet a student at college. Whilst acting 
as tutor at Moffat he was asked by John Home as to the existence 
of ancient Gaelic literature in the Highlands. After some pressing 
Macpherson undertook to translate some of the more striking 
poems, and submitted to Home a rendering of " The Death of 
Oscar." Blair, Ferguson and Robertson, the foremost men 
in the Edinburgh literary circles of the day, were enthusiastic 
about the unearthing of such unsuspected treasures, and at 
their instance Macpherson published anonymously in 1760 his 
Fragments of Ancient Poetry, collected in the Highlands of Scotland 
and translated from the Gaelic or Erse Language. This publication 
contained in all fifteen translations, preceded by a preface from 
the pen of Blair. Published under such auspices, Macpherson's 
venture was bound to succeed. In the preface it was stated that 
among other ancient poems an epic of considerable length 
existed in Gaelic, and that if sufficient encouragement were 
forthcoming the author of the versions would undertake to 
recover and translate the same. A subscription was raised at 
once, and Macpherson set out on a journey of exploration in the 
Highlands and islands. As the result of this tour, on which he 
was accompanied by two or three competent Gaelic scholars, 
Macpherson published in London in 1762 a large quarto con- 
taining his epic styled Fingal with fifteen other smaller poems. 
In the following year a still larger epic appeared with the title of 
Temora. It was in eight books, and contained a number of notes 
in addition to Cath-Loda and other pieces, along with the seventh 
book of Temora in Gaelic as a specimen of the original. Ten years 
later a new edition of the whole was issued. The authenticity of 
Macpherson's translations was soon impugned by Dr Johnson, 
Hume and Malcolm Laing, and the author was urged by his 
friends to publish the originals. Macpherson prevaricated, even 
though the Highlanders of India sent him a cheque for £1000 to 
enable him to vindicate the antiquity of their native literature. 
Macpherson at different times, and particularly towards the end 
of his life, seems to have had some intention of publishing the 
Gaelic of his Ossian, but he was naturally deterred by the 
feeling that his knowledge of Gaelic was becoming shakier with 
his continued absence from the Highlands. At any rate he left 
behind a quantity of Gaelic matter in MS. which was ultimately 



6 3 8 



CELT 



[GAELIC LITERATURE 



published by the Highland Society of London in 1807. This MS., 
however, was revised and transcribed by Ross and afterwards 
destroyed, so that we are ignorant of its nature. The Highland 
Society also instituted an inquiry into the whole question, but 
their conclusions were somewhat negative. They succeeded in 
establishing that the characters introduced by Macpherson were 
familiar in the Highlands and that Ossianic ballads really 
existed, which Macpherson had utilized. Macpherson's claims 
still found ardent advocates, such as Clark, in the 'seventies, but 
the question was finally disposed of in papers by Alexander 
Macbain (1885) and L. C. Stern (1895). We can here only 
summarize briefly the main lines of argument. (1) Macpherson's 
Ossian is full of reminiscences of Homer, Milton and the Hebrew 
prophets. (2) He confuses the Ulster and the Fenian heroic 
cycles in unpardonable fashion. (3) The Gaelic text of 1807 only 
represents one-half of the English versions (n poems out of 22 
poems). Some Gaelic fragments from different pens appeared 
prior to 1807, but these differ considerably from the " official " 
version. (4) In the Gaelic text of 1807 the version of the passage 
from Temora is quite different from that published in 1763. 
(5) Macpherson's Gaelic is full of offences against idiom and un- 
naturally strained language. (6) The names Morven and Selma 
are entirely of his own invention (see also Macpherson, James). 
As a result of the stir caused by Macpherson's work a number of 
men set about collecting the genuine popular literature of the 
Highlands. A few years before the appearance of Fingal, 
Jeremy Stone, a schoolmaster at Dunkeld, had collected ten 
Ossianic ballads and published one of them in an English versified 
translation. For this collection see a paper by D. Mackinnon in 
the Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, vol. xiv. pp. 
314 ff. Unfortunately other persons were led to follow Mac- 
pherson's example. The chief of these imitators were (1) John 
Clark, who in 1778 published, along with several others, an 
English poem Mordubh, later translated into Gaelic by Gillies; 
(2) R. Macdonald, son of Alexander Macdonald, who is the author 
of The Wish of the Aged Bard; (3) John Smith of Campbeltown 
(d. 1807), author of fourteen Ossianic poems styled Seandana, 
published in English in 1780 and in Gaelic in 1787; (4) D. Mac- 
Callum of Arisaig, who in 1821 published Collath and a complete 
Mordubh " by an ancient bard Fonar." 

We have now reviewed in turn the greatest writers of the 
Scottish Highlands. The men we have dealt with created a kind 
of tradition which others have attempted to carry on. 
Ewen Maclachlan (1775-1822), the first transcriber of 
the Dean's Book, was assistant librarian of King's 
College and rector of the grammar school of Aberdeen. Amongst 
other things he translated the greater part of seven books of 
Homer's Iliad into Gaelic heroic verse, and he also had a large 
share in the compilation of the Gaelic- English part of the High- 
land Society's Dictionary. A number of Gaelic poems were 
published by him in 1816. These consist of poems of nature, 
e.g. Dain nan Aimsirean, Dan mu chonaltradh, Smebrach Chloinn- 
Lachuinn, and of a well-known love-song, the Ealaidh Ghaoil. 
William Ross (1762-1790), a schoolmaster at Gairloch, is the 
typical Highland poet of the tender passion, and he is commonly 
represented as having gone to an early grave in consequence of 
unrequited affection. His finest compositions are Feasgar Luain 
and Moladh na h-oighe Gaelich. Another exquisite song 
Cuachag nan Craobh, is usually attributed to this poet, but it 
seems to go back to the beginning of the 18th century. A fifth 
edition of Ross's poems appeared in 1902. The most popular 
writer of sacred poems after Buchanan is undoubtedly Peter 
Grant, a Baptist minister in Strathspey, whose Dain Spioradail 
(first published in 1809) reached a twentieth edition in 1904, 
Sweetness, grace and simplicity are the characteristics which 
have endeared him to the heart of the Gael. Two other well- 
known hymn-writers spent their lives in Nova Scotia — James 
Macgregor (1750-1830) and John Maclean, a native of Tiree. 
The compositions of the latter have been published under the 
title Clarsach na CoiUe (Glasgow, 1881). But John Morrison 
(1790-1852), the poet-blacksmith of Rodel, Harris, is the most 
worthy of the name of successor to Buchanan. His works have 



Later 
poets. 



been carefully edited in two volumes by George Henderson (2nd 
edition, 1896). His poems are remarkably musical and imagina- 
tive. Two of the most characteristic are An Iondruinn and Tha 
duin' dg agus seann duin' agam. William Livingston or Mac- 
Dhunleibhe (1808-1870) was a native of Islay. He received 
scarcely any education, and was apprenticed as a tailor, but he 
early made his way to the mainland. He was ever a fierce 
Anglophobe, and did his best to make up for the deficiencies of 
his early training. He published in English a Vindication of the 
Celtic Character, and attempted to issue a History of Scotland in 
parts. His poems, which have been at least twice published 
(1858, 1882), are equally powerful in the expression of ruthless 
fierceness and tearful sorrow. In Fios thun a' Bhaird he sings 
pathetically of the passing of the older order in Islay, and 
another powerful poem entitled Duan Geall deals with the cam- 
paign of the Highlanders under Sir Colin Campbell in the Crimea. 
Livingston's contemporary, Evan Maccoll (1808-1898), the son 
of a small farmer on Lochfyneside, in his early years devoured 
eagerly all the English literature and Gaelic lore that came in his 
way. In 1836 he issued a volume of songs called the Mountain 
Minstrel, containing his productions in Gaelic and English. 
Two years later two volumes appeared, one entirely in Gaelic, 
styled Clarsach nam Beann, the other in English under the old 
title. A third edition of the Gaelic collection was published in 
1886. Maccoll acted for many years as clerk in the custom- 
house at Liverpool, and afterwards he filled a similar post at 
Kingston, Canada. He has been called the Moore of Highland 
song. His spirit is altogether modern, and his poems are much 
nearer the Lowland type than those of the older bards. Among 
his best-known pieces are Bas Mairi and Duanag Ghaoil. We 
can do no more than mention the names of John Maclachlan of 
Rahoy (1804-1874), James Munro (1 794-1870), well known as a 
grammarian, Dugald Macphail (b. 1818), Mrs Mary Macpherson, 
Angus Macdonald (1804-1874), Mrs Mary Mackellar (1834-1890) 
and Neil Macleod (b. 1843), author of a popular collection 
Clarsach an Doire (1st ed., 1883; 3rd ed., 1904). Neil Macleod is 
also the writer of the popular song An Gleann 's an robh mi dg. 
Others whom we cannot mention here are known as the authors 
of one or more songs which have become popular. It is natural 
to compare the state of affairs at the beginning of the 20th 
century with that obtaining in 1800. In the dawn of the 19th 
century every district in the Highlands had its native poet, 
whilst a century later not a single Gaelic bard of known reputation 
existed anywhere within its borders. It is only too evident that 
the new writers prefer English to Gaelic as a medium of literature, 
partly because they know it better, but also because in it they 
appeal to a far wider public. 

It will have been observed that we have said nothing about 
prose works written in Gaelic. Original Gaelic prose is con- 
spicuous by its absence. The first printed work is the 
translation of Knox's Liturgy by Bishop Carsewell, ^rite'rs. 
published in 1567 (reprinted in 1873). Calvin's Cate- 
chism is said to have been issued in 1631. The Psalms and 
Shorter Catechism appeared in 1659, while two other psalters 
saw the light before the end of the century, one by Kirke (1684), 
the other issued by the Synod of Argyll (1694). The fanguage of 
all these publications may, however, be termed Irish. Apart 
from reprints of the catechism and psalter, the only other Gaelic 
matter which appeared in print before 1750 were Kirke's Irish 
version of the Bible in Roman type with a vocabulary (1690), 
and the Vocabulary by Alexander Macdonald (1741). But from 
the middle of the 18th century translations of the works of 
English religious writers streamed from the various presses. 
Alleine, Baxter, Boston, Bunyan, Doddridge and Jonathan 
Edwards were all prime favourites, and their works have gone 
through many editions. Apart from a well-meant but wholly 
inadequate version of Schiller's Tell, the only non-religious work 
which can be termed literature existing in a Gaelic translation is a 
portion of the Arabian Nights, though fragments of other classics 
such as Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare have appeared in maga- 
zines. The one-sided character of Gaelic literature, in addition to 
exercising a baneful influence on Highland character, has in the 



MANX LITERATURE] 



CELT 



6 39 



long run of necessity proved adverse to the vitality of the lan- 
guage. The best standard of Gaelic is by common consent the 
language of the Scriptures. ■ James Stewart of Killin's version of 
■the New Testament, published by the Society for Propagating 
Christian Knowledge, was followed by a translation of the Old 
Testament in four parts (i 783-1801), the work of John Stewart of 
Luss and John Smith of Campbeltown. The whole Gaelic Bible 
saw the light in 1807. But the revision of 1826 is regarded as 
standard. The translators and revisers had no norm to follow, 
and it is difficult to say how far they were influenced by Irish tra- 
dition. Much in the Gaelic version seems to savour of Irish idiom, 
and it is a pity that some competent scholar such as Henderson 
has not investigated the question. Of original prose works we can 
mention two. The one is a History of the Forty-five (Eachdraidh 
a' Phrionnsa, no Bliadhna Thearlaich), published, in 1845 by 
John Mackenzie, the compiler of the Beauties of Gaelic Poetry 
(1806-1848). A second edition of this book appeared in 1906. 
The other is the more famous Caraid nan Gaedheal, by Norman 
Macleod (new edition, 1899). This volume consists mainly of a 
number of dialogues dealing with various departments of High- 
land life, which were originally contributed to various magazines 
from 1829 to 1848. Macleod's style is racy and elegant, and his 
work is deservedly popular. 

In conclusion we must take notice of the more important 
collections of folklore. Gaelic, like Irish, is extraordinarily 
rich in proverbs. The first collection of Gaelic proverbs was 
published in 1 785 by Donald Macintosh. This work was supple- 
mented and enlarged in 1881 by Alexander Nicolson, whose 
book contains no fewer than 3900 short sayings. A large 
collection of Gaelic folk-tales was gleaned and published by 
J. F. Campbell under the title of Popular Tales of the West 
Highlands (4 vols., Edinburgh, 1862). Alexander Carmichael 
published a version of the Tdin Bo Calnge, called Toirioc na 
Tdine, which he collected in South Uist (Transactions- of the 
Gaelic Society of Inverness, ii. 25-42), also the story of Deirdre 
and the sons of Uisneach in prose taken down in Barra 
(ib. xiii. 241-257). Five volumes of popular stories, collected 
by J. G. Campbell, D. Maclnnes, J. Macdougall and Lord 
Archibald Campbell, have been published (1889-1895) by Nutt 
under the title Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition. These 
collections contain a good deal of matter pertaining to the old 
heroic cycles. Seven ballads dealing with the Ulster cycle were 
collected and printed by Hector Maclean under the title Ultonian 
Hero-ballads (Glasgow, 1892). Macpherson gave a fillip to 
collectors of Ossianic lore, and a number of MSS. going back to 
his time are deposited in the Advocates' Library at Edinburgh. 
J. F. Campbell spent twelve years searching for variants, and 
his results were published in his Leabhar na Feinne (1872). This 
volume contains 54,000 lines of heroic verse. The Edinburgh 
MSS. were transcribed by Alexander Cameron, and published 
after his death by Alexander Macbain and John Kennedy in his 
Reliquiae Celticae. This work is therefore a complete corpus of 
Gaelic heroic verse. Finally the charms and incantations of the 
Highlands have been collected and published by Alexander 
Carmichael in two sumptuous volumes under the title Carmina 
Gadelica (1900). 

Authorities. — The standard work is Magnus Maclean, The Litera- 
ture of the Highlands (London, 1904) ; see also various chapters in the 
same writer's Literature of the Celts (London, 1902) ; L. C. Stern, Die 
Kultur der Gegenwart, i. xi. 1, pp. 98-109 ; Nigel MacNeill, The Litera- 
ture of the Highlanders (Inverness, 1892) ; J. S. Blackie, The Language 
and Literature of the Scottish Highlands '(Edinburgh, 1876); P. T. 
Pattison, Gaelic Bards (1890); L. Macbean, Songs and Hymns of 
the Scottish Highlands (Edinburgh, 1888); John Mackenzie, Sir- 
obair nam Bard Gaelach, or The Beauties of Gaelic Poetry (new ed., 
Edinburgh, 1904); A. Sinclair, An t-Oranaiche (Glasgow, 1879); 
The Book of Deer, edited for the Spalding Club by Dr Stuart (1869) ; 
Alexander Macbain, Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, 
vols. xi. and xii. ; The Book of the Dean of Lismore, edited by T. 
Maclauchlan (1862); Alexander Cameron, Reliquiae Celticae (Inver- 
ness, 1892-1894); John Reid, BibHotheca Scoto-Celtica (Glasgow, 
1832); Catalogue of the books in the Celtic department, Aberdeen 
University Library (1897); George Henderson, Leabhar nan Gleann 
(Inverness, 1898); D. Mackinnon, " The Fernaig MS." in Transac- 
tions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, xi. 311-339; J- S. Smart, 



James Macpherson, An Episode in Literature (London, 1905); 
L. C. Stern, " Die Ossianischen Heldenlieder " in Zeitschrift fiir 
vergleichende Litteraturgeschichte (1895), translated by J. L. Robertson 
in Transactions of the Gaelic Society of Inverness, xxv. 257- 
325; G. Dottin, Revue de synthese histor'ique, viii. 79-91; M. C. 
Macleod, Modern Gaelic Bards (Stirling, 1908). (£. C. Q.) 

III. Manx Literature. — The literary remains written in 
the Manx language are much slighter than those of any other 
Celtic dialect. With one small exception nothing pertaining 
to the saga literature of Ireland has been preserved. The little 
we possess naturally falls under two heads — original compositions 
and translations. With regard to the first category we must 
give the place of honour to an Ossianic poem contained in a MS. 
in the British Museum (written in 1789), which relates how 
Orree, Finn's enemy, was tormented by the women of Finn's 
household when the latter was away hunting, how he in revenge 
set fire to the house, and how Finn had him torn in pieces by 
wild horses. Most of the existing literature of native origin, 
however, consists of ballads and carols, locally called carvels. 
These used to be sung on Christmas eve in the churches, the 
members of the congregation each bringing a candle. Any one 
who pleased could get up and sing one. These carvels deal 
largely with the end of the world, the judgment-day and the 
horrors of hell. About eighty of them were published under the 
title of Carvalyn Gailckagh (Douglas, 1891). An attempt is being 
made by Yn Cheshaght Gailckagh to revive the Oiel Voirrey 
( = Irish Oidhche Fheile Mhuire), " the feast of Mary," as the 
festival used to be called, and gatherings in the old style have 
been held in Peel for the last two or three years. Apart from 
the carvels there are other ballads in existence, the most important 
of which were printed in vol. xvi. of the Publications of the Manx 
Society. The earliest is an 18th-century song of Manannan Mac y 
Lheir, traditionally supposed to have been written in the 16th 
century, and which tells of the conversion of the island by 
St Patrick. Then comes Baase Illiam Dhdne (The Death of 
Brown William), dealing with the death of William Christian, 
who was shot as a traitor in 1662. The best-known Manx song 
is Mylecharaine ( = Irish Maolchiardn) . It is directed against a 
man of this name who was the first to give a dowry to his daughter, 
the custom having previously been for the bridegroom to pay 
money to the father of the bride. Others are Ny Kirree fo 
Sniaghtey (The Sheep under the Snow), a song about the loss 
of the Douglas herring fleet in 1787 (reprinted at Douglas, 1872), 
and O Vannin Veg Veen (Dear little Mona). A further ballad 
was taken down by J. Strachan and is published in the Zeitschrift 
fiir celtische Philologie, i. 79. In 1760 Joseph Bridson wrote 
a "Short Account of the Isle of Man " in Manx (Coontey 
Ghiare jeh Elian Vannin ayns Gailck) , which was reprinted in 
vol. xx. of the Publications of the Manx Society. The translated 
literature is almost entirely of a religious character. Jenner 
prints a list of twenty -three volumes in his article referred to 
below, but we can only here mention the most important. The 
first is the translation of the English Prayer-Book by Bishop 
Phillips, 1610 (published by A. W. Moore, Oxford, 1895). The 
Sermons of Bishop Wilson in 3 vols. (1783) are a very rare work, 
highly important for our knowledge of Manx prose, and it is 
to be hoped that Yn Cheshaght Gailckagh will see their way to 
reprint it. A translation of parts of Milton's Paradise Lost 
(Pargys Caillit) by Thomas Christian, 1796, is reprinted in vol. 
xx. of the Publications of the Manx Society. The later translation 
of the Church of England Prayer-Book was printed in 1765 and 
again in 1777 and 1840. But by far the most important of all 
is the translation of the Bible. The energetic Bishop Wilson 
managed to get parts of the Scriptures translated and the 
Gospel of St Matthew was printed in 1748. Wilson's successor, 
Bishop Hildesley, completed the work, and in 1775 the whole 
Bible appeared. The last reprint of the Bible appeared in 1819, 
that of the New Testament in 1810 (?). As a curiosity it may 
be mentioned that recently Aesop's Fables have been translated 
into the vernacular (Douglas, 1901). 

Authorities. — H. Jenner, " The Manx Language: its Grammar, 
Literature and Present State," Transactions of the London Philological 
Society (1875), pp. 172 ff. ; Publications of the Manx Society, vols, 
xvi., xx., xxi. ; L. C. Stern, Die Kultur d. Gegenwart, i. xi. 1 , pp. 1 10-1 1. 



640 



CELT 



[WELSH LITERATURE 



Early 
MSS. 



IV. Welsh Literature. — The oldest documents consist of 
glosses of the 9th and 10th centuries found in four MSS. — Oxoni- 
ensis prior and posterior, the Cambridge Juvencus 
and Martianus Capella. These glosses were published 
by J. Loth in his Vocabulaire vieux-breton (1884), but 
their value is entirely philological. In addition, we possess two 
short verses, written in Irish characters, preserved in the 
Juvencus Manuscript in the University Library at Cambridge 
(printed in Skene's Four Ancient Books of Wales). This manu- 
script is a versification of the Gospels dating from the 9th 
century. The value of these two verses is threefold: they give 
us, in the first place, a specimen of the Welsh language at a time 
when the modern laws of euphony were in a comparatively 
elementary stage; secondly, they are of the utmost importance 
to the historian tracing the development of Welsh versification, 
and, in future research, they must be taken into account by the 
historian of modern metres in other languages; and, thirdly, 
the similarity of their form and diction to other verses, attributed 
to Lly warch Hen, and preserved in a much later orthography, will 
be a serious consideration to the higher critic in Welsh literature. 
All the prose and verse of the succeeding centuries, that is to 
say from the 10th to the beginning of the 14th, is preserved in 
"«/ k four important manuscripts, written during the latter 
Bookot half of the period. The first of these manuscripts is 
Carmnr- the Black Book of Carmarthen, a small quarto vellum 
then. " manuscript of fifty leaves, written in Gothic letters by 
various hands during the reign of Henry II. (published in 
facsimile by Gwenogvryn Evans, Oxford, 1907). This book 
belonged originally to the priory of Black Canons at Carmarthen, 
from whom it passed to the church of St David; at the suppres- 
sion of the monasteries in the reign of Henry VIII. it was pre- 
sented by the treasurer of that church to Sir John Price, one of 
the king's commissioners, and from him it passed eventually 
into the hands of Sir Robert Vaughan, the owner of the famous 
Hengwrt collection. It is now among the Peniarth 
AaeMn"" Manuscripts, undoubtedly the most valuable collec- 
tion of Welsh manuscripts in the United Kingdom. 
The second manuscript is the Book of Aneirin, a small 
quarto manuscript of nineteen leaves of vellum, written about 
1250. It was at one time in the possession of Sir Thomas 
Phillips of Middlehill, and now belongs to the free 
-Bookot library of the city of Cardiff. The third is the Book 
of Taliessin, in the Hengwrt and subsequently in the 
Peniarth collection. It is a small quarto manuscript 
containing thirty-eight leaves, written in Gothic letters, about 
the early part of the 14th century. The fourth manuscript, and 
in some respects the most important, is the Red Book 
"Red j jj er g es t y so called from Hergest Court, one of the 
Hergest." seats of the Vaughans. It is a folio volume of 360 
leaves written by different hands between the beginning 
of the 14th and the middle of the 1 5th century. This manuscript, 
which is the most extensive compilation of the medieval prose 
and verse of Wales, is now in the possession of Jesus College, 
Oxford, and is kept in the Bodleian Library of that university. 
The main body of the poems contained in these four MSS. was 
printed by W. F. Skene with a tentative English version in his 
Four Ancient Books of Wales. 

The other Welsh manuscripts, ranging down from the 15th 
to the 18th century, are far too numerous to notice, and it is 
outside the scope of this article to deal minutely with the original 
sources of the text of Welsh writings. 

We will now only endeavour to sketch the history of Welsh 
literature from these early centuries down to our own times, 
and to show how the Celtic people of Wales have developed a 
literature true to their own genius, and how that literature 
stands to this day both a minister to the culture of the Welsh 
people and a sure indication of it. 

1. Early Latin Writers. — The works now known as those of 
Gildas {q.v.) and Nennius {q.v.) are written in Latin; they throw 
considerable light on the origin of Welsh romantic literature 
and on the history of the earlier poems. Gildas was born at 
Ailclyd, the modern Dumbarton, that part of Britain which is 



Tallest 
sin. 



called by Welsh writers Y Gogledd, or the North. Several dates 
have been assigned for his birth and death, but he probably 
flourished between 500 and 580, and his book, De Excidio 
Britanniae seems to have been written about 560. This work is 
a sketch of British history under the Romans and in the 
period after their withdrawal from the country, and 
includes the period of the wars of the Britons with the Picts, 
Scots and Saxons. Mr Skene suggests very reasonably that the 
well-known letter of the Britons to Aetius, asking for Roman aid, 
is misplaced, and that if put in its own place some of the ana- 
chronisms of Gildas will disappear. This work, which contains 
some spirited attacks on the leaders of the Britons for their sins, 
is strangely full of contradictions. It seems to be the work of 
some person well versed in the facts of that part of British history, 
to which he had an easy access, but who supplemented them with 
traditional details and with dates which were mere guess-work. 
Mr Skene thinks that the work of Nennius was originally written 
in Welsh in the north and was afterwards translated into Latin. 
To this nucleus was added the genealogies of the Saxon kings 
down to 738. Afterwards some person, called Marc in the Vatican 
manuscript, appended probably about 823 the life of St Germanus 
and the legends of St Patrick, which were subsequently incor- 
porated with the history. Some South Welshman added to the 
oldest manuscript of the history in these countries, about 977, 
a chronicle of events from 444 to 954, in which there are genea- 
logies beginning with Owain, son of Hywel Dda, king of South 
Wales. This chronicle, which is not found in other manuscripts, 
has been made the basis of two later chronicles brought down 
to 1286 and 1288 respectively. It is consequently not the work 
of one author. A learned Irishman named Gilla Coemgin, who 
died in 1072, translated it into Irish and added many things 
concerning the Irish and the Picts. The Historia Britonum 
is more valuable for the legendary matter which it contains than 
for what may be accepted as history, for it gives us the British 
legends of the colonization of Great Britain and Ireland, the 
exploits of King Arthur and the prophecies of Merlin, which are 
not found elsewhere before the 12th century. The date of the 
book is of the greatest importance to the history of medieval 
romance, and there can be no doubt that it is earlier than the 
Norman Conquest and that the legends themselves are of British 
origin. 

2. The Epic Period, 700-950. — The higher criticism of the 
early poetry of Wales contained in the four ancient manuscripts 
already mentioned has undergone a good many changes since 
their contents first excited the curiosity of English scholars. In 
turn Welshmen, with more zeal than discretion, have displayed an 
amazing charlatanism in the extraordinary theories which they 
put forth, and Englishmen have shown an utmost meanness in 
belittling what is undoubtedly a most valuable monument of the 
past. But now the labours of Zeuss and others who have made 
a study of Celtic philology furnish us with much safer canons 
of criticism than existed in 1849, when even a learned Welshman, 
the late Thomas Stephens, who did more than any one else to 
establish the claims of his country to a real literature, doubted 
the authenticity of a large number of the poems said to have been 
written by Taliessin, Aneirin, Myrddin and Llywarch Hen, who 
are supposed to have lived in the 5th century. A great service 
was done to Welsh literature by the publication of the texts of 
those poems from the four ancient manuscripts by W. F. Skene. 
In addition to the text, translations of the poems were furnished 
by Dr Silvan Evans and the Rev. Robert Williams, but the 
translation, though on the whole a very creditable work, is full 
of mistakes which few men, writing at that time, could have 
avoided. The publication of the text of the Black Book, with 
notes by Dr Gwenogvryn Evans, will be of great service towards 
clearing up the mist which envelops this older literature. 

Most of the poems in these four manuscripts are attributed 
to four poets, Aneirin, Llywarch Hen, Taliessin and Myrddin, 
who are said to have lived and written in Cumbria or Y Gogledd, 
where the actors in the events referred to also lived. The 
greater part of this region enjoyed substantial independence 
down to the end of the 9th century, with the exception of the. 



WELSH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



641 



interval from 655, when they were subjected to the kingdom of 
Northumbria by Oswy after the defeat of Cadwallawn and Penda, 
to the battle of Dunnichen in 686, when Ecfrid, king of North- 
umbria, was defeated. From the 7th to the 9th century Cumbria, 
including under that name all the British territory from the 
Ribble to the Clyde, was the principal theatre of British and 
Saxon conflict. The rise of the dynasty of Maelgwn Gwynedd, 
who, according to Welsh tradition, was a descendant of Cunedda 
Wledig, one of the Picts of the north, brought Wales into close 
connexion with the Cumbrian kingdom, and prepared both North 
and South Wales for the reception of the northern traditions and 
the rise of a true Welsh literature. 

Whether the poets of the north really wrote any of the poems 
which in a modified form have come down to us or not, there 
can be no doubt that a number of lays attributed to them lived 
in popular tradition, and that under the sudden burst of glory 
which the deeds of Cadwallawn called forth and which ended in 
the disastrous defeat of 655, a British literature began to spring 
up, and was nourished by the hopes of a future resurrection 
under his son Cadwaladr, whose death was disbelieved in for 
such a long time. These floating lays and traditions gradually 
gathered into North Wales, brought thither by the nobility and 
the bards who fled before advancing hosts of the victorious 
Saxon kings of the north. The heroes of the north became now 
the heroes of Wales, and the sites of the battles they fought 
were identified with places of similar name in Wales and 
England. 

By far the longest and the most famous poem of this series 
is attributed to Aneurin. This spelling of his name is compara- 
tively modern, and in the old manuscripts it is given 
as Aneirin. The later form seems to have been affected 
by'the form eurin, " golden," and to owe the continuation of the 
misspelling to a belief that the poet and Gildas, whose name 
is supposed to be the Latin form of the Old English gylden, 
were one and the same person. This poem, called the Gododin 
(with notes by T. Stephens and published by Prof. Powel for the 
Cymmrodorion Society, Londdh, 1888), is extremely obscure, 
both on account of its vocabulary and its topography and 
allusions. It deals mainly with " the men who went to Cat- 
traeth," which is supposed to have been fought between the 
Britons and the Scots under Aedan, king of Dalriada, and the 
pagan Saxons and their British subjects in Devyr (Deira) and 
Bryneich (Bernicia), and the half-pagan Picts of Guotodin, a 
district corresponding to the northern half of the Lothians along 
the Firth of Forth. Critics have attempted with partial success 
to cast some light on its obscurity by supposing that the poem 
as a whole is made up of two parts dealing with two distinct 
battles. This may or may not be, but there is no doubt that 
many of the stanzas of the poem as found in the manuscript 
are not in their proper places, and a critical readjustment of the 
different stanzas and lines would do much towards solving its 
problem. It seems probable, too, that the original nucleus of 
the poem was handed down orally, and recited or sung by the 
bards and minstrels at the courts of different noblemen. It 
thus became the common stock-in-trade of the Welsh rhapsodist, 
and in time the bards, using it as a kind of framework, added to 
it here and there pieces of their own composition formed on the 
original model, especially when the heroes named happened to 
be the traditional forefathers of their patrons, and occasionally 
introduced the names of new heroes and new places as it suited 
their purpose; and all this seems to have been done in early 
times. Older fragments dealing too with the legendary heroes 
of the Welsh were afterwards incorporated with the poem, and 
some of these fragments undoubtedly preserve the orthographical 
and grammatical forms of the 9th century. So that, on the whole, 
it seems as fruitless to look for a definite record of historical 
events in this poem as it would be to do so in the Homeric 
poems, but like them, though it cannot any longer be regarded 
as a correct and definite account of a particular battle or war, 
it still stands to this day the epic of the warriors of its own 
nation. It matters not whether these heroes fought at far 
Cattraeth or on some other forgotten field of disaster; this song 
v. 21 



Taliessln. 



Merlin. 



still reflects, as a true national epic, the sad defeats and the brave 
but desperate rallies of the early Welsh. Like the music of the 
Welsh, its dominant note is that of sadness, expressing the 
exultation of battle and the very joy of life in minor notes. To 
a great extent Welsh poets are to this day true and faithful 
disciples of this early master. 

Many of the poems attributed to Taliessin are undoubtedly 
late. Indeed, both Taliessin and Myrddin, 1 the one as 
the mythological chief of all Welsh bards and the other 
as a great magician, seem pre-eminently suited to attract a great 
deal of later Welsh poetry under their aegis; but the older 
poems attributed to them are worthy of any literature. ■ Some- 
times, as in the verses attributed to Llywarch Hen beginning 
Stafell Cynddylan, an early specimen of poetic grief over departed 
glory, we find that gentle elegiac note which is so common in 
early English poetry. In the Taliessinic poems, the Battle of 
Argoed Llwyvain and others, we have that boldness of portraiture 
which is found in the Gododin, whilst in many a noble line we 
seem to hear again the ravens screaming shrilly over their 
sword-feasts, and the strong strokes of the advancing warriors. 

It was but natural that all the pseudo-prophetic poems, 
written of course after the events which they foretold, should be 
attributed to the chief among seers, Myrddin, or, as 
his name is written in English, Merlin; so that all the 
poems accredited to him, with the exception perhaps of the 
Avallenau, were not written before the 12th century. 

In most of the poems attributed to Llywarch Hen and in 
some of the Myrddin poems, the verses begin with the same line, 
which, though it has no direct reference to the subject of the 
poem itself, is used as a- refrain or catch-word, exactly like the 
refrains employed by Mr Swinburne and others in their ballads. 
These lines generally refer to some natural object or objects, as, 
for instance, " the snow of the mountain " or " bright are the tops 
of the broom." 

The first period, then, of Welsh literature lies between 700 and 
950. It is in most respects the epic period, the period in which 
poets wrote of great men and their deeds, the legendary and the 
historic heroes of the Cymry, men like Urien Rheged, and heroes 
like Hyveidd Hir. Even in the next period the epic note had 
not quite died out. 

3. The Prose Romances and the Poet Princes, 1100-1290. — It 
will be seen that there is a considerable gap between the first 
and second period of Welsh literature. It must not be supposed, 
however, that nothing was composed or written during these 
years. Indeed, it may well be that some of the poetry attributed 
to the minor bards of the last period was composed between 900 
and 1 100, and that some other poetry too was written and lost. 
But there are abundant reasons for believing that Welsh poetry 
was at a very low ebb during those years. The progress of Wales 
as a political unit had suffered a check after the battle of Chester 
in 613. The effects of this defeat were not immediate, as the 
Welsh had still enough of their characteristic hopefulness to 
expect ultimate victory; we therefore have reasons for believing 
that the Gododin series of poems were still used — or 
perhaps used then for the first time — to spur on " the V* e 
hawks of war " to greater efforts. Gradually, however, series. 
the Angles, hemming them in on all sides from the 
Clyde to the Severn, began to press nearer and nearer; the Welsh 
at last seem to have lost heart, and no one any longer " had the 
desire of song." Content with their old epics and their older 
myths, which owe perhaps to these years a darker and more 
sombre tinge, they allowed their song to be hushed. The great 
lords had hardly chosen their final abodes; the smaller lords 
had all been killed in war and their places taken now by one, 
now by another, so that the warrior prince himself had not the 
leisure, and hardly the inspiration necessary, for song, and the 
bards found but scanty patronage among such a diminished and 
poverty-stricken nobility. The only order that seemed to prosper 
was that of the monks, and we owe them our gratitude for 

1 It is indeed probable that Myrddin is a purely fictitious character, 
whose name has been made up from Caer Fyrddin ( = Maridunum), 
which was certainly not a personal name. 



642 



CELT 



[WELSH LITERATURE 



preserving the ancient writings and the ancient traditions; but 
they were simply copyists, though they had undoubtedly some 
hand in giving the Gododin its final form and in setting in its 
convenient framework the names of the forefathers of their 
aristocratic abbots. 

In the year 1044 Gruff ydd ab Llewelyn conquered Hywel ab 
Edwin and became king of Wales. By means of his diplomacy 
and his arms he succeeded in stemming the tide of Saxon in- 
vasion that was threatening to overflow even the little remnant 
of land that was left to the Welsh, and his strong rule gave the 
Welsh muse another opportunity. Gruffydd, however, died in 
1063, and was eventually succeeded in 1073 by Trahaern in 
North Wales, and Rhys ab Owen in South Wales. The rule of 
these two princes was destined to be the last period of literary 
inertness in the long interval following the confinement of Wales 
to her inaccessible highlands. 

During these years a man was hiding in Ireland, called 
Gruffydd ab Cynan, a scion of the old branch of Welsh kings. 
In Brittany, too, Rhys ab Tewdwr, a claimant to the throne of 
South Wales, had sought the protection of his Breton kinsmen. 
In 1073 Rhys ab Tewdwr obtained the throne of Rhys ab Owen, 
and, after many years of hard fighting, Gruffydd ab Cynan, 
with the help of Rhys ab Tewdwr, defeated Trahaern at the 
battle of Myrydd Cam in 1081. On the accession of these two 
powerful princes the whole country broke forth into songs of 
praise and jubilation, and the long night was at an end. 

It is important to remember that both Gruffydd and Rhys had 
a direct personal influence on the literary revival of their times. 
Gruffydd ab Cynan while in exile had seen how the Irish Oenach 
was held, and had seen prizes given for poetry and song. We 
have it on the authority of Welsh writers that he reorganized 
the bards and improved the music, and in many other ways gave 
a great and beneficial impulse to Welsh literature. He may 
have brought over some of the later Irish legends which have 
had such a powerful effect on the literature of Wales. 

Rhys ab Tewdwr, too, brought with him from Brittany an 
enthusiasm for the old Celtic tales, and perhaps some of the 
tales themselves which had been by that time forgotten in 
Wales, tales of the Round Table, and Arthur " begirt with 
British and Armoric knights," of knightly deeds and magical 
metamorphoses, which were destined to influence profoundly 
all the literatures of the West. We find, therefore, in this period 
that poetry flourished mostly in the North under Gruffydd ab 
Cynan, and prose in the south under Rhys ab Tewdwr, where 
the new enthusiasm for the old Welsh legends resulted in the 
History of Britain of Geoffrey of Monmouth, which 
Geoffrey j g an exparls j on f me books attributed to Gildas and 
mouth. Nenmus. It was written in Latin sometime before 
1 147, and is dedicated to Robert, earl of Gloucester, 
the grandson of Rhys ab Tewdwr. In the introductory epistle, 
Geoffrey states that Walter, archdeacon of Oxford, had given him 
a very ancient book in the British tongue, giving an account 
of the kings of Britain from Brutus to Cadwaladr, and that he had 
translated it into Latin at the archdeacon's request. The book, 
however, is a compilation and not a translation, but the materials 
were probably drawn from British sources. In this history 
Geoffrey asserts that the deeds of Arthur " were commonly 
related in a pleasing manner." He was perhaps originally but 
the hero of some popular ballad, or of a forgotten stanza of the 
Gododin, and the importance of his name in the literature of 
the world seems to be due to an accident. We cannot, however, 
in this article consider the Arthurian Legend (q.v.) as a whole; 
we must be content with dealing with the most important of the 
romantic tales which are contained in the Red Book of Hergest. 
They may be divided into four classes: — 

(i.) The Mabinogi proper, containing (1) Pwyll, prince of 
Pyvet; (2) Branwen, daughter of Llyr; (3) Manawyddan, son 
of Llyr; (4) Math, son of Mathonwy. 

(ii.) Old British tales referring to Roman times, viz. (1) 
Lludd and Llevelys; (2) The Dream of Macsen Wledic. 

(iii.) British Arthurian tales, viz. (1) Ktthwch and Olwen; 
(2) The Dream of Rhonabwy. 



(iv.) Later tales of chivalry, viz. (1) The Lady of the Fountain; 
(2) Peredur, son of Evrawc; (3) Geraint, son of Erbin. 

The group of four romances in the first class forms a cycle 
of legends and is called in the manuscript Pedeir Keinc y Mabinogi 
— the Four Branches of the Mabinogi; so it is only 
these four tales that can, strictly speaking, be called nogiont 
Mabinogion. In these stories we have the relics of 
the ancient Irish mythology of the Tuatha De Danann, some- 
times mixed with later myths. The Caer Sidi, where neither 
disease nor old age affects any one, is the Sid of Irish mythology, 
the residence of the gods of the Aes Side. It is called in one of 
the old poems the prison of Gweir, who no doubt represents 
Gaiar, son of Manandan MacLir, the Atropos who cut the thread 
of life of Irish mythology. Llyr is the Irish sea-god Lir, and 
was called Llyr Llediaith, or the half-tongued, implying that he 
spoke a language only partially intelligible to the people of the 
country. Bran, the son of Llyr, is the Irish Bran MacAllait, 
Allait being one of the names of Lir. Manawyddan is clearly 
the Manandan or Manannan MacLir of Irish mythology. These 
tales contain other characters which may not have been borrowed 
from Irish mythology but which are common to both mytho- 
logies; for example, Rhiannon, the wife of Pwyll who possessed 
marvellous birds which held warriors spell-bound for eighty 
years by their singing, comes from Annwn, or the unseen world, 
and her son Pryderi gives her, on the death of Pwyll, as a wife 
to Manawyddan. 

Of the second class the first story relates to Lludd, son of Beli 
the Great, son of Manogan, who became king after his father's 
death, while his brother Llevelys becomes king of France and 
shows his brother how to get rid of the three plagues which 
devastated Britain : — first, a strange race, the Coranians, whose 
knowledge was so great that they heard everything no matter 
how low soever it might be spoken; second, a shriek which came 
into every house on May eve, caused by the fighting of two 
dragons; and third, a great giant who carried off all the pro- 
visions of the king's palace every day. The second tale relates 
how Maxen, emperor of Rome* has a dream while hunting, 
in which he imagines that he visits Britain, and in Caer Seint 
or Carnarvon sees a beautiful damsel, Helen, whom he ultimately 
finds and marries. > Both tales are British in origin and are 
founded on traditions referring to Roman times. 

The most important of these tales are undoubtedly those 
contained in the first class, and the story of Ktthwch and Olwen. 
The form in which they are found in the Red Book of Hergest is, 
as we have already said, comparatively speaking, modern. But 
it is apparent to any one reading these tales that the writers or 
compilers, as Matthew Arnold has suggested, are " pillaging an 
antiquity, the secret of which they do not fully possess." The 
foundations of the tales are the old Celtic traditions of the gods 
and the older heroes, and they clearly show Goidelic influence 
both in the persons they introduce and in their incidents. The 
tales would at first exist only in oral tradition, and after the 
advent of Christianity the characters they contain lost their title 
of divinity and became simply heroes — warriors and magicians. 
In time the monks began to write these ancient traditions, 
embellishing them and suppressing no doubt what they con- 
sidered to be most objectionable. These then are the tales which 
we now possess — the traditional doings of the old heroes as set in 
order by Christian writers. 

The changes which these later copyists wrought in the sub- 
stance of the tales fall into two main divisions. In the first place, 
they attempted to find some connexion between tales or cycles of 
tales which originally had no connexion whatever, and were 
therefore forced to invent new incidents or to introduce other 
incidents from the outside in order to establish this connexion; 
and secondly, as in the case of the Gododin, the tales were twisted 
and altered to support references to and explanations of names 
known to the writer. So we find in the tale of Math vab Mathonwy 
the incident of the pigs is expanded to explain some place- 
names which the writer knew. It is this also that gives a local 
interest to the tales; for instance, Dyvet, the land of Pwyll, has 
come to be regarded as the home of Hud a Lledrith, of magic and 



WELSH LITER&TtJRE] 



CELT 



6 43 



enchantment. Some places in North Wales, especially in the 
vicinity of Carnarvon, seem to be well known to the writers, and, 
therefore, to' have associated with them to all time the glamour 
of the Mabinogion. 

besides the scholastic efforts of the monks, which in course of 
time so greatly changed these old legends, there was another class 
of men who had no little influence on the form and matter of 
Welsh, 1 and consequently of European, romance. These were the 
Welsh jongleurs — the professional story-tellers, against whom the 
bards proper fitirsed a deadly hatred because, presumably, their 
tales drew larger audiences and won greater rewards than the 
wwdlau of the poets. There is little doubt that this order existed 
in Wales at a very early period, being quite a natural evolution 
of the older poet who sang in comparatively free metres of the 
deeds of the great dead. It is these men who invented the term 
Mabinogi, which is supposed to mean a " tale for young people "; 
but whatever the word may mean, the fact that they were the 
stock-in-trade of the professional story-teller will explain a good 
many of their structural peculiarities. 

Thus there existed two distinct classes of tales, though it is to 
be supposed that the subject matter of both was more or less 
common; there are, in the first place, the " four branches " and 
the tales of the secoftd class, and, secondly, tales like those of the 
third class. With the exception of the Irish influence, which we 
have already referred to, aiid some later additions from early 
continental romance in the third class, we may take it that these 
three classes are of purely British origin. The pedair cainc are 
the old tales which were first committed to writing at an early 
period before the influence of the Armoric Arthur began to be 
felt, that is to say, about the beginning of the reign of Rhys ab 
Tewdwr in 1073. The other tales, that is those we have put in 
the third class, remained for a much longer time unwritten and 
were not set in writing before the early Arthur of Armoric and 
British romance had been evolved. This will account for the 
fact that Arthur is not mentioned in the first class of tales, and 
that in the third class he is simply a British Arthur. The third 
class is, therefore, in a sense later than the first and second, but its 
materials are as old as the oldest of the Mabinogion proper, and 
they show the influence of Irish mythology to the same extent. 
In the first class Irish names like Penardim, which have not been 
assimilated, show conclusively that the tale is a written one, 
while the eloquence of the descriptions in Kilhwch ac Olwen seem 
to point to the fact that it was up to a late period a spoken tale. 
Other such tales there were once, but they have now been lost. 

The romances of the fourth class do not claim much notice. 
They are mostly imitations or translations of Norman French 
originals, and they belong to the history of European chivalry 
rather than to the history of Welsh literature. 

As literature the Mabinogion may rank among the world's 
classics. We cannot here point out their beauties, but it will be 
sufficient to notice that the unknown writer who gave them their 
final form was a true artist in every sense of the word. In 
Branwen verck Lyr, for instance, the whole setting of the story is 
that of a great tragedy, a tragedy neither Hellenic nor Shake- 
spearean, but the strong and ruthless tragedy of the Celts, — the 
tragedy of nature among unnatural surroundings, the tragedy 
which in our times Mr Thomas Hardy has so successfully 
developed. In this tale, Branwen is introduced as the sister of 
Manawyddan, the king of all Britain, and as the " fairest maid 
in the world." But as the tragedy deepens we read how this 
woman, dowered with beauty and goodness and nobility of 
lineage, is simply used as a pawn in a political game, and the full 
force of the tragedy falls on her own undeserving head. She is 
subjected to all kinds of indignities in her husband's court in 
Ireland, but throughout all her severe trials she preserves the 
cold and detached haughtiness which characterizes the full- 
bosomed heroines of the northern sagas; and, in the end, when 
her brother has delivered her and punished the Irish, and when 
she has safely reached the shores of her own M6n, she raises her 
eyes and beholds the two islands,Britain and Ireland. " 'Ah God!' 
said she, 'is it well that two islands have been made desolate for 
my sake?' And she gave a deep groan and died." So was her 



tragedy consummated, and the writer, with a superb tragic 
touch, mentions the very shape of the grave in which they left 
her on the bank of the Alaw in Mon. 

One of the earliest poets of this period whose productions we 
can be certain of is Meilir, bard of Trahaern, whom Gruffydd ab 
Cynan defeated at the battle of Cam, and afterwards of the 
conqueror Gruffydd himself. His best piece is the Death-bed of 
the Bard, a semi-religious poem which is distinguished by the 
structure of the verse, poetic feeling and religious thought. 
Meilir was the head of a family of bards; his son was Gwalchmai, 
one of the best Welsh poets; the latter had two sons, Einion and 
Meilir, some of whose poetry has reached us. In Gorhofedd 
Gwalchmai, Gwalchmai's Delight, there is an appreciation of the 
charms of nature, medieval parallels to which are only to be found 
in Ireland. His Arwyrain i Owain is an ode of considerable 
beauty and full of vigour in praise of Owain Gwynedd, king of 
North Wales; on account of his victory of Tal y Moelvre, part of 
which has been translated by Gray under the name of " The 
Triumphs of Owen.' Kynddelw, who lived in the second half of 
the 1 2th century, was a contemporary of Gwalchmai, and wrote 
on a great number of subjects including religious ones ; indeed 
some of his eulogies have a kind of religious prelude. He had a 
command of words and much skill in versification, but he is 
pleonastic and fond of complicated metres and of ending his lines 
with the same syllable. 

Among the other poets of the second half of the 12 th century 
may be mentioned Owain Kyveiliog and Howel ab Owain 
Gwynedd. The first named was prince of Powys, and was 
distinguished also as a soldier. The Hirlas, or drinking-horn, is 
a long poem where the prince represents himself as carousing 
in his hall after a fight; bidding his cup-bearer fill his great 
drinking-horn, he orders him to present it in turn to each of the 
assembled warriors. As the horn passes from hand to band he 
eulogizes each in a verse beginning Diwallaw di venestr, " Fill, 
cup-bearer." Having thus praised the deeds of two warriors, 
Tudyr and Moreiddig, he turns round to challenge them, but 
suddenly recollecting that they had fallen in the fray, and 
listening, as it were, to their dying groans, he bursts into a 
broken lamentation for their loss. The second was also a 
prince; he was the eldest of the many sons of Owain Gwynedd, 
and ruled for two years after his father until he fell in a battle 
between himself and his step-brother Dafydd. He was a young 
man of conspicuous merit, and one of the most charming poets 
of Wales, his poems being especially free from the conceits, 
trivial commonplaces, and complicated metres of the professional 
bards, while full of a gay humour, a love of nature and a delicate 
appreciation of women. The Welsh poets went on circuit like 
their Irish brethren, staying in each place according as hospitality 
was extended to them. When departing, a bard was expected 
to leave a sample of his versification behind him. In this way 
many manuscripts came to be written, as we find them in different 
hands. Llywarch ab Llywelyn has left us one of those departing 
eulogies addressed to Rhys Gryg, prince of South Wales, which 
affords a favourable specimen of his style. 

The following are a few of the poets of the 13 th century 
whose poems are still extant. Davydd Benvras was the author 
of a poem in praise of Llywelyn ab Iorwerth; his 
works, though not so verbose or trite as bardic poems ,3tb 
of this class usually are, do not rise much above the ^"etsT 
bardic level, and are full of alliteration. Elidir Sais 
was, as his name implies, able to speak the English language, 
and wrote chiefly religious poetry. Einiawn ab Gwgawn is the 
author of an extant address to Llywelyn ab Iorwerth of con- 
siderable merit. Phylip Brydydd, or Philip the poet, was house- 
hold bard to Rhys Gryg (Rhys the hoarse), lord of South Wales. 
One of his pieces, an apology to Rhys Gryg, is a striking example 
of the fulsome epithets a household bard was expected to bestow 
upon his patron, and of the privileged domesticity in which the. 
bards lived, which, as in Ireland, must have been fatal to genius. 
Prydydd Bychan, the Little Poet, was a South Wales bard 
whose extant work consists of short poems all addressed to his 
own princes. The chief feature of his Englynion is the use of a 



644 



CELT 



[WELSH LITERATURE 



kind of assonance in which in some cases the final vowels agreed 
alternately in each quatrain, and in others each line ended in a 
different vowel, in both cases with alliteration and consonance 
of final consonants or full rhyme. Llygad Gwr is known by an 
ode in five parts to Llywelyn ab Gruffydd, written about the 
year 1270, which is a good type of the conventional flattery of a 
family bard. Howel Voel, who was of Irish extraction, 
possessed some poetical merit; his remonstrance to Llywelyn 
against the imprisonment of his brother Owain is a pleasing 
variety upon the conventional eulogy. It has many lines 
beginning with the same word, e.g. gibr, man. The poems of 
Bleddyn Vardd, or Bleddyn the Bard, which have come down 
to us are all short eulogies and elegies. One of the latter on 
Llywelyn ab Gruffydd is a good example of the elaborate and 
artificial nature of Welsh versification. 

The most illustrious name among the poets of this century is 
Gruffydd ab yr Ynad Coch, " Gruffydd, son of the Red Justice," 
who wrote many religious poems of great merit. His greatest 
work, however, is the elegy to Llywelyn ab Gruffydd, the last 
prince of Wales. It is easily first among all the elegies written 
in the Welsh language. We do not find in it that artficial grief 
which is too evident in the Marwnadau of the Welsh poets; it 
re-echoes an intense personal grief, and throughout the whole 
piece the poet feels that he stands at the end of all things,— the 
end of his own ideals, the extinction of all Cymric hopes. So 
poignant is his grief, and in so universal a manner does the 
catastrophe of Llywelyn's death present itself to him, that he 
imagines that all the natural features of the Welsh fatherland 
know that the last great Welshman is dead; the winds howl 
over the mountains, the rain-clouds gather thick, the waves rage 
with grief against the Welsh coasts, and far away on the hills 
the giant oak-trees beat against each other in the fury of their 
passion. Sadly, in this manner, closes the second period of 
Welsh literature. 

4. The Golden Age of the Cywydd, 1340-1440. — Just as, after 
the loss of the North, the Welsh muse was hushed, so after the 
final subjugation of Wales in 1282, hardly a note was heard for 
many a long year. The ancient patrons of literature were dead, 
and the country had not yet settled down to the steady rule of 
England. Indeed, the conquest of Wales effectively put an end 
to the older Welsh poetry of that type which we noticed in the 
last period. These older bards were without exception subjects 
of the princes of North Wales, where the old heroic poetry was 
still popular, and when the power of these princes came to an 
end the old poetry too ceased. When the Welsh muse emerges 
again from the darkness of this interval she is no longer of the 
North; the new poets are drawn from the Welshmen of the 
South, a land which had practically ceased to be a part of an 
independent Wales shortly after the Norman conquest of 
England. We find, too, that the poetry which poured forth 
from the Welsh bards of the south is of an altogether different 
type, it is modern in all its essentials, in diction, in language, 
and, comparatively speaking, in sentiment. Indeed, there is an 
infinitely greater difference between Dafydd ab Gwilym and 
Gruffydd ab yr Ynad Coch than there is between him and any 
poet writing in the alliterative metres in the 19th century. So 
that we must suppose that at the time when the poets of North 
Wales still sang of war and mead-drinking in a style and diction 
that was an inheritance from the times of the Gododin, the poets 
of the South, unharassed by wars, were developing a new poetry 
of their own, a poetry that had relinquished for ever the Old 
Welsh models and was at last in line with the great poetical 
movements of Europe. And, judging from the fact that the 
earliest of these poets whose works are accessible to us are in the 
full zenith of their poetical development, we must believe that 
their work is the consummation of a period, that is to say, that 
they must have had a long line of predecessors whose works 
were lost during the period intervening between the loss of Welsh 
independence and the rise of Daf} f dd ab Gwilym. These men 
wrote, as we have already said, in South Wales, a country which 
was then under the rule of the Norman lords, who, with the lapse 
of years and the rise of new systems, were fast becoming Welsh. 



It ds no wonder, then, that the poets who wrote under their 
patronage should show unmistakable traces of Norman influence, 
Most of the barons still spoke French, and it was only natural 
that they should be well versed in French poetry. The poets 
followed the lead of their patrons, and their work was modelled 
to a very great extent on French and Provencal poetry. Nor 
does this account altogether for the wonderful similarity between 
Welsh cywyddau and other poems of this period and the French 
lays; we must remember that the Welsh poets lived under 
conditions similar to those under which the troubadours and the 
trouveres lived, and it was natural that the same environments 
should produce the same kind of work. The Provencal alba and 
the French aube, the serenade and other forms, became well 
known in South Wales and were of course read by the Welsh 
poets. We find continual references in the poets to " books of 
love " under the name of llyfr Ofydd, or the " book of Ovid," 
and a reference in one of Dafydd ab Gwilym's poems shows con- 
clusively that one particular llyfr Ofydd was a work of the French 
poet Chrestien de Troyes. Indeed, one of the commonest names 
among the poets of this period — the llatai, 1 or love-messenger — 
may be a Romance word borrowed through the Norman-French 
from the Italian Galeotto, originally the name of the book of the 
loves of Galahaad, but afterwards the ordinary word for a go- 
between. This book of Galeotto, by the way, was the book 
which taught Paolo and Francesca da Rimini, in Dante's Divina 
Commedia, the tragic secret of love. 

Another movement also was favourable to the rise of the new 
Welsh poetry. The iron hand of the church, which had been 
the censor of poetry for so many centuries, was slowly relaxing 
its grasp, and the men who a few years before would have sung 
religious hymns to the Virgin, now laid their tributes at the feet 
of divine womanhood as they saw it in the Welsh maidens and 
matrons living among them. The pale queen of heaven no longer 
held hearts captive; they had transferred their allegiance to the 
" brow that was as the snow of yesternight," and " the cheeks 
that were like the passion-flower." The Iolo MSS. assert that 
some time between January 1327 and November 1330 there were 
held, under the patronage of Ivor Hael, Dafydd ab Gwilym's 
patron, and others, the three Eisteddfodau Dadeni, or the 
Eisteddfods of the Revival of the Muse, to reorganize the bards, 
and to set in order all matters pertaining to Welsh poetry. The 
most important bards who are reported as present at some or all 
of these meetings were Dafydd ab Gwilym, Sion Cent, Rhys 
Goch of Eryri, and Iolo Goch. It is now, however, generally 
agreed that this account is a fabrication and that the date of 
all the poets is later. 

Dafydd ab Gwilym is certainly the most distinguished of all 
the Welsh poets, and were it not for the absolute impossibility 
of adequately translating his cywyddau he would rank 
amongst the greatest poets of medieval times. By g^™,.** 
far the greater part of his poetry is written in the 
metre called cywydd, with heptasyllabic lines rhyming in couplets. 
It was he who imparted so much lustre to this metre that it 
became the vehicle of all the most important poetry from his 
time to the 19th century, and he is generally referred to by his 
contemporaries as the special poet of the cywydd — Dafydd 
gywydd gwin, " Dafydd of the wine-sweet cywydd." Most of his 
poems deal with love in the spirit of the medieval writers of 
France and of Provence, but with this very important difference, 
that the French writers must base their reputation on their 
treatment of love as a theme, whereas Dafydd's claim to fame is 
based on his treatment of nature and of out-door life. In many 
cases, indeed, love is only a conventional peg whereon he may 
hang his observations on nature, and Welsh literature may 
claim the distinction of having had its Wordsworth in the 14th 
century. His treatment of nature is not merely realistic and 
objective, it has a certain quaint and elusive symbolism and a 
subjectiveness which come as a revelation to those who are 
acquainted with the medieval poetry of other nations. Many 

1 Another derivation of this word is from Had, " profit " + kai, a 
suffix denoting the agent. Others derive it from or connect it with 
the Irish slad-. 



WELSH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



6 45 



of the poems attributed to him are undoubtedly the work of 
later hands, but even after making all possible deductions, 
there is still an infinite variety among what remains, ranging 
as his poems do from a sturdy denunciation of monkish fraudu- 
lenee to the most delicate and pathetic recollections of departed 
joys. He has, besides, considerable importance as a teacher, as 
when, for instance, he invites the nun " to leave her watercress 
and paternosters of Romish monks," and to come with him 
" to the cathedral of the birch to listen to the cuckoo's sermons," 
for, " were it not an equally worthy deed to save his (Dafydd's) 
soul in the birch-grove as to do so by following the ritual of Rome 
and St James of Compostella " ? Even in his old age, when he 
is beginning to repent of his rash and merry youth, nature has 
not deserted him, — the very tree under which in the old days 
he used to meet his sweetheart has become bent and withered 
in sympathy with him. Though Dafydd yields not the palm 
to any poet of his class throughout the world, and though his 
influence is still a potent factor in the literature of Wales, we are 
certain of hardly a single fact about his life. He flourished 
between 1340 and 1390. His works were published in London 
in 1789. This edition was reprinted by Ffoulkes of Liverpool 
in 1870. See L. C, Stern, Zeilschr. f. celt. Phil. vol. vii. 

Sion Cent was chaplain to the Scudamores of Kentchurch in 
Herefordshire, and though, therefore, in orders, was a most 
bitter opponent of the pretentious and the evil life of the monks 
of his time. All his writings show signs of the influence of the 
moralists of the middle ages, and treat of religious or of moral 
subjects. His poetry is strong and austere, interfused here and 
there with the most biting satire. He died about 1400. Like 
many of his con terriporaries,Dunbar, Villon, Menot and Manrique, 
his dominant note is that of sadness and regret. 

Rhys Goch Eryri had a sprightly muse which deals with 
fanciful subjects. His themes are often similar to those of 
Dafydd ab Gwilym, but whereas the subject of Dafydd's muse 
was nature and his treatment universal, Rhys Goch's are 
simply natural objects which he treats in a vigorous but narrow 
and cold manner. 

Iolo Goch, that is, Iorwerth the Red, deserves a special 
mention as the poet who voiced the aspirations of a new Wales 
when Owen Glyndwr began to rise into power, and it is to one 
of his poems that we owe a most minute description of Sycharth, 
Owen Glyndwr's home. His poetry is slightly more archaic in 
diction than that of his contemporaries, as his subject — war and 
the glory of Welsh heroes — belonged more properly to the age 
before his own. In one very striking cywydd composed after 
Glyndwr's downfall, he calls upon this hero to come again and 
claim his own, and addresses himself fancifully to all the countries 
of the world where his hero may be in hiding. He died after 
1405, and, if the dates generally given for his birth be even 
approximately correct, he must have lived to a prodigious age 
(cf. Gweithiau Iolo Goch, by Charles Ashton, London, 1896). 

Rhys Goch ap Rhiccert claims to be named with Dafydd ab 
Gwilym as a writer of lyrics in praise of beautiful women. He 
has one advantage, however, over his more famous contemporary 
in the variety of his metres. The musical lilt and the delicate 
workmanship of his poems, with their recurring refrain, give him 
a unique position among his medieval contemporaries as the 
first purely lyrical poet. His jloreat is probably a little later 
than that of Dafydd ab Gwilym, for we must not be misled by 
the late orthography of his poems. 

Dafydd Nanmor is chiefly famous for two exquisite cywyddau, 
Cywydd Marwnad Merch, or Elegy of a Maiden, and Cywydd i 
walk Llio, or Cywydd to Llio's Hair. In both these poems he 
shows elegance rather than depth, and a fancy as bold as that 
of his great master Dafydd. In the first of these cywyddau his 
grief is so great that he wishes that he were but the shroud 
around his dead sweetheart, and, in the second, Llio Rhydderch's 
golden hair over her white brow is compared to the refulgence of 
lightning over the fine snow. He is supposed to be a younger 
contemporary of Rhys Goch Eryri, but there are many facts to 
warrant a supposition that he lived much later, even as late 
as 1490. 



Llywelyn Goch ap Meurig Hen deserves to be mentioned as the 
author of the famous Marwnad Lleucu Llwyd, an elegy which is 
far more convincing in its sincerity than Dafydd Nanmor's 
cywydd. Few of his compositions are extant, but the one 
already mentioned is sufficient to place him in the first rank of 
the poets of the period. He lived approximately from 1330 
to 1390. 

The other poets of this period who deserve some mention 
are Dafydd Ddu o Hiraddug, who wrote poems on religious 
subjects, and who is supposed to have translated part of the 
Officium Beatae Mariae into Welsh; Gruff ydd Grug, between 
whom and Dafydd ab Gwilym a most fierce poetic quarrel raged, 
but who is the author of a beautiful elegy on his opponent; 
Gruffydd Llwyd ab Dafydd, who was the poet of-Owen Glyndwr ; 
and whose cywydd in praise of his patron is one of the best of 
that type; Hywel Swrdwal and Gwilym ab Ieuan Hen. 

5. The Silver Age of the Cywydd. 1440-1550. — The insurrection 
of Owen Glyndwr, though originally the result of a private 
quarrel, was the general revolt of a nation against the con- 
querors whom it hated, and the English king knew well enough 
that the discontent with his rule was fanned by the older and 
more national Welsh institutions, and by none more than by 
the system of wandering bards. The conditions which had given 
rise to this system were fast dying out, but the noblemen, who 
fortunately were still intensely Welsh, were loth to give up their 
family bards, and the bards themselves, never a too industrious 
class, were too glad of their freedom and easy life to turn to more 
profitable work. We find, therefore, that a law was passed in 
1403, the fourth year of Henry IV.'s reign, prohibiting bards 
" and other vagrants " from exercising their profession in 
Gwynedd or North Wales. This law, however, like its pre- 
decessor in the reign of Edward I., failed utterly in its purpose. 
By prohibiting the Welsh noblemen from giving their patronage 
to the bards, and, therefore, from distinguishing between the real 
bards and the mendicant rhymesters, this law took away the 
only safeguard against the latter class, with the result that by 
about 1450 they had become a pest to the country. About 
that time there flourished a poet called Llawdden, who, noticing 
the very unsatisfactory state of poetry in Wales, induced his 
kinsman, Gruffydd ab Nicolas, a nobleman living in Y Dre- 
newydd (Newtown), to petition Henry VI. for permission to hold 
an eisteddfod similar in purpose to the three Eisteddfodau 
Dadeni of the last period. This famous eisteddfod 
was held at Caerfyrddin (Carmarthen) in 1451, and / W j/, 
shortly before the actual eisteddfod was held a 
" statute " was drawn up under the direction of Llawdden, 
regulating the different orders of bards and musicians and setting 
in order the cynghaneddion a mesurau, the different kinds of 
alliterative verse to be presented to the assembled bards at the 
meeting. Among those present at that eisteddfod the most 
distinguished was Dafydd ab Edmwnd, who then made famous 
the dictum that the purpose of an eisteddfod was " to bring to 
mind the past, to consider the present, and to deliberate about the 
future." He, therefore, proposed emendations in " the rules of 
Welsh verse," making them more strict, so as to keep the un- 
learned rhymesters from the privileged bardic class. This 
measure had a most important effect on Welsh literature. It 
effectively put an end to the charming spontaneity which 
distinguishes the poetry of Dafydd ab Gwilym and his con- 
temporaries, and by introducing an arbitrary set of rules 
gave an artificial tone to almost all the poetry of the next two 
hundred years. It had, indeed, exactly the same retarding effect 
on Welsh poetry as the Unities had on the French drama. So 
that, whereas the poems of Dafydd ab Gwilym, though written 
in the difficult alliterative metres, are nearly all light and have 
a sweet lyrical re-echo, the poetry of Dafydd ab Edmwnd and 
his successors is often heavy and nearly always artificial. After 
making, however, all these deductions, it is a debatable point 
whether the hard and fast rules which now regulated Welsh 
poetry did not eventually justify their existence. They have 
helped, by inciting to carefulness, to keep the idiom and the 
language pure and undented, and to this day style in Welsh 



646 



CELT 



[WELSH LITERATURE 



poetry is not necessarily a striving after the uncommon as it 
too often is in English. 

There are some poets included in this period who belong more 
properly to the last, but even these show signs of the attempt at 
correctness and distinction which was supplanting the old 
simplicity. Ieuan ap Rhydderch ab Ieuan Llwyd, who is 
supposed to be a brother of the Llio Rhydderch of Dafydd 
Nanmor's poem, is the author of some cywyddau and other 
poems addressed to the Virgin, the structure of which shows 
great skill accompanied by force and clearness. He flourished 
about 1425. Dafydd ab Meredydd ap Tudur, who flourished 
about 1420, is the author of a cywydd " to Our Saviour." 
About the same time lived Rhys Nanmor, Ieuan Gethin ab 
Ieuan, and Ieuan Llwyd ab Gwilym. Among the earliest of the 
poets who belong properly to this period is Meredydd ap Rhys, 
whose cywyddau are a fair specimen of the generality of poems 
written in these years. Among the most famous of his works 
is a cywydd "begging for a fishing-net," and another giving 
thanks for the same. We shall find that many of his con- 
temporaries were able to write long and interesting poems on 
such seemingly dry and uninteresting subjects, but it is vain 
to look for anything beyond good verse in such compositions. 
Of poetry, as generally understood, there is none. 

The commanding figure in this period is, of course, Dafydd 
ab Edmwnd, who was a disciple of Meredydd ap Rhys. He 
bears somewhat the same relation to his contemporaries 
T E4mwni. as Dafydd ab Gwilym does to his, and to strain an 
analogy, we might say that as Dryden was to Milton, 
so Dafydd ab Edmwnd was to Dafydd ab Gwilym. He was 
regarded by his contemporaries as the greatest poet that North 
Wales had ever produced, and some would set him up as a rival 
even to Dafydd ab Gwilym himself. He would probably 
have produced much greater poetry had he understood that the 
cywydd and the other metres were strait and shackled enough 
without the cymeriadau and other devices which he introduced, 
or at least sanctioned and made popular. He begins many of 
his cywyddau and odes with the same letter; he is the chief 
among Welsh formalists, but in spite of his self-imposed restric- 
tions he is a great poet also. His most famous poems are three 
Cywyddau Merck or " Poems to a Lady," and his Cywydd i Wallt 
Merck, " cywydd to a lady's hair." He is the author of the 
lines already quoted: " thy brow," he sings, " is as the snow of 
yesternight, and thy cheeks like a shower of roses." He died 
about 1480. Dafydd ab Edmwnd's disciples were Gutyn Owain 
and Tudur Aled, who was also his nephew. Gutyn Owain lived 
between 1420 and 1500, and was one of the men appointed by 
the king's commissioners to trace, or perhaps to manu- 
facture, the Welsh pedigree of Henry VII. He belonged entirely 
to the school inaugurated by Dafydd ab Edmwnd, and though 
he was by no means wanting in imagination, the highest distinc- 
tion of his verse is its intricacy of form and very often the 
felicity of his couplets. 

Just as the rise of Owen Glyndwr in the beginning of the 
century had given a new impulse and a new interest to poetry, 
so in 1485, when Henry VII. — the " little bull " as he is called 
by the poets — ascended the throne of England, a particular kind 
of poetry called brud, half history and half prophecy, became 
popular, and we have in the manuscripts much writing of this 
description, a good deal of it worthless as poetry. Occasionally, 
however, some of these " bruts " may claim to be called poetry, 
especially the compositions of Robin Ddu o Fon, who wrote 
poems in praise of the Tudors and hailed them as the deliverers 
of the nation, even before Henry VII. had landed in England, 
and Dafydd Llwyd ab Llywelyn, whose works deserve to be 
much better known than they are at present. One of the best 
cywyddau among his works is the " Address to the Raven," to 
whom he promises a right royal feast when the hero whom all 
Wales is expecting has met his royal enemy. Tudur Aled, too, 
was a zealous partisan of Henry VII. and wrote many cywyddau 
in praise of Sir Rhys ap Thomas, the great champion of Henry's 
cause in South Wales. He is also famous as having supplemented 
and made a new recension of Dafydd ab Edmwnd's rules of 



poetry in the eisteddfod held at Caerwysin 1524. Tudur Aled 
has always been more widely known in Wales than almost any 
other of the earlier poets except Dafydd ab Gwilym. This is 
perhaps due to the quotability and sententiousness of his couplets. 
There is a certain refreshing dryness about his poetry which 
partly makes up for his want of imagination. One of the most 
interesting poets of this century is Lewis Glyn Cothi, who lived 
between 1410 and 1490. During the Wars of the Roses he was 
a zealous Lancastrian, and his bitterest enemies were the men 
of Chester, who had treated him scurvily while he was there in 
hiding, and his omidl, satirizing the men of that city, is one of the 
most vigorous compositions in the language. Indeed, among 
so many cywyddau of this period in conventional praise of 
different patrons, it is most refreshing to find such an outburst 
of sincere personal feeling, boldly and fiercely expressed. He 
wrote an awdl also rejoicing in the victory of Henry VII. Most 
of his work, however, consists of cywyddau mawl — praise of 
patrons — containing weary and unpoetical pedigrees. Gruffydd 
Hiraethog, who flourished about 1 540, was a disciple of Tudur 
Aled. A fierce poetical dispute raged between him and Sion 
Brwynog of Anglesey, who was a contemporary of his. About 
this time there were many poets in Wales who were imitators 
of Dafydd ab Gwilym, and who did not follow implicitly the 
lead of Dafydd ab Edmwnd, like those whom we have mentioned. 
Much of their poetry is feeble, but Bedo Brwynllysg especially 
stands out from among the rest, and his poetry, though highly 
imitative and often over fanciful, is of a much higher order than 
the genealogical poems of Lewis Glyn Cothi and others. In the 
same way the only poem of any merit of Ieuan Denlwyn printed 
in the Gorchestion is written in this imitative strain. Other poets 
of the middle of this period are Deio ap Ieuan Du, Iorwerth 
Fynglwyd, Lewys Morganwg, Ieuan Brydydd Hir, and Tudur 
Penllyn, who wrote a superb cywydd to Dafydd ab Siencyn, the 
outlaw. 

Towards the end of the period we begin to breathe a literary 
atmosphere that is gradually but surely changing, — it is the 
change from the misty Wales of Roman Catholic times to the 
modern Wales after the Reformation. The poetical incoherencies 
of the old metres and the tricks of fancy of the old stylists 
occasionally form a somewhat incongruous dress for the thoughts 
of later poets. The old spirit and the glamour were gradually 
wearing away, only to be momentarily revived in the poetry 
of Goronwy Owen, nearly two centuries later. Two; or three 
figures, indeed, stand out prominently during these years, 
among whom are some of the bards ordained penceirddiaid 
(master-poets) in the second Caerwys Eisteddfod held in 1568, 
viz. William Llyn,' William Cynwal, Sion Tudur, and Sion 
Phylip. William Llyn (1530?-! 580) was a pupil of Gruffydd 
Hiraethog. His complicated awdlau are marvels of ingenuity, 
but many of them are on that very account almost unintelligible. 
He was, however, a complete master of the cywydd, in which 
he sometimes displays a sense of style and a sweetness of imagery 
allied to a melodiousness of language unequalled by the other 
poets of the period. His best-known work is the famous marwnad 
to his master, Gruffydd Hiraethog. Sion Tudur (d. 1602), also a 
disciple of G. Hiraethog, was connected in some capacity or other 
with the cathedral at St Asaph. He is a realist, and delights in 
giving vivid word pictures in a less fanciful strain than his pre- 
decessors. Sion Phylip (1543-1620) wrote a famous marwnad 
to his father and a cywydd "to a sea-gull," which is a superb 
piece of nature-painting in the style of Dafydd ab Gwilym. 
While dealing with this second Eisteddfod at Caerwys, we may 
note that Simwnt Fychan's " Laws of Poetry " were accepted 
at this festival. 

Two poets of this period, whom an English writer describes 
a " the two filthy Welshmen who first smoked publicly in the 
streets," were captains in Queen Elizabeth's navy, viz. Thomas 
Prys (d. 1634) of Plas Iolyn, and William Myddleton (1556- 
1621), called in Welsh Gwilym Canoldref. The former wrote, 
among other things, humorous cywyddau descriptive of life in 
London and in the English navy of those days, in a style which 
was afterwards attempted by Lewys Morys. The work of 



WELSH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



647 



Myddleton, by which he is best known, is his translation of the 
Psalms (1603) into Welsh cywydd metre, a difficult and profitless 
experiment. 

With Edmwnd Prys (1541-1624), the famous archdeacon of 
Merioneth, we come to distinctly modern times. He is hardly 
a great poet, if we judge him by the canons which are now 
popular. His gift was a gift of terse and biting statement, and 
his cywyddau on the whole have more of literary than of poetical 
merit. He was a man of vast learning, and his works are full 
of scholastic and often difficult allusions. His most famous 
cywyddau are those written in the literary quarrel between him 
and Wiliam Cynwal. " Wiliam Cynwal," says Goronwy Owen, 
" though the greater poet, was like a man fighting with bare fists 
against complete armour," and it may be freely granted that in 
this, the most famous quarrel in Welsh literature, the palm of 
victory rested with the contentious old ecclesiastic. We shall 
deal with the rest of Edmwnd Prys's literary work in the section 
on the rise of popular poetry. 

Here the age of the cywydd and the awdl, as the chief forms of 
verse, ends. They appear again in the succeeding centuries, but 
as aliens among a nation that no longer paid them homage. 
The distinctly Welsh fashion in song was dying out. 

6. Prose, 1550-1750. — One of the most striking features of 
Welsh literature is the almost entire absence of prose between 
1300 and 1550. The genius of the people has always befen an 
eminently poetical and imaginative one, and the history of 
Wales, politically and socially, has always been a fitter subject 
for poetry than for prose. During this period, Wales enjoyed a 
rest from propagandists and revolutionaries which has seldom 
been the happy lot of any other nation— they lay content with 
their own old traditions, acquiescing proudly in their separation 
from the other nations of Europe, and in their aloofness from all 
the movements which shook England and the continent during 
those years. Dynasties came and went, one religion ousted 
another religion, a new learning exposed the absurdities of the 
old, but the Welsh, among their hills, knew nothing of it; and 
when new ideas began to brood over the consciousness of the 
nation, they never got beyond the stage of providing new subjects 
for cywyddau. The Peasant Revolt, for instance, had but little 
effect on Welsh history, its most important contribution to the 
heritage of the nation being Iolo Goch's superb " Cywydd to the 
Labourer." Even the Reformation, which helped to change the 
whole fabric of English literature, had little effect on that of 
Wales, and the age of the cywydd dragged out wearily its last 
years without experiencing the slightest quickening from the 
great movement which was remaking Europe. Hardly a prophet 
or reactionary raised his voice in defence or condemnation, and 
the Welsh went on serenely making and reading poetry. The two 
political movements in which Wales was really interested, the 
revolt of Glyndwr and the accession of Henry VII., paid their 
tribute to its poetry alone, and both enterprises had sufficient of 
romance in them to repel the historian and to capture the poet. 
Naturally, therefore, we have no prose in this period, because 
there was no cause strong enough to produce it. What prose 
the nation required they found in the tales of romance, in the 
legends of Arthur and Charlemagne and the Grail, and, as for 
pedigrees and history, were they not written in the cywyddau of 
the poets? 

The little prose that was produced during this period (1300- 
iSSo) was of an extraordinary kind. It was simply an exercise 
in long sentences and in curiously built compounds, and therefore 
more nearly allied to poetry. It generally took the form of dewis- 
bethau, a list of the " choice things " of such and such a person, 
or of the later triads (trioedd), which, starting from an ancient 
nucleus, gradually grew till, at the present day, Wales has a 
gnomic literature out of all proportion to the rest of its prose. 
Modern Welsh prose, however, is only very indirectly connected 
with these compositions. It is almost altogether a product of the 
Biblical literature which began to appear after the Reformation, 
and we shall proceed to give here the main facts and dates in its 
development. The first Welsh book was printed in 1546. It 
consisted of extracts in Welsh from the Bible and the Prayer 



Book, and -a calendar. The author was Sir John Prys (1502- 
1555). The most important name in the early part of this period 
is William Salesbury (i520?-i6oo?). His chief books were, 
A Dictionary in Englyshe and Welshe (printed in 1547, and pub- 
lished in facsimile reprint by the Cymmrodorion Society), 
Kynniver Llilh a Ban (1551), the Prayer Book in Welsh (1567), 
and the most important of all his works, the translation of the 
New Testament (1567). It is difficult to form any estimate, at 
this distance of time, of the impetus which William Salesbury 
gave to Welsh prose, but it must be regretfully admitted that his 
great work was marred by many defects. He had a theory that 
Welsh ought to be written as much like Latin as possible, and 
the result is that his language is very poor Welsh, both in spelling 
and idiom; it is an artificial dialect. It is a striking testimony, 
however, to his influence that many of the constructions and 
words which he manufactured are found to this day in correct 
literary Welsh. 

In 1567 was published a Welsh Grammar by Dr Gruffydd 
Roberts, a Roman Catholic priest living at Milan (reprinted in 
facsimile, Paris, 1883), and in 1583, under the direction of Dr 
Rhosier Smyth, his Drych Cristionogawl was published at Rouen. 
Many other important Welsh books were produced during these 
years, but the work which may be regarded as having the 
greatest influence on the subsequent literature of Wales was the 
translation of the Welsh Bible (1588) by Dr William Morgan 
(1547 ?-i6o4), bishop of Llandaff, and afterwards of St Asaph. 
The Authorized Version (1620) now in use is a revision of this 
work by Dr Richard Parry, bishop of St Asaph (1560-1623). 
In 1592 the Welsh Grammar of Sion Dafydd Rhys (1 534-1609) 
was published — a most valuable treatise on the language and on 
the rules of Welsh poetry. It was followed in 1621 by the Welsh 
Grammar, and in 163 2 by the Welsh Dictionary of Dr John Davies 
o Fallwyd (rS7o 7-1644). 

There are two prose compositions which stand entirely by 
themselves in this period of Bibles and grammars — the History 
of Ellis Gruffydd, and Morris Kyffin's Defyniad y Ffydd. The 
former was a soldier in the English army during the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth, and wrote a long history of England from the 
earliest times to his own day. This document, which has never 
been published, and which lies hidden away among the Mostyn 
MSS., is a most important and valuable original contribution to 
the history of the author's contemporaries, and it sheds con- 
siderable light on the inner life of the court and the army. It is 
written in a delightfully easy style, contrasting favourably with 
the stiff diction of this period of translations. The work of 
Morris Kyffin (1555 ?-i 598 ?) which we have mentioned is a 
translation of Bishop Jewel's Apologia Ecclesiae Anglicanae 
(1562) and was published in 1595- This work is the first piece 
of modern Welsh prose within reach of the ordinary reader, 
written in the rich idiom of the spoken Welsh. It is a precursor 
of many other books of its kind, a long series culminating in 
the immortal Bardd Cwsc. In this sense Morris Kyffin may 
with perfect justice be hailed as the father of modern Welsh 
prose. 

Most of the works which were afterwards written in the strong 
idiomatic Welsh of Morris Kyffin were on religious subjects, and 
many of them were translated from the English. The first was 
Ymarfer Dduwioldeb (1630) by Rowland Vychan o Gaergai (a 
translation of Bailey's Practice of Piety), which was followed in 
1632 by Dr John Davies's Llyfr y Resolution, and in 1666 by 
Hanes y Ffydd Ddijfuant (A History of the True Faith) by 
Charles Edwards. All these authors and many of their successors 
were strong adherents of the Established Church, which was then 
intensely Welsh in sentiment. But in the midst of these church- 
men, a flame-bearer of dissent appeared — Morgan Llwyd o 
Wynedd, who published in 1653 " a mystery to be understood 
of some, and scorned of others " — Llyfr y Tri Aderyn (The Book 
of the Three Birds). It is in the form of a discussion between 
the eagle (Cromwell), the dove (Dissent) and the raven (the 
Established Church) . This book is certainly the most important 
original composition published during the 17th century, and to 
this day remains one of the widely-read classics of the Welsh 



6 4 8 



CELT 



[WELSH LITERATURE 



tongue. Morgan Llwyd wrote many other books in- Welsh and 
English, all more or less in the vein of the first book. 

During the remaining years of this period, the prose output 
of the Welsh press consisted mainly of devotional books, written 
or translated for or at the instigation of the Society for Promoting 
Christian Knowledge. The Established Church, with the help of 
this society, made a gallant attempt to lighten the darkness of 
Wales by publishing books of this description, and it is mainly 
due to its exertions that the lamp of Welsh prose was kept 
burning during these years. Among the clergy who produced 
books of this description were Edward Samuel (1674-1748), 
who published among other works Holl Ddyledswydd Dyn, a 
translation of The Whole Duty of Man (17 18); Moses Williams 
(1684-1742), a most diligent searcher into Welsh MSS. and 
translator; Griffith Jones of Llanddowror (1683-1761), the father 
of Welsh popular education; Iago ab Dewi (1644 P-I722) and 
Theophilus Evans (1694-1769), the famous author of Drych y 
Prif Oesoedd (1716 and 1740). This book, like Llyfr y Tri 
Aderyn and Y Bardd Cwsc, has an established position for all 
time in the annals of Welsh literature. 

We come now to the greatest of all Welsh prose writers, 
Ellis Wyn o Lasynys (1671-1734). His first work was a 
translation of Jeremy Taylor's^ Holy Living, under the title of 
Rheol Buchedd Sanctaidd (1701). His next work was the 
immortal Gweledigaethau y Bardd Cwsc (1703). The founda- 
tion of this work was L'Estrange's translation of the Suenos 
of the Spaniard Quevedo. Ellis Wyn has certainly followed 
his original closely, even as Shakespeare followed his, but by 
his inimitable magic he has transmuted the characters and the 
scenery of the Spaniard into Welsh characters and scenery of 
the 17th century. No writer before or after him has used the 
Welsh language with such force and skill, and he will ever 
remain the stylist whom all Welsh writers will strive to imitate. 
The magic of his work has endowed the stately idiom of Gwynedd 
with such glamour that it has now become the standard idiom 
of Welsh prose. See Stern, Z. f. celt. Phil. iii. 165 ff. 

7. The Rise of Popular Poetry, 1600-1750. — When Henry 
VII. ascended the throne, the old hostility of the Welsh 
towards the English disappeared. They had realized their 
wildest hope, that of seeing a Welshman wearing " the crown of 
London." Naturally enough, therefore, the descendants of the 
old Welsh gentry began to look towards England for recognition 
and preferment, and their interest in their own little country 
necessarily began to wane. The result was that the traditional 
patrons of the Welsh muse could no longer understand the 
language of the poets, and the poets were forced to seek some 
more profitable employment. Besides, the old conditions were 
changing; the medieval traditions were indeed dying hard, 
but it gradually and imperceptibly came about that the poets of 
the older school had no audience. The only poets who still 
followed the old traditions were the rich farmers who " sang 
on their own land," as the Welsh phrase goes. A new school, 
however, was rising. The nation at large had a vast store of 
folk-poetry, full of all the poetical characteristics of the Celt, 
and it was this very poetry, despised as it was, that became 
ultimately the groundwork of the new literature. 

The first landmark in this new development was the publica- 
tion in 162 1 of Edmwnd Prys's metrical version of the Psalms 
(followed by later editions in 1628, 1630, 1638 and 1648), and of 
the first poem of the Welshmen's Candle (Cannwyll y Cymry) 
of Rhys Pritchard, vicar of Llandovery (1569-1644). This was 
published in 1646. These works were not written in the old 
metres peculiar to Wales, but in the free metres, like those of 
English poetry. The former work is of the utmost importance, 
as these Psalms were about the first metrical hymns in use. 
They are often rugged and uncouth, but many of the verses — 
such as the 23rd Psalm — have a haunting melody of their own, 
which grips the mind once and for ever. The second work, the 
first complete edition of which was published in 1672, consisted 
of moral verses in the metres of the old folk-songs (Penillion 
Telyn), and for nearly two centuries was the " guide, philosopher 
and friend " of the common people. Many other poets of the 



early part of this period wrote in these metres, such as Edward 
Dafydd o Fargam (fl. 1640), Rowland Fychan, Morgan Llwyd o 
Wynedd and William Phylip (d. 1669). Poetry in the free 
metres, however, was generally very crude, until it was given 
a new dignity by the greatest poet of the period, Huw Morus o 
Bont y Meibion (1622-1709). Most of his earlier compositions, 
which are among his best, and which were influenced to a great 
extent by the cavalier poetry of England, are love poems, perfect 
marvels of felicitous ingenuity and sweetness. He fixed the 
poetic canons of the free metres, and made what was before 
homely and uncouth, courtly and dignified. He wrote a cywydd 
marwnad to his contemporary, Edward Morus o'r Perthi Llwydion 
(d. 1689), who was also a poet of considerable merit. Most of 
his work is composed of " moral pieces " and carols. Other 
poets of the period were Sion Dafydd Las (1650-1691), who was 
among the last of the family bards, and Dafydd Jones o Drefriw 
(fl. 1750). Towards the end of the period comes Lewys Morys 
(1700-1765). His poetry alone does not seem to warrant his 
fame, but he was the creator of a new period, the inspirer and 
the patron of Goronwy Owen. According to the lights of the 
18th century, he was, like his brothers Richard and William; 
a scholar. His poetry, except a few well-known pieces, will 
never be popular, because it does not conform to modern canons 
of taste. His greatest merit is that he wrote the popular poetry 
then in vogue with a scholar's elegance. 

8. The Revival, 1750-1830. — The two leading figures in this 
period are Goronwy Owen (172 2-1769) and William Williams, 
Pantycelyn (1717-1791). Goronwy Owen wrote all his poetry 
in the cynghanedd, and his work gave the old metres a new life; 
He raised them from the neglect into which they had fallen, 
and caused them to be/till this day, the vehicle of half the poetical 
thought of Wales. But he was in no way a representative of 
his age; he, like Milton, sang among a crowd of inferior poets 
themes quite detached from the life of his time, so that he also, 
like his English brother, lacks •" human interest." After Dafydd 
ab Gwilym, he is the greatest poet who sang in the old metres, 
and the influence of his correct and fastidious muse remains to 
this day. William Williams, however, wrote in the free metres in 
a way that was astoundingly fresh. It is not enough to say of 
him that he was a hymnologist; he is much more, he is the 
national poet of Wales. He had certainly the loftiest imagina- 
tion of all the poets of five centuries, and his influence on the 
Welsh people can be gauged by the fact that a good deal of his 
idiom and dialect has fixed itself indelibly on modern literary 
Welsh. Besides the hymns, he wrote a religious epic, Theo- 
memphus, which is to this day the national epic of evangelical 
Wales. Even as Goronwy Owen is the father of modern Welsh 
poetry in the old metres, so William Williams is the great fountain- 
head of the free metres, because he set aflame the imagination 
of every poet that succeeded him. With two such pioneers, it is 
natural that the rest of this period should contain many great 
names. Thomas Edwards (Twm o'r Nant) (1739-1810) has 
been called by an unwarrantably bold hyperbole, " the Welsh 
Shakespeare." Most of his works are interludes and ballads, 
and he used to be very popular with the common people; he 
is, to this day, probably the oftenest quoted of all the Welsh 
poets. William Wynn, rector of Llangynhafal (1 704-1 760), 
is the author of a " Cywydd of the Great Judgment," which 
bears comparison with Goronwy Owen's masterpiece. Evan 
Evans (Ieuan Brydydd Hir) (1 731-1789) was famous both as 
a poet and as a scholar and antiquarian. Edward Rhisiart 
(171 4- 1777), the schoolmaster of Ystradmeurig, was a scholar 
and a writer of pastorals in the manner of Theocritus. Most 
of the other poets who flourished towards the end of this period 
— Dafydd Ddu Eryri (1760-1822), Gwallter Mechain (1761- 
1849), Robert ab Gwilym Ddu (1767-1850), Dafydd Ionawr 
(1751-1827), Dewi Wyn o Eifion (1784-1841) — were brought 
into prominence by the Eisteddfod, which began to increase 
in influence during this period until it has become to-day the 
national festival. They all wrote for the most part in cynghanedd, 
and the work of nearly all of them is marked by correctness 
rather than by poetical inspiration. 



WELSH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



649 



9. Prose after 1830. — In the preceding periods, we have seen 
that Welsh prose, though abundant in quantity, had a very 
narrow range. Few writers rose above theological controversy 
or moral treatises, and the humaner side of literature was almost 
entirely neglected. In this period, however, we find a prose 
literature that, with the exception of scientific works, is as 
wide in its range as that of England, and all departments are well 
and competently represented, though by but few names. Dr 
Lewis Edwards (1800-1887) struck a new note when he began 
to contribute his literary and theological essays to the periodicals, 
but, though many have equalled and even surpassed him as 
theological essayists, few, if any, of his followers have attempted 
the literary and critical essays on which his fame as writer must 
mainly rest. Together with Gwilym Hiraethog (1802-1883), 
the author of the inimitable Llythyrau Hen Ffarmwr, he may 
be regarded as the pioneer of the new literature. Samuel 
Roberts (1800-1885), generally known as S.R., wrote numerous 
tracts and books on politics and economics, and as a political 
thinker he was in many respects far in advance of his English 
contemporaries. It was in this period, too, that Wales had her 
national novelist, Daniel Owen (1836-1895). He was a novelist 
of the Dickens school, and delighted like his great master 
" in writing mythology rather than fiction." He has created a 
new literary atmosphere, in which the characters of Puritanical 
and plebeian Wales move freely and without restraint. He can 
never be eclipsed just as Sir Walter Scott cannot be eclipsed, 
because the Wales which he describes is slowly passing away. 
He has many worthy disciples, among whom Miss Winnie Parry 
is easily first. Indeed, in her finer taste and greater firmness 
of touch, she stands on a higher plane than even her great master. 
The inspiring genius of the latter part of this period is Owen 
M. Edwards (b. 1858), and, as a stylist, all writers of Welsh 
prose since Ellis Wynn have to concede him the laurel. His 
little books of travel and history and anecdote have created, 
or rather, are creating a new school of writers, scrupulously 
and almost pedantically careful and correct, an ideal which, 
on its philological side is the outcome of the scientific study of 
the language as inaugurated by Sir John Rhys and Professor 
Morris Jones. One of the earliest, if not the ablest writer of 
this " new Welsh " was the independent and original Emrys 
ap I wan (d. 1906), whose Homiliau was published in 1907. 

10. Poetry after 1820. — The origins of this period are really 
placed in the last period. Its great characteristics are the 
development of the lyric, and the influence of English and 
continental ideas. Just as the cywydd was among the older 
writers the favourite form of poetry, so the lyric becomes now 
paramount, almost to the exclusion of other forms. The first 
great name, after those already mentioned in the development of 
this form of poetry, is that of Anne Griffiths (1776-1805). Her 
poetry is exclusively composed of hymns, but to the English 
mind, the word " hymn " is entirely inadequate to give any idea 
of the passion, the mysticism and the rich symbolistic grace of 
her poems. She gave to the Welsh lyric the depth and the rather 
melancholy intensity which has always characterized it. Evan 
Evans (Ieuan Glan Geirionydd) (1795-1855) was also a hymno- 
logist, but he wrote many secular lyrics and awdlau — among the 
former being the famous Morfa Rkuddlan. Ebenezer Thomas 
(Eben Fardd) (1802-1863) was a famous Eisteddfodwr; his best 
work is his awdlau, and no one will deny him the distinction of 
being the master poet of the awdl in the 19th century. Gwilym 
Cawrdaf (1795-1848), also a writer of awdlau, has the gift of 
simple and direct expression, well exemplified in Hiraeth Cymro 
am ei wlad. Daniel Ddu (1792-1846) was a scholar who wrote 
some touching lyrics and hymns. Gwilym Hiraethog (1802- 
1883) attempted an epic, Emmanuel, with indifferent success. 
His shorter works and some of his awdlau are of a much higher 
order. Caledfryn (1801-1869) was a direct successor of Dewi 
Wyn and the earlier writers of awdlau, but his Drylliad y Rothsay 
Castle is superior to anything which his master wrote. Similar 
in genius, though not on quite as high a plane, were Nicander 
(1809-1874), Cynddelw (1812-1875), Gwalchmai (1803-1897) and 
Tudno (1844-1895). 



John Blackwell (Alun) (1797-1840) was a lyricist of the first 
order. With Ieuan Glan Geirionydd, he is the pioneer of the 
secular lyric of the 19th century. Succeeding to this group of 
lyricists, we have another later group, Ceiriog (1832-1887), 
Talhaiam (1810-1869) and Mynyddog (1833-1877), who certainly 
had the advantage over their predecessors in freshness, in 
vigour and in human interest, but they lacked the scholastic 
training of the earlier group, and so their work is often uneven, 
and cannot therefore be fairly compared with that of the earlier 
poets. Ceiriog, of course, is the greater name of the three, and is 
to Wales what Robert Burns was to Scotland, sharing with him 
his poetical faults and merits. He is called the national poet of 
Wales, because he was the first to sing of the land and the nation 
he knew, and he cast the glamour of his genius over the life of the 
gwerin, the peasants of Wales. 

Somewhat higher flights were essayed by Gwilym Maries 
(1834-1879) and Islwyn (1832-1878). Their poetry is Words- 
worthian and mystical, and well exemplifies the love of meta- 
physics and speculation which is growing in Wales. Islwyn's 
Y storm, though uneven, is full of powerful passages, and he was a 
master of blank verse. Of the remaining poets of the period / 
living in 1908, the most distinguished was the Rev. Elvet Lewis in 
the older generation, and Eifion Wyn in the younger — both 
writers of lyrics. Other lyrical poets of the first class are Gwylfa 
and Silyn Roberts. In the old metres, two poets stand out 
prominent above all others — J. Morris Jones and T. Gwynn 
Jones. The Awdl i F anion of the former, and the Ymadawiad 
Arthur of the latter, gave reason to believe that Welsh poetry 
was only entering on its golden period. 

Authorities. — General. — T. Stephens, Literature of the Kymry 
(London 2 , 1876) ; L. C. Stern in Die Kultur d. Gegenwart, i. xi. 1 pp. 
1 14-130; Gweirydd ap Rhys. Hanes Llenyddiaeth Gymreig, 1300- 
1650 (London, 1885) ; C. Ashton, Hanes Llenyddiaeth Gymreig, 165 1- 
1850 (Liverpool, 1893); J. Loth, Les Mabinogion (2 vols., Paris, 
1889) ; E. Anwyl, Prolegomena to Welsh Poetry (London, 1905), also on 
the Mabinogi in Zeitschr.f. celt. Phil. i. 277 ff. ; LB. John, The Mabin- 
ogiore(London, 1901) ; T. Shankland, Diwygwyr Cymru, reprinted from 
Sereh Gomer (1899); W. J. Gruffydd, Foreign Influences on Welsh 
Literature in the XIV. and XV. Centuries, Guild of Welsh Graduates . 
(1908) ; Gwilym Lleyn, Llyfryddiaeth y Cymry (Llanidloes, 1867) ; 
Robert Williams, Enwogion Cymru (Llandovery, 1852) ; Owen Jones, 
Cymru (2 vols., London, 1875); D. W. Nash, History of the Battle 
of Cattraeth (Tenby, 1861); Encyclopaedia Cambrensis (10 vols., 
2 1 889-1 896); C. Ashton, Bywyd ac amserau yr Esgob Morgan 
(Treherbert, 1891); J. Foulkes, /. Ceiriog Hughes, ei fywyd a'i 
waith (Liverpool, 1887); J. M. Jones, Llenyddiaeth fy ngwlad (Holy- 
well, 1893) ; H. Elvet Lewis, Sweet Singers of Wales (London, 1889) ; 
H. W. Lloyd, Welsh Books Printed Abroad in the XVI. and XVII. 
Centuries (London, 1881). 

Anthologies, Selected Prose and Verse, &c. — W. F. Skene, The 
Four Ancient Books of Wales (2 vols., Edinburgh, 1868); W. Owen 
(Pughe), Iolo Morganwg and Owen Jones (Myfyr), Myvyrian Archai- 
ology of Wales (3 vols., London, 1801; 2 Denbigh, 1870, in 1 vol.); 
Dr John Davies (o Fallwyd), Flores Poetarum Britannicorum (Shrews- 
bury, 1710; Swansea, 1814; reprinted London, 1864); Iolo 
Morganwg, Iolo Manuscripts (Llandovery, 1848); E. Evans, Some 
Specimens of the Poetry of the Antient Welsh Bards translated into 
English, &c. (London, 1764); Hugh Jones, Dewisol Ganiadau yr 
Oes Hon (Shrewsbury, 1759; 6 Merthyr, 1827), Diddanwch Teuluaidd 
(London, 1763); David Jones, Blodeugerdd Cymry (Shrewsbury 2 , 
1779); Owen Jones, Ceinion Llenyddiaeth Gymreig (2 vols., London, 
1876); W. Lewis Jones, Caniadau Cymru (Bangor 2 , 1908); W. 
Jenkyn Thomas, Penillion Telyn (Carnarvon, 1894); Myrddin 
Fardd, Cynfeirdd Lleyn (1905) ; Cyfres Lien Cymru, vols, i.-vi. 
(Cardiff, 1900-1906) ; W. J. Gruffydd, Y Flodeugerdd Newydd 
(Cardiff, 1908) ; 0. M. Edwards, Beirdd y Berwyn (Conway, 1903). 

Versification, &c, — Dafydd Morganwg, Yr Ysgol Farddol (Cardiff 3 , 
1887); Iolo Morganwg, Cyfrinach Beirdd Ynys Prydain (Merthyr, 
1829 ; 2 Carnarvon, 1874) ; Simwnt Vychan and Dafydd Ddu Athraw, 
Dosparlh Edeyrn Davod Aur, ed. by J. Williams ab Ithel (Llandovery, 
1856) ; J. Morris Jones, " Welsh Versification," Zeitschr.f. celt. Phil. 
iv. pp. 106-142. 

Collected Works, Editions and Reprints, — J. Gwenogvryn Evans 
and John Rhys, Y Llyyyr Coch Hergest (2 vols. Oxford, 1887-1890), 
Pedeir Kainc y Mabinogi (Oxford, 1897); J. Gwenogvryn Evans, 
The Black Book of Carmarthen (Oxford, 1907; also in facsimile, 
Oxford, 1888), Llyvyr Job trans. byDr Morgan, 1558 (reprinted 1888)., 
Oil Synwyr pen [Salesbury] (Bangor, 1902) ; J. Morris Jones and 
John Rhys, Llyvyr Agkyr Llandewivrevi (Oxford, 1894); Aneurin 
Owen, Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales (2 vols., London, 1841), 
Brut y Tywysogion (London, 1863); J. Williams ab Ithel, Gododin 
with Notes and Translation (Llandovery, 1852); T. Stephens, 



650 



[BRETON LITERATURE 



Gododin with Notes and Translation, ed. by T. Powel (London, 1888) ; 
R. Williams, Selections from the Hengwrt MSS. (2 vols., London, 
1876-1892); T. Powel, Ystorya de Carolo Magno (London, 1883), 
Psalmau Dafydd trans, by W. Morgan (facsimile, 1896) ; Owen Jones 
(Myfyr) and W. Owen (Pughe), Barddoniaeth Dafydd ab Gwilym 
(London, 1789) ; Walter Davies and J. Jones, Poetical Works of 
Lewis Glyn Cothi (1837); Prince Louis Bonaparte, Athrawaeth 
Gristnogavl by Morys Clynoc (facsimile London, 1880) ; Walter 
Davies, Caniadau Huw Morus (2 vols., 1823), Psalmau Dafydd gan 
W. Middleton (Llanfair, 1827) ; J. Morris Jones, Gweledugaethai y 
Bardd cwsc gan Elis Wynne (Bangor, 1 898) ; R. Jones, The Poetical 
Works of Goronwy Owen (2 vols., London, 1876); W. J. Gruffydd, 
Cywyddau Goronwy Owen (Newport, 1906) ; T. E. Ellis, Gweithiau 
Morgan Llwyd (Bangor, 1899); J. H. Davies, Yn y Llyvyr hwn 
(Bangor, 1902) ; S. J. Evans, Drych y Prif Oesoedd gan Th. Evans 
(Bangor, 1902) ; W. P. Williams, Deffyniad Ffydd Eglwys Loegr gan 
Morys Kyffin (Bangor, 1908) ; N. Cynhafal Jones, Gweithiau W. 
Williams Pantycelyn (2 vols., 1 887-1891); O. M. Edwards, Gweithiau 
Islwyn (1897). (W. J. G.) 

V. Breton Literature. — Unlike the literature of Wales, the 
literature of Brittany is destitute of originality, and we find 
nothing to compare with the Mabinogion. Till the 19th century- 
all the monuments which have come down to us are copies of 
French models, though the retention down to the 17 th century of 
that intricate system of versification found in Welsh and Cornish 
may indicate that what was really Breton in spirit has riot been 
preserved (v. J. Loth, La Melrique galloise, ii. 177-203). 
It is usual to divide the literature into three periods in con- 
formity with the language in which the monuments are written — ■ 
Old, Middle, and Modern Breton. No connected monuments of 
the first period (8th to nth centuries) have come down to us: 
For our knowledge of the language of this period we must have 
recourse to the manuscripts containing glosses and the names 
occurring in ancient documents. The chief collections of glosses 
are (1) the Oxford glosses on Eutychius; (2) the Luxemburg 
glosses; (3) the Bern glosses on Virgil; (4) the glosses on 
Amalarius (Corpus Christi, Cambridge); (5) five Collationes 
Canonum, the chief manuscripts being at Paris and Orleans. All 
these glosses have been published in one volume by J. Loth 
( Vocabulaire Vieux-Breton, Paris, 1 884) . From a linguistic point 
of view the Breton names in the Latin lives of saints are very 
important, particularly those of St Samson, St Paul, Aurelian, 
St Winwaloe, St Ninnoc, St Gildas and St Brieuc. Of even 
greater value are the names in the Charter of Redon, which was 
written in the nth century, but dates largely from the 9th 
(published by A. de Courson, 1865); we 'may also mention the 
Charter of Landevennec (nth century). In the Middle Breton 
period, which extends from the nth to the 17th centuries, we are 
obliged, down to the 15th century, to rely on official documents 
such as the Charter of Quimperle. French seems to have been 
the language of the aristocracy and the medium of culture. 
Hence the oldest connected texts are either translated or imitated 
from French, and are full of French words. We might mention a 
Book of Hours belonging to the 16th century, published by 
Whitley Stokes, and three religious poems bound up with the 
Grand Mystere de Jesus; further, the Life of St Catherine (1576) in 
prose (published by Ernault, Revue celtique, viii. 76), translated 
from the Golden Legend, the Mirror of Death, containing 3360 
verses, which was composed in 1519 and printed in 1576, the 
Mirror of Confession, a translation from the French in prose 
(1621), the Christian Doctrine, a translation in verse (1622), 
a collection of carols {An Nouelou ancien, 1650, Rev. celt. vols, 
x.-xiii.) and the Christian Meditations of J. Cadec, 1651 (Rev. Celt, 
xx. 56). The earliest Breton printed work is the Catholicon of 
Jean Lagadeuc, a Breton-Latin-French dictionary, dated 1464 
but printed first in 1499 (reprinted by R. F. Le Men, Lorient, 
1867). Modern Breton begins with the orthographical reforms 
of the Jesuit, Julien Maunoir, whose grammar (Le SacrS College 
de Jesus) and dictionary appeared in 1659. Throughout the 
modern period we find numerous collections of religious poems 
and manuals of devotion in prose and verse, which we cannot 
here attempt to enumerate. But the bulk of Breton litera- 
ture before the 19th century consists of mysteries and miracle 
plays. This class of literature had a tremendous vogue in 
Brittany, and the native stage was only killed about 1850. 



It is stated, for instance, that no less than 15,000 copies 
were sold of the Tragedy of the Four Sons of Aymon, first 
published in 1815. It is impossible to give the titles of all the 
dramas which have come down to us (about 120). The manuscript 
collection of the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris is described 
in the Revue celtique, xi. 389-423 (many since published) and 
Le Braz gives a useful list of other manuscripts in the biblio- 
graphical appendix to his TMdtre celtique. A few of these plays 
belong to the Middle Breton period. The Life of St Nonn, the 
mother of St David, belongs to the end of the 15th century, 
and follows the Latin life (published by Ernault in the Revue 
celtique, viii. 230 ff., 405 ff.). Le Grand Mystere de J&sus 
(1513) follows the French play of Arnoul Gresban and Jean 
Michel (published by H. de la Villemarque, Paris, 1865). A 
French original is also followed in the Mystere de Sainte Barbe 
(1st ed., 1557, 2nd ed., 1647, reprinted by Ernault, Nantes, 
(1885). These mystery plays may be divided into four categories 
according to the subjects with which they deal: (1) Old Testa- 
ment subjects; (2) New Testament subjects; (3) lives of 
saints; (4) romances of chivalry. There is occasionally a dash of 
local colouring in these plays; but the subject matter is taken 
from French sources or, in the case of the third category, from 
Latin lives. Even when the life of a Breton saint, e.g. St 
Gwennolfi, is dramatized, the treatment is the traditional one 
accorded to all saints of whatever origin. Amongst the most 
favourite subjects in addition to those already mentioned we may 
note the following: Vie des quatre fils, Aymon, Ste Tryphine et le 
red Arthur, Huon de Bordeaux, Vie de Louis Eunius, Robert le 
Diable. These mysteries commonly contain from 5000 to 9000 
lines of either 1 2 or 8 syllables apiece. For the sake of complete- 
ness we may add the names of three farces, described by Le 
Braz: Ar Farvel goapaer (Le bouffon moqueur), Ian Melargt 
(Mardi-gras), La Vie de Mardi-gras, de triste Mine, safemme, et de 
ses enfants. The actors, who were always peasants, came to be 
regarded with an unfavourable eye by the clergy, who finally 
succeeded in killing the Breton stage. 

We look in vain for any manifestation of originality in Breton 
literature until we reach the 19th century. The consciousness 
of nationality then awakened and found expression in verse. 

The movement led by Le Gonidec (described above in the 
section on Breton language) caused ardent patriots to endeavour 
to create a national literature, more especially when the attention 
of the whole world of letters was directed to Brittany after the 
publication of the Barzas Breiz. The most prominent of these 
pioneers were Auguste Brizeux, F. M. Luzel and Prosper Proux. 
Brizeux (1803-1858), better known as a French poet, wrote a 
collection of lyrics entitled Telen Arvor, or the Armorican Harp 
(Lorient, 1844, reprinted Paris, 1903). Luzel's original com- 
positions were published under the title of Bepred Breizad, 
Toujours Breton (Morlaix, 1865), and Prosper Proux is known as 
the author of Canaouenno grit gant eur C'hernewod (1838) and 
Ar Bombard Kerne, or The Hautboy of Cornouailles (Guingamp, 
1866). Dottin also mentions Telenn Remengol, by J. Lescour 
(Brest, 1867) ; Telenn Gwengam, by the same writer (Brest, 1869), 
a volume of Chansoniou by Y. M. Thomas (Lannion, 1870), and 
another by C. Rannou. This was a very creditable beginning, 
but the themes of these writers are apt to be somewhat conven- 
tional and the constant recurrence of the same situation or the 
same idea grows monotonous. An anthology of poems connected 
with this movement appeared at Quimperle in 1862 under the 
title of Bleuniou Breiz, Poisies anciennes et modemes de la Basse- 
Bretagne (reprinted, Paris, 1905). Several of La Fontaine's 
fables were published in a Breton dress by P. D. de Goesbriand 
(Morlaix, 1836), and a collection of fables in verse which is 
thought very highly of by cultivated Bretons appeared under the 
title of Marvaillou Grac'h koz by G. Milin (Brest, 1867). A book 
of Georgics in the dialect of Vannes appeared under the title of 
Lew al labourer (The Farmer's Book) by 1' Abbe Guillome (Vannes, 
1849), and Le Gonidec prepared a translation of the Scriptures, 
which was revised by Troude and Milin, and published at St 
Brieuc in 1868. But the real literature of Brittany consists of 
legends, folk-tales and ballads. The first to tap this source was 



CORNISH LITERATURE] 



CELT 



651 



Hersart de la Villemarque (1815-1895), who issued in 1839 his 
famous collection of ballads entitled Barzas Breiz, but which 
cannot be regarded as an anthology of Breton popular poetry. 
The publication of this work gave rise to a controversy which 
is almost as famous as that caused by Macpherson's forgeries. 
De la Villemarque was endowed with considerable poetic gifts, 
and, coming as he did at a time when folk-poetry was the fashion, 
he determined to collect the popular literature of hisown country. 
However, he was not content to publish the poems as he found 
them circulating in Brittany. With the aid of several colla- 
borators he transformed his material, eliminating anything that 
was crude and gross. The poems included in his collection may 
be divided into three classes: (1) Poems rearranged by himself 
or others. These consist mainly of love-songs and ballads. 
(2) Modern poems transferred to medieval times. (3) Spurious 
poems dealing with such personages as Nominoe and Merlin. 
The compiler of the Barzas Breiz unfortunately laboured under 
the delusion that these Breton folk-songs were in the first 
instance the work of medieval bards corresponding to Taliessin 
and Llywarch Hen in Wales, and that it was possible to make 
them appear in their primitive dress. The very title of the 
collection indicates the artificial nature of the contents. For 
Barzas (in the 2nd edition of 1867 spelt Barzaz) is not a Breton 
word at all but is formed on Welsh barddas (bardic poems). 
For the whole controversy the reader may consult H. Gaidoz and 
P. Sebillot, " Bibliographie des traditions et de la litterature 
populaire de la Bretagne " {Revue celtique, v. 277 ff., and 
G. Dottin in the Revue de synthese historique, viii. 95 ff.). In 
Brittany it is usual to divide the popular poetry into gwerziou 
and soniou. The gwerziou (complaintes) deal with local history, 
folk-lore, religious legends and superstitions, and are in general 
much more original than the other class. The soniou consist of 
love-songs, satires, carols and marriage-lays, as well as others 
dealing with professional occupations, and seem in many cases 
to show traces of French influence. The first scholar who 
published the genuine ballad literature of Brittany was F. M. 
Luzel, who issued two volumes under the title of Gwerziou 
Breiz-Izel, chants populaires de la Basse-Bretagne (Lorient and 
Paris, 1868, 1874). This collection contains several of the 
originals of poems in the Barzas Breiz. Luzel is also the author 
of a collection of Breton tales in French translation, Conies 
bretons recueillis et Iraduits par F. M. Luzel (Quimperle, 1870). 
The same author published Les L'egendes chreliennes de la Basse- 
Bretagne (Paris, 1881) and Veillees bretonnes, maeurs, chants, 
contes etrecits populaires des Bretons- Armoricains (Morlaix, 1879). 
Another indefatigable collector of Breton legends is Anatole le 
Braz, who was commissioned by the minister of public instruction 
to investigate the stories current with reference to An Ankou 
(death). Le Braz's results are to be found in his La LSgende de 
la mort (1902 2 ). A well-known collection of stories with a 
French translation was issued by the lexicographer Trbude under 
the title of Ar marvailler brezounek (Brest, 1870), and one of the 
most popular books at the present day is Pipi Gonto, by A. le Moal 
(St Brieuc, vol. i. 1902, vol. ii. 1908). A recent collection of 
stories with a religious tendency is C. M. le Prat's Marvailhou ar 
Vretoned (Brest, 1907). The modern movement, which started 
in the 'nineties of last century, has already produced numerous 
dramas and volumes of lyrics, and it may now be affirmed in all 
seriousness that Brittany is producing something really national. 
The scope of the writers of the earlier movement was very 
■ limited and little originality was displayed in their productions. 
The literary output of the last ten years in Brittany may truly 
be termed prodigious, and much of it reaches quite a high level. 
The dramas which are being produced are mainly propagandist 
in the interests either of the Union RSgionaliste Bretonne or of 
temperance reform. These are for the most part very crude, 
but they have been received with great enthusiasm, and this has 
led to the revival of the old mysteries, though in a somewhat 
modified form. The foremost living writer is Fanch Jaffrennou, 
who writes under the name of " Taldir " (Brow of Steel) and is the 
author of two very striking volumes of lyrics — An Hirvoudou 
or Sighs (St Brieuc, 1899) and An Delen Dir or The Harp of 



Steel (St Brieuc, 1900). The latter is the most interesting out- 
come of the modern movement. Among other poets we may 
mention N. Quellien (Annaik, Paris, 1880; Breiz, Poisies 
bretonnes, Paris, 1898), Erwan Berthou (Dre an Delen hag ar 
c'horn-boud, Par la harpe et par le cor de guerre, St Brieuc, 1904), 
C. M. le Prat, who writes under the name of Klaoda (Mouez 
Reier Plougastel, " The Voice of the Cliffs of Plougastel," St 
Brieuc, 1905), J. Cuillandre (Mouez an Aochcu, La Voix des 
greves, Rennes, 1903), abbe Lec'hvien, Gwerziou ha soniou (St 
Brieuc, 1900), and, further, two anonymous volumes of verse, 
An Tremener, Gwerziou ha soniou (Brest, 1900), and Kanaou- 
ennou Kerne (Brest, 1900). Two older collections are mentioned 
by Dottin — J. Cadiou, En Breiz-Izel (Morlaix, 1885) and Ivona 
(Morlaix, 1886). An anthology of latter-day lyrics appeared at 
Rennes in 1902 under the title of Bleuniou Breiz-Izel, Dibab 
Barzoniezou. Of the numerous plays those most deserving of 
mention from a literary point of view are perhaps Ar Vezventi 
by T. le Garrec; the comedy Alanik al Louarn by J. M. Perrot 
(Brest, 1905) based on the farce of Pathelin; Tanguy Malmanche, 
Le Conte de I'dme qui a faim, in which Breton superstitions 
connected with the spirits of the dead are introduced with 
strange effect; J. le Bayon, En Eutru Keriolet (Vannes, 1902), 
which deals with the life and death of a blaspheming Breton 
nobleman of the early part of the 17th century; F. Jaffrennou, 
Pontkallek (Brest, 1903), which tells of the betrayal of a noble 
Breton who was put to death by the French in 1720; and the 
farce Eur Pesk-Ebrel by L. Rennadis (Morlaix, 1900). 

Authorities. — A history of Breton literature does not exist, 
though we possess ample materials for such a work. The following 
works and articles may be consulted: G. Dottin. Revue de synthese 
historique, viii, 93-104, contains a full bibliography; J. Loth, 
Chrestomathie bretonne (Paris, 1890); L. C. Stern in Die Kultur d. 
Gegenwart, i. xi. 1, pp. 132-137; A. le Braz, Le Theatre celtique 
(Paris, 1904) ; H. Gaidoz and P. Sebillot, " Bibliographie des 
traditions et de la litterature populaire de la Bretagne " (Revue 
celtique, v. 277-338; supplement by P. Sebillot, Revue de Bretagne, 
de Vendee, et d'Anjou, 1894); F. M. Luzel, " Formules initiates et 
finales des conteurs en Basse-Bretagne " (Revve celtique, iii. 336 ff.) ; 
L. F. Sauve, " Formulettes et traditions diverses de la Basse- 
Bretagne " (Revue celtique, v. 157 ff.) ; Channes, " Oraisons et con- 
jurations magiques," ib vi. 66 ff. ; " Devinettes bretonnes," ib. iv 
60 ff. ; " Proverbes et dictons de la Basse-Bretagne," ib. i.-iii. 
For Breton proverbs see also A. Brizeux, " Furnez Breiz," in CEuvres 
de A. Brizeux (Paris, 1903) ; J. Loth, " Chansons en bas-vannetais " 
(Revue celtique, vii. 171 ff.) ; N. Quellien, Chansons et danses des 
Bretons (Paris, 1889); E. Ernault, " Chansons populaires" (Revue 
celtique, xxiii. 121 ff.) ; P. le Roux, " Une Chanson bretonne du xviii 
siecle " (Revue celtique, xix. 1). Since 1901 a complete bibliography of 
modern works pertaining to Breton language and literature appears 
from time to time in the Annates de Bretagne. (E. C. Q.V 

VI. Cornish Literature. — The literature of Cornwall is 
more destitute of originality and more limited in scope than that 
of Brittany, and it is remarkable that the medieval drama should 
occupy the most prominent place in both. The earliest Cornish 
we know consists of proper names and a vocabulary. About 200 
Cornish names occur among the manumissions of serfs in the 
Bodmin Gospels (10th century). They were printed by 
Whitley Stokes in the Revue celtique, i. 232. Next comes the 
Cotton ian Vocabulary, which seems to follow a similar Anglo- 
Saxon collection and is contained in a 12th-century MS. at the 
British Museum. It consists of seven pages and the words are 
classified under various headings, such as heaven and earth, 
different parts of the human body, birds, beasts, fishes, trees, 
herbs,, ecclesiastical and liturgical terms. At the end we find a 
number of adjectives. This vocabulary was printed by Zeuss 2 , 
p. 1065, and again in alphabetical order by Norris in the Ordinalia. 
The language of this document is termed Old Cornish, although 
the forms it contains correspond to those of Mid. Welsh and 
Mid. Breton. 

The first piece of connected Cornish which we know consists of 
a poem, or portion of a play (?), of forty-one lines discovered by 
Jenner in the British Museum. This fragment was probably 
written about 1400 and deals with the subject of marriage 
(edited by W. Stokes in the Revue celtique, iv. 258). A little 
later is the Poem of Mount Calvary or the Passion, of which 
five MSS. are in existence. The poem has been twice printed, * 



652 



CELT 



first by Davies Gilbert with English translation by John Keigwin 
(1826), and again by W. Stokes for the London Philological 
Society in 1862. It consists of 259 stanzas of eight lines of 
seven syllables apiece, and contains a versified narrative of the 
events of the Passion made up from the Gospels and apocryphal 
sources, notably the Gospel of Nicodemus. But the bulk of 
Cornish literature is made up of plays, and in this connexion it 
may be noted that there still exist in the west of Cornwall the 
remains of a number of open-air amphitheatres, locally called 
plan an guari, where the plays seem to have been acted. The 
earliest representatives of this kind of literature in Cornwall 
form a trilogy going under the name of Ordinalia, of which 
three MSS. are known, one a 15th-century Oxford MS. from 
which the two others are copied. The Ordinalia were published 
by Edwin Norris under the title of The Ancient Cornish Drama 
(Oxford, 1859). The first play is called Origo Mundi and deals 
with events from the Old Testament down to the building of 
Solomon's temple. The second play, the Passio Domini, goes 
on without interruption into the third, the Resurrectio Domini, 
which embraces the Harrowing of Hell, the Resurrection and 
Ascension, the legend of St Veronica and Tiberius, and the 
death of Pilate. Here again the pseudo-Gospel of Nicodemus 
is drawn upon, and interwoven with the Scriptural narrative 
we find the Legend of the Cross. As the title Ordinalia indicates, 
these plays are of learned origin and are imitated from English 
sources. The popular name for these dramas, quari-mirkle, 
is a literal translation of the English term miracle play, and 
Norris shows that whole passages were translated word for word. 
Many of the events are represented as having taken place in 
well-known Cornish localities, but apart from this scarcely any 
traces of originality can be discovered. The same remark holds 
good in the case of another play, Beunans Meriasek or the Life 
of St Meriasek. This deals in an incoherent manner with the 
life and death of Meriasek (in Breton Meriadek), the son of a 
duke of Brittany, and interwoven with this theme is the legend 
of St Silvester and the emperor Constantine, quite regardless 
of the circumstance that St Silvester lived in the 4th and St 
Meriasek in the 7th century. The MS. of this play was written 
by " Dominus Hadton " in the year 1504, and is preserved in the 
Peniarth library. The language is more recent than that of the 
Ordinalia, and there is a certain admixture of English. The 
Life of St Meriasek falls into two parts, and at the end of each the 
spectators are invited to carouse. St Meriasek was in earlier 
times the patron saint of Camborne, where his fountain is still 
to be seen and pilgrims to it were known by the name of Merra- 
sickers. In this play, consequently, we might expect to find 
something really Cornish. But le Braz has shown that the 
author of this motley drama was content to draw his materials 
from Latin and English lives of saints. The story of Meriasek 
himself was taken from a Breton source and closely resembles 
the narrative of the 17th-century Breton hagiographer, Albert 
le Grand. The last play we have to mention is Gwreans an Bys 
(The Creation of the World), of which five complete copies are 
known. Two of these are in the Bodleian and one in the British 
Museum, which also possesses a further fragment. The oldest 
text was revised by William Jordan of Helston in 161 1, but 
there are indications that parts of it at any rate are older than 
the Reformation. This play bears a great resemblance to the 
first part of the Origo Mundi, and may have been imitated from 
it. It was printed first by Davies Gilbert in 1827 with a transla- 
tion by John Keigwin, and again by W. Stokes in the Transactions 
of the London Philological Society for 1864. The language shows 
considerable signs of decay, and Lucifer and his angels are often 
made to speak English. The only other original compositions 
of any length written in Cornish are Nebbaz Gerriau dro tho 
Carnoack (A Few Words about Cornish) , by John Boson (printed 
in the Journal of the Royal Institution of Cornwall, 1879), and the 
Story of John of Chy-an-Hur (Ram's House) , a folk- tale which 
appears in Ireland and elsewhere. The latter was printed in 
Lhuyd's Grammar and in Pryce's Archaeologia. Andrew Borde's 
Booke of the Introduction of Knowledge (1542) contains some 
> Cornish conversations (see Archiv f. celt. Lexikographie, vol. i.), 



and in Carew's Survey of Cornwall a number of words and phrases 
are to be found. Apart from the Cornish preface to Lhuyd's 
Grammar, the other remains of the language consist of a few 
songs, verses, proverbs, epigrams, epitaphs, maxims, letters, 
conversations, mottoes and translations of chapters and passages 
of Scripture, the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, the Commandments, 
King Charles's Letter, &c. These fragments are to be found 
(1) in the Gwavas MS. in the British Museum, a collection 
ranging in date from 1709 to 1736; (2) in the Borlase MS. 
(1750); (3) in Pryce's Archaeologia Cornu-Britannica (1790); 
(4) in D. Gilbert's editions of the Poem of the Passion (i826) : 
and the Creation of the World (1827). They are enumerated, 
classified and described by Jenner in his Handbook. 

Authorities. — H. Jenner, Handbook of the Cornish Language 
(London, 1904) ; A. le Rraz, Le Thedtre celtigue (Paris, 1905) ; E. 
Norris, The Ancient Cornish Drama (2 vols., Oxford, 1859); T C. 
Peter, The Old Cornish Drama (London, 1906) ; L. C. Stern, Die 
Kultur d. Gegenwart, i. xi. 1, pp. 131-132. (E. C. Q.) 

CELT, a word in common use among British and French 
archaeologists to describe the hatchets, adzes or chisels of chipped 
or shaped stone used by primitive man. The word is variously 
derived from the Welsh cellt, a flintstone (that being the material 
of which the weapons are chiefly made, though celts of basalt 
felstone and jade are found) ; from being supposed to be the 
implement peculiar to the Celtic peoples; or from a Low Latin 
word celtis, a chisel. The last derivation is more probably 
correct. The word has come to be somewhat loosely applied to 
metal as well as stone axe-heads. The general form of stone celts 
is that of blades approaching an oval in section, with sides more 
or less straight and one end broader and sharper than the other. 
In length they vary from about 2 to as much as 16 in. The 
largest and finest specimens are found in Denmark: one in an 
English collection being of beautiful white flint 13 in. long, i| in. 
thick and 35 in. broad. Those found in Denmark are sometimes 
polished, but usually are left rough. Those found in north- 
western Europe are ground to a more or less smooth surface. 
That some were held in the hand and others fixed in wooden 
handles is clear from the presence of peculiar polished spaces 
produced by the friction of the wood. In the later stone adzes 
holes are sometimes found pierced to receive the handles. 

The bronze celts vary in size from an inch to a foot in length. 
The earlier specimens are much like the stone ones in shape and 
design, but the later manufactures show a marked improvement, 
the metal being usually pierced to receive the handles. It is 
noteworthy that the celtmakers never cast their axes with a 
transverse hole through which the handle might pass. Bronze 
celts are usually plain, but some are ornamented with ridges, 
dots or lines. That they were made in the countries where they 
are found is proved by the presence of moulds. 

A point worthy of mention is the position which stone celts 
hold in the folk-lore and superstitious beliefs of many lands. 
In the West of England the country folks believe the weapons 
fell originally from the sky as " thunderbolts," and that the water 
in which they are boiled is a specific for rheumatism. In the 
North and Scotland they are preservatives against cattle diseases. 
In Brittany a stone celt is thrown into a well to purify the water. 
In Sweden they are regarded as a protection against lightning. 
In Norway the belief is that, if they are genuine thunderbolts, a 
thread tied round them when placed on hot coals will not burn 
but will become moist. In Germany, Spain, Italy, the same 
beliefs prevail. In Japan the stones are accounted of medicinal , 
value, while in Burma and Assam they are infallible specifics for 
ophthalmia. In Africa they are the weapons of the Thunder- 
God. In India and among the Greeks the hatchet appears to 
have had a sacred importance, derived, doubtless, from the 
universal superstitious awe with which these weapons of pre- 
historic man were regarded. 

See Sir J. Evans's Ancient Stone Implements of Great Britain; 
Lord Avebury's Prehistoric Times (1865-1900) and Origin of Civiliza- 
tion (1870); E. B. Tylor's Anthropology, and Primitive Culture, &c. 
For the history of polished stone axes up to the 17th century see 
Dr Marcel Bandouin and Lionel Bonnemere in the Bulletin de la 
Societe d' Anthropologic de Paris, April-May 1905. 



CELTES— CEMENT 



6 53 



CELTES, KONRAD (1459-1508), German humanist and Latin 
poet, the son of a vintner named Pickel (of which Celtes is the 
Greek translation), was born at Wipfeld near Schweinfurt. He 
early ran away from home to avoid being set to his father's 
trade, and at Heidelberg was lucky enough to find a generous 
patron in Johann von Dalberg and a teacher in Agricola. After 
the death of the latter (1485) Celtes led the wandering life of 
a scholar of the Renaissance, visiting most of the countries of 
the continent, teaching in various universities, and everywhere 
establishing learned societies on the model of the academy of 
Pom'ponius.Laetus at Rome. Among these was the Sodalitas 
litteraria Rhenana or Celtica at Mainz (1491). In i486 he pub- 
lished his first book, Ars versificandi et carminum, which created 
an immense sensation and gained him the honour of being 
crowned as the first poet laureate of Germany, the ceremony 
be'ing performed by the emperor Frederick III. at the diet of 
Nuremberg in 1487. In 1497 he was appointed by the emperor 
Maximilian I. professor of poetry and rhetoric at Vienna, and in 
1 502 was made head of the new Collegium Poetarum et Mathe- 
maticorum, with the right of conferring the laureateship. He 
did much to introduce system into the methods of teaching, to 
purify the Latin of learned intercourse, and to further the study 
of the classics, especially the Greek. But he was more than a 
mere classicist of the Renaissance. He was keenly interested in 
history and topography, especially in that of his native country. 
It was he who first unearthed (in the convent of St Emmeran at 
Regensburg) the remarkable Latin poems of the nun Hrosvitha 
of Gandersheim, of which he published an edition (Nuremberg, 
1 501), the historical poem Ligurinus sive de rebus gestis Frederici 
primi imperatoris libri x. (Augsburg, 1507), and the celebrated 
map of the Roman empire known as the Tabula Peutingeriana 
(after Konrad Peutinger, to whom he left it). He projected a 
great work on Germany; but of this only the Germania generalis 
and an historical work in prose, De origine, situ, moribus et 
institutis Nurimbergae libellus, saw the light. As a writer of 
Latin verse Celtes far surpassed any of his predecessors. He 
composed odes, elegies, epigrams, dramatic pieces and an un- 
finished epic, the Theodoriceis. His epigrams, edited by Hart- 
felder, were published at Berlin in 1881. His editions of the 
classics are now, of course, out of date. He died at Vienna on 
the 4th of February 1508. 

For a full list of Celtes's works see Engelbert Klijpfel, De vita et 
scriptis Conradi Celtis (2 vols., Freiburg, 1827); also Johann Asch- 
bach, Die friiheren Wanderjahre des Conrad Celtes (Vienna, 1869) ; 
Hartmann, Konrad Celtes in Niirnberg (Nuremberg, 1889). 

CELTIBERIA, a term used by Greek and Roman writers to 
denote, sometimes the whole north-east of Spain, and sometimes 
the north-east part of the central plateau of the peninsula. 
The latter was probably the correct use. The Celtiberi, in this 
narrower sense, were not so much one tribe as a group of cantons — 
Arevaci, Pelendones, Berones and four or five others. They were 
the most warlike people in Spain, and for a long time offered a 
stubborn resistance to the Romans. Originally Carthaginian 
mercenaries, they were induced to serve the Romans in a similar 
capacity, and Livy (xxiv. 49) distinctly states that they were the 
first mercenaries in the Roman army. They did not, however, 
keep faith, and several campaigns were undertaken against them. 
In 179 B.C. the whole country was subdued by T. Sempronius 
Gracchus, who by his generous treatment of the vanquished 
gained their esteem and affection. In 153 they again revolted, 
and were not finally overcome until the capture of Numantia 
(133). The twenty years' war waged round this city, and its 
siege and destruction by Scipio the Younger (133 B.C.) form only 
the most famous episode in the long struggle, which has left its 
mark in entrenchments near Numantia excavated in 1906-1907 
by German archaeologists. After the fall of Numantia, and still 
more after the death of Sertorius (72 B.C.), the Celtiberians 
became gradually romanized, and town life grew up among their 
valleys; Clunia, for instance, became a Roman municipality, 
and ruins of its walls, gates and theatre testify to its civilization; 
while Bilbilis (Bambola), another municipality, was the birth- 
place of the eminently Roman poet Martial. The Celtiberians 



may have been so called because they were thought to be the 
descendants of Celtic immigrants from Gaul into Iberia (Spain), 
or because they were regarded (cf. Lucan iv. 9) as a mixed race 
of Celts and Spaniards (Iberians) ; in either case the name repre- 
sents a geographer's theory rather than an ascertained fact. 
That a strong Celtic element existed in Spain is proved both by 
numerous traditions and by the more trustworthy evidence of 
place-names. The Celtic place-names of Spain, however, are 
not confined to Celtiberia or even to the north and east; they 
occur even in the south and west. 

A long description of the manners and customs of the Celtiberi 
is given by Diodorus Siculus (v. 33, 34). Their country was rough 
and unfruitful as a whole (barley, however, was cultivated), being 
chiefly used for the pasture of sheep. Its inhabitants either led a 
nomadic life or occupied small villages; large towns were few. 
Their infantry and cavalry were both excellent. In battle, they 
adopted the wedge-shaped formation of the column. They carried 
double-edged swords and short daggers for use hand to hand, the 
steel of which was hardened by being buried underground; their 
defensive armour was a light Gallic shield or a round wicker buckler, 
and greaves of felt round their legs. They wore brazen helmets 
with purple crests, and rough-haired black cloaks, in which they slept 
on the bare ground. Like the Cantabri, they washed themselves with 
urine instead of water. They were said to offer sacrifice to a nameless 
god (Strabo iii. p. 164) at the time of the full moon when all the 
household danced together before the doors of the houses. Although 
cruel to their enemies, they were hospitable to strangers. They ate 
meat of all kinds, and drank a kind of mead. E. Hiibner's article 
in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopddie, iii. (1886-1893), collects all 
the ancient references, which are almost all brief. Strabo's notice 
(bk. iii.), based perhaps on Poseidonius, is fullest. (F. J. H.) 

CEMENT (from Lat. caementum, rough pieces of stone, a 
shortened form of caedimentum, from caedere, to cut), apparently 
first used of a mixture of broken stone, tiles, &c, with some 
binding material, and hence of any material capable of adhering 
to, and uniting into a coherent mass, fragments of a substance 
not in itself adhesive. The term is often applied to adhesive 
mixtures employed to unite objects or parts of objects (see below), 
but in engineering, when used without qualification, it means 
Portland cement, its modifications and congeners; these are all 
hydraulic cements, i.e. when set they resist the action of water, and 
can, under favourable conditions, be allowed to set under water. 

Hydraulic Cements. — It was well known to builders in the 
earliest historic times that certain limes would, when set, resist 
the action of water, i.e. were hydraulic; it was also known that 
this property could be conferred on ordinary lime by admixture 
of silicious materials such as pozzuolana or tufa. We have here 
the two classes into which hydraulic cements are divided. 

When pure chalk or limestone is " burned," i.e. heated in a 
kiln until its carbonic acid has been driven off, it yields pure lime. 
This slakes violently with water, giving slaked lime, 
which can be made into a smooth paste with water 1^"°' 
and mixed with sand to form common mortar. The cement 
setting of the mortar is due to the drying of the lime 
(a purely physical phenomenon, no chemical action occurring 
between the lime and the sand). The function of the sand is 
simply that of a diluent to prevent undue shrinkage and cracking 
in drying. Subsequent hardening of the mortar is caused by 
the gradual absorption of carbonic acid from the air by the lime, 
a skin of carbonate of lime being formed; but the action is 
superficial. Mortar made from pure or " fat " lime cannot with- 
stand the action of water, and is only used for work done above 
water-level. If, however, such " fat " lime is mixed in the 
presence of water, not with sand but with silica in an active 
form, i.e. amorphous and (generally) hydrated, or with a silicate 
containing silica in an active condition, it will unite with the 
silica and form a silicate of lime capable of resisting the action 
of water. The mixture of the lime and active silica or silicate is a 
pozzuolanic cement. The simplest of all pozzuolanic cements 
would be a mixture of pure lime and hydrated silica, but though 
the latter is prepared artificially for various purposes, it is too 
expensive to be used as a cement material. A similar obstacle 
lies in the way of using a certain native form of active silica, 
viz. kieselguhr, for it is too valuable as an absorbent of nitro- 
glycerine, for the manufacture of dynamite, to be available for 
making pozzuolanic cement. There are, however, many silic'ous 



65+ 



CEMENT 



substances occurring abundantly in nature which can thus be 
used. They are mostly of volcanic origin, and include pumice, 
tufa, santorin earth, trass and pozzuolana itself. The following 
analyses show their general composition : — 





Neapolitan 
Pozzuo- 
lana 
(per cent). 


Roman 
Pozzuo- 
lana 
(per cent). 


Trass 
(per cent). 


Soluble silica (Si0 2 ) . 
Insoluble silicious residue 
Alumina (AI2O3) . 
Ferric oxide (Fe 2 03) 
Lime (CaO) . 
Magnesia (MgO) . 
Sulphuric anhydride (SO3) 
Combined water (H 2 0) . 
Carbonic anhydride (C0 2 ) 
Moisture 
Alkalis and loss 


27-80 

35-38 

j- 19-80 

5-68 

o-35 
Trace 

\ 4-27 
6-72 


32-64 

25-94 

22-74 \ 

4-06 

1-37 
Trace 

8-92 | 
4-33 


19-32 

50-40 

13-86 

3-10 

0-13 

7-57 

5-04 
0-58 


IOO-OO 


100-00 


loo-oo 



An artificial product which serves perfectly as a pozzuolana is 
granulated blast-furnace slag. The slag, which must contain a 
high percentage of lime, is granulated by being run while fused 
into abundance of water. This granulated slag differs from the 
same slag allowed to cool slowly, in that a portion of the energy 
which it possesses while fused is retained after it has solidified. 
It bears to ordinary slowly-cooled slag a similar relation to that 
borne by plastic sulphur to ordinary crystalline sulphur. This 
potential energy becomes kinetic when the slag is brought into 
contact with lime in the presence of water, and causes the forma- 
tion of a true hydraulic silicate of lime. The following analysis 
shows the composition of a typical slag:- 









Per cent 


Insoluble residue .... 1-04 


Silica (Si0 2 ) 






31-50 


Alumina (A1 2 3 ) . 






18-56 


Manganous oxide (MnO) 






0-44 


Lime (CaO) 






42-22 


Magnesia (MgO) 






3 -i8 


Soda (Na 2 0) 






0-70 


Sulphuric anhydride (SO3) 






o-45 


Sulphur (S). 






2-21 




I00-30 


Deduct oxygen equivalent to 


sulph 


ur 


I-IO 



99-20 
Granulated slag of this character is ground with slaked lime 
until both materials are in a state of fine division and intimately 
mixed. The usual proportions are three of slag to one of slaked 
lime by weight. The product termed slag cement sets slowly, 
but ultimately attains a strength scarcely inferior to that of 
Portland cement. Although it is cheap and suitable for many 
purposes, its use is not large and tends to decrease. Pozzuolanic 
cements are little used in England. Generally speaking, they 
are only of local importance, their cheapness depending largely 
on the nearness and abundance of some suitable volcanic deposit 
of the trass or tufa class. They are not usually manufactured 
by the careful grinding together of the pozzuolana and the lime, 
but are mixed roughly, a great excess of pozzuolana being 



employed. This excess does no harm, for that part which fails 
to unite with the lime serves as a diluent, much as does sand in 
mortar. In fact, ordinary pozzuolanic cement made on the spot 
where it is to be used may be regarded as a better kind of common 
mortar having hydraulic qualities. Good hydraulic mortars may 
be made from lime mixed with furnace ashes or burnt clay as the 
pozzuolanic constituent. 

Cements of the Portland type differ in kind from those of the 
pozzuolanic class; they are not mechanical mixtures of lime and 
active silica ready to unite under suitable conditions, 
but consist of definite chemical compounds of lime and Cement. 
silica and lime and alumina, which, when mixed with 
water, combine therewith, forming crystalline substances of great 
mechanical strength, and capable of adhering firmly to clean inert 
material, such as stone and sand. They are made by heating to a 
high temperature an intimate mixture of a calcareous substance 
and an argillaceous substance. The commonest of suchsubstances 
in England are chalk and clay, but where local conditions demand 
it, limestone, marl, shale, slag or any similar material may be 
used, provided that the correct proportions of lime, silica and 
alumina are maintained. The earliest forms of cements of the 
Portland class were the hydraulic limes. These are still largely 
used, and are prepared by burning limestones containing clayey 
matter. Some of these naturally possess a composition differing 
but little from that of the mixture of raw materials artifici- 
ally prepared for the manufacture of Portland cement itself. 
Although hydraulic limes have been in use from the most ancient 
times, their true nature and the reason of their resistance to 
water have only become known since 1791. Next in antiquity 
to hydraulic lime is Roman cement, prepared by heating an 
indurated marl occurring naturally in nodules. Its name must 
not be taken to imply that it was used by the ancients; in point of 
fact the manufacture of this substance dates back only to 1796. 

With the growth of engineering in the early part of the 19th 
Century arose a great demand for hydraulic cement. The supply 
of materials containing naturally suitable proportions of calcium 
carbonate and clay being limited, attempts were made to produce 
artificial mixtures which would serve a similar end. Among those 
who experimented in this direction was Joseph Aspdin, of Leeds, 
who added clay to finely ground limestone, calcined the mixture, 
and ground the product, which he called Portland cement. 
The only connexion between Portland cement and the place 
Portland is that the cement when set somewhat resembles 
Portland stone in colour. True, it is possible to manufacture 
Portland cement from Portland stone (after adding a suitable 
quantity of clay), but this is merely because Portland stone is 
substantially carbonate of lime; any other limestone would serve 
equally well. Although Portland cement is later in date than 
either Roman cement or hydraulic lime, yet on account of its 
greater industrial importance, and of the fact that, being an 
artificial product, it is of approximately uniform composition 
and properties, it may conveniently be treated of first. The 
greater part of the Portland cement made in England is manu- 
factured on the Thames and Medway. The materials are chalk 
and Medway mud; in a few works the latter is replaced by gault. 

The composition of typical samples of chalk and clay is shown in 

the following analyses :— 



Chalk. 



Clay. 



Silica (SiOj) . . . . . 

Alumina + ferric oxide (Al 2 03 + 

Fe 2 3 ) 

Lime (CaO) .... 

Magnesia (MgO) 

Carbonic anhydride (C0 2 ) . 



Per cent. 
092 

0-24 
55-0O 

0-36 
43-40 

99-92 



Insoluble silicious matter 
Silica (Si0 2 ) 
Alumina (A1 2 3 ) . 
Ferric oxide (Fe 2 0s) 
Lime (CaO) 
Magnesia (MgO) . 
Soda (Na 2 0) 
Potash (K 2 0) 
Sodium chloride (NaCl) 
Combined water, organic 
matter, and loss 



Per cent. 
26-67 

31-24 
16-60 
8-66 
0-25 
1-91 
i-oo 

o-45 
1-86 

11-36 



Consisting of 
Quartz (SiOs) 
Silica (SiOs) . . 
Alumina (Al 2 O s ) . 
Magnesia (MgO) 
Soda (Na 2 0) . . 



19-33 
5-19 
1-47 
0-03 
0-65 



26-67 



Felspar 
7-34% 



CEMENT 



655 



These materials are mixed in the proportion of about 3 :i by weight 
so that the dried mixture contains approximately 75 % of calcium 

'. carbonate, the balance being clay. The mixing may be 

nixing. effected- in several ways. The method once exclusively 
used consists in mixing the raw materials with a large quantity of 
water in a wash mill, a machine having radial horizontal arms driven 
from a central vertical spindle and carrying harrows which stir up 
and intermix any soft material placed in the pit in which the 
apparatus revolves. The raw materials in the correct proportion 
are fed into this mill together with a large quantity of water. The 
thin watery "slip" or slurry flows into large settling tanks ("backs ") 
where the solids in suspension are deposited ; the water is drawn off, 
leaving behind an intimate mixture of chalk and clay in the form 
of a wet paste. This is dug out, and after being dried on floors heated 
by flues is ready for burning. This process is now almost obsolete. 
According to present practice the raw materials are mixed in a wash 
mill with so much water that the resulting slurry contains 40 to 
50 % of water. The slurry, which is wet enough to flow, is ground 
between millstones so as to complete the process of comminution 
begun in the wash mill. Thorough grinding and mixing are of the 
utmost importance, as otherwise the cement ultimately produced 
will be unsound and of inferior quality. The drying of the slurry is 
generally effected by the waste heat of the kilns, so that while one 
charge is burning another is drying ready for the next loading of the 
kilns. The kilns commonly employed are " chamber kilns," circular 
structures not unlike an ordinary running lime kiln, but 
Jl t« having the top closed and connected at the side with a 
the join. ^ j e ^ ue j n wh j ch the slurry is exposed to the hot products 
of combustion from the kiln. The farther ends of the flues of several 
such kilns are connected with a chimney shaft. The slurry, in 
drying on the floor of the flue, forms a fairly tough cake which cracks 
spontaneously in the process of drying into rough blocks suitable 
for loading into the kiln. At the bottom of the kiln is a grate of 
iron bars, and on this wood and coke are piled to start the fire. A 
layer of dried slurry is loaded on this, then a layer of coke, then a 
layer of slurry, and srfon until the kiln is filled with coke and slurry 
evenly distributed. Fresh slurry is run on to the drying floors, and 
the kiln is started. The construction of an ordinary chamber kiln 
may be gathered from the accompanying diagram (fig. 1). The 



Chimney 



^L^^i.|."u'L^V!^?•^i^>^a^■^V'j 'i ; T"^ 'i tt i i Vij ffi 




Plan 



Kiln 



Fig. I. 



operation of burning, is a slow one. An ordinary kiln, which will 
contain about 50 tons of slurry and 12 tons of coke, will take two 
days to get fairly alight, and will be another two or three days in 
burning out. Therefore, allowing adequate time for loading and 
unloading, each kiln will require about one week for a complete run. 
The output will be about 30 tons of " clinker " ready to be ground 
into cement. The grinding of the hard rock-like masses of clinker 
is effected between millstones, or in modern plants in ball-mills, 
tube-mills and edge-runners. It is an important part of the manu- 
facture, because the finished cement should be as fine and " floury " 
as possible. The foregoing description represents the procedure in 
use in many English factories. There are various modifications in 
practice according to local conditions: a few of these may be 
described. In all cases, however, the main queries are the same,
viz. intimately mixing the raw materials, drying the mixture, if 
necessary, and burning it at a clinkering temperature (about 1 500? C. 
= 2732° F.). Thus when hard limestone is the form of calcium 
carbonate locally available, it is ground dry and mixed with the 
correct proportion of clay also dried and ground. The mixture is 
slightly damped, moulded into rough bricks, dried and burned. A 
possible alternative is to burn the limestone first and mix the result- 
ing lime with clay, the mixture being burned as before. By this 
method grinding the hard limestone is avoided, but there is an extra 
expenditure of fuel in the double burning. 
■ Many different forms of kiln are used for burning Portland' 
cement. Besides the chamber kilns which have been described, 
there are the old-fashioned bottle kilns, which ire similar 
to the chamber kilns, but are bottle-shaped and open 
at the top; they do not dry the slurry for their next 
charge. Their use is becoming obsolete. There are also stage kilns 



Other 
kilns. 



Upper shaft 

containing 

raw material 



of the Dietzsch type, which consist of two vertical shafts, one above 
the other, but not in the same vertical line, connected by a horizontal 
channel. At this middle portion and in the upper part of the lower 
shaft the burning proper proceeds ; the upper shaft is full of unburnt 
raw material which is heated by the hot gases coming from the 
burning zone, and the lower shaft contains clinker already burned 
and hot enough to heat the incoming air which supplies that necessary 
for combustion at the clinkering zone. A pair of Dietzsch kilns, 
built back to back, are shown in fig. 2. There are other forms of 
shaft kiln, such as the Schneider, in which there is a burning zone, 
a heating and cooling zone as in the Dietzsch, but no horizontal 
stage, the whole shaft being in the same vertical plane. Another 
form is the Hoffmann or ring kiln, made up of a number of compart- 
ments arranged in a ring and connected with a central chimney; 
in these compartments rough brick-shaped masses of the raw 
materials are stacked, and between these bricks fuel is sprinkled. 
At a given moment one of these compartments is burning and at its 
full temperature ; the air for combustion is drawn in through one or 
more compartments behind it which have just finished burning, and 
is thereby strongly heated; the products of combustion pass away 
through one or more compartments in front of it and heat their 
contents before they are subjected to actual combustion. It will 
be seen that the principle of the ring kiln is similar to that of the stage 
kiln. In each case the clinker which has just been burned and is fully 
hot serves to heat 
the air-supply to 
the compart- 
ment where com- 
bustion is actu- 
ally proceeding ; 
in like manner 
the raw materials 
about to be 
burned are well 
heated by the 
waste gases from 
the compartment 
in full activity 
before they them- 
selves are burned. 
(It may be noted 
that here and 
generally in this 
article " burn " 
is used in the 
technical sense ; 
it is technically 
correct to speak 
of cement clinker Bumng zone 
being burned, *- 

although it is not 
a fuel ; in accur- 
ate terms it is 
the fuel which is 
burned, and it is hot clinker 
the heat it gen- 
erates which 
raises the clinker 
to a high temper- 
ature, i.e. tech- 
nically " burns " 
it.) By this de- 
vice a great part of the heat is regenerated and a saving of fuel is 
effected. 

The methods of burning cement described above are obsolescent. 
They are being replaced by the rotatory process, so called because 
the cement is burned in rotating cylinders instead of in R t a torv 
fixed kilns. These cylinders vary from 60 to 150 ft. in tiins 
length, an ordinary length in modern practice being 100 
to 120 ft.; their diameter correspondingly varies from 6 ft. to 7 ft. 
6 in. The cylinders are made of steel plate, lined with refractory 
bricks, are carried on rollers at a slight angle with the horizontal, 
and are rotated by power. At the upper end the raw material is fed 
in either as a dry powder or as a slurry ; at the lower end is a power- 
ful burner. In the early days of rotatory kilns producer gas was 
used as a fuel, but with little success; about 1895 petroleum was 
used in the United States with complete success, but at a relatively 
heavy cost. At the present time, finely powdered coal injected by 
a blast of air is almost universally employed, petroleum being used 
only where it is actually cheaper than coal. In the working of this 
type of kiln the rotation and slight inclination of the cylinder cause 
the raw material to descend towards the lower end. At the upper 
end the raw material is dried and heated moderately. As it descends 
it reaches a part of the kiln where the temperature is higher; here 
the carbonic acid of the carbonate of lime, and the combined water 
of the clay are driven off, and the resulting lime begins to act chemi- 
cally on the dehydrated clay. The material is then in a partially 
burnt and slightly sintered state, but it is not fully clinkered and 
would not make Portland cement. The material continues to 
descend by the rotation of the kiln and reaches the lower end nearest 




Lower shaft 
containing. 



Fig. 2. 



6 5 6 



CEMENT 



the burner where the temperature is highest, and is there heated so 
highly that the union of the lime, silica and alumina is complete, 
and fully burnt clinker falls out of the kiln. It is extremely hot, 
and is cooled usually by being passed down one or more rotating 
cylinders, similar to' the first, but smaller, and acting as coolers 
instead of kilns. On its way down the cylinders the clinker meets 
a current of cold air and is cooled, the air being correspondingly 
warmed and passing on to aid in the combustion of the fuel used 
in heating the kiln. This regenerative heating is similar in principle 
and effect to that obtained by means of the shaft and ring kilns 
described above. The output of these kilns varies from 200 to 400 
tons per kiln per week according to their size and the nature of the 
raw materials burned, as against 30 tons per week for an ordinary 
chamber kiln. A large saving in labour is also secured. The rotatory 
system presents many advantages and is rapidly replacing the older 
methods of cement making. Fig. 3 represents diagrammatically a 




Fig. 3. 

rotatory cement plant on the Hurry & Seaman system, which was 
one of the first to make cement by the rotatory process successfully 
on a large scale, using powdered coal as fuel. Rotatory kilns of 
various other makes are now in use, but the same principles are 
embodied, namely, the employment of a rotating inclined cylinder 
for burning the raw materials, a burner fed with powdered coal and 
a blast of air, and some device such as a cooling cylinder or cooling 
tower by which the clinker may be cooled and the air correspondingly 
heated on its way to the burner. 

Another method of making Portland cement which has been 
proposed and tried with some success consists in fusing the raw 
materials together in an apparatus of the type of a blast furnace. 
The high temperature necessary to fuse cement clinker makes this 
process difficult to accomplish commercially, but it has many 
inherent merits and may be the process of the future, displacing 
the rotatory method. 

Portland cement clinker, however produced, is a hard, rock-like 
substance of semi-vitrified appearance and very dark colour. The 
Cement product from a well-run rotatory kiln is all evenly burnt 
clinker. an d properly vitrified; that from an ordinary fixed kiln 
of whatever type is apt to contain a certain amount (5 
to 15%) of underburnt material, which is yellowish and friable and 
is not properly clinkered. This material must be picked out, as such 
underburnt stuff contains free lime or unsaturated lime compounds. 
These may slake slowly in the finished cement and cause such ex- 
pansion as may destroy the work of which it forms part. Well-burnt, 
well-picked clinker when ground yields good Portland cement. 
Nothing is added during or after grinding save a small amount 
(1 to 2%) of calcium sulphate in the form either of gypsum or of 
plaster of Paris, which is sometimes needed to make the cement 
slower-setting. For the same purpose a small quantity of water 
(up to 2 %) may be added either by moistening the clinker or by 
blowing steam into the mills in which the clinker is ground. This 
small addition for this specified purpose is recognized as legitimate, 
but the employment of various cheap materials such as ragstone 
and blast-furnace slag, sometimes added as diluents or make-weights, 
is adulteration and therefore fraudulent. 

The composition of Portland cement varies within comparatively 
narrow limits, and for given raw materials the variations are tending 
Compost- t0 become smaller as regularity and skill in manufacture 
tioa. increase. The following analysis may be taken as typical 

of cements made from chalk and clay on the Thames and 
Medway : — 



Silica (Si0 2 ) _ 
Insoluble residue . 
Alumina _(A1 2 3 ) . 
Ferric oxide (Fe20 3 ) 
Lime (CaO) 
Magnesia (MgO) 
Sulphuric anhydride (SO3) 
Carbonic anhydride (CO2) 
Water (H,0) 
Alkalis .... 



Per cent. 
22-0 

I'O 

7-5 
3-5 

62-0 
I-O 

i-5 
o-5 
o-5 
o-5 



IOO-O 



There may be variations from this composition according to the 



nature of the raw materials employed. Thus the silica may range 
from 19 to 27 %, the alumina and ferric oxide jointly from 7 
to 14%, the lime from 60 to 67 %. All such variations are per- 
missible provided that the quantity of silica and alumina is sufficient 
to saturate the whole of the lime and to leave none of it in a " free " 
condition, likely to cause the cement to expand after setting. Other 
things being equal, the higher the percentage of lime within the limits 
indicated above the stronger is the cement, but such highly limed 
cement is less easy to burn than cement containing about 62 % of 
lime ; and unless the burning is thorough and the raw materials are 
intimately mixed, the cement is apt to be unsound. Although the 
ultimate composition of cement, that is, the percentage of each base 
and acid present, can be accurately determined by analysis, its 
proximate composition, i.e. the nature and amount of the compounds 
formed from these acids and bases, can only be ascertained indirectly 
and with difficulty. The foundations of our knowledge on this 
subject were laid by H. le Chatelier, whose work 
has since been supplemented by that of Spenser 
B. Newberry, W. B. Newberry and Clifford Richard- 
son. As the outcome of these inquiries it has been 
established that tricalcium silicate 3CaO-Si02 is the 
essential constituent of Portland cement. The cpn- 
stituent of next importance is an aluminate, but 
whether this is dicalcium aluminate, 2CaO-Al 2 Os, or 
Cru*. RoJ» tricalcium aluminate, 3CaO AI2O3,. is still in doubt. 

■ ' "i ' In the following description it is assumed to be the 

tricalcium aluminate. The remaining silicates and 
aluminates present, and ferric oxide and magnesia, 
if existing in the moderate quantities which are 
usual in Portland cement of good quality, are of 
minor importance and may be regarded as little more 
than impurities. The silicates and aluminates of 
which Portland cement is composed are believed to 
exist not as individual units but as solid solutions of each other, these 
solid solutions taking the form of minerals recognizable as individuals. 
The two principal minerals are termed alite and celite; according 
to the best opinion, alite consists of a solid solution of tricalcium 
aluminate in tricalcium silicate, and celite of a solid solution of 
dicalcium aluminate in dicalcium silicate. Celite is little affected 
by water, and has but small influence on the setting; alite is de- 
composed and hydrated, this action constituting the main part of 
the setting of Portland cement. Both the components of alite react, 
and for simplicity their reactions may be stated in separate equations, 
thus:-~- 

(1) 2(3CaO-Si0 2 ) +9H 2 = 2(CaO-Si0 2 )-5H 2 0+4Ca(OH) 2 
Tricalcium silicate. Hydrated mono- Calcium 

calcium silicate. hydroxide. 

(2) 3CaO-Al 2 3 +12H 2 O = 3CaO-Al20 3 -12H 2 O 
Tricalcium aluminate. Hydrated tricalciurn aluminate. 

Since alite is a solid solution and, although an individual mineral, 
is not a chemical unit, the proportion of tricalcium silicate to tri- 
calcium aluminate in a given specimen of alite will vary ; but, what- 
ever the proportions, each of these substances will react in its char- 
acteristic manner according to the equations given above. 

The precise mechanism of the process of setting of Portland 
cement is not known with certainty, but it is probably analogous 
to that of the setting of plaster of Paris, consisting in the dissolution 
of the compounds produced by hydration while they are in a more 
soluble form, their transition to a less soluble form, the consequent 
supersaturation of the solution, and the deposition of the surplus 
of the dissolved substance in crystals which interlock and form a 
coherent mass. This theory being accepted, it is evident that a 
small quantity of water, by successive dissolution and deposition 
of a substance capable of existing in a more soluble and in a less 
soluble form, is able to bring about the crystallization of an in- 
definitely large quantity of material. It is not necessary that there 
should be present sufficient water to dissolve the whole of the react- 
ing substance at any one time ; it is sufficient if there is enough for 
hydration and a small surplus for the crystallization by successive 
stages as above described. It is generally admitted that the alu- 
minate is the chief agent in the first setting of the cement, and that 
its ultimate hardening and attainment of strength are due to the 
tricalcium silicate. 

As mentioned above, the constituents other than the tricalcium 
silicate and tricalcium aluminate of which alite is composed, are of 
minor importance. The function of the ferric oxide present in 
ordinary cement is little more than that of a flux to aid the union of 
silica, alumina and lime in the clinker; its r61e in the setting of the 
cement is altogether secondary. In fact, excellent Portland cement 
can be prepared from materials free from iron. Such cement, if free 
also from manganese, is white, and its manufacture has been proposed 
for exterior decorative use. Magnesia, if present in Portland cement 
in quantity not exceeding 5%, appears to be inert, but there is 
evidence that in larger proportion, e.g. 10-15%, it may hydrate 
and set after the general setting of the cement, and may give rise 
to disruptive strains causing the cement to " blow " ar.d fail. In 
so-called natural cement which is comparatively lightly burnt, the 
magnesia appears to be inert, and as much as 20 to 30% may be 
present. Another constituent of Portland cement which influences 



CEMENT 



6 S7 



its setting time is calcium sulphate, naturally formed from the 
sulphur in the raw materials or fuel, or intentionally added to the 
finished cement as gypsum or plaster of Paris. It has a remarkable 
retarding effect on the hydration of the calcium aluminate, and 
consequently on the setting of the cement; thus it is that a little 
gypsum is often added to convert a naturally quick-setting cement 
into one which sets slowly. It will be observed that in the hydration 
of tricalcium silicate, the main constituent of Portland cement, a 
large portion of the lime appears as calcium hydroxide, i.e. slaked 
lime. It is evident that this will form a pozzuolanic cement if a 
suitable silicious material such as trass is added to the cement. The 
ultimate product when set may be regarded as a mixed Portland 
and pozzuolanic cement. The use of trass in this manner as an 
adjunct to Portland cement has been advocated by W. Michaelis, 
and undoubtedly increases the strength of the material, but it has 
not become general. 

The quality of Portland cement is ascertained by its analysis 
and by determining its specific gravity, fineness, mechanical strength 
_, . and soundness. A good sample will usually have a com- 

Testlng. position within the limits cited above and approximating 
to the typical figures given above. It will be ground so finely that 
not more than 3% will be left on a sieve of 76X76 meshes per sq. 
in., the wires of the sieve being 0-005 m - m diameter. It will have, 
when freshly burned, a specific gravity not lower than 3-15, and 
briquettes made from it and kept in water will possess a tensile 
strength of 400-500 ft per sq. in. seven days after they are made, 
while briquettes made from a mixture of 3 parts by weight of sand 
and 1 of cement will give about 225 ft per sq. in. at twenty-eight 
days. Formerly the soundness of cement was determined by keep- 
ing thin pats of the cement in cold water for twenty-eight days, 
or in warm water (iio -I2o' :> F.) for twenty-four hours, and examin- 
ing for cracks or other signs of expansion. Modern practice is to 
measure the expansion of a test piece of cement kept in water at a 
temperature of 212° F. The simplest and most generally used 
method is due to H. L. le Chatelier, and consists in measuring the 
increase in circumference of a cylinder of cement 30 mm. in diameter 
by means of a split ring encircling the cylinder, the motion of which 
is magnified by two light rods extending radially. Another quanti- 
tative test for soundness is that formulated by L. Deval, who has 
shown that briquettes of 3 of sand and I of cement kept in water 
for two days at 80° C. = 176° F. attain approximately the same 
strength as similar briquettes attain at seven days in water at the 
ordinary temperature. In like manner briquettes kept at 176° F. 
for seven days are approximately equal in strength to those kept at 
the ordinary temperature for twenty-eight days. A cement not 
perfectly sound will give low results in the hot test, and a cement of 
indifferent soundness will crack and go to pieces. The test is ad- 
mittedly severe, but can be passed without difficulty by cement 
made with proper care and skill. There are many modifications and 
elaborations of all the tests which have been mentioned. Cement 
for all important work is submitted to a rigorous system of testing 
and analysis before it is accepted and used. 

Hydraulic Lime is a cement of the Portland as distinct from 
the pozzuolanic class. The most typical hydraulic lime is that 
known as Chaux du Theil, made from a limestone found at 
Ardeche in France. This limestone consists of calcium carbonate 
most intimately intermixed with very finely divided silica. It 
contains but little alumina and oxide of iron, which are the 
constituents generally necessary to bring about the union of 
silica and lime to form a cement, but in spite of this the silica is so 
finely divided and so well distributed that it unites readily with 
the lime when the limestone is burned at a sufficiently high 
temperature. English hydraulic limes are of a different class; 
they contain a good deal of alumina and ferric oxide, and in 
composition resemble somewhat irregular Portland cement. 
Analyses of the two classes of hydraulic lime are as follows : — 

Chaux de Theil. Blue Lias. 
Per cent. Per cent. 

Insoluble silicious matter . . 0-3 2-39 

Silica (Si0 2 ) .... 21-7 14-17 

Alumina (A1 2 3 ) ... 1-8 6-79 

Ferric oxide (Fe 2 0»), . . . o-6 2-34 

. Lime (CaO) . . 74"° 63-43 

Magnesia (MgO) ... 0-7 1-54 

Sulphuric anhydride (SO3) • . 0-3 1-63 

Carbonic anhydride (COj) \ , ( 3-64 

Water (H 2 0) f °'° } 2-69 

Alkalis and loss ... .. 1-38 

ioo-o 100-00 

Hydraulic lime contains a good deal of uncombined lime, and has 
to be slaked before it is used as a cement. In France this slaking 
is conducted systematically by the makers, the freshly burned lime 
being sprinkled with water and stored in large bins where slaking 
proceeds slowly and regularly until the whole of the surplus uncom- 



bined lime is slaked and rendered harmless, while the cementitious 
compounds, notably tricalcium silicate, remain untouched. In 
English practice hydraulic lime is slaked by the user. Seeing that 
regular and perfect slaking is more easily attained when working 
systematically on a large scale and by storing the material for a long 
period, the French method is the better and more rational. The 
product may then be regarded as a cement of the Portland class 
mixed with slaked lime. When gauged with water and made into 
a mortar it sets slowly, but ultimately becomes almost as strong as 
Portland cement. Its slow setting is an advantage for some purposes, 
e.g. for foundations and abutments where settlements may occur. 
The structure is free to take its permanent position before the lime 
sets, and cracks are thus avoided. A case in point is the employ- 
ment of hydraulic lime in place of Portland cement as grouting out- 
side the cast-iron tubes used for lining tunnels made by the shield 
system. 

Roman Cement is another cement of the Portland class which 
came into use shortly before the manufacture of artificial Port- 
land cement was attempted. It is still in use, though only for 
special purposes where a quick-setting material is required. It 
is made from septaria nodules which are dredged up on the Kent 
and Essex coasts and consist of about 60 % of calcium carbonate 
mixed with clay, the mass being sufficiently indurated to remain 
coherent under water. The nodules are not prepared in any 
way, but simply burned at a moderate red heat. 

The resulting cement varies somewhat in composition, but ap- 
proximates to the following figures : — 

Per cent. 
Insoluble silicious matter .... 5-86 



Silica (SiOj) 


-o" 
19-62 


Alumina (AI2O3). 


. 10-30 


Ferric oxide (Fe 2 0s) . 


7-44 


Manganese dioxide (Mn0 2 ) . 


1-57 


Lime (CaO) 


• 44-54 


Magnesia (MgO) 


2-92 


Sulphuric anhydride (SO3) . 


2-6l 


Carbonic anhydride (C0 2 ) . 


3-43 


Water (H 2 0) . 


0-25 


Alkalis and loss . 


1-46 



100-00 

The most characteristic constituent is the oxide of iron, which gives 
the cement a reddish colour, and the presence of manganese also 
differentiates Roman from Portland cement, which rarely contains 
appreciable quantities of that element. The high percentage of 
alumina causes the cement to be quick-setting, and it becomes hard 
in about five minutes. It resists the action of water, salt or fresh, 
very well, and is therefore useful in situations where the work is 
likely to be submerged immediately after it has been put in place. 

The term Natural Cements is applied to cements made by 
burning mixtures of clay and carbonate of lime naturally occur- 
ring in approximately suitable proportions. They may be 
regarded as badly-mixed Portland cements, and need no special 
description. American "natural" cements are of a somewhat 
different class. They are usually made from a silicious limestone 
containing magnesia, and are comparatively lightly burned. 

The following analysis is typical of a cement of this kind : — 

Per cent. 
Silica (Si0 2 ) . . . . . . 24-30 



Alumina (Al 2 0s) 

Ferric oxide (Fe 2 0s) 

Lime (CaO) 

Magnesia (MgO) 

Water, carbonic anhydride, and loss 



7-22 

5-o6 

33-70 

20-94 

8-78 

100-00 



These irregular cements of the Portland class are good building 
materials for ordinary purposes, but are not so suitable as good 
artificial Portland cement for heavy and important undertakings. 

Passow Cement is a recent product which is in a class by itself. 
It is made by granulating blast furnace slag of suitable com- 
position and finely grinding the product, either alone or with an 
admixture of about 10 % of Portland cement clinker. It differs 
from ordinary slag cement (see above) in that it is not a pozzuo- 
lanic cement depending on the interaction of granulated slag 
and lime. The particular method of granulating slag for Passow 
cement produces a material which sets per se and attains a 
strength comparable with that of Portland cement. Passow 
cement has been successfully made from slag of different 
compositions in Germany, England and America. 



6 5 8 



CEMENT 



The chief use of hydraulic cements, whether of the pozzuolanic 
or Portland class, is to act as an adhesive material in work which 
is to be exposed to water. No doubt in times of remote 
ft S rf S tie antiquity it was found that the jointing of masonry 
cements, which was to be immersed required the use of a cement 
indifferent to the action of water. Ordinary mortar 
failed in such positions; mortar made from lime prepared from 
limestones or chalks containing a little clay was found to stand; 
mortar made from lime mixed with trass or similar active 
silicious material was also found to stand. On this observation 
rests the whole of the present enormous employment of hydraulic 
cements. It was a natural transition to utilize these cements 
not merely for jointing masonry but also for making concrete, 
and the only reason why hydraulic cements, as distinct from 
cements which are not hydraulic (e.g. ordinary mortar), are used 
for the latter purpose is their great mechanical strength. Their 
use in above-water work is checked by the low price of common 
brick. Even in such work, where it would be thought that 
masses of burnt clay would be the cheapest conceivable material, 
concrete is at least on level terms with its rival. It must be 
remembered that one of the great advantages of concrete is that 
five-sixths of its total mass may be provided from local sand and 
gravel, on which no carriage has to be paid. The cement, on 
which alone freight is to be reckoned, converts these from loose 
incoherent material into a solid stone. Thus it comes about that 
the largest use of cement is for manufacturing concrete for dock 
and harbour work, and for the making of foundations. It is also 
employed for the building of light bridges, floors, and pipes 
constructed of cement mortar disposed round a skeleton of iron 
rods. Such composite structures take advantage at once of the 
high tensile strength of iron and of the high compressive strength 
of cement mortar. (See also Concrete.) 

Good hydraulic cements are highly permanent materials 
provided certain conditions be observed. It might be supposed 
that hydraulic cements from their nature would be indifferent 
to the action of water, but this is only true if the structures of 
which they form part are sufficiently compact. In this case the 
action of the water is checked by the film of carbonate of lime 
which eventually forms oh the surface of calcareous cement. 
This, together with the compactness of the mortar, hinders the 
ingress and egress of water, and prevents the dissolution and 
ultimate destruction of the cement. But where the concrete or 
mortar is not well made and is porous, the continual passage of 
water through it will gradually break up and dissolve away the 
calcareous constituents of the cement until its strength is utterly 
destroyed. This destructive action is increased if the water 
contains sulphates or magnesium salts, both of which act 
chemically on the calcareous constituents of the cement. As 
sea-water contains both sulphates and magnesium salts, "it is 
especially necessary in concrete for harbour work to take every 
care to produce an impervious structure. There are various 
minor external causes for the failure and ultimate destruction 
of cement mortar and concrete, but their discussion is a matter 
for the specialist. Failure from inherent vice in the cement has 
been already touched on; it can always be traced to want of 
skill and care in manufacture. 

Calcium Sulphate Cements. — Under this term are comprehended 
all cements whose setting properties primarily depend on the 
hydration of calcium sulphate. They include plaster of Paris, 
Keene's cement and many variants of these two types. The 
raw material is gypsum (q.v.). This may be almost chemically 
pure, when it is generally used for Keene's cement; or it may 
contain smaller or greater quantities of impurities, in which 
case it is suitable for the preparation of cements of the plaster 
of Paris class. The mode of preparation is to calcine the gypsum 
at temperatures which depend on the class of cement to be 
produced. If plaster of Paris is to be made, calcination is 
carried out at about 204° C. ( = 400° F.); at this temperature, 
gypsum, CaS04-2H 2 0, loses three-quarters of its combined 
water and becomes 2CaS04-H 2 0. If a cement of the Keene's 
cement class is to be prepared the temperature used is higher, 
e.g. 500 C. ( = 932° F.), and the whole of the combined water of 



the gypsum is expelled, the anhydrous sulphate • CaS04 being 
obtained. 

To produce plaster of Paris European practice consists in baking 
the mineral in ovens, and in America in heating it in kettles. Both 
processes are inferior in economy to calcination in rotatory piaster of 
kilns, a process which may be regarded as the method of p ar / s . 
the present and the immediate future. Keene's cement K eea ' e > s 
and its congeners are made in fixed kilns so constructed cement. 
that only the gaseous products of combustion come into 
contact with the gypsum to be burnt, in order to. avoid contamination 
with the ash of the fuel. ' ' . 

The setting of plaster of Paris depends On the fact that when 
2CaS04-H 2 is treated with water it dissolves, forming a super- 
saturated solution of CaS04-2H 2 0. The excess held temporarily in 
solution is then deposited in crystals of CaS04-2H 2 0. In the light 
of this knowledge the mode of setting of plaster of Paris becomes 
clear. The plaster is mixed with a quantity of water sufficient to 
make it into a smooth paste; this quantity of water is quite in- 
sufficient to dissolve the whole of it, but it dissolves a small part, 
and gives a supersaturated solution of CaS04-2H 2 0. In a few minutes 
the surplus hydrated calcium sulphate is deposited from the solution, 
and the water is capable again of dissolving 2CaS04-H 2 0, which in 
turn is fully hydrated and deposited as CaS(V2H 2 0. The process 
goes on until a relatively small quantity of water has by instal- 
ments dissolved and hydrated the 2CaSOVH 2 0, and has deposited 
CaS04-2H 2 in felted crystals forming a solid mass well cemented 
together. The setting is rapid, occupying only a few minutes, and 
is accompanied by a considerable expansion of the mass. There is 
reason to suppose that the change described takes place in two stages, 
the gypsum first forming orthorhombic crystals and then crystal- 
lizing in the monosymmetric system. Gypsum thus crystallized 
is in its normal monosymmetric form, more stable under ordinary 
conditions than the orthorhombic form. Correlatively in its process 
pf dehydration to form plaster of Paris, monosymmetric gypsum 
is, converted into the orthorhombic form before it begins to be 
dehydrated. 

The principles which govern the preparation and setting of the 
other class of calcium sulphate cements, that is, cements of the Keene 
class, are not fully understood, but there is a fair amount of know- 
ledge on the subject, both empirical and scientific. The essential 
difference between the setting of Keene's cement and that of plaster 
of Paris is that the former takes place much more slowly, occupying 
hours instead of minutes, and the considerable heating and expansion 
which characterize the setting of plaster of Paris are much less 
marked. ' . > 

It is the practice in Great Britain to burn pure gypsum at a low 
temperature so as to convert it into the hydrate 2CaSCVH 2 0, to soak 
the lumps in a solution of alum or of aluminium sulphate, and to 
recalcine them at about 500° C. On grinding they give Keene's 
cement. Instead of alum various other' salts, e.g. borax, may be 
used. The quantity of these materials is so small that analyses of 
Keene's cement show it to be almost pure anhydrous calcium 
sulphate, and make it difficult to explain what, if any, influence 
these minute amounts of alum and the like can exert on the setting 
of the cement. It seems probable that the effect of, the salts is 
inconsiderable, and that the governingcondition is the temperature 
at which the cement has been burnt. The setting of Keene's cement 
takes place by the same sort of process which has been described for 
the setting of plaster of Paris, the chief differences being .that the 
substance dissolved is anhydrous calcium sulphate and that the 
operation takes a longer time. 

All cements having calcium sulphate as their base are suitable only 
for indoor work because of the solubility of this substance. They 
form excellent decorative plasters on account of their clean white 
colour and the sharpness of castings made from them, this latter 
quantity being due to their expansion when setting. 

See D. B. Butler, Portland Cement (London, 1905) ; E. C. Eckel, 
Cements, Limes and Piasters (New York, 1905) ; G. R. Redgrave and 
Charles Spackman, Calcareous Cements (London, 1905) ; F, H. Lewis, 
" Manufacture of Hydraulic Cements in the United States," The 
Mineral Industry (New York, 1898) ; W. H. Stanger and Bertram 
Blount, " Cement ! Manufacture in Great Britain," The Mineral 
Industry, New York, 1897 and 1905; Id. " The Testing of Hydraulic 
Cements," Journ. Soc. Chem. Ind., 1894, 13, p. 455; Id., Proc. Inst. 
Civ. Eng., 1901 ; B. Blount, " Recent Progress in the Cement 
Industry," Journ. Soc. Chem. Ind., 1906, 25, p. 1020; H. L. le 
Chatelier, Recherches experimenlales sur la constitution des mortiers 
hydrauliques ; Desch, Concrete, No. 2, pp. 101,-102; Davis, Journ. 
Soc. Chem. Ind., 1905, 26, p. 727. (B. Bl.) 

Adhesive Cements. — Mixtures of animal, vegetable and mineral 
substances are employed in great variety in the arts for making 
joints, mending broken china and other objects, &c. A strong 
cement for alabaster and marble, which sets in a day, may be prepared 
by mixing 12 parts of Portland cement, 8 of fine sand and I of in- 
fusorial earth, and making them into a thick' paste with silicate of 
soda; the object to be cemented need not be heated. For stone t 
marble, and. earthenware a strong cement, insoluble in water, can be 
made as follows :— slcimmed-milk cheese is boiled in water till of a gluey 
consistency, washed, kneaded well in cold water, and incorporated 



CEMETERY 



^59 



with quicklime; the composition is warmed for use. A. similar 
cement is a mixture of dried fresh curd with ^th of its weight 
of quicklime and a little camphor; it is made into a paste with 
water when employed. A cement for Derbyshire spar and china, 
&c, is composed of 7 parts of rosin and 1 of wax, with a little plaster 
of Paris; a small quantity only should be applied to the surfaces to 
be united, for, as a general rule, the thinner the stratum of a cement, 
the more powerful its action. Quicklime mixed with white of egg, 
hardened Canada balsam, and thick copal or mastic varnish are also 
useful for cementing broken china, which should be warmed before 
their application. For small articles, shellac dissolved in spirits of 
wine is a very convenient cement. Cements such as marine glue are 
solutions of shellac, india-rubber or asphaltum in benzene or naphtha. 
For use with wood which is exposed to moisture, as in the case of 
wooden cisterns, a mixture may be made of 4 parts of linseed oil 
boiled with litharge, and 8 parts ot melted glue; other strong 
cements for the same purpose are prepared by softening gelatine 
in cold water and dissolving it by heat in linseed oil, or by mixing 
glue with one-fourth of its weight of turpentine, or with a little 
bichromate of potash. Mahogany cement, for filling up cracks in 
wood, consists of 4 parts of beeswax, I of Indian red and yellow- 
ochre to give colour. Culler's cement, used for fixing knife-blades in 
their hafts, is made of equal parts of brick-dust and melted rosin, 
or of 4 parts of rosin with I each of beeswax and brick-dust. For 
covering bottle-corks a mixture of pitch, brick-dust and rosin is 
employed. A cheap cement, sometimes employed to fix iron rails 
in stone-work, is melted brimstone, or brimstone and brick-dust. 
For pipe-joints, a mixture of iron turnings, sulphur and sal ammoniac, 
moistened with water, is employed. Japanese cement, for uniting 
surfaces of paper, is made by mixing rice- flour with water and boiling 
it. Jewellers' or Armenian cement consists of isinglass with mastic 
and gum ammoniac dissolved in spirit. Gold and silver chasers keep 
their work firm by means of a cement of pitch and rosin, a little 
tallow, and brick-dust to thicken. Temporary cement for lathg-work, 
such as the polishing and grinding of jewelry and optical glasses, is 
compounded thus : — rosin, 4 oz. ; whitening previously made red- 
hot, 4 oz. ; wax, \ oz. ' 

CEMETERY (Gr. KOL/xiiTripiov, from uoinav, to sleep), literally 
a sleeping-place, the name applied by the early Christians to the 
places set apart for the burial of their dead. These were generally 
extra-mural and unconnected with churches, the practice of 
interment in churches or churchyards being unknown in the 
first centuries of the Christian era. The term cemetery- has, 
therefore, been appropriately applied in modern times to the 
burial-grounds, generally extra-mural, which have been sub- 
stituted for the overcrowded churchyards (q.v.) of populous 
parishes both urban and rural. 

From 1840 to 1855, attention was repeatedly called to the 
condition of the London churchyards by correspondence in the 
press and by the reports of parliamentary committees, the first 
of which, that of Mr Chad wick, appeared in 1843. The vaults, 
under the pavement of the churches, and the small spaces of 
open ground surrounding them, were crammed with coffins. 
In many of the buildings the air was so tainted with the products 
of corruption as to be a direct and palpable source of disease 
and death to those who frequented them. In the churchyards 
coffins were placed tier above tier in the graves until they were 
within a few feet (or sometimes even a few inches) of the surface, 
and the level of the ground was often raised to that of the lower 
windows of the church. To make room for fresh interments the 
sextons had recourse to the surreptitious removal of bones and 
partially-decayed remains, and in some cases the contents of 
the graves were systematically transferred to pits adjacent to the 
site, the grave-diggers appropriating the coffin-plates, handles 
and nails to be sold as waste metal. The neighbourhood of the 
churchyards was always unhealthy, the air being vitiated by the 
gaseous emanations from the graves, and the water, wherever 
it was obtained from wells, containing organic matter, the source 
of which could not be mistaken. In all the large towns the evil 
prevailed in a greater or less degree, but in London, on account 
of the immense population and the consequent mortality, it 
forced itself more readily upon public attention, and after more 
than one partial measure of relief had been passed the church- 
yards were, with a few exceptions, finally closed by the act of 
1.855, an< i the cemeteries which now occupy a large extent of 
ground to the north, souths east and west became henceforth 
the burial-places of the metropolis. Several of them had been 
already established by private enterprise before the passing of 
the Burial Act of 1855 (Kensal Green cemetery dates from 1&32), 



but that enactment forms the epoch from which the general 
development of cemeteries in Great Britain and Ireland began. 
Burial within the limits of cities and towns is now almost every- 
where abolished, and where it is still in use it is surrounded by 
such safeguards as make it practically innocuous. This tendency 
has been conspicuous both in the United Kingdom and the 
United States. The increasing practice of cremation (q.v.) has 
assisted in the movement for disposing of the dead in more 
sanitary conditions; and the proposals of Sir Seymour Haden 
and others for burying the dead in more open coffins, and 
abandoning the old system of family graves, have had consider- 
able effect. The tendency has therefore been, while improving 
the sanitary aspects of the disposal of the dead, to make the 
cemeteries themselves as fit as possible for this purpose, and 
beautiful in arrangement and decoration. 

The chief cemeteries of London are Kensal Green cemetery 
on the Harrow Road; Highgate cemetery on the slope, of 
Highgate Hill; the cemetery at Abney Park (once the residence 
of Dr Watts) ; the Norwood and Nunhead cemeteries to the 
south of London; the West London cemetery at Brompton; 
the cemeteries at Ilford and Ley tons tone in Essex; the Victoria 
cemetery and the Tower Hamlets cemetery in East London; 
and at a greater distance, accessible by railway, the great 
cemetery at Brookwood near Woking in Surrey, and the cemetery 
at New Southgate. The general plan of all these cemeteries 
is the same, a park with broad paths either laid out in curved 
lines as at Kensal Green and Highgate, or crossing each other 
at right angles as in the case of the West London cemetery. 
The ground on each side of these paths is marked off into grave 
spaces, and trees and shrubs are planted in the intervals between 
them. The buildings consist of a curator's residence and one or 
more chapels, and usually there is also a range of family graves 
with imposing tombs, massive structures containing in their 
corridors recesses for the reception of coffins, generally closed 
only by an iron grating. The provincial cemeteries in the main 
features of their arrangements resemble those of the metropolis. 
One of the most remarkable is St James's cemetery at Liverpool, 
which occupies a deserted quarry. The face of the eastern side 
of the quarry is traversed by ascending gradients off which open 
catacombs formed in the living rock, — a soft sandstone; the 
ground below is planted with trees, amongst which stand hundreds 
of gravestones. The main approach on the north side is through 
a tunnel, above which, on a projecting rock, stands the cemetery 
chapel, built in the form of a small Doric temple with tetrastyle 
porticos. 

Many of the cities of America possess very fine cemeteries. 
One of the largest, and also the oldest, is that of Mount Auburn 
near Boston. Others of importance are the Laurel Hill cemetery 
(1836) at Philadelphia; the Greenwood cemetery (1838) at 
Brooklyn (New York); the Lake View cemetery at Cleveland, 
Ohio; while the cemeteries at New Orleans (q.v.) are famous 
for their beauty. 

The chief cemetery of Paris is that of Pere la Chaise, the 
prototype of the garden cemeteries of western Europe. It takes 
its name from the celebrated confessor of Louis XIV., to whom 
as rector of the Jesuits of Paris it once belonged. It was laid out 
as a cemetery in 1804. It has an area of about 200 acres, and 
contains about 20,000 monuments, including those of all the great 
men of France of the 19th century — marshals, generals, ministers, 
poets, painters, men of science and letters, actors and musicians. 
Twice the cemetery and the adjacent heights have been the scene 
of a desperate struggle; in 1814 they were stormed by a Russian 
column during the attack on Paris by the allies, and in 1871 the 
Communists made their last stand among the tombs of Pere la 
Chaise; 900 of them fell in the defence of the cemetery or were 
shot there after its capture, and 200 of them were buried in 
quicklime in one huge grave and 700 in another. There are 
other cemeteries at Mont Parnasse and Montmartre, besides the 
minor burying-grounds at Auteuil, Batignolles, Passy, La 
Villette, &c. In consequence of all these cemeteries being more 
or less crowded, a great cemetery was laid out in 1874 on the 
plateau of M6ry sur Oise, 16 m. to the north of Paris, with which 



66o 



CENCI 



it is connected by a railway line. It includes within its circuit 
fully 2 sq. m. of ground. The French cemetery system differs 
in many respects from the English. Every city and town is 
required by law to provide a burial-ground beyond its barriers, 
properly laid out and planted, and situated if possible on a rising 
ground. Each interment must take place in a separate grave. 
This, however, does not apply to Paris, where the dead are 
buried, forty or fifty at a time, in the fosses communes, the poor 
being interred gratuitously, and a charge of 20 francs being 
made in all other cases. The fosse is filled and left undisturbed 
for five years, then all crosses and other memorials are removed, 
the level of the ground is raised 4 or 5 ft. by fresh earth, and 
interments begin again. For a fee of 50 francs a concession 
temporaire for ten years can be obtained, but where it is desired 
to erect a permanent monument the ground must be bought by 
the executors of the deceased. In Paris the undertakers' trade 
is the monopoly of a company, the SociStS des pompes funebres, 
which in return for its privileges is required to give a free burial 
to the poor. 

The Leichenhauser, or dead-houses, of Frankfort and Munich 
form a remarkable feature of the cemeteries of these cities. The 
object of their founders was twofold — (1) to obviate even the 
remotest danger of premature interment, and (2) to offer a 
respectable place for the reception of the dead, in order to 
remove the corpse from the confined dwellings of the survivors. 
At Frankfort the dead-house occupies one of the wings of the 
propylaeum, which forms the main entrance to the cemetery. 
It consists of the warder's room, where an attendant is always on 
duty, on each side of which there are five rooms, well ventilated, 
kept at an even temperature, and each provided with a bier on 
which a corpse can be laid. On one of the fingers is placed a 
ring connected by a light cord with a bell which hangs outside 
in the warder's room. The use of the dead-house is voluntary. 
The bodies deposited there are inspected at regular intervals by 
a medical officer, and the warder is always on the watch for the 
ringing of the warning bell. One revival, that of a child, has been 
known to take place at Frankfort. The Leichenhaus of Munich 
is situated in the southern cemetery outside the Sendling Gate. 
At one end of the cemetery there is a semicircular building with 
an open colonnade in front and a projection behind, which 
contains three large rooms for the reception of the dead. At 
both Frankfort and Munich great care is taken that the 
attendants receive the dead confided to them with respect, and 
no interment is permitted until the first signs of decomposition 
appear; the relatives then assemble in one of the halls adjoining 
the Leichenhaus, and the funeral takes place. In any case 
there is, with ordinary care, little fear of premature interment, 
but in another way such places of deposit for the dead are Of 
great use in large towns, as they prevent the evil effects which 
result from the prolonged retention of the dead among the 
living. Mortuaries for this purpose have also been established 
in many places in England. 

In Italy the Campo Santo (Holy Field) is best illustrated by 
the famous one at Pisa, from which the name has been given to 
other Italian burying-grounds. Of the cemeteries still in use 
in southern Europe the catacombs (q.v.) of Sicily are the most 
curious. There is oiie of these under the old Capuchin monastery 
of Ziza near Palermo, where in four large airy subterranean 
corridors 2000 corpses are ranged in niches in the wall, many of 
them shrunk up into the most grotesque attitudes, or hanging 
with pendent limbs and head from their places. As a preparation 
for the niche, the body is desiccated in a kind of oven, and then 
dressed as in life and raised into its place in the wall. At the end 
of the principal corridor at Ziza there is an altar strangely 
ornamented with a kind of mosaic of human skulls and bones. 

Cemeteries have been in use among many Eastern nations 
from time immemorial. In China, the high grounds near Canton 
and Macao are crowded with tombs, many of them being in the 
form of small tumuli, with a low encircling wall, forcibly recalling 
the ringed barrows of western Europe. But the most picturesque 
cemeteries in the world are those of the Turks. From them it 
was, perhaps, that the first idea of the modern cemetery, with 



its ornamental plantations, was derived. Around Constantinople 
the cemeteries form vast tracts of cypress woods under whose 
branches stand thousands of tombstones. A grave is never 
reopened; a new resting-place is formed for every one, and so 
the dead now occupy a wider territory than that which is covered 
by the homes of the living. The Turks believe that till the body 
is buried the soul is in a state of discomfort, and the funeral, 
therefore, takes place as soon as possible after death. No coffin 
is used, the body is laid in the grave, a few boards are arranged 
round it, and then the earth is shovelled in, care being taken to 
leave a small opening extending from the head of the corpse to 
the surface of the ground, an opening not unfrequently enlarged 
by dogs and other beasts which plunder the grave. A tombstone 
of white marble is then erected, surmounted by a carved turban 
in the case of a man, and ornamented by a palm branch in low 
relief if the grave is that of a woman. The turban by its varying 
form indicates not only the rank of the sleeper below but also 
the period of his death, for the fashion of the Turkish head-dress 
is always changing. A cypress is usually planted beside the grave, 
its odour being supposed to neutralize any noxious exhalations 
from the ground, and thus every cemetery is a forest, where by 
day hundreds of turtle doves are on the wing or perching on the 
trees, and where bats and owls swarm undisturbed at night. 
Especially for the Turkish women the cemeteries are a favourite 
resort, and some of them are always to be seen praying beside 
the narrow openings that lead down into a parent's, a husband's, 
or a brother's grave. Some of the other cemeteries of Constan- 
tinople contrast rather unfavourably ' with the simple dignity 
of those which belong to the Turks. That of the Armenians 
abounds with bas-reliefs which show the manner of the death of 
whoever is buried below, and on these singular tombstones there 
are frequent representations of men being decapitated or hanging 
on the gallows. 

See also the articles Burial and Burial Acts; Cremation; 
Funeral Rites; Churchyard. 

CENCI, BEATRICE (1577-1599), a Roman woman, famous 
for her tragic story; poetic fancy has woven a halo of romance 
about her, which modern historic research has to a large extent 
destroyed. Born at Rome, she was the daughter of Francesco 
Cenci (1549-1598), the bastard son of a priest, and a man of 
great wealth but dissolute habits and violent temper. He seems 
to have been guilty of various offences and to have got off with 
short terms of imprisonment by bribery; but the monstrous 
cruelty which popular tradition has attributed to him is purely 
legendary. His first wife, Ersilia Santa Croce, bore him twelve 
children, and nine years after her death he married Lucrezia 
Petroni, a widow with three daughters, by whom he had no 
offspring. He was very quarrelsome and lived on the worst 
possible terms with his children, who, however, were all of them 
more or less disreputable. He kept various mistresses and was 
even prosecuted for unnatural vice, but his sons were equally 
dissolute. His harsh treatment of his daughter Beatrice was 
probably due to his discovery that she had had an illegitimate 
child as the result of an intrigue with one of his stewards (A. 
Bertolotti, in his Francesco Cenci, publishes Beatrice's will in 
which she provides for this child), but there is no evidence that 
he tried to commit incest with her, as has been alleged. The 
eldest son Giacomo was a riotous, dishonest young scoundrel, 
who cheated his own father and even attempted to murder him 
(1595). Two other sons, Rocco and Cristoforo, both of them 
notorious rakes, were killed in brawls. Finally Francesco's 
wife Lucrezia and his children Giacomo, Bernardo and Beatrice, 
assisted by a certain Monsignor Guerra, plotted to murder him. 
Two bravos were hired (one of them named Olimpio, according 
to Bertolotti, was probably Beatrice's lover), and Francesco was 
assassinated while asleep in his castle of Petrella in the kingdom 
of Naples (1598). Giacomo afterwards had one of the bravos 
murdered, but the other was arrested by the Neapolitan 
authorities and confessed everything. Information having been 
communicated to Rome, the whole of the Cenci family were 
arrested early in 1599; but the story of the hardships they 
underwent in prison is greatly exaggerated. Guerra escaped; 



CENOBITES— CENSOR 



66 1 



Lucrezia, Giacomo and Bernardo confessed the crime; and 
Beatrice, who at first denied everything, even under torture, 
also ended by confessing. Great efforts were made to obtain 
mercy for the accused, but the crime was considered too heinous, 
and the pope (Clement VIII.) refused to grant a pardon; on 
the nth of September 1599, Beatrice and Lucrezia were 
beheaded, and Giacomo, after having been tortured with red- 
hot pincers, was killed with a mace, drawn and quartered. 
Bernardo's penalty, on account of his youth, was commuted to 
perpetual imprisonment, and after a year's confinement he was 
pardoned. The property of the family was confiscated. 

The romantic character of the history of this family has been the 
subject of poems, dramas and novels. Shelley's tragedy is well 
known as a magnificent piece of writing, although the author adopts 
a purely fictitious version of the story. Nor is F. D. Guerrazzi's 
novel, Beatrice Cenci (Milan, 1872), more trustworthy. The first 
attempt to deal with the subject on documentary evidence is 
A. Bertolotti's Francesco Cenci e la sua famiglia (2nd ed., Florence, 
1879), containing a number of interesting documents which place 
the events in their true light; cf. Labruzzi's article in the Nuova 
Antohgia, 1879, vol. xiv., and another in the Edinburgh Review, 
January 1879. 

CENOBITES (from Gr. koiws, common, and /3ios, life), 
monks who lived together in a convent or community under a 
rule and a superior, — in contrast to hermits or anchorets who 
live in isolation. The Basilians (q.v.) in the East and the Bene- 
dictines (q.v.) in the West are the chief cenobitical orders (see 
Monasticism). 

CENOMANI, a branch of the Aulerci in Gallia Celtica, whose 
territory corresponded generally to Maine in the modern depart- 
ment of Sarthe. Their chief town was Vindinum or Suindinum 
(corrupted into Subdinnum), afterwards Civitas Cenomanorum 
(whence Le Mans), the original name of the town, as usual in 
the case of Gallic cities, being replaced by that of the people. 
According to Caesar (Bell. Gall. vii. 75. 3), they assisted Vercin- 
getorix in the great rising (52 B.C.) withaforceof 5000 men. Under 
Augustus they formed a civitas stipendiaria of Gallia Lugdunensis, 
and in the 4th century part of Gallia Lugdunensis iii. About 
400 B.C., under the leadership of Elitovius (Livy v. 35), a large 
number of the Cenomani crossed into Italy, drove the Etruscans 
southwards, and occupied their territory. The statement of 
Cato (in Pliny, Nat. Hist. iii. 130), that some of them settled near 
Massilia in the territory of the Volcae, may indicate the route 
taken by them. The limits of their territory are not clearly 
defined, but were probably the Athesis (Adige or Etsch) on the 
east, the Ollius (Oglio, or perhaps the Addua) on the west, and 
the Padus on the south. Liyy gives their chief towns as Brixia 
(Brescia) and Verona; Pliny, Brixia and Cremona. The Ceno- 
mani nearly always appear in history as loyal friends and allies 
of the Romans, whom they assisted in the Gallic war (225 B.C.), 
when the Boii and Insubres took up arms against Rome, and 
during the war against Hannibal. They certainly joined in 
the revolt of the Gauls under Hamilcar (200), but after they had 
been defeated by the consul Gaius Cornelius (197) they finally 
submitted. In 49, with the rest ofGallia Transpadana, they 
acquired the rights of citizenship. 

The orthography and the quantity of the penultimate vowel 
of Cenomani have given rise to discussion. According to 
Arbois de Jubainville, the Cenomani of Italy are not identical 
with the Cenomani (or Cenomanni) of Gaul. In the case of the 
latter, the survival of the syllable " man " in Le Mans is due to 
the stress laid on the vowel; had the vowel been short and 
unaccented, it would have disappeared. In Italy, Cenomani 
is the name of a people; in Gaul, merely a surname of the 
Aulerci. 

See A. Voisin, Les Cenomans anciens et modernes (Le Mans, 1862) ; 
A. Desjardins, GSographie historique de la Gaule romaine, ii. (1876- 
1893) ; Arbois de Jubainville, Les Premiers Habitants de VEurope 
(1889-1894); article and authorities in La Grande Encyclopedic; 
C. Hiilsen in Pauly-Wissowa's Realencyclopadie, iii. pt. 2 (1899); 
full ancient authorities in A. Holder, Alt-celtischer Sprachschatz, i. 
(1896). 

CENOTAPH (Gr. /cecos, empty, t<x<£os, tomb), a monument or 
tablet to the memory of a person whose body is buried elsewhere. 



The custom arose from the erection of monuments to those 
whose bodies could not be recovered, as in the case of drowning. 

CENSOR (from Lat. censer e, assess, estimate; in Gr. n/xr/Tijs). 
I. In ancient Rome, the title of the two Roman officials who 
presided over the census, the registration of individual citizens 
for the purpose of determining the duties which they owed to 
the community. In the etymology of the word lurks the idea 
of the arbitrary assignment of burdens or duties. Varro defines 
census as arbitrium, and derives the name censores from the 
position of these magistrates as arbitri populi (Varro, de Ling. 
Lat. v. 81; ap. Non. p. 519). This original idea of "discre- 
tionary power" was never entirely lost; although ultimately 
it came to be more intimately associated with the appreciation 
of morals than with the assignment of burdens. From the point, 
of view of its moral significance the censorship was the Rorriart 
manifestation of that state control of conduct which was a not 
unusual feature of ancient societies. It is true that Rome 
possessed sumptuary laws, and laws dealing with moral offences, 
which it was the duty of other magistrates to enforce; but the, 
organization for the control of conduct was mainly exhibited 
in the censorship, and, as thus exhibited, was at once simple and 
comprehensive. 

The censorship was believed to have been instituted in 443 B.C. 
to relieve the consuls of the duties of registration. Since the 
periods of registration were quinquennial, it was not a continuous 
office; but its tenure does not seem to have been fixed until 
434 B.C., when a lex Aemilia provided that the censors should 
hold office for eighteen months. This magistracy was at first 
confined to patricians; a plebeian censor is first mentioned in 
351 B.C. A lex Publilia of 339 B.C. is said to have enacted that 
one censor must be a plebeian. Two plebeian censors were for 
the first time elected in 131 B.C. The election always took place 
in the Comitia Centuriata (see Comitia). The censorship, 
although lacking the powers implied in the imperium and the 
right of summoning the senate and the people, was not only one 
of the higher magistracies, but was regarded as the crown of a 
political career. It was an irresponsible office; and the only 
limitations on its powers were created by the restriction of 
tenure to a year and a half, the fact that re-election was forbidden, 
and the restraint imposed on each censor by the fact that no act 
of his was valid without the assent of his colleague. 

The original functions of the censors were (1) the registration 
of citizens in the state-divisions, such as tribes and centuries; 
(2) the taxation of such citizens based on an estimate of their 
property; (3) the right of exclusion from public functions on 
moral grounds, known as the regimen morum; (4) the solemn 
act of purification (lustrum) which closed the census. Two 
other functions were subsequently added:— (5) the selection of 
the senate (lectio senatus, see Senate), and (6) certain financial 
duties such as the leasing of the contracts for tax-collecting and 
for the repair of public buildings. The first four of these functions 
were those of the census, which was a detailed examination of 
the citizen body as represented by heads of families (patres 
familiarum) in the Campus Martius. The equites were a select 
portion of this citizen body; but the review of these knights 
took place, not in the Campus, but in the Forum (see Equites). 
It was in connexion with this review of the ordinary citizens and 
the knights, as well as with the choice of senators, that the 
censors published their edicts stating the moral rules which 
they intended to enforce. The offences which they punished 
were sometimes concerned with family life and private relations, 
sometimes with breaches of political duty. Certain professions, 
such as that of an actor or gladiator, also invoked their stigma, 
and at times the disqualifications they pronounced were the? 
consequence of a previous judicial condemnation. Infamia 
was the general name given to the disabilities pronounced by 
the censor. These varied in degree from the deprivation of a 
senator of his seat, or a knight's loss of his horse, to exclusion 
from the tribes or centuries, an exclusion which entailed the loss 
of voting power. All the disabilities pronounced by one pair of 
censors might be removed by their successors. 

The censorship, although its control over the senate came to 



662 



CENSORINUS--CENSUS 



be weakened (see Senate), lasted as long as the republic; and 
it was only suspended, not abolished, during the principate. 
Although the princeps exercised censorial functions, he was 
seldom censor. Yet the office itself was held by Claudius I. and 
Vespasian. Domitian assumed the title of life censor (censor 
perpetuus), but the precedent was not followed. A fruitless 
attempt to galvanize the republican office into new life was made 
in a.d. 251, during the reign of the emperor Decius. 

Authorities. — Mommsen, Romisches Staatsrecht, ii. 331 foil. 
(3rd ed., Leipzig, 1887); Daremberg-Saglio, Dictionnaire des anti- 
quites grecques et romaines, i. 990 foil. (1875, &c.) ; Lange, Romische 
Alterthiimer, i. 572 foil. (Berlin, 1856, &c.) ; de Boor, Fasti Censorii 
(Berlin, 1873); Gerlach, Die romische Censur in ihrem Verhalt- 
nisse zur Verfassung (Basel, 1842) ; Nitzsch, " Uber die Census " 
in Neues Jahrbuch f. Phil, lxxiii. 730 (Leipzig, 1856) ; Zumpt, 
"Die Lustra der Romer " in Rhein. Museum, xxv. 465, xxvi. 1. 

(A.H.J.G.) 

■ II. In modern times the word " censor " is used generally for 
one who exercises supervision over, or criticizes, the conduct of 
other persons. In the universities of Oxford and Cambridge it 
is the title of the official head or supervisor of the non-collegiate 
students (i.e: those who are not attached to a college, hall or 
hostel) . In Oxford the censor is nominated by the vice-chancellor 
and the proctors, and holds office for five years; in Cambridge 
he is similarly appointed, and holds office for life. The censors 
of the Royal College of Physicians are the officials who grant 
licences. 

Council of Censors, in American constitutional history, is the 
name given to a council provided by the constitution of Pennsyl- 
vania from 1776 to 1790, and by the constitution of Vermont 
from 1777 to 1870. Under both constitutions the council of 
censors was elected once in seven years, for the purpose of 
inquiring into the working of the governmental departments, 
the conduct of the state officers, and the working of the laws, 
and as to whether the constitution had been violated in any 
particular. The Vermont council of censors, limited in number 
to thirteen, had power, if they thought the constitution required 
amending in any particular, to call a convention for the purpose. 
A convention summoned by the council in 1870 amended the 
constitution by abolishing the censors. 

For the censorship of the press, see Press Laws ; for the censor- 
ship of plays, Theatre : Law, and Lord Chamberlain. 

CENSORINUS, Roman grammarian and miscellaneous writer, 
flourished during the 3rd century a.d. He wag the author of a 
lost work De Accentibus, and of an extant treatise De Die Natali, 
written in 238, and dedicated to his patron Quintus Caerellius 
as a birthday gift. The contents are of a varied character: the 
natural history of man, the influence of the stars and genii, 
music, religious rites, astronomy, the doctrines of the Greek 
philosophers. The second part deals with chronological and 
mathematical questions, and has been of great service in deter- 
mining the principal epochs of ancient history. The whole is 
full of curious and interesting information. The style is clear 
and concise, although somewhat rhetorical, and the Latinity, 
for the period, good. The chief authorities used were Varro 
and Suetonius. Some scholars, indeed, hold that the entire 
work is practically an adaptation of the lost Pratum of Suetonius. 
The fragments of a' work De Natali Institutione, dealing with 
astronomy, geometry, music and versification, and usually 
printed with the De Die Natali of Censorinus, are not by him. 
Part of the original MS., containing the end of the genuine work, 
and the title and name of the author of the fragment are lost. 

The only good edition with commentary is still that of H. Linden- 
brog (1614) ; the most recent critical editions are bv O. Jahn (1845), 
F. Hultsch (1867), and J. Cholodniak (1889). There is an English 
translation of the De Die Natali (the first eleven chapters being 
omitted) with notes by W. Maude (New York, 1900). 

CENSUS (from Lat. censere, to estimate or assess; connected 
by some with centum, i.e. a count by hundreds), a term used to 
denote a periodical enumeration restricted, in modern times, 
to population, and occasionally to industries and agricultural 
resources, but formerly extending to property of all kinds, for 
the purpose of assessment. 



Operations of this character have been conducted with 
different objects from very ancient times. The fighting strength 
of the children of Israel at the Exodus was ascertained by a 
count of all males of twenty years old and upwards, made by 
enumerators appointed for each clan. The Levites, who were 
exempted from military duties, were separately enumerated 
from the age of thirty upwards, and a similar process was' 
ordained subsequently by Solomon, in order to distribute 
amongst them the functions assigned to the priestly body in 
connexion with the temple. The census unwillingly carried out 
by Joab at the behest of David related exclusively to the fighting 
men of the community, and the dire consequences ascribed to it 
were quoted in reprobation of such inquiries as late as the middle 
of the 18th century. It appears, too, that a register of the 
population of each clan was kept during the Babylonian captivity 
and its totals were published on their return to Jerusalem. In 
the Persian empire there was apparently some method in force 
by which the resources of each province were ascertained for the 
purpose of fixing the tribute. In China, moreover, an enumera- 
tion of somewhat the same nature was an ancient institution in 
connexion with the provincial revenues and military liabilities. 
In Egypt, Amasis had the occupation of each individual annually 
registered, nominally to aid the official supervision of morals 
by discouraging disreputable means of subsistence; and this 
ordinance, according to Herodotus, was introduced by Solon 
into the Athenian scheme of administration, where it developed 
later into an electoral record. 

It was in Rome, however, that the system from which the 
name of the inquiry is derived was first established upon a 
regular footing. The original census was ascribed to Servius 
Tullius, and in the constitution which goes by his name it was 
decreed that every fifth year the population should be enumer- 
ated along with the property of each family — land, live-stock, 
slaves and freedmen. The main object was to ensure the 
accurate division of the people into the six main classes and 
their respective centuries, which were based upon considerations 
of combined numbers and wealth. With the increase of the 
city the operation grew in importance, and was followed by an 
official lustrum, or purificatory sacrifice, offered on behalf of the 
people by the censors or functionaries in charge of the classifica- 
tion. Hence the name of lustrum came to denote the intercensal 
term, or a period of five years. The word census, too, came to 
mean the property qualification of the class, as well as the 
process of registering the resources of the individual. Later, 
it was used in the sense of the imposition itself, in which it has 
survived in the contracted form of cess. Unfortunately the 
statistics of population thus collected were subordinated to the 
fiscal interests of the inquiry, and no record has been handed 
down relating to the population of the city and its neighbourhood. 
In the time of Augustus the census was extended to the whole 
empire. In the words of the Gospel of St Luke, he ordered 
" the whole world to be taxed," or, according to the revised 
version, to be enrolled. The compilation of the results of this 
the most comprehensive enumeration till then attempted was 
engaging the attention of the emperor, it is said, just before his 
death, but was never completed. The various inquiries instituted 
during the middle ages, such as the Domesday Book and the 
Breviary of Charlemagne, were so far on the Roman model that 
they took little or no account of the population, the feuda} 
system probably rendering information regarding it unnecessary 
for the purposes of taxation or military service. 

The foundations of the census on the modern system were 
laid in Europe towards the middle or end of the 17th century. 
Sweden led the way, by making compulsory the parish record 
of births, deaths and marriages, kept by the clergy, and extending 
it to include the whole of the domiciled population of the parish. 
In France, Colbert, in 1670, ordered the extension to the rural 
communes of the system which had for many years been in force 
in Paris of registering and periodically publishing the domestic 
occurrences of the locality. Five years before this, however, 
a periodical enumeration by families and individuals had been 
established in the colony of New France, and was continued in 



CENSUS 



663 



Quebec from 1665 till 1754. This, therefore, may be considered 
to be the earliest of modern censuses. 

'Efforts have been almost unceasingly made since 1872 by 
statistical experts in periodical conference to bring about a 
general understanding, first, as to the subjects which may be 
considered most likely to be ascertained with approximate 
accuracy at a census, and secondly — a point of scarcely less 
importance — as to the form in which the results of the inquiry 
should be compiled in order to render comparison possible 
between the facts recorded in the different areas. In regard 
to the scope of the inquiry, it is recognized that much is practic- 
able in a country where the agency of trained officials is employed 
throughout the operation which cannot be expected to be 
adequately recorded where the responsibility for the correctness 
of the replies is thrown upon the householder. The standard 
set up by eminent statisticians, therefore, may be taken to repre- 
sent an ideal, not likely to be attained anywhere under present 
conditions, but towards which each successive census may be 
expected to advance. The subjects to which most importance 
is attached from the international standpoint are age, sex, 
civil condition, birthplace, illiteracy and certain infirmities. 
Occupation, too, should be included, but the record of so detailed 
a subject is usually considered to be better obtained by a special 
inquiry, rather than by the rough and ready methods of a 
synchronous enumeration. This course has been adopted in 
Germany, Belgium and France, and an approach to it is made 
in the decennial census of Canada and the United States. 
Religious denomination, another of the general subjects suggested, 
is of considerably more importance in some countries than in 
others, and the same may be said of nationality,; which is often 
usefully supplemented by the return of mother-tongue. Nor 
should it be forgotten that the internal classification and the 
combinations of the above subjects are also matters to be treated 
upon some uniform plan, if the full value of the statistics is to 
be extracted from the raw material. On the whole, the progress 
towards a general understanding on many, if not most, of the 
questions here mentioned which has been made in the present 
generation, is a gratifying tribute to those who have long 
laboured in the cause of efficient enumeration. 

The British Empire 
England and Wales. — Up to the beginning of the 19th century 
the number of the population was a matter of estimate and 
conjecture. In 1753 a bill was introduced by a orivate member 
of the House of Commons, backed by official support, to provide 
for the annual enumeration of the people and of the persons in 
receipt of parochial relief. It was violently opposed as " sub- 
versive of the last remains of English liberty " and as likely to 
result in " some public misfortune or an epidemical distemper." 
After passing that House, however, the bill was thrown out by 
the House of Lords. The fear of disclosing to the enemies of 
England the weakness of the country in fighting-material was 
one of the main objections offered to the proposal. By the end 
of the century, however, owing to a great extent to the publica- 
tion of the essays of Malthus, the pendulum had swung far in the 
opposite direction, it was thought desirable to possess the means 
of judging from time to time the relations between an increasing 
population and the means of subsistence. A census bill, accord- 
ingly, again brought in by a private member, became law without 
opposition at the end of 1800, and the first enumeration under 
it took place in March of the following year, the queries being
confined to Great Britain. The inquiry was entrusted in England 
to the overseers, acting under the justices of the peace and the 
high constables, and in Scotland, to village schoolmasters, under 
the sheriffs. A supplementary statement of births, deaths and 
marriages for each parish was required from the clergy, who 
transmitted it to parliament through the bishops and primates 
successively. There was no central office or control. The 
schedule required the number of houses, inhabited and otherwise, 
the population of each family, by sex, and the occupation, under 
one of the three heads, (a) agriculture, (b) trade, manufacture or 
industry, or (c) other than these two. The results, which were 



not satisfactory, were published without comment. Ten years 
later, the chief alteration in the inquiry was the substitution of 
the main occupation of the family for that of the individual. 
The report on this census contained a very valuable exposition 
of the difficulties involved in such queries and the numerous
sources of error latent in an apparently simple set of questions. 
In 182 1 an attempt to get a return of ages was made, but it was 
not repeated in 1831, when the attention of the enumerators 
was concentrated upon greater detail in the occupation record. 
Their efforts were successful in getting a better, but still far from 
complete result. The creation, in 1834, of poor law unions, and 
the establishment, in 1836, of civil registration districts, as a 
rule coterminous with them, provided a new basis for the taking 
of a census, and the queries in 1 841 were made over accord-
ingly to the supervision of the registrar-general and his staff. 
The inquiry was extended to the sex, age and occupation Of 
every individual; those born in the district were distinguished 
from others, foreigners being also separately returned. The 
number of houses inhabited, uninhabited and under construction 
respectively, was noted in the return. The parish statement of 
births, deaths and marriages was sent up by the clergy for the 
last time. The most important innovation, however, was the 
transfer of the responsibility for filling up the schedule from 
the overseers to the householders, thereby rendering possible 
a synchronous record. 

With some modification in detail, the system then inaugurated 
has been since maintained. In 1851 the relationship to the head 
of the family, civil condition, and the blind and deaf- mute were 
included in the inquiry. On this occasion, the act providing 
for the census was interpreted to authorize the collection of 
details regarding accommodation in places of public worship 
and the attendance thereat, as well as corresponding informa- 
tion about educational establishments. A separate report wa's 
published on the former subject which proved something of a 
storm centre. The census of 187 1 obtained for the first time a 
return of persons of unsound mind not confined in asylums. 
During the next ten years, the separate areas for which popula- 
tion returns had to be prepared were seriously multiplied by the 
creation of sanitary districts, to the number of 966. The necessity, 
for administrative or other purposes, of tabulating separately 
the returns for so many cross-divisions of the country constitutes 
one of the main difficulties of the English census queries,
more particularly as the boundaries of these areas are frequently 
altered. In anticipation of the census of 1891, a treasury 
committee was appointed to consider the various suggestions 
made in regard to the form and scope of the inquiry. Its pro- 
posals were adopted as to the subdivision of the occupation 
column into employer, employed and independent worker, and 
as to the record upon the schedule of the number of rooms 
occupied by the family, where not more than five. Separate 
entry was also made of the persons living upon property or 
resources, but not following any occupation. No action was 
taken, however, upon the more important recommendation that 
midway between two censuses a simple enumeration by sex and 
age should be effected. A return was also prepared in 1891, for 
Wales, of those who could speak only Welsh, only English, and 
both languages, but, owing to the inclusion of infants, the results 
were of little value. In 1901 the same information was called 
for, excluding all under three years of age. The term tenement, 
too, was substituted for that of storey, as the subdivision of a 
house, whilst in addition to inhabited and uninhabited houses, 
those occupied by day, but not by night, were separately recorded.' 
The nationality of those born abroad, which used to be returned 
only for British subjects, was called for from all not born within 
the kingdom. 

Scotland. — In the acts relating to the census from 1801 to 
1851, provision for the enumeration of Scotland was made with 
that for England and Wales, allowance being made for the 
differences in procedure, which mainly concerned the agency 
to be employed. In 1855, however, civil registration of births 
and deaths was established in Scotland, and the conduct of the 
census of 1861 was, by a separate act, entrusted to the registrar- 



66 4 



CENSUS 



general of that country. The same course was followed at the 
three succeeding enumerations, but in 1901 the former practice 
was resumed. The complexity of administrative areas, though 
far less than in England, was simplified, and the census com- 
pilation proportionately facilitated, by the passing of the Local 
Government Act for Scotland, in 1889. In 1881, the definition 
of a house in Scotland was made identical with that in England, 
since previously what was called a house in the northern portion 
of Great Britain was known as a tenement in the south, and vice 
versa. Since 1861 a return has been called for in Scotland of 
the number of rooms with one or more windows, and that of 
children of school-age under instruction is also included in the 
inquiry. The number of persons speaking Gaelic was recorded 
for the first time in 1881. The question was somewhat expanded 
at the next census, and in 1901 was brought into harmony with 
the similar inquiry as to Welsh and Manx. 

Ireland. — An estimate of the population of Ireland was made 
as early as 1672, by Sir W. Petty, and another in 1712, in con- 
nexion with the hearth-money, but the first attempt to take a 
regular census was made in 181 1, through the Grand Juries. 
It was not successful, and in 1821 again, the inquiry was con- 
sidered to be but little more satisfactory. The census of 183 1 was 
better, but the results were considered exaggerated, owing to 
the system of paying enumerators according to the numbers they 
returned. The census, therefore, was supplemented by a re- 
visional inquiry three years afterwards, in order to get a good 
basis for the newly introduced system of public instruction. 
The completion of the ordnance survey and the establishment 
of an educated constabulary force brought the queries of
1 841 up to the level of those of the sister kingdom. The main 
difference in procedure between the two inquiries is that in 
Ireland the schedule is filled in by the enumerator, a member 
of the constabulary, or, in Dublin, of the metropolitan police, 
instead of being left to the householder. The tabulation of the 
returns, again, is carried out at the central office from the 
original schedule, and not, as in England, from the book into 
which the former has been copied by the enumerating agency. 
The inquiry in Ireland is more extensive than that in Great 
Britain. It includes, for instance, a considerable amount of 
information regarding holdings and stock. The details of house 
accommodation are fuller. A column is provided for the degree 
of education, and another for religious denomination, an addition 
which has always been successfully resisted in England. This 
last information was made voluntary in 1881 and the following 
enumerations without materially affecting the extent of the 
record. The inquiry as to infirmities, too, is made to extend to 
those temporarily incapacitated from work, whether at home 
or in a hospital. There is also a column for the entry of persons 
speaking the Irish language only or able to speak both that and 
English. In the report of 1901 for England and Wales (p. 170) 
a table is given showing, for the three divisions of the United 
Kingdom, the relative number of persons speaking the ancient 
languages either exclusively or in addition to English. 

British Colonies and Dependencies. — A simultaneous and 
uniform census of the British empire is an ideal which appeals 
to many, but its practical advantages are by no means com- 
mensurate with the difficulties to be surmounted. Scattered 
as are the colonies and dependencies over the world, the date 
found most suitable for the inquiry in the mother country and 
the temperate regions of the north is the opposite in the tropics 
and inconvenient at the antipodes. Then, again, as to the scope 
of the inquiry, the administrative purposes for which information 
is thus collected vary greatly in the different countries, and the 
inquiry, too, has to be limited to what the conditions of the 
locality allow, and the population dealt with is likely to be able 
and willing to answer. By prearrangement, no doubt, uniformity 
may be obtained in regard to most of the main statistical facts 
ascertainable at a census, at all events in the more advanced 
units of the empire, and proposals to this effect were made by 
the registrar-general of England and Wales in his report upon 
the figures for 1901. Previous to that date, the only step towards 
compilation of the census results of the empire had been a bare 



statement of area and population, appended without analysis; 
comparison or comment, to the reports for England and Wales> 
from the year 1861 onwards. In 1905, however, the returns 
published in the colonial reports were combined with those of 
the United Kingdom, and the subjects of house-room, sex, age, 
civil condition, birthplace, occupation, and, where available, 
instruction, religion and infirmities, were reviewed as fully as 
the want of uniformity in the material permitted (Command 
paper, 2860, 1906). The measures taken by the principal states, 
colonies and dependencies for the periodical enumeration of 
their population are set forth below. 

Canada. — The first enumeration of what was afterwards 
called Lower Canada, took place, as above stated, in 1665, and 
dealt with the legal, or domiciled, population, not with that 
actually present at the time of the census, a practice still main- 
tained, in contrast to that prevailing in the rest of the empire. 
The record was by families, and included the sex, age and civil 
condition of each individual, with a partial return of profession 
or trade. Later on, the last item was abandoned in favour of a 
fuller return of agricultural resources, a feature which has 
remained a prominent part of the inquiry. After the British 
occupation, a census was taken in 1765 and 1784, and annually 
from 1824 to 1842, the information asked for differing from 
time to time. Enumerations were conducted independently 
by the different states until 1871, when the first federal census 
was taken of the older parts of the Dominion. Since then, the 
enumeration has been decennial, except in the case of the more 
recently colonized territories of Manitoba and the North-West, 
where an intermediate census was found necessary in 1885-1886. 
The census of Canada is organized on the plan adopted in the 
United States rather than in accordance with British practice, 
and includes much which is the subject of annual returns in the 
latter country, or is not officially collected at all. The details 
of deaths in the year preceding the census, for instance, are 
called for, there being no registration of such occurrences in the 
rural tracts. In consideration of the large immigrant population 
again, the birthplace of each parent is recorded, with details as 
to nationality, naturalization and date of immigration. Occupa- 
tion is dealt with minutely, in conjunction with temporary 
unemployment, average wage or salary earned, and other 
particulars. No less than eleven .schedules are employed, most 
of them relating to details of industries and production. The 
duty of filling up so comprehensive a return, involving an answer 
to 561 questions, is not left to the householder, but entrusted 
to enumerators specially engaged, working under the supervision 
of the Department of Agriculture. Owing to the sparse popula- 
tion and difficulties of communication in a great part of the 
dominion, the inquiry, though referred to a single date, is not 
completed on that day, a month being allowed to the enumerator 
for the collection of his returns and their revision and trans- 
mission to the central office. A special feature in the queries
is the provision, necessitated by the record of the legal population, 
for the inclusion in the local return of the persons temporarily 
absent on the date of the census, and their adjustment in the 
general aggregates, a matter to which considerable attention is 
paid. The very large mass of detail collected at these inquiries 
entails an unusually long time spent in compilation; the 
statistics of population, accordingly, are available considerably 
in advance of those relating to production and industries. 

Australasia— As the sphere of the census queries in Canada
has been gradually spreading from the small beginnings on the 
east coast to the immense territories of the north-west, so, in 
the island continent, colonization, first concentrated in the 
south-east, has extended along the coasts and thence into the 
interior, except in the northern region. The first act of effective 
occupation of the country having been the establishment of a 
penal settlement, the only population to be dealt with in. the 
earlier years of British administration was that under restraint, 
with its guardians and a few scattered immigrants in the 
immediate neighbourhood of Sydney Cove. This was enumerated 
from 1788 onwards by official " musters," at first weekly, and 
afterwards at lengthening intervals. The record was so inaccurate 



CENSUS 



665 



that it had no statistical value until 1820, when the muster was 
taken after due preparation and with greater care, approximating 
to the system of a regular census. The first operation, however, 
called by the latter name, was the enumeration of 1828, when 
an act was passed providing for the enumeration of the whole 
population, the occupied area and the live-stock. The details 
of population included sex, children and adults respectively, 
religion and status, that is whether free (immigrants or liberated 
convicts), on ticket-of -leave, or under restraint. A similar 
inquiry was made in 1833 and again in 1836. In 1841 a separate 
census was taken of New Zealand and Tasmania respectively. 
The scope of the inquiry in New South Wales was somewhat 
extended and made to include occupations other than agriculture 
and stock-breeding. Five years later, the increase of the popula- 
tion justified the further addition of particulars regarding 
birthplace and education. The record of status, too, was made 
optional, and in 1856 was omitted from the schedule. In that 
year, moreover, Victoria, which had become a separate colony, 
took its - own census. South Australia, too, was enumerated 
in 1846, ten years after its foundation as a colony. From 1861 
the census has been taken decennially by all the states except 
Queensland, where, as in New Zealand, it has been quinquennial 
since 1875 and 1881 respectively. Up to and including the census 
of 1 901 each state conducted separately its own inquiries. The 
scheme of enumeration is based on that of Great Britain, modified 
to suit the conditions of a thin and widely scattered population. 
The schedules are distributed by enumerators acting under 
district supervisors; but it is found impossible to collect the 
whole number in a single day, nor does the mobility of the popu- 
lation in the rural tracts make such expedition necessary. In 
more than one state the police are employed as enumerators, 
but elsewhere, a staff has to be specially recruited for the purpose. 
The queries were improved and facilitated by means of an
interstatal conference held before the census of 1891, at which 
a standard schedule was adopted and a series of general tables 
agreed upon, to be supplemented in greater detail according 
to the requirements of each state. The standard schedule, in 
addition to the leading facts of sex, age, civil condition, birth- 
place, occupation and house-room, includes education and 
sickness as well as infirmities, and leaves the return of religious 
denomination optional with the householder. Under the head 
of occupation, the bread-winner is distinguished from his depend- 
ants and is returned as employer, employed, or working on his 
own account, as is now the usual practice in census-taking. 
Each state issues its own report, in which the returns are worked 
up in the detail required for both local administrative purposes, 
and for comparison with the corresponding returns for the 
neighbouring territory. The reports for New South Wales and 
Victoria are especially valuable in their statistical aspect from 
the analysis they contain of the vital conditions of a comparatively 
young community under modern conditions of progress. 

South Africa. — Almost from the date of their taking possession 
of the Cape of Good Hope and its vicinity, the Netherlands East 
Indian Company instituted annual returns of population, live- 
stock and agricultural produce. The results from 1687 for 
nearly a century were recorded, but do not appear to have been 
more accurate than those subsequently obtained on the same 
method by the British government, by whom they were dis- 
continued in 1856. The information was collected by district 
officials, unguided by any general instructions as to form or 
procedure. The first synchronous census of the colony, as it 
was then constituted, took place in 1865, on a fairly compre- 
hensive schedule. Ten years later the inquiry was extended 
to religion and civil condition, and for the census of 1891, again, 
a rather more elaborate schedule was used. The next census 
was deferred till 1904; in consequence of the disorganization 
produced by the Boer war. The inquiry was on the same lines 
as its predecessors, with a little more detail as to industries and 
religious denomination. Speaking generally, the administration 
of the queries is conducted upon the Australian plan, with
special attention to allaying the distrust of the native and more 
ignorant classes, for which purpose the influence of the clergy 



was enlisted. In some tracts it was found advisable to sub- 
stitute a less elaborate schedule for that generally prescribed. 
In Natal, indeed, where the first independent census was 
taken in 1891, the Kaffir population was not on that occasion 
enumerated at all. In 1904, however, they were counted on a 
very simple schedule, by sex and by large age-groups up to 40 
years old, with a return of birthplace, in a form affording a fair 
indication of race. Natives of India, an element of considerable 
extent and importance in this colony, are enumerated apart from 
the white population, but in full detail, recognizing the remarkable 
difference between the European and the Oriental in the matter 
of age distribution and civil condition. The Transvaal and the 
Orange River colonies were enumerated in 1904. In the latter, 
a census had been taken in 1890, in considerable detail, but that 
of the Transvaal, in 1896, seems to have been far from complete 
or accurate even in regard to the white population. In Southern 
Rhodesia the white residents were enumerated in 1891, but it 
was not until 1904 that the whole population was included in 
the census. The difficulty in all these cases is that of procuring 
a sufficient quantity of efficient agency, especially where a large 
and illiterate native population has to be taken into account. 
For this reason, amongst others, no census had been taken up 
to 1906 of Northern Rhodesia, the British possessions and 
protectorates of eastern Africa, or, again, of Nigeria and the 
protectorates attached to the West African colonies of Gambia, 
Sierra Leone and Lagos. 

The West Indies. — Each of the small administrative groups 
here included takes its census independently of the rest, though 
since 1871 all take it about the date fixed for that of the United 
Kingdom. The information required differs in each group, but 
the schedule is, as a rule, of a simple character, and the results 
of the inquiry are usually set forth with comparatively little 
comment or analysis. In some of the groups distinctions of 
colour are returned in general terms; in others, not at all. On 
the other hand, considerable detail is included regarding the 
indentured labourers recruited from India, and those of this class 
who are permanently settled on the land in Guiana and Trinidad. 
No census was taken in the former, or in Jamaica and Barbados, 
in 1901. 

Ceylon. — Here the census is taken decennially, on the same 
date as in India, in consideration of the constant stream of 
migration between the two countries. The schedule is much the 
same as in India with the substitution of race for caste. Until 
1 901, however, it was not filled in by the enumerator, as in India, 
but was distributed before and collected after the appointed 
date as in Great Britain. 

India'.— The population of India is the largest aggregate yet 
brought within the scope of a synchronous and uniform enumera- 
tion. It amounts to three-fourths of that of the British Empire, 
and but little less than a fifth of the estimated population of the 
world. Between 1853 and 1881 each province conducted its 
own census queries independently, with little or no attempt at
uniformity in date, schedule or tabulation. In the latter year the 
queries were placed for the first time under central administra-
tion, and thelike procedure wasadoptedin 1 89 1 and 1 901 , with such 
modification of detail as was suggested by the experience of the 
preceding census. On each occasion new areas had to be brought 
within the sphere of enumeration, whilst the necessity for the 
use in the wilder tracts of a schedule simpler in its demands than 
the standard, grew less as the country got more accustomed to 
the inquiry, and the efficiency of the administrative agency 
increased. Not more than 5 % of the householders in India can 
read and write, and the proportion capable of fully understanding 
the schedule and of making the entries in it correctly is still 
lower. From the literate minority, therefore, agency has to be 
drawn in sufficient strength to take down every particle of the 
information dictated by the heads of families. As it would be 
impossible for an enumerator to get through this task in the 
course of the census night for more than a comparatively small 
number of houses, the operation is divided into two processes. 
First a preliminary record is made a short time before the night 
in question, of the persons ordinarily residing in each house. 



666 



CENSUS 



Then, on that night, the enumerator, reinforced if necessary by 
aid drafted from outside, revisits his beat, and brings the record 
up to date by striking out the absent and entering the new 
arrivals. The average extent of each beat is arranged to include 
about 300 persons. Thus, in 1901, not far from a million men 
were required for enumeration alone. To this army must be 
added the controlling agency, of at least a tenth of the above 
number, charged with the instruction of their subordinates, the 
inspection and correction of the preliminary record, and the 
transmission of the schedule books to the local centre after the 
census has been taken. The supply of agency for these duties is, 
fortunately, not deficient. Irrespective of the large number 
of clerks, village scribes and state and municipal employes 
which can be drawn upon with but slight interruption of official 
routine, there is a fair supply of casual literary labour up to the 
moderate standard required. The services, too, of the educated 
public are often voluntarily placed at the disposal of the local 
authorities for the census night, with no desire for remuneration 
beyond out-of-pocket expenses, and the addition, perhaps, of 
a persona] letter of thanks from the chief official of the district. 
By means of a well-organized chain of tabulating centres, the 
preliminary totals, by sexes, of the 204 millions enumerated in 
1901 were given to the public within a fortnight of the census, 
and differed from the final results by no more than 94,000, or 
•03%. The schedule adopted contains in addition to the 
standard subjects of sex, age, civil condition, birthplace, occupa- 
tion and infirmities, columns for mother-tongue, religion and 
sect, and caste and sub-caste. It is printed in about 20 lan- 
guages. The results for each province or large state are tabulated 
locally, by districts or linguistic divisions. The final compilation 
is done by a provincial superintendent, who prepares his own 
report upon the queries and results. This work has usually
an interest not found in corresponding reports elsewhere, in the 
prominent place necessarily occupied in it by the ethnographical 
variety of the population. 

Foreign Countries 

Inquiries by local officials in connexion with measures of 
taxation, such as the hearth-tax in France, were instituted in 
continental Europe as early as the 14th century; but as the 
basis of an estimate of population they were intrinsically untrust- 
worthy. Going outside Europe, an extreme instance of the 
results of combining a census with more definite administrative 
objects may be found in the census of China in 171 1, when the 
population enumerated in connexion with a poll-tax and liability 
to military service, was returned as 28 millions; but forty years 
later, when the question was that of the measures for the relief 
of widespread distress, the corresponding total rose to 103 
millions! The notion of obtaining a periodical record of popula- 
tion and its movement, dissociated from fiscal or other liabilities, 
originated, as stated above, in Sweden, where, in 1686, the birth 
and death registers, till then kept voluntarily by the parish 
clergy, were made compulsory and general, the results for each 
year being communicated to a central office. A census, as a 
special undertaking, was not, however, carried out in that country 
until 1749. The example of Sweden was followed in the next 
year by Finland, and twenty years later, by Norway, where the 
parish register was an existing institution, as in the neighbouring 
state. Several other countries followed suit in the course of the 
18th century, though the results were either partial or inaccurate. 
Amongst them was Spain, though here a trustworthy census 
was not obtained until 1857, or perhaps 1887. Some of the small 
states of Italy, too, recorded their population in the middle of 
the above century, but the first general census of that country 
took place in 1861, after its unification. In Austria, a census was 
taken in 1754 by the parish clergy, concurrently with the civil 
authorities and the military commandants. Hungary was in 
part enumerated thirty years later. The starting-point of the 
modern census, however, in either part of the dual monarchy, was 
not until 1857. Speaking generally, most of the principal 
countries began the current series of their censuses between 
1825 and i860. The German empire has taken its census 



quinquennially since its foundation, but long before 187 1 a 
census at short intervals used to be taken in all the states of 
the Zollverein, for the purpose of ascertaining the contribution 
to the federal revenue, the amount of which was revisable every 
three years. The last great country to enter the census field 
was Russia. From 1721, what are known as revisions of the 
population were periodically carried out, for military, fiscal and 
police purposes; but these were conducted by local officials 
without central direction or systematic organization. In 1897 
a general census was taken as synchronously throughout the 
empire as was found possible. It embraced a population second 
to that of India alone, as China, probably the most populous 
country in the world, has not yet been subjected to this test. 
The inquiry was made in great detail, under central control, 
an3 on a plan sufficiently elastic to suit the requirements of so 
varied a country and population. As in India, the schedules 
had to be issued in an unusual number of languages, and were 
dealt with locally in the earlier stages of tabulation. The 
principal regions of which the population is still a matter of mere 
conjecture are the Turkish empire, Persia, Afghanistan, China 
and the Indo-Chinese peninsula, in Asia, nearly nine-tenths of 
Africa, and a considerable portion of South America. (J. A. B.) 

United States 

Modern census-taking seems to have originated in the United 
States. Professor von Mayr declares in a recent and authoritative 
work, " It was no European state, but the United States of 
America that made a beginning of census-taking in the large 
and true sense of that word," and Professor H. Wagner, writing 
of the censuses of Sweden, said to have been taken in the 18th 
century, uses these words, " Since 1749 careful parish registers 
have been kept by the clergy and have in general the value of 
censuses." The same authority, although mentioning a reported 
census of Norway in 1769, indicates his conviction that the first 
real census of that country was in 1815. Sweden, Norway and 
the United States are the only countries with any claim to have 
taken the first modern census, as distinguished from a register 
of tax-payers, &c, the lineal descendant of the old Roman census, 
and the innovation seems to be due to the United States. If so, 
the first modern census was the American census of 1790. At 
the present date more than three-fifths of the estimated popula- 
tion of the world has been enumerated in this way. It is of 
interest accordingly to note how and why the device originated. 

The Federal census, which began in 1790 and has been taken 
every ten years since under a mandate contained in the Con- 
stitution of the United States, was the outgrowth of a controversy 
in the convention which prepared the document. Represen- 
tatives of the smaller states as a rule claimed that the vote, and 
so the influence, of the states in the proposed government should 
be equal. Representatives of the larger states as a rule claimed 
that their greater population and wealth were entitled to recogni- 
tion. The controversy ended in the creation of a bicameral 
legislature in the lower branch of which the claim of the larger 
states found recognition, while in the upper, the Senate, each 
state had two votes. In the House of Representatives seats were 
to be distributed in proportion to the population, and the con- 
vention, foreseeing rapid changes of population, ordained an 
enumeration of the inhabitants and a redistribution or reappor- 
tionment of seats in the House of Representatives every ten years. 

The provision of the Constitution on the subject is as follows : — ■ 
" Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among 
the several states which may be included within this Union 
according to their respective numbers, which shall be determined 
by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those 
bound to service for a term of years and excluding Indians not 
taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration 
shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the 
Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent 
term of ten years, in such manner as they shall bylaw direct." 

In 1790 the population was reported classed as slaves and 
free, the free classed as white and others, the free whites as males 
and females, and the free white males as under or q.bove sixteen 



CENSUS 



years of age. In 1800 and 1810 the same classification was 
preserved, except that five age-groups instead of two were given 
for free white males and the same five were applied also to free 
white females. In connexion with the census of 18 10 an attempt, 
perhaps the earliest in any country, was made to gather certain 
industrial statistics showing " the number, nature, extent, 
situation and value of the arts and manufactures of the United 
States." In 1820 a sixth age class was introduced for free white' 
males, an age classification of four periods was applied to the free 
coloured and the slaves of each sex, and the number of aliens 
and of persons engaged in agriculture, in manufactures and in 
commerce was called for. The inquiry into industrial statistics 
begun in 1810 was also repeated and extended. 

In 1830 thirteen age classes were employed for free whites of 
each sex, and six for the free coloured and the slaves of each sex. 
The number of aliens, of the deaf and dumb and the blind were 
also gathered. 

The law under which the census of 1840 was taken contained 
a novel provision for the preparation in connexion with the 
census of statistical tables giving " such information in relation 
to mines, agriculture, commerce, manufactures and schools as 
will exhibit a full view of the pursuits, industry, education and 
resources of the country." This was about the first indication 
of a tendency, which grew in strength for half a century, to load 
the Federal census with inquiries having no essential or necessary 
connexion with its main purpose, which was to secure an accurate 
enumeration of the population as a basis for a reapportionment 
of seats in the House of Representatives. This tendency was 
largely due to a doubt whether the Federal government under 
the Constitution possessed the power to initiate general statistical 
inquiries, a doubt well expressed in the 9th edition of the Encyclo- 
paedia Britannica by Francis A. Walker, himself a prominent 
member of the party whose contention he states: — ■ 

" The reservation by the states of all rights not granted to the 
general government makes it fairly a matter of question whether 
purely statistical inquiries, other than for the single purpose of 
apportioning representation, could be initiated by any other 
authority than that of the states themselves. That large party 
which advocates a strict and jealous construction of the constitution 
would certainly oppose any independent legislation by the national 
Congress for providing a registration of births, marriages and deaths, 
or for obtaining social and industrial statistics, whether for the 
satisfaction of the publicist or for the guidance of the legislature. 
Even though the supreme court should decide such legislation to 
be within the grant of powers to the general government, the distrust 
and opposition, on constitutional grounds, of so large a portion of 
the people, could not but go far to defeat the object sought." 

The difficulty stated in the foregoing quotation, although now 
mainly of historic importance, exerted great influence upon the 
development of the American census prior to 1900. 

The pioneer work of the census of 1840 in the fields of educa- 
tional statistics, statistics of occupations, of defective classes 
and of causes of death, suffered from numerous errors and defects. 
Public discussion of them contributed to secure radical modifica- 
tions of scope and method at the census of 1850. Before the 
census law was passed, a census board, consisting of three members 
of the president's cabinet, was appointed to draft plans for the 
inquiry, and the essential features of its report prepared after 
consultation with a number of leading statisticians were embodied 
in the law. 

The census of 1850 was taken on six 'schedules, one for free 
inhabitants, one for slaves, one for deaths during the preceding 
year, one for agriculture, one for manufactures and one for social 
statistics. The last asked for returns regarding valuation, 
taxation, educational and religious statistics, pauperism, crime 
and the prevailing rates of wages in each municipal division. 
It was also the first American census to give a line of the schedule 
to each person, death or establishment enumerated, and thus to 
make the returns in the individual form indispensable for a 
detailed classification and compilation. The results of this 
census were tabulated with care and skill, and a preliminary 
analysis gave the salient results and in some cases compared them 
with European figures. 

The census of i860 followed the model of its predecessor with 



slight changes. When the time for the next census approached 
it was felt that new legislation was needed, and a committee of 
the House of Representatives, with James A. Garfield, afterwards 
president of the United States, at its head, made a careful and 
thorough study of the situation and reported an excellent bill, 
which passed the House, but was defeated by untoward influences 
in the Senate. In consequence the census of 1870 was taken with 
the outgrown machinery established twenty years earlier, a law 
characterized by Francis A. Walker, the superintendent of the 
census, who administered it, as " clumsy, antiquated and bar- 
barous." It suffered also from the fact that large parts of the 
country had' not recovered from the ruin wrought by four years 
of civil war. In consequence this census marks the lowest ebb 
of American census work. Tie accuracy of the results is generally 
denied by competent experts. The serious errors were errors of 
omission, were probably confined in the main to the Southern 
states, and were especially frequent among the negroes. 

Since 1870 the development of census work in the United 
States has been steady and rapid. The law, which had been 
prepared for the census of 1870 by the House committee, furnished 
a basis for greatly improved legislation in 1879, underwhich the 
tenth census was taken. By this law the census office for the 
first time was allowed to call into existence and to control an 
adequate local staff of supervisors and enumerators. The scope 
of the work was so extended as to make the twenty-two quarto 
volumes of the tenth census almost an encyclopaedia, not only of 
thepopulation,but also of theproductsand resources of the United 
States. Probably no other census in the world has ever covered 
so wide a range of subjects, and perhaps none except that of India 
and the eleventh American census has extended through so many 
volumes. The topics usually contained in a census suffered from 
the great addition of other and less pertinent matter, and the 
reputation of the work was unfavourably affected by the length 
of time required to prepare and publish the volumes (the last 
ones not appearing until near the end of the decade), the original 
underestimate of the cost of the work, which made frequent 
supplementary appropriations necessary, the resignation of the 
superintendent, Francis A. Walker, in 1882, and the disability 
and death of his successor, Charles W. Seaton. The eleventh 
census was taken under a law almost identical with that of the 
tenth, and extended through twenty-five large volumes, present- 
ing a work almost as encyclopaedic, but much more distinctively 
statistical. 

The popular opinion of a census, at least in the United States, 
depends largely upon the degree to which its figures for the 
population of the country, of states, and especially of cities, 
meet or fail to meet the expectations of the interested public. 
Judged by this standard, the census of 1890 was less favourably 
received than that of 1880. The enumerated population of the 
country in 1880 was larger than had been anticipated; and in 
the face of these figures it was difficult for local complaints, even 
where they were made, to find hearing and acceptance. But 
according to the eleventh census the decennial rate of growth 
of population fell suddenly from over 30%, which the figures had 
shown between 1870 and 1880, and in every preceding decade 
of the century, except that of the Civil War, to less than 25%, 
in spite of an immigration nearly double that of any preceding 
decade. For this change no adequate explanation was offered 
by the census office. Hence the protests of those who believed 
that the figures for population were too small swelled into a. 
general chorus of dissatisfaction. But the census was probably 
more correct than the critics. Most of the motives influencing 
popular estimates of population in the United States tend to 
exaggeration. The convention which drafted the Constitution 
of the United States attempted to secure a balance of interests 
by apportioning both representatives in Congress and direct 
taxes according to population. A passage in The Federalist 
suggests the motives of the convention as follows: — 

" As the accuracy of the census to be obtained by Congress will 
necessarily depend in a considerable degree on the disposition if 
not co-operation of the states, it is of great importance that the 
states should feel as little bias as possible to swell or reduce the 



668 



CENSUS 



amount of their numbers. Were their share of representation 
alone to be governed by this rule, they would have an interest in 
exaggerating their inhabitants. Were the rule to decide their 
share of taxation alone, a contrary temptation would prevail. By 
extending the rule to both objects the states will have opposite 
interests, which will control and balance each other, and produce 
a requisite impartiality." 

With the disappearance of direct taxation as a source of federal 
revenue, the motive mentioned for understating the population 
disappeared. - On the other hand, the desire for many repre- 
sentatives in Congress has been reinforced by the more influential 
feelings of local pride and of rivalry with other cities of somewhat 
similar size. Hence a complaint that the population is overstated 
is seldom heard, and hence, also, popular charges of an under- 
count afford little evidence that the population was really larger 
than stated by the census. 

After the detailed tabulation had been completed, it was shown 
that the number of persons under ten years of age in 1890 was 
surprisingly small, and that this deficiency in children was a 
leading cause of the slow growth in population. Before the 
tabulation had been made Francis A. Walker wrote: — " If the 
birth-rate among the previously existing population did not 
suffer a sharp decline . . . the census of 1890 cannot be vindi- 
cated. To ascertain the facts we must await the tabulation of 
the population by periods of life, and ascertain how many of 
the inhabitants of the United States of 1890 were under ten years 
of age." These results thus confirmed the accuracy of the 
count of 1890. Efforts to invalidate the census returns by com- 
parison with the registration records of Massachusetts cannot be 
deemed conclusive, since in the United States, as in Great Britain, 
the census must be deemed more accurate and less subject to 
error than registration records. A strong argument in favour 
of the eleventh census, apart from its self-consistency, is that its 
results as a whole fit in with the subsequent state enumerations. 
In eleven cases such enumerations have been taken; and on 
computing from them and the results of the federal census of 
1880 what the population at the date of the eleventh census 
should have been, if the annual rate of increase had been uniform, 
it appears that in no case, except New York City and Oregon, 
was the difference between the enumerations and these estimates 
over 4%. In Oregon about 30,000 more people were found in 
1890 than the estimate would lead one to expect; in New York 
city, about 100,000 less. It seems not improbable that in the 
latter, where the difficulties incident to a count during the 
summer are almost insurmountable, serious omissions occurred. 
Still, such a comparison confirms the accuracy of the eleventh 
census as a whole. fe ( 

The results of the twelfth census {1900) further refute the 
argument that would maintain the eleventh census to be 
inaccurate because it showed a smaller rate of increase in popula- 
tion during the preceding decade than had been recorded by 
other censuses during earlier decades. The rate of increase dur- 
ing the decade ending in 1900 was even less than that for the 
preceding decade; and it is impossible that a falling off so marked 
could in two successive enumerations be the result of sheer 
inaccuracy. The rate of increase from 1890 to 1900, eliminating 
from the computation the population of Alaska, Hawaii, Indian 
Territory and Indian reservations, was 20-7; the rate of increase 
if these places are included — in which case the figures of the 
population of Hawaii in 1890 must be taken from the census of 
the Hawaiian government in that year — was 21 %. 

The law regulating the twelfth census deserves to rank with 
those of 1790, 1850 and 1879 as one of the four important laws 
relative to census work. By this law the census office was far 
more independent than ever before. Appointments and removals 
were made by the director of the census rather than by the secretary 
of the interior, and in all plans for the execution of the law the 
head of the office was responsible for success. The law divided the 
subjects of census inquiry into two parts — first, those of primary 
importance, requiring the aid of the enumerator; and, secondly, 
those of subsidiary importance, capable of production without the 
aid of the enumerator. The former had to be finished and published 
by 1st July 1902; the latter were not to be undertaken until the 
former were well advanced towards completion. By this means 
the attention of the office could be concentrated on a small number 



of subjects rather than distributed over the long list treated in the 
volumes of the tenth and eleventh censuses. 

Under the federal form of government, with its delegation of all 
residuary powers to the several states, the United States have no 
system of recording deaths, births and marriages. Hence there is 
no such basis as exists in nearly every other civilized state for a 
national system of registration, and the country depends upon 
the crude method of enumerators' returns for its information on 
vital statistics, except in the states and cities which have estab- 
lished a trustworthy registration system of their own. These are 
the New England states and a few others in their vicinity or influ- 
enced by their example. Enumerators' returns in this field are so 
incomplete that hardly two-thirds of the deaths which have occurred 
in any community during the preceding year are obtained by an 
enumerator visiting the families, no satisfactory basis for the com- 
putation of death-rates is afforded, and the returns have compara- 
tively little scientific value. In the regions where census tables and 
interpretations are derived from registration records kept by the 
several states or cities they are often made more complete than 
those in the state or municipal documents. The census of agricul- 
ture is also liable to a wide margin of error, owing to defects in farm 
accounts and the inability of many farmers to state the amount or 
the value even of the leading crops. The census figures relate to 
the- calendar year preceding 1st June 1900, and hurried and careless 
answers about the preceding year's crop are almost sure to have been 
given by many farmers in the midst of the summer's work. 

The difficulties facing the manufacturing census were of a different 
character. A large proportion of the industries of the country 
keep satisfactory accounts, and can answer the questions with some 
correctness. But manufacturers are likely to suspect the objects 
of the census, and to fear that the information given will be open 
to the public or betrayed to competitors. Furthermore, the manu- 
facturing schedule presupposes some uniformity in the method of 
accounting among different companies or lines of business, and this 
is often lacking. Another source of error in the manufacturing 
census of the United States is that the words of the census law are 
construed as requiring an enumeration of the various trades and 
handicrafts, such as carpentering. The deficiencies in such returns 
are gross and notorious, but the census office feels obliged to seek 
for them and to report what it finds, however incomplete or in- 
correct the results may be. Even on the population returns certain 
answers, such as the number of the divorced or the number unable 
to read and write, may be open to question. 

The wide range of the American census, and the publication of 
uncertain figures, find a justification in the fact that the develop- 
ment of accurate census work requires a long educational process 
in the office, and, above all, in the community. Rough approxi- 
mations must always precede accurate measurements; and these 
returns, while often inaccurate, are better than nothing, and probably 
improve with each decade. 

Besides ,the breadth of its scope, in which the American census 
stands unrivalled, the most important American contribution to 
census work has been the application of electricity to the tabula- 
tion of the results, as was first done in 1890. The main difficulties 
which this method reduced were two. The production of tables 
for so enormous a population as that of the United States through 
the method of tallying by hand requires a great number of clerks 
and a long period of time, and when complete cannot be verified 
except by a repetition of the process. The new method abbreviates 
the time, since an electric current can tally almost simultaneously 
the data, the tallying of which by hand would be separated by 
appreciable intervals. The method also renders comparatively 
easy the verification of the results of certain selected parts. 

Judged by European standards the cost of the American census 
is very great. The following table gives the total and the per 
capita cost of each enumeration. 



Date. 


Cost. 


Date. 


Cost. 


Total in 


Per Capita 


Total in 


Per Capita 




dollars. 


in cents. 




dollars. 


in cents. 


1790 


44,377 


I-I2 


1850 


1423,351 


6-13 


1800 


66,109 


1-24 


i860 


1,969,377 


626 


1810 


178,445 


2-46 


1870 


3,421,198 


8-87 


1820 


208,526 


216 


1880 


5,790,678 


11-48 


1830 


378,545 


2-94 


1890 


11,547,127 


18-33 


1840 


833,371 


4-88 


1900 


16,116,930 


21-16 



For the sake of comparison it may be stated that the per capita 
cost of the English census of 1901 was 2-24 cents, or little more than 
one-tenth that of the American census. This difference is due in 
part to the greater scope and complexity of the American census, 
and in part to the fact that in the United States the field work is 
done by well-paid enumerators, while in England it is done in most 
cases by the heads of families, who are not paid. 

The course of events has clearly established the fact that the 
authority of the Federal government in this field is greater than 
the strict constructionists of a previous generation as represented 



CENT AUREA— CENTIPEDE 



669 



by Generat Walker in the passage already quoted believed it to be. 
Decision after decision of individual instances has made it a settled 
practice for the Federal government to co-operate with or to supple- 
ment the state governments in the gathering of statistics that may fur- 
nish a basis for state or Federal legislation. The law has allowed the 
Federal census office in its discretion to compile and publish the 
birth statistics of divisions in which they are accurately kept ; one 
Federal report on the statistics of marriages and divorces through- 
out the country from 1867 to 1886 inclusive was published in 1889, 
and a second for the succeeding twenty-year period was published in 
1908-1909; an annual volume gives the statistics of deaths for 
about half the population of the country, including all the states 
and cities which have approximately complete records of deaths; 
Federal agencies like the bureau of labour and the bureau of cor- 
porations have been created for the purpose of gathering certain 
social and industrial statistics, and the bureau of the census has 
been made a permanent statistical office. 

The Federal census office has been engaged in the compilation 
and publication of statistics of many sorts. Among its important 
lines of work may be mentioned frequent reports during the cotton 
ginning season upon the amount of cotton ginned, supplemental 
census reports upon occupations, on employees and wages, and on 
further interpretation of various population tables, reports on 
street and electric railways, on mines and quarries, on electric light 
and power plants, on deaths in the registration area 1900-1904, 
on benevolent institutions, on the insane, on paupers in almshouses, 
on the social statistics of cities and on the census of manufactures 
in 1905. Congress has recently entrusted it with still further duties, 
and it has developed into the main statistical office of the Federal 
government, finding its nearest analogue probably in the Imperial 
Statistical Office in Berlin. (W. F. W.) 

CENTAUREA, in botany, a genus of the natural order Com- 
positae, containing between four and five hundred species, and 
of wide distribution, but with its principal centre in the Medi- 
terranean region. The plants are herbs with entire or cut often 
spiny-toothed leaves, and ovoid or globose involucres surrounding 
a number of tubular, oblique or two-lipped florets, the outer of 
which are usually larger and neuter, the inner bisexual. Four 
species are native in Britain. C. nigra is knapweed, common 
in meadows and pastureland; C. Cyanus is the bluebottle or 
cornflower, a well-known cornfield weed; C. Calcitrapa is star- 
thistle, a rare plant, found in dry waste places in the south of 
England, and characterized by the rose-purple flower-heads 
enveloped by involucral bracts which end in a long, stiff spine. 
Besides cornflower, a few other species are worth growing as 
garden plants; they are readily grown in ordinary soil: — C. 
Cineraria, a half-hardy perennial, native of Italy, is remarkable 
for its white downy foliage; C. babylonica (Levant) has large 
downy leaves and a tall spike of small yellow flowers; C. dealbata 
(Caucasus) is a low-growing plant with larger rose-coloured heads; 
C. macrocephala (Caucasus) has large yellow heads; C. Montana 
(Pyrenees) large handsome blue heads; and C. ragusina (S.E. 
Europe) beautiful silver-haired leaves and yellow flowers. 

CENTAURS, in Greek mythology, a race of beings part horse 
part man, dwelling in the mountains of Thessaly and Arcadia. 
The name has been derived (1) from KtvTtiv (goad) and raupos 
(bull), implying a people who were primarily herdsmen, (2) from 
Kevrttv and the common termination -avpos or avpa ("air") 
i.e. " spearmen." The former is unsatisfactory partly from the 
philological standpoint, and the latter, though not certain, is 
preferable. The centaurs were the offspring of Ixion and Nephele 
(the rain-cloud), or of Kentauros (the son of these two) and some 
Magnesian mares or of Apollo and Hebe. They are best known 
for their fight with the Lapithae, caused by their attempt to 
carry off Deidameia on the day of her marriage to Peirithous, 
king of the Lapithae, himself the son of Ixion. Theseus, who 
happened to be present, assisted Peirithous, and the Centaurs 
were driven off (Plutarch, Theseus, 30; Ovid, Metam. xii. 210; 
Diod. Sic. iv. 69, 70). In later times they are often represented 
drawing the car of Dionysus, or bound and ridden by Eros, in 
allusion to their drunken and amorous habits. Their general 
character is that of wild, lawless and inhospitable beings, the 
slaves of their animal passions, with the exception of Pholus and 
Chiron. They are variously explained by a fancied resemblance 
to the shapes of clouds, or as spirits of the rushing mountain 
torrents or winds. As children of Apollo, they are taken to 
signify the rays of the sun. It is suggested as the origin of the 
legend, that the Greeks in early times, to whom riding was 



unfamiliar, regarded the horsemen of the northern hordes as one 
and the same with their horses; hence the idea of the Centauf 
as half-man, half-animal. Like the defeat of the Titans by Zeus, 
the contests with the Centaurs typified the struggle between 
civilization and barbarism. 

In early art they were represented as human beings in front, with 
the body and hind legs of a horse attached to the back: later, they 
were men only as far as the waist. The battle with the Lapithae, 
and the adventure of Heracles with Pholus (Apollodorus, ii. 5; 
Diod. Sic. iv. 11) are favourite subjects of Greek art (see Sidney 
Colvin, Journal of Hellenic Studies, i. 1881, and the exhaustive article 
in Roscher's Lexikon der Mythologie). Fig. 34 in article Greek Art 
(the west pediment of the temple of Zeus at Olympia) represents the 
attempt of the Centaurs to carry off the bride of Peirithous. 

CENTAURUS (" The Centaur "), in astronomy, a constella- 
tion of the southern hemisphere, mentioned by Eudoxus (4th 
century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd century B.C.), Ptolemy catalogued 
thirty-seven stars in it. a-Centauri is a splendid binary star. 
Its components are of the 1st magnitude, and revolve in a period 
of eighty-one years; and since its parallax is 0-75", it is the 
nearest star to the earth; ui-Centauri, the finest globular star- 
cluster in the heavens, consists of about 6000 stars in a space 
of about 20' diameter, of which about 125 variables have been 
examined. Nova Ceniauri, a " new " star, was discovered in 
1895 by Mrs Fleming in photographs taken at Harvard. 

CENTAURY (Erythraea Centaurium, natural order Gentian- 
aceae), an annual herb with erect, smooth stem, usually branched 
above, and a terminal inflorescence with numerous small red or 
pink regular flowers with a funnel-shaped corolla. The plant 
occurs in dry pastures and on sandy coasts in Britain, and 
presents many varieties, differing in length of stem, degree of 
branching, width and shape of leaves, and laxity or closeness of 
the inflorescence. Several other species of the genus are grown 
as rock-plants. 

CENTENARY (from Lat. centenarius, of or belonging to a 
hundred, from centeni, distributive of centum, hundred), a space 
of a hundred years, and particularly the celebration of an event 
on the lapse of a hundred years, a centennial anniversary. The 
word " centennial " (from Lat. centennis, from centum, and annus, 
a year), though usually an adjective as in " the Centennial 
State," the name given to Colorado on its admission to statehood 
in 1876, is also used as a synonym of centenary. 

CENTERVILLE, a city and the county-seat of Appanoose 
county, Iowa, U.S.A., in the south part of the state, about 
90 m. N.W. of Keokuk. Pop. (1890) 3668; (1900) 5256; (1905, 
state census) 5967 (487 being foreign-born); (1910) 6936. Center- 
ville is served by the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, the Chicago, 
Rock Island & Pacific and the Iowa Central railways. Among 
the principal buildings are the county court-house and the 
Federal building, and the city has a public library and a hospital. 
It is in one of the most productive coal regions of the state ; 
it ships coal, limestone and livestock, has large bottling works, 
and manufactures iron, brick and tile, machine-shop products, 
woollen goods, shirts, cigars and flour. The place was platted 
in 1846, was called Chaldea until 1849, when the present name 
was adopted, was incorporated as a town in 1855, and in 1870 
was chartered as a city of the second class. The city limits were 
extended in 1 906-1 907. 

CENTIPEDE, the characteristic member of the group Chilopoda, 
a class of the Arthropoda, formerly associated with the Diplopoda 
(Millipedes), the Pauropoda and the Symphyla, to constitute 
the now abandoned group Myriapoda. The resemblance between 
the Chilopoda and the Diplopoda is principally superficial and 
due to the elongation and vermiform shape of the body, which 
in both is composed of a number of similar or subsimilar somites 
not differentiated as are those of Insecta, existing Arachnida 
and most Crustacea, into series or " tagmata " of varying 
function. Until 1893 no one doubted the correctness of the 
assumption that the Chilopoda and Diplopoda were orders of a 
class Myriapoda of the same systematic status as the Arachnida 
or Hexapoda. But in that year, R. I. Pocock and J. S. Kingsley 
independently pointed out that they differ as much from each 
other as either differs from the Hexapoda; and should, therefore, 



670 



CENTIPEDE 



rank as distinct classes of Arthropods. . Pocock, indeed, definitely 
associated the Chilopoda with the Hexapoda in a group, the 
Opisthogoneata (Opisthogonea), equivalent to a group, the 
Progoneata (Prosogonea), comprising the Diplopoda, Pauropoda 
and Symphyla. As the basis for this classification was taken 
the position of the generative orifices which open in the Opistho- 
gonea at the posterior end and in the Prosogonea near the anterior 
end of the body. As a matter of fact, in the Chilopoda they are 
Situated on the penultimate or pretelsonic somite; in the 
Hexapoda upon the antepenultimate somite (male) or a little 
farther forward (female). Moreover, the recent researches of 
Heymons into the embryology of Scolopendra, one of the 
Chilopods, has shown a close correspondence in the number of 
cephalic metameres between the Chilopoda and Hexapoda, a 
correspondence which has not yet been established in the case 
of the Diplopoda or Symphyla. This last discovery bears out 
the view of relationship between the centipedes and insects, to 
the exclusion of the Diplopoda, Symphyla and Pauropoda. 
But even -if in the future it can be shown that all these groups 
can be brought into line with respect to the metamerism of the 
head, the position of the generative orifices will remain as a 
fundamental and constant character, distinguishing the Chilo- 
poda from the other groups of so-called " Myriapods " and the 
Hexapoda from the Symphyla, which in many particulars they 
resemble. 

Structure of the Chilopoda. — -The exoskeletal elements of a typical 
somite consist of a dorsal plate or tergum, a ventral plate or sternum, 
a lateral or pleural membrane, often strengthened with chitinous 
Sclerites, and a pair of appendages. At the anterior extremity 
there is a head-shield or cephalite, which bears eyes, when present, 
and a pair of antennae. In all centipedes, except the Scuhgeridae, 
the preantennal portion of the cephalite is sharply reflexed, ventrally 
forrning an area called the clypeus. The inferior edge of this bears 
the labrum, which is usually represented by a small median, and two 
large lateral plates- The appendages are modified as a single pair 
of antennae, four pairs, of jaws or gnathites, a variable number of 
walking legs and a single pair of generative limbs or gonopods. The 
antennae, articulated to the forepart of the head and preoral in 
position, are long and flexible and consist of fourteen or more seg- 
ments. The jaws of the first pair of mandibles are stout and bi- 
segmented, with a dentate cutting edge. Those of the second pair 
or maxillae vary considerably in structure in different groups. They 
are foliaceous and are usually regarded as biramous. In some genera 
(Scutigera, Lithobius) the inner branch consists of two distinct seg- 
ments meeting those of the opposite side in the middle line. The 
outer branch, which is always larger, consists of three or four seg- 
ments. Generally, however, the basal segments of the two branches 
are coalesced with each other and with the corresponding segments 
of the opposite side to form a single broad transverse plate. The 
above described condition seen in Scutigera suggests that two pairs 
of jaws may be involved in the formation of the maxillae in the 
Chilopoda. The jaws of the third pair, the palpognaths or second 
pair of maxillae, resemble dwarfed walking legs, and consist of five 
or six segments, of which the basal or coxa is united mesially to its 
fellow. The jaws of the fourth pair, the toxicognaths or poison- 
jaws, are long and powerful, and consist like the legs primarily of 
six segments, whereof the basal is large and usually fused with its 
fellow to form a large coxal plate, the second is small and generally 
suppressed by fusion with the third, the fourth and fifth are also 
small, while the sixth is transformed into a great piercing fang, at 
the tip of which opens the duct of a poison gland lodged within 
the appendage. 

The tergal elements of the somites bearing the antennae, man- 
dibles and maxillae appear to be represented by the head-shield 
or cephalite. The tergal element of the somite bearing the palpo- 
gnath is usually suppressed ; that of the toxicognath is sometimes 
of large size as in some Geophilomorpha (Himantarium) , sometimes 
small as irt Scutigera, Lithobius, Craterostigmus, sometimes suppressed 
probably by fusion with the tergum of the first leg-bearing somite 
as in the Scolopendromorpha. The sternal plates of all the jaw- 
bearing somites have disappeared, except in the case of the somite 
of the toxicognath, where it may be vestigial. In the case of the 
somites bearing the walking legs the tergal and sternal elements 
are preserved without fusion with the corresponding plates of the 
preceding or succeeding somites, so that great flexibility of the body 
is retained. The only exception to this is presented by Scutigera, 
where the terga corresponding to the sofaites bearing the fifteen 
pairs of legs -are reduced by fusion and suppression to seven. The 
walking legs are articulated to the inferior portion of the pleural 
or lateral area of the somites close to the external margins of the 
sterna, which widely separate those of the left from those of the 
right side, Generally speaking the legs resemble each other, although 
as a rule they progressively increase in length towards the posterior 



end of the body. They consist typically of six segments, of which the 
basal is termed the coxa and the apical the tarsus. The tarsus is 
armed with a single terminal claw, and, except in the Geophilo- 
morpha and a few genera of other orders, is divided by a mesial 
transverse joint into two segments, as is the case in Scolopendra and 
Lithobius for example. But in some of the longer-legged, swift- 
footed centipedes of the order Lithobiomorpha (e.g. Henicops, 
Cermalobius) the tarsi are further subdivided. The multiplication 
of sub-segments reaches its maximum in Scutigera, where the tarsi 
are extremely long, slender, flexible and annulated. The legs of 
the last pair are directed backwards in a line parallel with the long 
axis of the body, so that their coxae, fused in some cases with the 
pleural sclerites (Scolopendra, Geophilus), or free and of large size 
(Scutigera, Lithobius), serve to protect the small genital and anal 
somites. They are often greatly modified. In the males of some 
species of Lithobius one or more of the segments is inflated or fur- 
nished with tubercle-bearing, tactile bristles; in some Geophilo- 
morpha the whole limb is thickened in the male sex. In most 
Scolopendromorpha the basal segment is armed beneath with spines 
or spikes (Dacetum, Scolopocryptops) ; sometimes the whole appen- 
dage is thickened and terminated by a sharp and serrate claw 
(Theatops, Plutonium). In these cases the legs act as weapons of 
defence and offence. In other cases (Newportia) the tarsi lose the 
claw, become many-jointed and act as feelers, while in Alipes the 
terminal segments are flattened, leaf-like and furnished with a 
peculiar stridulating organ. The genital somite is always small 
and sometimes retractile within the somite bearing the last pair 
of legs. Its tergal plate is usually retained, but its sternal plate is 
generally suppressed. In females of the Lithobiomorpha and 
Scutigeromorpha the appendages of this somite— the gonopods — 
are jointed, forcipate and relatively well developed although small. 
In the females of the other orders they are greatly reduced or absent. 
In the males their development varies considerably. They are well 
developed in Scutigera, where they form two pairs of digitiform 
sclerites, whereas in the Geophilomorpha they are reduced to a pair 
of very short, two-jointed limbs. The anal somite is always small 
and limbless. In Craterostigmus the genital and anal somites are 
represented by a pair of elongate valves projecting between the legs 
of the last pair. The structure of the gonopods is unknown, and 

the homology between the two valves and the skeletal elements 

of the somites in question not clearly understood. 

A study of the development of Scolopendra has shown that the 

antennae of the adult are the appendages of the second postoral 

metamere and the mandibles 

those of the fourth, the first 

postoral metamere, which has a 

pair of transient preantennal 

appendages, and the third, which 

has no appendages, being ex- 

calated at an early stage of 

embryonic growth. Further- 
more, behind the legs of the last 

pair two pairs of appendages are 

present. The second of these 

persists as the gonopods of the 

adult, but the first is suppressed. 

Possibly, however, it is repre- 
sented in the male of Scutigera 

by the anterior branches of 

the gonopods. The cerebral or 

cephalic portion of the nervous 

system consists of a quadrilobate 

mass. From the two upper 

lobes, which are set transversely, 

arise the ocular nerves; from 

the two lower lobes, which are 

united by a transverse commis- 
sure, spring the antennal nerves 

in front and the chords which 

form the oesophageal collar be- 
hind. These chords unite below 

the oesophagus to form the com- 
pound suboesophageal ganglion, 

whence the nerves for the four 

pairs of jaws arise. The ventral 

system consists of a double 

chord uniting in each of the leg- 
bearing segments in a ganglionic 

swelling which gives off four 

pairs of nerves to the limbs and 

tissues of the somite. There is embryo of Scolopendra, ventral 

a single ganglion in the genital view, showing the anal segment 

segment. or telson (/) ; the legs of the last 

Eyes are frequently absent. P air in the adult (Ig. 21) and the 

When present they may be either tw ° rudimentary pairs of legs 

simple or compound, i.e. consist- ('£• 22 > '#• 2 3)- 

ing externally of a single lens 

(monomeniscous) of or an aggregation of lenses (polymeniscous). 

Simple eyes vary in number on each side of the h<»ad from one, as in 

Henicops, to as many as forty, as in some specie of Lithobius. In 





Modified from Heymons, Bib. Zool., 1001, 
by permission of E. Nagele. 

Fig. 1. 

A, Diagram of anterior ex- 
tremity of an early embryo of 
Scolopendra, ventral view; cl, 
clypeus; lb, labrum; m, mouth; 
p.a, preantennal appendage; a, 
antenna ; int, premandibular rudi- 
ment; mdl, mandible; mx, max- 
illa; p.g, palpognath; t.g, toxico- 
gnath ; Ig. 1 , first pair of walking 
legs. 

B, Posterior end of a later 



CENTIPEDE 



671 



Scolopendra, where there are four, the corneal lens is a biconvex thick- 
ening of the cuticle. The soft or retinal portion of the eye beneath 
the lens consists of an aggregation of large cells forming a single layer 
continuous with the epidermic cells of the circumocular area. Thus 
the eye is monostichous. The arrangement of the cells, however, 
is peculiar. They are invaginated to form what may be described 
as a very deep cup with exceedingly thick walls and correspondingly 
narrow median space, the outer surface of the cup being formed 
by the inner or proximal ends of the cells and the inner surface by 
their outer or distal ends. It results from this arrangement that 
the cells forming all but the bottom of the invagination lie horizon- 
tally, i.e. at right angles to the vertical axis of the eye. From the 
distal ends of the cells are secreted chitinous rhabdomeres, forming 
a rhabdom which occupies and fills up the central portion of the cup 
beneath the middle of the corneal lens. The outer ends of the cells 
are nucleated and are continuous with the fibres of the optic nerve, 



rv.ani 



large accessory glands; and a pair of tubes, or vesiculae seminaSe. , 
open, one on each side, into the divided sperm ducts close to the* 
point of origin above the intestine. 



The organs of the female are very 
similar. There is a large median 
ovary followed by a short oviduct 
forming a circum-intestinal collar 
and a common atrium. Into the 
latter open a pair of short re- 
ceptacula seminis and the slender 
duct of two pairs of large acces- 
sory glands. There is nothing in 
the female corresponding to the 
supra-intestinal vesiculae semin- 
ales of the male. In the male of 
Scolopendra,on the contrary, there 



lerU 




71- opt 




P9<C 



O.ii: 




5%P*r-- '.-'n/opl 



A and B after Heymons, Bi&Z. Zool., 1901, by permission of E, Nagele. 

A, Brain tif Scolopendra. n.ant, Antenna! nerves; 
n.opt, ocular nerves; n.pr.ant, preantennal nerves; 
oes.comm, oesophageal commissure. 



Fig. 2. 
B, Section of Eye of Scolopendra. len, 
Corneal lens; ret, retinal or visual cells; 
n.opt, optic nerve. 



"\> 



% 



...s.gi 



....iti.g 



..m.l 



which passes from the outer surface of the bottom of the cup to the 
brain. Compound eyes are found only in the Scutigeridae. Exter- 
nally the eye consists of one hundred or 
more little lenses or lenticles. The retinal 
portion is composed of a corresponding 
number of ocular units or ommatidia. 
Each ommatidium is an elongated cone 
with its broad extremity abutting against 
the corneal lenticle. It consists of a 
non-nucleated crystalline cone developed 
from embryonic cells, and is enveloped 
in three tiers of large nucleated cells. 
The cells of the outermost tier are heavily 
pigmented; those of the middle and 
innermost (proximal) tiers, the retinal 
cells, are at their inner extremities pro- 
duced into threads continuous with the 
fibres of the optic nerve. In the space 
between these cells and the crystalline 
cone which they surround, there is a layer 
of rhabdomeres deposited apparently by 
the cells. 

The alimentary canal is a simple tube 
running without convolutions from the 
mouth to the anus. Its anterior portion 
or pharynx, which arises from the stomo- 
daeal invagination in the embryo, is 
short; a pair of large, so-called salivary 
glands open into it. The mesenteric part 
of the canal is relatively wide and 
receives at its junction with the hind-gut 
the excretory products of a pair of very 
a long and slender malpighian tubes of 

Fig. 3. — Diagram of proctodaeal origin. The posterior end of 
Alimentary Canal of the canal, arising from the proctodaeum, 
" : " " is relatively short and narrow. 

The generative organs vary in struc- 
tural details in different centipedes. In 
the male of Lithobius the testes consist 
of a single coiled tube lying above the 
alimentary canal. The slender vas de- 
ferens which proceeds from its hinder 
end divides posteriorly into a right and 
left branch, embracing the gut and unit- 
ing beneath it to form a common chamber or atrium within the 
genital orifice. The atrium receives the secretion of two pairs of 



Ugli 



Lithobius. 
a, Anus. 
mg, Mid-gut. 
hg, Hind-gut. 
mt, Malpighian tubule. 
's.gl, Salivary gland. 
h-h. lg-i$, Legs of first 
and fifteenth pairs. 



C after Adensamer, Verh. z. &. Verein, Vienna, 1893, pi. vii. 
C, Ocular unit or ommatidium 
of compound Eye of Scutigera. 
len, corneal lenticle; c.c, crystal- 
line cone; 1, pigmented cells of 
outermost tier; 2, 3, retinular 
cells of middle and innermost 
tiers; rbd, rhabdomeres; n.opt, 
optic nerve; pg, pigment cells. 



are as many as twelve pairs of 
somewhat sausage-shaped testes, 
approximated two by two. From 
each pair proceed two slender 
ducts which open into a median 
duct coiled in the posterior third of the body and much expanded 
in the last three of the leg-bearing segments. The right and left 
portions of the intestinal ring of the genital duct are unequally de- 
veloped, and there are no vesiculae seminales, but two pairs of 




gl. ace 




After Heymons, Bibl. Zool., 1901, by permission of E. Nagele. 

Fig. 4. — Posterior portion of generative organs of male of 

Scolopendra (A), of female (B). t, Testes; v.d, vas deferens; oil, 

ovary; r.s, receptaculum seminis; gl.acc, accessory glands; g.o, 
generative orifice. 

accessory glands communicate with the genital atrium as in 
Lithobius. In the female Scolopendra the right and left portions 
of the intestinal collar are also unequally developed, and only a 
single pair of accessory glands besides the receptacula seminis open 
into the atrium. 

The heart is tubular and lies in the middle dorsal line immediately 



672 



CENTIPEDE 



beneath the integument. It consists of a series of chambers corre- 
sponding roughly to the leg-bearing segments, and lies in a blood- 
sinus formed by a pericardial membrane whence large alary muscles 
extend to the sides of the body. Each chamber gives off in Scolo- 
pendra a pair of fine lateral vessels, and is furnished at its posterior 

B 





a.m. 



A after Newpoit, Phil. Trans., 1843. B after Haase, Zool. Beilrage, i. pt. 65, 1 

C after Haase, he. cil. 

Fig. 5. 
B, Two segments of Scolo- 
pendra, showing the branching 
and anastomosing tracheae and a 
spiracle (sp). 



A, Anterior extremity of 
Scolopendra, showing two 
chambers of the heart (h), the 
aortic ring (a), the alae cordis 
(a.m.) and a cardiac orifice (0). . , 

extremity with a pair of orifices by which the blood re-enters the 
organ from the pericardial space. From the anterior chamber, 
which lies in the first or second leg-bearing segment, proceed three 
arteries, a median which runs forwards into the head to supply 
the brain and other organs, and a lateral which with its fellow of the 
opposite side forms an oesophageal aortic collar. From the sides 
of the latter arise vessels to the gnathites, and from its inferior portion 
an unpaired vessel passes forwards into the head and another back- 
wards above the nerve chord to the posterior end of the body, 
supplying each segment in its course with a delicate lateral branch. 
In Scolopendra the chambers of the heart, excepting the first and 
last, which are small, are subequal in size; but in forms like Scutigera 
where the terga are very unequal in size a corresponding inequality 
in the size of the chambers is manifested. 

In all centipedes, except Scutigera, respiration is effected by 
chitinized tracheal tubes which extend with their ramifications 
throughout the body and open to the exterior by means of 
spiracles perforating the lateral or pleural membrane of more or 
fewer of the somites below the edge of the terga. Spiracles are never 
present upon the anal, genital and last leg-bearing somites, and only 
rarely, as in Henicops, upon the somite bearing the legs of the first 
pair. In the majority of cases the spiracles are circular, sigmoid 
or slit-like orifices, with chitinized rim, leading into a pocket-like 
integumental infolding, from which emanate numerous small tracheal 
tubes which soon anastomose to form the main tracheal trunks. 
In Dacetum, one of the Scolopendridae, there is no pocket-like in- 
folding, the small tracheal tubes opening direct to the exterior on 
a large subcircular plate where their apertures fuse to form a com- 
plicated network. The apertures, as in the case of other 
genera, are protected by fine hairs; and the tracheae 
themselves are strengthened by a fine spiral filament. In the 
Lithobiidae the tracheae do not anastomose; but in Scolopendra 
and Geophilus the main trunks in each segment fuse transversely 
with those of the opposite side and also longitudinally with those 
of the preceding and succeeding segments. 

In Scutigera the tracheae differ both in structure and position 
from those of all other Chilopoda. The spiracles, unpaired and 
seven in number, open in the median dorsal line. Each leads into 
a short sac from which five tracheal tubes depend into the peri- 
cardial blood-sinus. 

Existing Chilopoda may be classified as follows, into five orders 
referable to two subclasses — 

Subclass I. Pleurostigma. 

Order 1 Geophilomorpha. 

,, 2 Scolopendromorpha. 

,, 3 Craterostigmomorpha. 

,, 4 Lithobiomorpha. 

Subclass II. Notostigma. 

Order 5 Scutigeromorpha. 

Subclass i, Pleurostigma.— Chilopods furnished with a rich 
system of branching tracheal tubes, the spiracles of which are 




is' 

by permission of J, 



C, A pair of tufted tracheae 
of Scutigera. d, Dorsal plate ; 
t.s, tracheal sac; tr, tracheal 
tubes. 



paired and open upon the pleural area of more or fewer of the 
somites. Each leg-bearing somite contains a distinct tergum 
and sternum, the number of sterna never exceeding that of 
the terga. Eyes are either preserved or lost; when preserved 
they are represented either by a single one-lensed ocellus or 
by an aggregation of such ocelli on each side of the head. 
The anterior portion of the head, bearing the labrum, is bent 
sharply downwards and backwards beneath the larger posterior 
portion lying behind the antennae, so that these appendages, 
approximated in the middle line, project directly forwards 
from the margin of the head formed by this retroversion of 
the labral area. The maxillae are short and have no sensory 
organ; the palpognaths consist of four segments, and the 
toxicognaths have their basal segments fused to form a single 

coxal plate. 

Order 1. Geophilomorpha. — 
Chilopods with a large and in- 
definite number of somites, most 
of which are partially or com- 
pletely divided into a smaller 
anterior segment, represented by 
a pretergal and two presternal 
sclerites, and a larger posterior 
segment bearingthe spiracles and 
legs. Spiracles are present upon 
all the leg-bearing somites except 
the first and last ; and the legs 
which are short and subequal in 
length consist of six segments, 
the basal of which remains small. 
There are no eyes, and the an- 
tennae consist invariably of four- 
teen segments. The tergal plate of the somite bearing the toxi- 
cognaths always remains distinct and separates the head-shield from 
the tergum of the first leg-bearing somite. The penultimate and 
antepenultimate segments of the toxicognaths are reduced on the 
preaxial side of the appendage to the condition of arthrodial integu- 
mental folds and suppressed on the postaxial side where the distal 
segment or fang is firmly jointed to the femoral segment. In the 
last leg-bearing somite the pleural sclerites coalesce with the coxa 
of the appendage; but the second segment (trochanter) of this 
appendage does not fuse with the third (femur). The genital and anal 
somites are not retractile within the last leg-bearing somite, and 
the gonopods typically persist in „ 

the male as small two-jointed 
appendages and in the female as 
jointed or Unjointed sclerites. The 
young are hatched with the full 
number of segments. 

Remarks. — The Geophilomorpha 
are universally distributed in suit- 
able localities. The number of 
families into which the order should 
be divided is as yet unsettled, some 
authors admitting several groups of 
this rank, others referring all the 
genera tp a single family, Geo- 
philidae. In habits the Geophilidae 
are mostly subterranean, living in 

Fig. 6. 

A, Upper view of anterior ex- 
tremity in Geophilus. 
a, Basal segments of antennae, 
c, Cephalic plate. [palpognaths. 
t.palp, Tergal plate of somite, bearing 
t.tox, Tergal plate of somite, bearing 

toxicognaths (tox). 
t.lg. I , Tergal plate of somite, bearing 
legs of first pair. 

B, Toxicognaths of Scolopendra, 
showing the large coxal plate and 
the reduced penultimate and ante- 
penultimate segments. 

C, Terminal segment or fang of 
the same, showing the orifice of the 
poison gland. 

(After Latzel, Vie Myr. bst.-ung. Mori. vol. 
i. "Chilopoda," Vienna, 1880.) 

the earth and feeding principally upon earthworms. Occasionally 
they may be found eating fruit or fungi, probably for the sake of 
moisture. Although without eyes, they are extremely sensitive to 
light, and when exposed to it crawl away in serpentine fashion to the 
nearest sheltered spot, feeling the way with their antennae. They 



t.pafy) 



t.lq.l 



..tox 






CENTIPEDE 



6 73 



can, however, progress with almost equal facility backwards, using 
the legs of the posterior pair as feelers. Differing from the majority 
of the family in habits are the two species Linotaenia maritima and 
Schendyla submarina, which live under stones or seaweed between 
tide-marks on the coasts of western Europe. Most, if not all, the 
species are provided with glands, which open upon the sterna and 
secrete a fluid which in some forms (Himantarium) is blood-red, while 
in others it is phosphorescent. In the tropical form Orphnaeus phos- 
phoreus the fluid is known to possess this property ; and its lumin- 
osity has been repeatedly observed in England in the autumn in the 
case of Linotaenia acuminata and L. crassipes. 

The number of pairs of legs within this family varies from between 
thirty and forty to over one hundred and seventy. Corresponding 
discrepancies are observable in size, the smallest specimens being 
less than I in. long and barely I mm. wide, while the largest example 
recorded, a specimen of Notiphilides from Venezuela, was u in. 
long and J of an inch wide. 

When pairing takes place the female fertilizes herself by taking 

up a spermatophore which a male has left upon a sheet of web for 

that purpose. The female lays a cluster of eggs in some sheltered 

spot, sometimes in a specially prepared nest, and encircling them 

with her body, keeps guard until the young 

disperse and shift for themselves. 

Order 2. Scolopendromorpha. — Chilopods 
differing principally from the Geophilo- 
morpha in that the number of leg-bearing 
somites is definitely fixed at twenty-three 
or twenty-one. These are differentiated 
into larger and smaller, which alternate 
with nearly complete regularity. The 
anterior portion of each somite is only 
partially cut off as a subsegment. The 
tergal plate of the somite bearing the 
toxicognaths is suppressed, probably by 
fusion with the tergum of the first leg- 
bearing somite. The antennae consist of a 
number of segments varying from seventeen 
to about thirty, and usually differing in the 
individuals of a species. The second seg- 
ment (trochanter) of the legs of the last pair 
is coalesced with the third (femur). In 
only one genus, namely Plutonium, which 
occurs in Italy, is there a pair of spiracles 
for each leg-bearing segment, except the 
first and last, as in the Geophilomorpha. 
In most genera there are only nine pairs of 
spiracles situated upon the 3rd, 5th, 8th, 
10th, 12th, 14th, 16th, 18th and 20th leg- 
bearing segments, as in Scolopendra, Cormo- 
cephalus, Cryptops, &c. In genera with 
twenty-three pairs of legs, like Scolopo- 
Fig. 7. — Scolopendra cryptops, there is an additional pair of 
morsitans (after Buffon). spiracles on the twenty-second pedigerous 
A, a, Cephalic plate. segment ; and a few genera such as Rhy- 
b, Tergum of segment, sida, Edentisloma, possess a pair upon the 
bearing first pair of 7th segment. Eyes, when present, _are 




legs (d). 
Tip of palpognath. 
Antenna. 
Toxicognath. 
Last pair of append- 



always four in number on each side. The 
newly hatched young has the full com- 
plement of appendages. 

This order is divided into four families : — 
Scolopendridae {Scolopendra, Rhysida), 
age's, enfargeS and Cryptopidae (Cryptops, Theatops), Scolopo- 
directed back- cryptopidae (Scolopocryptops, Otocryplops) 
wards, and Newportiidae (Newportia). Apart from 

the frigid zones it is cosmopolitan in distri- 
bution, though only one genus (Cryptops) extends into north temperate 
latitudes. In the tropics and warmer countries of the southern 
hemisphere the genera and species are particularly abundant, and 
individuals reach the greatest dimensions, some specimens of the 
tropical American species Scolopendra gigantea exceeding 12 in. in 
length. They are strictly carnivorous, their diet consisting of any 
animal, vertebrate or invertebrate, small enough to be overcome. 
They live in damp obscure places, under logs of wood or stones, and 
are nocturnal, shunning, like the Geophilidae, exposure to light ; and 
as in the Geophilidae, the females guard their eggs and young until 
the latter disperse to lead an independent life. 

Order 3. Craterostigmomorpha. — Chilopods with twenty-one tergal 
plates as in the typical genera of Scolopendromorpha, but with 
only fifteen pairs of legs as in the Lithobiomorpha. As in some 
members of the latter order there is a single ocellus on each side 
of the head, the penultimate and antepenultimate segments of the 
toxicognaths are complete on the postaxial side of the appendage, 
and spiracles are present upon the 3rd, 5th, 8th, 10th, 12th and 14th 
leg-bearing somites. In the size and shape of the head, of the toxi- 
cognaths, of the tergal plate of this somite, and of the first leg-bearing 
somite, great similarity to some genera of Geophilomorpha (e.g. 
Mecistocephalus) is presented ; but in the structure of the posterior 
end of the body this order differs f rom'all the other orders of Chilopoda. 
The skeletal elements of the last leg-bearing segment are welded 
together to form a subcylindrical tube, and the genital and anal 



t.tox 



1.1&2..& 




■box 






somites are represented by a pair of chitinous valves capable of 
opening below for the escape of the genital and intestinal products. 

This order, containing the family Craterostigmidae, is based upon 
a remarkable genus and species Craterostigmus tasmanianus, of 
which only two specimens are known. These were collected under 
stones upon the 
summit of Mount 
Rumney in Tas- 
mania. They are 
about I J in. in length; 
but nothing has been 
recorded of their 
habits. The chief 
morphological in- 
terest attaching to 
Craterostigmus is 
that, apart from cer- 
tain structural pecu- 
liarities of its own, 
it presents features 
previously believed 
to be found exclu- 
sively either in the 
S c olopendromorpha , 
or the Geophilo- 
morpha, or the Litho- 
biomorpha; and it 
shows how the Litho- 
biomorpha may be 
derived from a Scolo- 
pendromorphous 
type most nearly re- 
sembling Plutonium 
by the excalation 
of the third, sixth, 
ninth, eleventh, four- 
teenth and seven- 
teenth leg - bearing 
somites. 

Order 4. Lithobio- 
morpha. Chilopoda 
with fifteen pairs of 
leg-bearing somites 
differentiated into 
larger and smaller, 
the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 
8th, 10th, 12th and . 
14th being large, the 
others small. Spir- 
acles present upon all 
the larger with the 
exception sometimes 
of the 1st. The toxicognaths are relatively weaker than in the orders 
hitherto considered, and have their basal segments less firmly fused 
mesially. In correlation with their weaker muscularity the first 
leg-bearing segment is relatively small. The gonopods, present 
and usually jointed in both sexes, are especially well developed 
and forcipate in the female, and arise from a large ventral plate 
resulting from the fusion of their coxae with the sternum of the 
genital somite. The antennae are many-jointed, and there is a 
single ocellus or a cluster of ocelli on each side of the head. The 
coxae of the legs are large, and those of the last four or five pairs 
usually contain glands opening by large orifices. The newly-hatched 
young has only seven pairs of legs, the remaining pairs being succes- 
sively added as growth proceeds. 

The genera of this order are divisible into three families, the 
Lithobiidae (Lithobius, Bothropolys), Henicopidae (Henicops, Haasi- 
ella), the Cermatobiidae (Cermatobius). Cermatobius, based upon a 
single species, martensii, from the isl. of Adenara, is of peculiar 
interest, since in the absence of coxal pores, and the length and 
multi-articulation of the antennae and tarsal segments, it approaches 
more nearly to Scutigera than does any other pleurostigmousChilopod. 
It is also stated that the spiracles have assumed a more dorsal 
position, thus foreshadowing the completely dorsal situation they 
have taken up in the Notostigma. The Henicopidae, containing 
centipedes of small size, attains its maximum of development in 
the southern continents and islands, more particularly Australia. 
New Zealand, South Africa and South America. One genus (Lamyctes) 
however, occurs in Europe. The Lithobiidae, on the contrary, are 
almost exclusively northern in range, being particularly abundant and 
of large size individually in Europe, extra-tropical Asia, and North 
and Central America. In habits the Lithobiidae closely resemble the 
Scolopendridae. They are, however, comparatively far more agile 
with their shorter, more compact bodies and stronger legs. They 
are mostly of small size, the largest species, Lithobius fusciatus, of 
south Europe measuring only 2 in. in length of body. The females 
do not guard their eggs, but coat them with soil and leave them to 
their fate. 

Subclass 2, Notostigma. — Chilopods with a series of median 

it 



After Pocock. Q.J.M.S. vol. 45, pi. 23, 1902. 

Fig. 8. 

A, Anteriorendof Craterostigmus fromabove. 
a. Basal segments of antennae. 

c, Cephalic plate with eyes (0). 

t.tox, Tergal plate of somite bearing toxi- 
cognaths (tox). 

t.lg.l, Tergal plate of somite bearing legs of 
first pair. 

B, Maxillae. 

C, Palpognath. 

D, Toxicognath. 

E, Last segment with genital capsule(g.c) ,and 

basal segments of legs of 14th and 15th 
pairs (Ig. 14, Ig. 15). 



674 



CENTLIVRE-^CENTUAL AMERICA 



dorsal tracheal sacs furnished with tubes dipping into the 
pericardial blood space, and opening each by an unpaired 
spiracle upon the ist, 3rd, 5th, 8th, 10th, 12th and 14th leg- 




Fig. 9. — A, Sculigera rubrolineata (after Buffon). B, Tergum and 
part of a second of the same enlarged to show the position of the 
stigmata 0, 0; p, hinder margin of tergum. 

bearing somites. This characteristic is accompanied by the 
complete disappearance of the tergum of the 7th, either by 
fusion with that of the 8th or by excalation, and by the evanes- 
cence of the terga of the 2nd, 4th, 6th, gth, nth and 13th 
pedigerous somites. The preantennal area of the head is not 
strongly reflexed inferiorly, and the eyes are large and compound. 
The maxillae are long and have a sensory organ; the palpognaths 
are long, spiny and composed of five segments, like the primitive 
Chilopod leg, and the toxicognaths have their basal segments 
disunited and independently movable. Gonopods duplicated 
in the male. 

This subclass contains the single order Scutigeromorpha and the 
family Scutigeridae. As in the Lithobiomorpha there are fifteen pairs 
of legs, the gonopods are well developed in both sexes and the young 

is hatched with only seven 
pairs of legs. The legs and 
antennae in the adult are 
extremely long and many 
jointed. In habits as well as 
in structure the Scutigeridae, 
of which Scutigera is the best- 
known genus, differ greatly 
from other centipedes. 
Although they hide under 
stones and logs of wood like 
Lithobius, they are not luei- 
fugous but diurnal, and may 
be seen chasing their foes in 
the blazing sun. They run 
with astonishing speed and 
have the power of dropping 
their legs when seized. South 
of about the 40th parallel of 
north latitude they are uni- 
versally distributed in suit- 
able localities. In most 
species the body only reaches 
a length of about 1 in. ; but 
twice that size or more is 
reached by examples of the 
Indian species Scutigera 
longicornis. 




After Latzel, Die Myr. dst.-ung. Mm. 
" Cliilopoda," Vienna, 1880. 

Fig. 10.— Gnathites of Scutigera. 
I. Mandibles. II. Maxillae. 
III. Palpognaths. IV. Toxicognaths. 



Some fossils of Carboniferous age have been described as Chilopoda 
by Scudder, who refers them to two families, Gerascutigeridae and 
Eoscolopendridae. But until the specimens have been examined by 
zoologists the genera they are alleged to represent cannot be taken 
seriously into consideration. Remains of centipedes closely related to 
existing forms have been recorded from Oligocene beds. (R. I. P.) 

CENTLIVRE, SUSANNA (c. 1667-1723), English dramatic 
writer and actress, was born about 1667, probably in Ireland, 
whither her father, a Lincolnshire gentleman named Freeman, 
had been forced to flee at the Restoration on account of his 
political sympathies. When sixteen she married the nephew of 
Sir Stephen Fox, and on his death within a year she married 
an officer named Carroll, who was killed in a duel. Left in 
poverty, she began to support herself, writing for the stage, and 
some of her early plays are signed S. Carroll. In 1706 she 



married Joseph Centlivre, chief cook to Queen Anne, who 
survived her. Her first play was a tragedy, The Perjured 
Husband (1700), and she herself appeared for the first time at 
Bath in her comedy Love at a Venture (1706). Among her most 
successful comedies are — The Gamester (1705); The Busy Body 
(1709).; A Bold Stroke for a Wife (1718); The Basset-table (1706); 
and The Wonder! a Woman keeps a Secret (1714), in which, as the 
jealous husband, Garrick found one of his best parts. Her plots, 
verging on the farcical, were always ingenious and amusing, 
though coarse after the fashion of the time, and the dialogue 
fluent. She never seems to have acted in London, but she was 
a friend of Rowe, Farquhar and Steele. Mrs Centlivre died on 
the ist of December 1723. Her dramatic works were published, 
with a biography, in 1761 (reprinted 1872). 

CENTO, a town of Emilia, Italy, in the province of Ferrara, 
18 m. S.E. direct from the town of Ferrara; 50 ft. above sea- 
level; it is reached by road (6 m. to the W.) from the station 
of S. Pietro in Casale, 15 m. S.W. by W. of Ferrara, and also by a 
steam tramway (18 m. N.) from Bologna to Pieve di Cento, on 
the opposite bank of the Reno. Pop. (1901) 4307 (town), 19,078 
(commune). It is connected by a navigable canal with Ferrara. 
It was the birthplace of the painter Giovanni Francesco Barbieri 
(Guercino). The communal picture-gallery aftd several churches 
contain works by him, but none of first-rate importance. A 
statue of him stands in front of the 16th century Palazzo Govern- 
ativo. The town was surrounded by walls, the gates of which 
are preserved. The origin of the name is uncertain. 

CENTO (Gr. nhrpcov, Lat. cento, patchwork), a composition 
made up by collecting passages from various works. The 
Byzantine Greeks manufactured several out of the poems of 
Homer, among which may be mentioned the life of Christ by 
the famous empress Eudoxia, and a version of the Biblical history 
of Eden and the Fall. The Romans of the later empire and the 
monks of the middle ages were fond of constructing poems out 
of the verse of Virgil. Such were the Cento Nuptialis of Ausonius, 
the sketch of Biblical history which was compiled in the 4th 
century by Proba Falconia, wife of a Roman proconsul, and the 
hymns in honour of St Quirinus taken from Virgil' and Horace 
by Metellus, a monk of Tegernsee, in the latter half of the 
1 2th century. Specimens may be found in the work of Aldus 
Manutius (Venice, 1504; Frankfort, 1541, 1544). In iS3sLaelius 
Capitulus produced from Virgil an attack upon the dissolute 
lives of the monks; in 1536 there appeared at Venice a Petrarca 
Spirituale; and in 1634 Alexander Ross (a Scotsman, and one 
of the chaplains of Charles I.) published a Virgilius Evangelizans , 
seu Historia Domini nostri Jesu Christi Virgilianis verbis et 
versibus descripta. 

CENTRAL AMERICA, that portion of the American continent 
which lies between Mexico and Colombia, comprising the British 
crown colony of British Honduras, and the six independent 
republics of Guatemala, Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa 
Rica and Panama. These seven divisions are described in 
Separate articles. Central America is bounded towards the N. 
by the Caribbean Sea, and towards the S. by the Pacific Ocean, 
and extends between 7 12' and 18 3' N. and between 77° 12' 
and 92 17' W. It has an area of about 208,500 sq. m., and 
stretches for some 1300 m. from N.W. to S.E., in a succession of 
three serpentine curves, reaching its greatest breadth, 450 m., 
between the Peninsula of Nicoya and the north coast of Honduras, 
and diminishing to 35 m. in the Isthmus of Panama. The 
eastern boundary of Central America was usually regarded as 
identical with that of Costa Rica until 1903, when the republic 
of Panama was formed out of the northern territories of Colombia ; 
and the more modern definition given above does not command 
the universal assent of geographers, because it fails to include 
the whole region up to the natural frontier on the north-west, 
i.e. the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Mexico. It has, however, 
the support of political and historical considerations, as well as 
of common usage; and it may therefore be regarded as adequate, 
although, in respect of climate and natural products, it would 
be more accurate to define Central America as lying between 
Tehuantepec and Darien. 



CENTRAL AMERICA 



675 



Physical Features. — The Cordilleras, or mountain chains of Central 
America do not form a complete link between the western ranges 
in the north and south of the continent, for their continuity is 
interrupted by various depressions, of which the chief is the lacustrine 
basin of Nicaragua. With these exceptions, they traverse Central 
America from end to end, their main axis trending from north-west 
to south-east. They do not, as a rule, rise in sharply serrated ridges 
or series of volcanic crests, like the Andes, but the central Cordilleras 
are disposed in a succession of mountain masses, with many lesser 
chains radiating from them. The principal summits have an altitude 
of 12,000 and even, in a few cases, of 13,000 ft., and the general 
character of the ranges is volcanic, many craters being still active. 
Large tracts of land remained imperfectly surveyed at the beginning 
of the 20th century, owing to the unhealthiness of the tropical 
climate, and the dense underwoods which impede exploration. 
In the northern part of Guatemala, on the Pacific coast of the same 
country , in British Honduras, along the Segovia river,on the Mosquito 
Coast, and in the basin of Lake Nicaragua and the San Juan river, 
there are broad stretches of comparatively flat country. The main 
line of watershed is everywhere nearer to the Pacific than to the 
Atlantic, except in southern Costa Rica and Panama, where it is 
almost equidistant from the two oceans. In consequence, the rivers 
of the Pacific seaboard are mostly short and swift, — mere mountain 
torrents, in many instances, until they reach the sands and swamps 
which border the sea. The rivers of the Atlantic littoral descend 
more gradually, and by longer channels. The largest of them is the 
Segovia, in Nicaragua and Honduras, which has a course of 450 m. 
Lake Nicaragua, the largest inland sheet of water, has an area ex- 
ceeding 3500 sq. m. There are also several mountain lakes of excep- 
tional interest and beauty, such as Atitlan and Amatitlan, in 
Guatemala, besides two great land-locked salt-water lakes — the 
Pearl Lagoon of the Mosquito Coast, and the Carataska Lagoon 
in Honduras. 

Geology. — The neck of land which unites the continents of North 
and South America is not, geologically, the direct continuation of 




Enwry Walker ic 
Archean d Metamorphlc 

Younapr Volcanic Rocks 



either, but constitutes a third element which is wedged, as it were, 
between the other two. The folds in the earth's crust which form 
the Andes and the Western ranges of North America, are not con- 
tinued along the connecting isthmus, where, on the contrary, the 
strata are folded from west to east, obliquely across the trend of 
the continent. It should, however, be noticed that the Andes, as 
they approach the Caribbean sea, bend round towards the east; 
and' it is probable that the folds of the North American Cordillera 
similarly bend eastward beneath the volcanic rocks of Mexico. 
The folds of Central America are tangential to the two arcs thus 
formed. 

By far the greater part of Central America and Mexico is covered 
by Cretaceous and Tertiary deposits, both sedimentary and volcanic ; 
but the foundation on which they rest is exposed at intervals. From 
the Rio Grande to the southern declivity of the Mexican plateau 
the existence of ancient crystalline rocks at the surface is yet un- 
proved, but they probably occur in the Sierra Madre del Pacifico. 
South of the plateau, in the state of Oaxaca, low mountain ridges 
composed of granites and gneisses, supposed to be of Archaean age, 
begin to appear. They strike from west to east, and mark the front 
of the series of east and west folds which stand en echelon across 
the Central American region. Between the 15th and 17th parallels 
of latitude, in the state of Chiapas and in the republic of Guatemala, 
there is a second group of ridges composed of granites and schists 
with an eastward trend. In this case the evidence of age is clear, 
for the rocks are covered by a limestone which is proved to be Pre- 
Carboniferous. Similar rocks, supposed to be of Archaean or at 



least of early Palaeozoic age, occupy considerable areas in British 
Honduras, Honduras and northern Nicaragua, and occur also 
in Costa Rica and perhaps in Panama; and wherever the strike 
has been observed, it is approximately from west to east. The 
presence of Palaeozoic rocks has been proved in Guatemala and 
the adjacent state of Chiapas, where limestones have been found 
containing many unmistakable Carboniferous fossils, and below 
these is a considerable thickness of beds supposed to be Silurian. 
Nowhere else in the Central American region is there any 
palaeontological evidence of Palaeozoic rocks. 

The Mesozoic series begins with sands and red or yellow 
clays containing plant remains and possibly of Triassic age; but 
the occurrence of these deposits is limited to a few small isolated 
outcrops. Jurassic beds have been found in Mexico but not in 
Central America. The Cretaceous system, consisting of a lower 
series of clays, sandstones and conglomerates, followed conformably 
by an upper series of limestones, covers a considerable area in Chiapas - ., 
Guatemala and Honduras, and is found also in Costa Rica. The 
upper series contains hippurites. The greater part of the eastern 
half of the Mexican plateau is also formed of Cretaceous beds. 

The Tertiary system may be conveniently divided into two 
divisions. The lower, of Eocene and Oligocene age, consists generally 
of sand and clays which were evidently laid down near a shore line. 
The upper division also, including the Pliocene and Pleistocene 
(which have not yet been clearly distinguished from each other), 
is usually of shallow water origin; but in the northern part of 
Yucatan it includes beds of chalky limestone, like those of the Antilles, 
which may have been deposited in a deeper sea. 

It is probable that folding took place at more than one geological 
epoch, and the whole series of beds up to the Oligocene is involved 
in the folds. The Pliocene, on the other hand, is usually undis- 
turbed, and the final effort must, therefore, have occurred during the 
Miocene period, which appears- to have been a period of great 
earth movement throughout the Caribbean region. From the 
southern extremity of the Mexican plateau to the Colombian border, 
the strike of the folds — of the Mesozoic and early Tertiary deposits, 
as well as of the older rocks — is in general from east to west ; but 
there is one considerable exception. On both sides of the deep 
depression which crosses Honduras from Puerto Cortez to the Gulf of 
Fonseca, the strike is commonly from north to south. The depression 
is probably a " Graben " or trough formed by faulting. 

The great volcanoes of Mexico and Central America stand upon 
the Pacific side of the continent, and it is only where the land con- 
tracts to a narrow neck that their products spread over to the 
Caribbean shore. The extent of the volcanic deposits is very great, 
and over a wide area they entirely conceal the original structural 
features of the country. The eruptions began towards the close 
of the Cretaceous period and continue to the present day. The rocks 
are lavas and ashes, chiefly of andesitic or basaltic composition, 
but rhyolites and trachytes also occur, and phonolite has been met 
with in one or two places. 

According to R. T. Hill, there is but little geological evidence 
of any Tertiary or later connexion between the Caribbean Sea and 
the Pacific, excepting, perhaps, a shallow opening during the Eocene 
period. It should, however, be stated that all authorities are not 
agreed upon this point, and K. Sapper found marls and sandstones 
which he believes to belong to the Upper Tertiary, lying horizontally 
at a height of about 7500 ft. in the Mexican state of Chiapas. Un- 
fortunately the fossils obtained from these beds were lost. 

Climate. — The climate of Central America is subject to the most 
marked local differences of heat and cold, owing partly to the 
proximity of two oceans, partly to the variations of altitude which 
render such territories as the swamps of the coast, or the lowlands 
of British Honduras and northern Guatemala, totally unlike 
the alpine regions of Salvador and Costa Rica. The whole area may, 
however, be roughly divided into a tropical zone {tierra calienle), 
from sea-level to about 1500 ft.; a temperate zone (tierra templada), 
from 1500 to 5000 ft.; and a cold zone {tierra fria), above 5000 ft. 
These figures are, of course, only approximately correct; and it 
often happens that, at the same elevation, the heat is greater 
on the Pacific than on the Atlantic versant. The rainy season on 
the Pacific slope varies in duration from four to six months, between 
April and December. It lengthens as the altitude increases. On 
the coast, it corresponds with the prevalence of the south-west 
monsoon, the tempestuous Cordonazo de San Francisco, or " Flagella- 
tion of St Francis," as it is called in Mexico, and it is often interrupted 
by an interval of two or three weeks of fine weather, known 
as the Veranillo de San Juan, or " Little summer of St John." In 
the rainy season, the morning has usually a clear sky; about two 
or three o'clock in the afternoon the clouds begin to gather in great 
cumulus masses; suddenly the lightning flashes out and the rain 
crashes down ; and by evening the sky is clear and starry. North 
winds are most usual during the dry season. On the Atlantic coast 
the trade-winds may bring rain in any month, and, owing to the moist 
atmosphere, the heat is more oppressive. The rainfall may vary 
in successive years from less than 50 in. to nearly 200 in., owing to 
the occurrence of cloud-bursts. Frosts are not rare above 7000 ft., 
but snow seldom falls. 

Fauna. — The fauna of Central America is more closely connected 
with the fauna of South than with that of North America. As the 



6;6 



CENTRAL AMERICA 



region is comparatively small, and its limits conventional, there are 
comparatively few species that it can claim as peculiarly its own. 
It is almost entirely free from the presence of animals dangerous 
to man. Of felines it possesses the jaguar {Felis onza), popularly 
called the tiger; the cuguar (Felis concolor), popularly called the 
lion; the tigrillo (Felis tigrina), which is sometimes kept tame; 
and other species. Several species of monkeys (Mycetes and A teles) 
are numerous in the warm coast region. The Mexican deer (Cervus 
mexicanus) has a wide range both in the lowlands and highlands. 
Besides the tapir there are several varieties of wild pig, such as 
the marrano de monte (Sus torquatus) and the jabali or javali 
(Sus labiatus javali). The Edentata are represented by a species 
of armadillo, the honey-bear (Myrmecophaga tomandua) , and the 
Myrmecophaga didactyla; and among the rodents may be mentioned, 
besides rats, hares and rabbits, the fruit-eating cotorra and tepes- 
cuinte (Dasyprocta aguti and Coelogenys paca), and the troublesome 
Geomys mexicana. The manatee is common in all the larger streams. 
Much annoyance is caused to the agriculturist by the little marsupial 
called the tacuacine, or the Dideiphys carcinora, its allied species. 
The bats are so numerous that villages have sometimes had to be 
left to their undisputed occupancy. In the south-east of Costa Rica 
the inhabitants are at times compelled to withdraw, with all their 
live-stock, before the swarms of large migratory vampires which in 
a single night can bleed the strongest animal to death. Most of the 
domestic animals — the horse, ox, goat, sheep, pig, dog, rabbit, 
common fowl, peacock and pigeon — are of European origin, and 
are popularly grouped together as animales de Castillo-. For the 
bird collector there is a rich harvest. The catalogue of the National 
Museum at Washington shows that Costa Rica alone possesses more 
than twice as many species of birds as the whole of Europe. Among 
birds of prey it is sufficient to mention Corogyps atratus, the 
commonest of the vultures, which acts as a universal scavenger, 
the Cathartes aura, the beautiful Polyborus vulgaris, and the king of 
the vultures (Sarcorhamphus papa). Neither the condor of the 
southern continent nor the great eagles of the northern are known. 
The parrot, macaw and toucan are found in all parts; the crow, 
blackbird, Mexican jay, ricebird, swallow, rainbird, wood-pecker, 
humming-bird and trogon are also widely distributed. A bird 
of the last-named genus, the quetzal, quijal or quesal (Trogon 
resplendens) is of special note, not only from the fact that its yellow 
tail-feathers. 2 or 3 ft. long, were formerly worn as insignia by the 
Indian princes, but because it has been adopted as the emblematical 
figure on the national arms of Guatemala. The gallinaceous order 
is well represented, and comprises several peculiar species, as the 
pavo de cacho, and the Peten turkey (Meleagris ocellata), which has 
a bronze sheen on its plumage ; and aquatic birds, it is almost need- 
less to add, are unusually numerous in a region so richly furnished 
with lagoons, rivers and lakes. 

Besides the alligator, which swarms in many rivers, the almost 
endless varieties of Central American reptiles include the harmless 
boba or chicken-snake, python and black snake; the venomous 
corali, tabcba, culebra de sangre and rattlesnake; iguanas of great 
size, scorpions, edible lizards and other lizards said to be poisonous. 
In the rivers aad lakes, as in both seas, fish of many kinds abound ; 
turtles and tortoises are exported ; and there are valuable pearl and 
oyster fisheries. Insect life is even richer and more varied. Of the 
Coleoptera, the Camelicorns, the Longicorns, the Curculionids, and 
the Chrysomelines are said to be best represented, and of the Lepido- 
ptera the prevalent genera are — Ageronia, Papilio, Heliconia, Sphinx 
and Bombyx. There are five species of bees, and the European 
honey-bee, known as aveja de Castilla or " bee of Castile," has been 
naturalized. Ants are common, and may sometimes be seen march- 
ing in a column 3 or 4 m. long. The mosquito, wood-tick, flea and 
locust are unfortunately no less plentiful in certain districts, but 
their distribution varies greatly, the mosquito being almost unknown 
in parts of Honduras. A curious species of butterfly is the Timeles 
Chiron, which migrates in countless multitudes from the forests 
of Honduras to the Mosquito Coast, but is never known to return. 

Flora. — The flora of Central America ranges from the alpine 
to the tropical, with the transition from one climatic zone to another. 
Although its forest growths are, on the whole, inferior in size to those 
of corresponding latitudes in the eastern hemisphere, it is unsurpassed 
for beauty, luxuriance and variety. In the volcanic districts, the 
soil is extremely fertile, yielding, where cultivated and irrigated, 
magnificent crops of sugar, cotton, rice, tobacco, coffee, cocoa and 
maize. Indigo is produced in small quantities; sugar yields two 
or three crops, and maize as many as four, this cereal supplying 
a chief staple of food. Plantains, bananas, beans, tomatoes, yams, 
arrowroot, pine-apples, guavas, citrons and many other tropical 
fruits are also cultivated, while the extensive primeval forests 
abound in mahogany, cedars, rosewood, ironwood, rubber, gum 
copal, vanilla, sarsaparilla, logwood and many other dye-woods, 
medicinal plants, and valuable timbers. Conspicuous amongst 
the forest trees are the giant ceiba, or pyramidal bombax, and the 
splendid Coyal palm (Cocos butyracea, L.), with feathery leaves 15 
to 20 ft. long, golden flowers 3 ft. high, and a sap which when fer- 
mented produces the intoxicating chicha or vino de Coyol. In Guate- 
mala occurs the remarkable Herrania purpurea, a " Chocolate tree," 
whose seeds yield a finer flavoured chocolate than the cocoa itself. 
The same country is famous for its magnificent orchids, huge arbores- 



cent thistles, and a remarkable plant called by the Spaniards Flor de 
la Calentura, " fever flower," from the heat which it is said to emit 
at the moment of fertilization. Salvador produces an abundance 
of medicinal plants, notably the so-called Peruvian balsam (Myro- 
spermum salvatorense) ; in Honduras there are immense forests 
of conifers, resembling those of the Landes in France ; in Nicaragua 
a characteristic tree is the cortes (Tecoma sideroxylon) yielding 
timber as hard as ebony, and noteworthy for the golden blossom 
with which it is entirely covered after the leaves have fallen. 

Inhabitants — In 1905 the population of Central America 
numbered about 4,750,000, and this total tends to increase, 
despite the unhealthy climate of many districts, the terribly high 
average of infant mortality, and the slow progress of immigration. 
Some authorities estimate it at 5,500,000. The vast majority of 
the inhabitants are of mixed Indian and Spanish blood, but the 
Indian element predominates everywhere except in Costa Rica, 
where the whites are exceptionally numerous. The Indian races 
have not shown the same power to adapt themselves to modern 
civilization as the Mexicans; in some regions there are tribes 
remaining in a state of complete savagery although before the 
Spanish conquest their ancestors attained a high level of culture 
(see below under Archaeology)'. The density of population 
throughout Central America is little more than 25 per sq. m.; 
and it is clear that several large areas now thinly peopled once 
maintained a far greater number of inhabitants. Such are parts 
of the Nicaraguan lake district, where the flora consists in great 
measure of plants that were formerly cultivated by the Indians. 
The depopulation of these areas was effected partly by tribal 
wars, partly by the harsh rule of the Spaniards. Apart from the 
German agricultural settlements in Guatemala and elsewhere, 
the foreign population is chiefly confined to the seaports and other 
centres of commerce, Great Britain, Germany and the United 
States being largely represented among the wealthier classes of 
residents; while the foreign labourers are mostly Italians or 
negroes, with a few Chinese on the Pacific coast. 

History. — Central America was discovered by Columbus in 
August 1502; and part of the territory which is now Costa Rica 
was conquered by the Spaniards under Pedro Arias de Avila after 
1513. Between 1522 and 1525, the authority of Avila was 
superseded, and his work of conquest completed by Hernando 
Cortes, who had already subjugated Mexico. Panama formed 
part of a distinct Spanish government, "New Granada"; 
British Honduras was colonized, though not formally annexed, 
in the 18th century; and over the Mosquito Coast the British 
government exercised a nominal protectorate after 1665. Other- 
wise the rest of Central America remained a Spanish dependency 
bearing the general name of " Guatemala," until 1821. It 
ranked as a captaincy-general under the rule of a military 
governor, and was organized in five departments, corresponding 
in area with the modern republics of Guatemala, Honduras, 
Salvador, Nicaragua and Costa Rica. For three centuries it 
was administered by Spanish officials, who almost invariably 
devoted their whole energy to enriching themselves and the home 
authorities. The old Indian civilization was swept away; the 
native races were enslaved, maltreated and, for a time, 
demoralized. But their history offers no parallel to that of the 
West Indian Caribs, who failed to survive, and were replaced by 
hordes of African slaves. In Central America the Indians not 
only survived, thus leaving no room for any large negro popula- 
tion, but quickly acquired the language, religion and habits of 
their masters, with whom they intermarried. By the close of 
the 1 8th century, the majority had attained something like 
uniformity of life and thought. Racial distinctions had been 
obscured by intermarriage; even the term Ladino, or " Latin," 
came to mean an educated man, whether of Spanish or Indian 
blood. Nowhere, except in Mexico, has a mixed or coloured 
race more completely absorbed the civilization of its white rulers; 
but so gradual and silent was the process that it passed almost 
unnoticed. Its result, the successful revolt of the Spanish 
colonies — colonies mainly peopled by Indians or half-castes — was 
no more a conflict of rival races or civilizations than the rebellion 
of the British colonies in North America. 

" New Granada " attained its independence in 1810; and in 
1821 " Guatemala " declared itself free. That the subsequent 



CENTRAL AMERICA 



677 



history of the Central American republics has been largely a 
record of civil war, maladministration and financial dishonesty, is 
perhaps due in part to racial inferiority. In part, however, it may 
be explained by the absence of any tradition of good government; 
perhaps also by the brevity and artificiality of the evolution 
which converted a debased slave-population into the citizens of 
modern democratic states. The five divisions of " Guatemala " 
were temporarily incorporated in the Mexican empire during 
1822, but regained their autonomy (as Guatemala, Honduras, 
Salvador, Nicaragua and Costa Rica) on the declaration of a 
Mexican republic, and in July 1823 combined to form the 
Republic of the United States of Central America. The Liberal 
or Federalist party, which was supreme in Honduras, found itself 
opposed by the Conservatives, including the clergy and former 
Spanish officials, who were very influential in Guatemala. A 
bitter and protracted struggle ensued. In 1837-1839 a Con- 
servative rising, under Rafael Carrera, president of Guatemala, 
resulted in the overthrow of the Liberals, under General Francisco 
Morazan of Honduras; and in 1842, after a vain attempt to 
restore the Federal republic, Morazan was captured and shot. A 
fresh union of the republics (except Costa Rica) was concluded in 
1842, and dissolved in 1845. The year 1850 was signalized by the 
conclusion, on the 19th of April, of the Clayton-Bulwer treaty 
(g.v.) between Great Britain and the United States, which was 
designed to facilitate the construction of an interoceanic canal. 
The history of this project is given in detail under Panama 
Canal. One important result of the treaty was the abandon- 
ment, in i860, of the British protectorate over the Mosquito 
Coast. This event had been preceded by a decade of political 
disturbances. In 1850 Honduras, Salvador and Nicaragua had 
combined to restore federal unity; but their allied armies were 
defeated by the Guatemalans under Carrera. In 1856 the 
American adventurer, William Walker, endeavoured to usurp 
the government of Nicaragua; in i860 he invaded Honduras 
and was captured and shot. His object was to assist the slave- 
holders of the United States by adding new slave-states to the 
Union. A further attempt to restore federal unity failed in 1885, 
and its promoter, Justo Rufino Barrios, president of Guatemala, 
lost his Hfe. In 1 805 the Greater Republic of Central America was 
formed by the union of Nicaragua, Salvador and Honduras; 
and a constitution was framed providing for the admission of 
Guatemala and Costa Rica; in December 1898 it was dissolved, 
as unsatisfactory to Salvador. On the 4th of November 1903 
Panama, which had since 1863 formed part of Colombia, declared 
itself an autonomous republic. Its independence was immedi- 
ately recognized by the United States, and shortly afterwards 
by the European powers. The United States also forbade the 
landing of any Colombian force on the territories of Panama, 
and thus guaranteed the security of the new state. 

Bibliography. — For a general description of Central America, 
and especially of-its physical features, the following monographs by 
K. Sapper are of prime importance : — In den Vulcangebieten Mittel- 
amerikas und Westindiens (Stuttgart, 1905) ; Mittelamerikanische 
Reisen und Studien aus den Jahren 1888 bis 1900 (Brunswick, 1902), 
and Das nbrdliche Mittelamerika nebst einem Ausflug nach dem 
Hochland von Anahuac (Brunswick, 1897); these all contain many 
useful illustrations and maps. See also Central America and the 
West Indies, by A. H. Keane, edited by Sir C. Markham (London, 
1901, 2 vols., with maps and illustrations); Central and South 
America, by H. W. Bates (London, 1882); The Spanish American 
Republics, by T. Child (London, 1892) ; and Expedition nach Zentral 
und Sudatnerika, by P. Preuss (Berlin, 1901). For geology, see 
" The Geological History of the Isthmus of Panama and Portions 
of Costa Rica," by R. T. Hill, in Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard, 
vol. xxviii., No. 5 (1898); and the following by K. Sapper: — 
" Grundziige der physikalischen Geographie von Guatemala," in 
Petermann' s Mitt. Erganzungsheft, No. 113 (1894), "Uber Gebirgsbau 
und Boden des nordlichen Mittelamerika," ibid., No. 127 (1899), 
and " Uber Gebirgsbau und Boden des siidlichen Mittelamerika," 
ibid., No. 151 (1905). The States of Central America, by E. G. Squier 
(New York, 1858), is still valuable, as are others of the numerous 
essays, pamphlets, &c., on Central American affairs left by this 
author; see the bibliography of his writings published in New 
York in 1876. The Bulletins of the Bureau of American Republics 
(Washington, from 1893) give ample information en commerce and 
industry. See also History of Central America, by H. Bancroft 
(San Francisco, 1881-1887. 3 vols.). 



Archaeology of Central America 

Discoveries and investigations carried on during the 19th 
century have thrown much light on the splendid past of Central 
America. The still extant ruins of great buildings, unlike any- 
thing which is known in the old world, testify to the high culture 
attained in pre-Columbian days by several native peoples differing 
greatly from one another in speech and racial affinities. As a 
science the archaeology of Central America has scarcely yet 
emerged from its infancy. Entire branches are still wholly 
uninvestigated. Amongst the numerous problems which await 
solution must still be reckoned the decipherment of the inscrip- 
tions, which hitherto has not progressed beyond the discovery 
of calendar systems and the relative darings involved in such 
systems. 

For a complete survey of this ancient civilization, so far as it 
has been investigated, it is necessary to include with Central 
America, properly so called, a considerable portion of the Mexican 
territories south and east of the isthmus of Tehuantepec. The 
peoples inhabiting Yucatan, Campeche, Guatemala, Chiapas 
and Oaxaca present at the first view striking ethnical differences. 
On a linguistic basis, however, they may be united into several 
large groups. Thus, Yucatan and the greater part of Guatamala 
are inhabited by the Mayas, with whom may be included the still 
savage Lacantun or Lacandones. Related to these linguistically 
are the Tzendals in Chiapas and the Quiches and Cackchiquels 
in Guatemala, as well as the less important tribes of the Mam, 
Pokoman, Pokonchi, Tzotzil, Tzutuhil and Ixil. Between these 
there are patches of country in which dialects of the Mexican are 
spoken. In Oaxaca there is an extraordinary mixture of lan- 
guages, some of which, like that of the Huave of Tehuantepec, 
are of quite unknown affinities; the bulk of the population, 
however, is composed of Mixtecs and Zapotecs with which the 
Mixe and Zoque on the east are connected. Mexican dialects 
also occur in isolated parts of Oaxaca. 

Mayan Culture. — The civilization of the Mayas may well have 
been reared upon one more ancient, but the life of that culture of 
which the ruins are now visible certainly lasted no more than 
500 years. The date of its extinction is unknown, but in 
certain places, notably Mayapan and Chichenitza, the highest 
development seems to be synchronous with the appearance of 
foreign, viz. Mexican or Nahua elements (see below). This quite 
distinctive local character suggests that the cities in question 
played a certain preponderating role, a hypothesis with which 
the scanty documentary evidence is in agreement. On the other 
hand the Mayan culture evinces an evident tendency to assimilate 
heterogeneous elements, obliterating racial distinctions and 
imposing its own dominant character over a wide area. Oaxaca, 
the country of the Mixtecs and Zapotecs, became, as was natural 
from its geographical position midway between Yucatan and 
Mexico, the meeting-ground where two archaeological traditions 
which are sharply contrasted in their original homes united. 

Central American architecture is characterized by a fine 
feeling for construction, and the execution is at once bold and 
aesthetically effective. Amongst the various ruins, 
some of which represent the remains of entire cities, Jj'L ec ' 
while others are no more than groups of buildings or 
single buildings, certain types persistently recur. The commonest 
of such types are pyramids and galleries. The pyramids are 
occasionally built of brick, but most usually of hewn stone with 
a covering of finely-carved slabs. Staircases lead up to the top 
from one or more sides. Some pyramids are built in steps. 
Usually the platform on the top of a pyramid is occupied by 
buildings, the typical distribution of which is into two parts, 
viz. vestibule and sanctuary. In connexion with the pyramid 
there are various subsidiary structures, such as altars, pillars, 
and sacrificial stones, to meet the requirements of ritual and 
worship, besides habitations for officials and " tennis-courts " 
for the famous ball-game like that played by the Mexicans. 
The tennis-courts always run north and south, and all the 
buildings, almost without exception, have a definite orientation 
to particular points of the compass. Frequently the pyramids 



678 



CENTRAL AMERICA 



constitute one of the four sides of a quadrangular enclosure, 
within which are contained other pyramids, altars or other 
buildings of various dimensions. 

The normal type of gallery is an oblong building, of which 
the front facing inwards to the enclosure is pierced by doors. 
These divide it into a series of rooms, behind which again there 
may be a second series. Occasionally the rooms are distributed 
round a central apartment, but this is ordinarily done only when 
a second storey has to be placed above them. The gallery- 
buildings may rise to as much as three storeys, the height, size 
and shape of the rooms being determined by the exigencies of 
vaulting. The principle of the true arch is unknown, so that the 
vaults are often of the corbelled kind, the slabs of the side-walls 
being made to overlap in succession until there remains only so 
narrow a space as may be spanned by a single flat stone. At 
Mitla, where the material used in the construction of the buildings 
was timber instead of stone, the larger rooms were furnished with 
stone pillars on which the beams could rest. The same principle 
recurs in certain ruins at Chichenitza. The tops and sides of 
the doors are often decorated with carved reliefs and hieroglyphs, 
and the entrances are sometimes supported by plain or carved 
columns and pilasters, of which style the serpent columns of 
Chichenitza afford the most striking example. On its external 
front one of these galleries may have a cornice and half-pillars. 
Above this is a plain surface of wall, then a rich frieze which 
generally exhibits the most elaborate ornamentation in the whole 
building. The subjects are geometrical designs in mosaic, 
serpents' heads and human masks. The corners of the wall 
terminate in three-quarter pillars, above which the angles of the 
frieze frequently show grotesque heads with noses exaggerated 
into trunks. The roof of the gallery is flat and occasionally 
gabled. 

Principal Sites. — Such are the general characteristics of Central 
American buildings, but it must be understood that almost every 
site exhibits peculiarities of its own, and the number of the 
ruined settlements even as at present known is very large. The 
most considerable are enumerated below. 

Yucatan. — Of the very numerous ruins which are distributed 
over Yucatan and the islands of the east coast the majority still 
await exploration. A few words of special notice may be devoted 
to one or two sites in the centre of the peninsula which have 
already become famous. At Uxmal the buildings consist'of five 
considerable groups, viz. — the Casa del Adivino, which is a step- 
pyramid 240 ft. long by 160 ft. wide and 80 ft. high, crowned by 
a temple 75 ft. long by 12 ft. wide; the Casa de Monjas, a striking 
erection of four oblong buildings on an extensive terrace ; the 
Casa de Tortugas, Casa del Gobernador, and Casa de Palomas, 
the last of which is a group of six galleries surrounding a court. 
At Izamal there is a very imposing group of ruins, as yet quite 
insufficiently explored. At Chichenitza, a city of first-rate 
importance, situated 22 m. west of Valladolid, the ruins consist 
of eight principal groups, the chief of which are as follows. The 
Casa de Monjas, a three-storeyed building, attributable to 
several distinct periods; the Caracol, a round structure with 
dome in imitation of a snail-shell, showing evident traces of 
Mexican influence; El Castillo, a large temple standing on a 
base 200 ft. long and 75 ft. high, approached by staircases on all 
four sides, and furnished with serpent-pillars of a kind unknown 
anywhere else except at Uxmal and Tula near Mexico; an 
unnamed temple-pyramid, which is remarkable for a group of 
caryatid figures; a tennis-court; and finally the Tiger Temple, 
which contains marvellous coloured reliefs representing figures 
of warriors and place-hieroglyphs, all executed in a distinctively 
Mexican style. Yet another evidence of Mexican influence at 
Chichenitza is to be noted in five figures of the so-called Chac-mol 
type, that is to say, horizontal figures in which the arms are 
extended to the navel which is indicated by a cup-like depression. 
This Chac-mol type is characteristic of such sites as Tlascala 
and Cempoallan. 

Other important sites in Yucatan are Chacmaltun, with fine 
wall-paintings; Tantah, with remarkable pillared facades; the 
ruins of Labna, Chunhuhub, and the caves of Loltun; and 



Xlabpak de Santa Rosa, where there is a three-storeyed temple 
palace. Two sculptured reliefs are of great interest; they 
represent a person holding a staff on which is a figure of the 
god Ah-bolon-tzacab. 

Guatemala. — The Guatemalan ruins are distributed over a wide 
area. The most numerous and extensive are on the Usumacinta 
river. The most important sites in that district are Piedras 
Negras, and Yaxchilan or Menche Tinamit, where there are 
temples covered with sculptured reliefs and hieroglyphic inscrip- 
tions, and stelae and slabs carved with human figures placed in 
niches. In the Peten district, Tikal is famous for its splendid 
sculptures representing Kukulkan and other divinities. Near 
the modern city of Guatemala are the vast ruins of Guatemala- 
Mixco. Chacujal, which Cortes visited on his expedition of 
1524-1525 is very possibly to be identified' with the modern 
Pueblo Viejo on the river Tinaja. Chacula and Quen-Santo 
between the headwaters of the Rio de Chiapas and the Rio 
Lacantun are two sites of a strongly marked local character. 
Series of three pyramids are peculiar to these two settlements, 
as also are pyramids with human figures on their platforms. 
Stelae discovered at Quen Santo have a calendar character, 
which proves that Mayan science had penetrated into what was 
probably the home of an old Lacantun culture. 

Santa Lucia Cozumalhuapa, on the Pacific slope of the Cor- 
dilleras, is a very peculiar site. The ruins are those of a settle- 
ment which had already been deserted before Alvarado's 
expedition of 1522. The sculptures of gods, goddesses and 
other figures, executed on enormous blocks of stone, show a dis- 
tinctively Mexican character, with which, however, various Mayan 
features are blended. They may perhaps be attributed to some 
offshoot of the Nahua stock, probably the Pipil Indians, which 
developed on lines of its own in this remote corner. 

Near the frontier of' Honduras are the remarkable ruins of 
Quirigua, which rival Copan in importance and have suffered 
less from the ravages of the climate. The ruins of temples and 
palaces contain gigantic stone stelae of very fine workmanship, 
on which are sculptured human and animal figures representing 
hieroglyphs of the calendar dates. 

Honduras. — Copan, one of the most important seats of Mayan 
civilization, lies close to the borders of Guatemala. The ruins 
comprise great buildings, temples, pyramids, &c. and contain 
sculptures of the highest interest. Especially noteworthy are 
altars in the form of a turtle and stelae covered with hieroglyphs. 
The hieroglyphs are of the kind usually found in such ruins, 
the meaning of which is so far clear that it is known that the 
commencement of an inscription records certain dates in the 
complicated calendar system of the Mayas. A collation of these 
dates demonstrates that the most ancient on record are separated 
from the most recent by an interval of only a few centuries. 
From this it may be concluded that the Mayan civilization, 
whether or not it was preceded by anything older, flourished for 
only a comparatively short period, the beginning of which cannot 
be placed many centuries before a.d. iooo. 

According to Squier (Honduras, London, 1870, p. 75) the other 
principal ruins of Honduras are to be found in plains of the 
department of Comayagua, near Yarumela, near Lajamini, and 
in the ruined town of Cururu. They are " large, pyramidal, 
terraced structures, often faced with stones, conical mounds of 
earth and walls of stone." Further ruins, such as those of Cala- 
mulla, Jamalteca, Maniana, Guasistagua, Chapuluca and 
Chapulistagua, are found in the department of Comayagua in 
the side valleys and adjoining tablelands. The most interesting 
and most extensive are the ruins of Tenampua (Pueblo Viejo), 
about 20 m. south-east of Comayagua. Here ramparts, defence 
works, terraced stone mounds and numerous large pyramids 
are to be found. Squier found further ruins in the west of 
Honduras, which have also been described in part by Stephens, 
and were probably first mentioned in 1576 by Diego Garcia de 
Palacio (Carta dirigida al Rei de Espana, published by Squier, 
New York, i860). 

At Rio Ulloa are remains which testify to the existence of a 
large population in past days. Possibly they may be identified 



CENTRAL AMERICA 




PANAMA 

Continuation east on 
Same Scale 



B Longitude West 88 of Greenwich Q 



CENTRAL AMERICA 



679 



with a site of the name of Naco mentioned by Las Casas and by 
Bernal Diaz (Histoire veridique de la conqulte de la Nouvelle 
Espagne, translated by D. Fourdanet, 2nd ed., Paris, 1877, 
ch. 178, p. 690). 

Chiapas (Mexico). — The principal site is Palenque, the ruins 
of which were amongst the earliest of all to attract attention. 
The style of architecture, with the gigantic vaults and singular 
comb-shaped gables, distinguishes Palenque from Copan and 
Quirigua, which it surpasses also in the unequalled magnificence 
of its sculptures. Five out of the remarkably uniform series of 
buildings may be specially mentioned. They are the Great 
Palace, a complex structure of galleries and courts commanded 
by a three-storeyed tower, the Temples of the Cross, which are 
galleries constructed on terraces and containing the well-known 
reliefs, the Temple of Inscriptions, the Sun. Temple and the 
Temple of the Relief. The sculptured figures of Palenque are 
familiar from many reproductions. The most characteristic 
groups represent a deity standing between worshippers who hold 
a staff surmounted by the water-god Ah-bolon-tzacab, the " god 
of the nine medicines." The inscriptions on the famous Cross 
and in the Sun Temple contain calendar-da tings which are 
remarkable as showing a particular combination of numbers and 
hieroglyphs, which does not occur elsewhere. 

A whole series of sites is included within the geographical 
limits of Chiapas, which from the archaeologist's standpoint 
must be considered as belonging properly to Guatemala. The 
country has been quite insufficiently explored. 

Oaxaca (Mexico).— The bulk of the population of the province 
of Oaxaca is composed of a distinct racial group, best represented 
by the Zapotecs, who have been for an unknown length of time 
the intermediaries between the Nahua civilization of Mexico 
on the west and the Mayan on the east. The influence of the 
two separate currents may be detected in the bastard calendar 
system no less than in the still undeciphered inscriptions. The 
principal ruins are those of Mitla, the burial city of the priests 
and kings of the ancient Zapotecs, which bear a quite distinct 
character, though presenting certain analogies with the Mexican. 
One of the chief structures is a step-pyramid, rising in three steps 
to a height of 130 ft., another is a pyramid of brick. Besides 
these there are courts, surrounded by palaces which represented 
necropolises, the dwellings of the priests, of the chief priest, and 
of the king (with an audience-hall). The wall paintings of the 
" palaces " are especially admirable, and it is to be noted that 
the deities represented in them are those of the Mexican pantheon. 
Monte Alban is interesting for the definitely Zapotec character 
of its sculptures. Quiengola near Tehuantepec is a site with 
extensive ruins including a fine tennis court. 

British Honduras.— The antiquities of British Honduras have 
been but little investigated. In the scanty literature relating to 
them a few accounts of ruined places are to be found. In style 
these buildings closely resemble those of the neighbouring 
Yucatan. The ruins in the colony New Boston, mentioned by 
Froebel {Central America, p. 167), are of this kind. F. de P. 
Castells (see American Antiquarian, Chicago, 1904, vol. xxvi. 
pp. 32-37) describes the ruins, in the north of the colony, of 
" Ixim chech," supposed to be the Indian form of the English 
name " Indian Church." They are on the road to the Lake of 
Yaxha (green water), where further ruins are to be found. 
Thomas Gann gives detailed accounts of numerous mounds also 
in the northern part of British Honduras (see igth Annual Report 
of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington, 1900, part i. 
pp. 661-692, with plates). The most interesting ruins are those 
which have been discovered in Santa Rita, at the mouth of the 
New River, near the town of Corosal. Here wonderful wall 
paintings in stucco came- to light, which unfortunately Gann 
could only save ; i part. The remainder were destroyed by 
Indians. It should be remarked that a number of the mounds 
in Santa Rita were erected over ruins of buildings which must 
therefore be of older date than the mounds. 

Salvador. — Pedro de Alvarado in his expedition of 1524 calls 
this whole district Cuscatan (Mex. Cozcatlan), that is, " Land of 
precious stones, of treasures, of abundance." A further descrip- 



tion of the land is given by Palacio (I.e.) in 1576. Although 
there are numerous relics of Mayan civilization buried in the 
earth," few ruins are to be seen on the surface. Karl Sapper has 
described three large ruins: Cuzcatlan near the capital, Tehuacan 
near S. Vicente, and Zacualpa on the Lake of Guija in the extreme 
north-west of the country. The ruins show a distinct affinity 
in style to those of the Mayan buildings in Guatemala, but they 
are less fine and artistically perfect. Probably the central and 
western districts of San Salvador were originally peopled by the 
same race of Mayas, and these tracts of country were later 
settled by the Mexican-speaking Pipiles. 

A characteristic feature of the extensive ruins of Zacualpa is 
that the pyramids and ramparts have perpendicular steps which 
are higher than they are broad, and this peculiarity may be 
attributed to the influence of the Maya tribes, who are related to 
the Mams of Guatemala. 

Decipherment of the Mayan Hieroglyphs. — The key to the 
decipherment, so far as this has progressed at present, was 
furnished by the Historia de las Cosas de Yucatan, a work written 
by Diego de Landa, the first bishop of the country. This pro- 
fessed to give, with much other more or less doubtful information, 
the full account of a calendar system analogous to that of the 
Mexicans, which was said to have been used by the Mayas (see 
Mexico). The signs for each of the 20 days and for the 18 
weeks of 20 days are figured by Landa. The first step was to 
compare these with the hieroglyphic characters contained in the 
few Mayan picture manuscripts (Codex Troano, Cortesianus, 
Peresianus, Dresden Codex) which have survived the destructive 
fanaticism of the Spanish missionaries. Forstemann's acute 
analysis detected that the bars and dots which occur along the 
margin and in the body of the pictorial scenes represented 
numerals, dots standing for each integer up to five, while for 
five a bar was used. Next, it was found that the order in which 
these numeral-signs are placed is regular, and that there are 
never more than five in a group. It was established that the 
first sign in such a group is that for the numeral 1 {Kin), the next 
that for 2o(Uinal), the third for 18X20 (Tun), the fourth for 
18X20 X2o(Kalun), and thefifthfor 18X20X20X20, that is to 
say, a cycle. 

Had the available material for study been confined to the 
manuscripts, little more progress would have been made beyond 
establishing subsidiary details in the actual calendar. But 
when a similar analysis was applied to the numerous monuments 
discovered and figured by Maudslay and others, some important 
results of a general bearing were obtained. It was found that 
many of the hieroglyphs of various forms upon the stones were 
also of numeral value, and, what was of great importance, that 
they all referred back to a single starting-point. This starting- 
point or zero is no doubt the mythological date at which, accord- 
ing to Mayan cosmology, the world was created. It is placed at 
nine or ten cycles before the time when Copan and Quirigua were 
erected and the picture manuscripts made. And it is by reference 
to it in the inscriptions that such students as Seler, Goodman 
and others have been enabled, as already stated, to obtain a 
record of the relative chronology of the most famous monuments, 
to confine the period of their erection within the space of a few 
centuries, and approximately to fix even their absolute antiquity. 
Though much yet remains to be done, these are substantial 
results which have already been won from the study of the 
hieroglyphs. 

Bibliography. — The AntiquitSs mexicaines of Dupaix (Paris, 
1 834) ,the Voyage pittoresque el archeologique dans la province a" Yucatan 
of F. de Waldeck (Paris, 1838), and the Monuments anciens du 
Mexique of Brasseur de Bourbourg and Waldeck (Paris, 1866) are 
quite out of date and superseded. Stephen's Incidents of Travel 
in Central America, Chiapas and Yucatan (New York, 1841 and 
1867), and B. M. Norman's Rambles in Yucatan (New York, 1843), 
are still of value, the first-mentioned especially for the drawings by 
Catherwood. Among the earlier writers may also be mentioned 
Charnay, Les Anciennes Villes du Nouveau Monde (Paris, 1885) and 
Cites et mines americaines (Paris, 1863), the latter written in colla- 
boration with Viollet-le-Duc. Those, however, who are not primarily 
bibliophiles will be content to study the following :— Maudslay (in 
Godman and Salvin's Biologia Centrali-Americana, sect. Archaeology, 



68o 



CENTRAL FALLS— CENTRAL INDIA 



London, 1889, &c), a pioneer work containing the admirably pre- 
sented results of scientific exploration. Maler, in Memoirs of the 
Peabody Museum, vol. ii. 1, 2 (Cambridge, U.S.A., 1901 and .1903); 
Holmes, Archaeological Studies among the Ancient Mexicans (Field 
Columbian Museum, Chicago, 1895); E. Seler, Die alten Ansiede- 
lungen von Chacula (Berlin, 1901), Wandmalereien von Mitla (Berlin, 
1895), Ges. Abhandlungen, vol. i. (Berlin, 1902) and vol. ii. (1904), 
Fuhrer von Mitla (Berlin, 1906). E. Forstemann has contributed 
many valuable essays to Globus and the Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie 
(Berlin) ; especially important are his commentaries to the Dresden 
Codex (Dresden, 1901), to the Codex Tro-Cortesianus Madrilensis 
(Danzig, 1902), and to the Codex Peresianus (Danzig, 1903). See 
also "The Archaic Maya Inscriptions," by F. T. Goodman (in 
Biologia Centrali- Americana, section Archaeology, viii., 1897), and 
Report of an Archaeological Tour in Mexico in 188 1, by A. F. Ban- 
delier (Boston, 1884). Valuable bibliographies have been made by 
Bandelier (Notes on the Bibliography of Yucatan and Central America, 
Worcester, U. S. A., 1881) and by K. Habler (" Die Maya Literatur 
und der Maya Apparat zu Dresden," in the Zentralblatt fur Biblio- 
thekwesen, xii., 1895). The Mayan picture MSS. have been published 
in facsimile as follows : — the Dresden Codex by Forstemann (Leipzig, 
1880, and Dresden, 1892), and the Codex Tro by Brasseur de Bour- 
bourg — Manuscrit Troano, etude sur le systeme graphique et la langue 
des Mayas (Paris, 1 869-1 870), the Codex Cortesianus by Leon de 
Rosny (Paris, 1883) and by F. de Dios de la Rada y Delgado and 
F. L. de Ayala y del Hierro (Madrid, 1893), tne Codex Peresianus 
by Duruy and Brasseur de Bourbourg (Paris, 1864) and by L. de 
Rosny (Paris, 1887). The following relate especially to the ruins in 
Salvador: — La Universidad, by D. Gonzalez, vol. iii. ser. 3, No. 6, 
p. 283 (San Salvador, 1892-1893) ; Le Salvador pre-Colombien, etudes 
archeologiques, by F. de Montcasus de Ballore (Paris, 1891), 25 plates ; 
Karl Sapper in Arch, fur Ethnologie, 9, p. 3 ff. (1896). (W. L.*) 

CENTRAL FALLS, a city of Providence county, Rhode Island, 
U.S.A., on the Blackstone river, about 5 m. N. of Providence. 
Pop. (1900) 18,167; (1905, state census) 19,446, of whom 8792 
were foreign-born, 4164 being French-Canadian, 1587 being Eng- 
lish, and 1292 being Irish; (1910) 22,754. It is served by the New 
York, New Haven & Hartford railway. The Blackstone furnishes 
good water-power, and the chief industry of the city is the manu- 
facture of cotton goods; other important industries are the 
refining of copper and the manufacture of woollens, silks and 
hair-cloth. The total value of the factory, product in 1905 was 
$5,090,984, being 12-9% more than in 1900. A settlement was 
established here about 1763 and was first a part of Smithfield, 
and then, after 1871, of Lincoln. About 1780 a chocolate mill 
was erected, and from then until 1827 the settlement was known 
as Chocolateville. It was incorporated as the Central Falls Fire 
District of Smithfield in 1847, and in 1895 was chartered as a city. 

CENTRALIA, a city of Marion county, Illinois, U.S.A., in the 
S. part of the state, about 62 m. E. of St Louis. Pop. (1890) 
4763; (1900) 6721 (571 foreign-born); (1910) 9680. The city 
is served by the Chicago, Burlington & Quincy, the Illinois 
Central, the Illinois Southern, and the Southern railways; the 
first two have repair shops here. Centralia is situated in the 
central part of southern Illinois, popularly known as " Egypt." 
Among its manufactures are window glass, envelopes, cigars, 
concrete blocks and flour. In and near the city coal is mined, and 
apples, strawberries and other fruits are raised, and the city 
is a shipping point for coal and fruit. Centralia was first settled 
in 1853, and was first chartered as a city in 1859. 

CENTRAL INDIA, a collection of native states in India forming 
a separate agency, which must not be confounded with the 
Centr.l Provinces. The Central India agency was formed in ; 
1 854, when Sir R. Hamilton was appointed agent to the governor- 
general. It lies between 21° 24' and 26° 52' N. and between 
74 o' and 83° o' E., and may be said to consist of two large 
detached tracts of country which, with Jhansi as a pivot, spread 
outwards east and west into the peninsula, reaching northward 
to within some 30 m. of Agra, and southward to the valley of the 
Nerbudda and the Vindhya and Satpura ranges. The total area 
is 78,772 sq. m. It is bounded on the N. and N.E. by the United 
Provinces, on the W. and S. W. by Rajputana, some native states 
of the Bombay presidency, and Khandesh. The Central Pro- 
vinces and the Bengal district of Chota Nagpur enclose it on the 
S. and E., while the Jhansi district of the United Provinces 
separates the two tracts. 

Central India may be divided into three great natural divisions: 
the highlands of the Malwa plateau, with a mean elevation of 



some 1500 ft. above sea-level; the low-lying country some 600 ft. 
above sea-level, comprising the greater part of the eastern section 
of the agency; and the hilly tracts, which lie mostly to the south. 
The Malwa plateau consists of great undulating plains, separated 
by fiat-topped hills, whose sides are boldly terraced, with here 
and there a scarp rising above the general level; it is covered 
with long grass, stunted trees and scrub, which owing to the 
presence of deciduous plants is of a uniform straw colour, except 
in the rains. The foundation of this plateau is a bed of sandstone 
and shales belonging to the Vindhyan series. This bed, which 
stretches east and west from Sasseram to Neemuch, and north 
and south from Agra to Hoshangabad, comprises the whole of the 
agency except the northern part of Bundelkhand. On the 
plateau itself the sandstone is generally overlaid by the Deccan 
trap, a blackish-coloured basaltic rock of volcanic origin, the high 
level tableland having been formed by a succession of lava flows, 
the valleys of Central India being merely " denudation hollows" 
carved out by the action of rain and rivers. It is apparently 
the northern limit of what was once a vast basaltic plain stretch- 
ing from Goona to Belgaum, " one of the most gigantic outpour- 
ings of volcanic matter in the world." The sandstone bed on 
which it rests is visible at a point just north of Goona, and in a 
small area round Bhilsa and Bhopal, as it is in those places freed 
from the layer of trap. The low-lying land includes roughly that 
part of the agency which lies to the east of the plateau and 
comprises the greater part of the political divisions of 
Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand and the country round Gwalior. 
The formation save in north Bundelkhand is sandstone of the 
Vindhyan series, free as a rule from " trap." In the north of 
Bundelkhand the prevailing rock is gneiss and quartz. The 
quartz takes the shape of long serrated ridges, which are in many 
places a characteristic feature of the landscape. Trap appears 
here and there in intrusive dykes. The hilly tracts lie chiefly 
to the south of the agency, where the Vindhya, Satpura and 
Kaimur ranges are met with. The country is rough forest and 
jungle land little used for cultivation. The greater part of Central 
India is covered with the well-known " black cotton soil," 
produced by the disintegration of the trap rock. It is a very 
rich loamy earth, possessing great fertility and an unusual power 
of retaining moisture, which makes artificial irrigation little 
needed. Opium and millet are the principal crops grown upon 
it. The ordinary " red soil " covers a large part of northern 
Bundelkhand, and as it requires much irrigation, tanks are a 
special feature in this country. Ethnologically as well as 
climatically the differences between the plateau and the eastern 
part of the agency are distinct and the languages markedly so. 
The plateau is inhabited by pure-blooded Rajput races, whose 
ancestry can be traced back for centuries, with all their numerous 
offshoots. The inhabitants of the low-lying country are also 
Rajputs, but their descent is mixed and as a rule the families 
of the plateau will have no marriage connexion with them. 
The races of the hilly tracts are semi-civilized tribes, who often 
flee at the mere sight of a white man, and have as yet been but 
little affected by the Hindu religion of their Rajput rulers. Of 
the climate of the plateau, Abul Fazl, the author of the Ain-i- 
Akbari, says: " The climate is so temperate that in the winter 
there is no occasion for warm clothing, nor is it necessary in 
summer to cool the water with saltpetre. But in the four rainy 
months the night here is cold enough to render a quilt necessary." 
The rains of the south-east monsoon reach Central India as a 
rule about the 12th of July, and last until the end of September. 
Administrative Divisions. — The Central India agency is 
divided for administrative purposes into eight units, two classed 
as residencies and six as agencies. These are the residencies of 
Gwalior and Indore, and the agencies of Baghelkhand, Bhopal, 
Bhopawar, Bundelkhand, Indore and Malwa. But these 
divisions are purely an artificial grouping for the purposes of 
the British government, the original native divisions consisting 
of 16 states and 98 minor states and estates. The 15 large states 
are Gwalior, Indore, Rewa, Bhopal, Dhar, Barwani, Datia, 
Orchha, Charkhari, Chhattarpur, Panna, Dewas (senior branch), 
I Dewas (junior branch), Jaora and Ratlam, At the close of the 



CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR 



68 1 



Pindari War in 1818 the whole country, that is now under the 
Central India agency was in great confusion and disorder, having 
suffered heavily from the extortions of the Mahratta armies 
and from predatory bands. It had been the policy of the great 
Mahratta chiefs, Holkar and Sindhia, to trample down into 
complete subjection all the petty Rajput princes, whose lands 
they seized and from whom they levied heavy contributions of 
money. Many of these minor chiefs had been expelled from their 
possessions, had taken refuge in the hills and forest, and retaliated 
upon the Mahratta usurpers by wasting the lands which they had 
lost, until the Mahrattas compounded for peace by payment of 
blackmail. In this state of affairs all parties agreed to accept 
the interposition of the British government for the restoration 
of order, and under Lord Hastings the work of pacification was 
effected. The policy pursued was to declare the permanency 
of the rights existing at the time of the British interposition, 
conditionally upon the maintenance of order; to adjust and 
guarantee the relations of subordinate and tributary chiefs to 
their superiors so as to prevent all further disputes or en- 
croachments; and to settle the claims of the ousted landholders, 
who had resorted to pillage or blackmail, by fixing grants of 
land to be made to them, or settling the money allowances to be 
paid to them. The general result was to place all the 
privileges, rights and possessions of these inferior chief s under the 
guarantee or protection of the British government, to whom all 
disputes between the superior and inferior states must be referred, 
and whose decision is final upon all questions of succession to 
hereditary rights or rulership. The states have no general 
ethnological affinity, such as exists in Rajputana. Their terri- 
tories are in many cases neither compact nor continuous, consist- 
ing of a number of villages here and there, with a nucleus of more 
or less importance round the chief town. Their relations to the 
government of India and to each other present many variations. 
Ten of them are under direct treaty with the government of 
India; others are held under sanads and deeds of fealty and 
obedience; while a third class, known as the mediatized states, 
are held under agreements mediated by the British government 
between them and their superior chiefs. 

Population. — The total population of the Central India agency 
in 1901 was 8,628,781, showing a decrease during the decade of 
16-4%. Considerable losses were caused by the famines of 
1897-1898 and 1899-1900, which were severely felt, especially 
in Bhopal and Malwa. The greater part of the population of 
Central India is of the Hindu religion, but a few Mahommedan 
groups still exist, either traces of the days when the Mogul 
emperors extended their sway from the Punjab to the Deccan, 
or else the descendants of those northern adventurers who hired 
out their services to the great Mahratta generals. Of the first 
Bhopal is the only example, while Jaora is the only notable 
instance of the other. Roughly there are four great sections of 
the population: the Mahratta section, who belong to the ruling 
circles; the Rajputs, who are also hereditary noblemen; the 
trading classes, consisting chiefly of Marwaris and Gujaratis; 
and lastly,. the jungle tribes of Dra vidian stock. The Mahrattas 
are foreigners, and, though rulers of the greater part of Central 
India, have no true connexion with the soil and are little met 
with outside cities, the vicinity of courts, and administrative 
centres. The Rajputs with all their endless ramifications form 
a large portion of the population. Originally invaders, they have 
sq long held a stake in the soil that they have become almost 
part of the indigenous population. The Marwaris hold practically 
all the trade of Central India, with the exception of the Bora 
class of Mahommedans. They are either Vaishnavite Hindus 
or else Jains. Their advent into Central India dates, except in 
the case of one or two families, from the time of the Mahratta 
invasion only. The Jain portion of this community is very 
wealthy. The last section, that of the jungle tribes, is mostly 
of Dravidian or mixed Aryo-Dravidian origin, these tribes being 
the modern representatives of the former rulers and inhabitants 
of this country. 

The British agent to the governor-general resides at Indore, 
and .there are British cantonments at Mhow, Neemuch and 



Nowgong. The whole country is fairly provided with railways, 
largely at the expense of Sindhia. 

CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR, a province of British 
India, which was formed in October 1903 by the amalgamation 
of the Central Provinces and the Hyderabad Assigned Districts. 
The total area of the provinces is 1 13,281 sq. m., and the population 
on that area in 1901 was 10,847,325. As is shown by its name 
the province is situated in the centre of the Indian peninsula, 
comprising a large proportion of the broad belt of hill and plateau 
country which separates the plains of Hindustan from the 
Deccan. It is bounded on the N. and N.E. by the Central India 
states, and along a small strip of the Saugor district by the 
United Provinces; on the W. by Bhopal, Indore and the 
Khandesh district of Bombay; on the S. by Hyderabad and the 
large zamindari estates of the Madras presidency; and on the 
E. by these latter estates and the tributary states of Bengal. 
In October 1905 most of Sambalpur and five Oriya-speaking 
hill-states were transferred from the Central Provinces to Bengal, 
while the Hindi -speaking statesof Chota Nagpur were transferred 
from Bengal to the Central Provinces. The province, therefore, 
now consists of the five British divisions of Jubbulpore, Ner- 
budda, Nagpur, Chhattisgarh and Berar, which are divided into 
the twenty-two districts of Saugor, Damoh, Jubbulpore, Mandla, 
Seoni, Narsinghpur, Hoshangabad, Nimar, Betul, Chhindwara, 
Wardha, Nagpur, Chanda, Bhandara, Balaghat, Raipur, Bilaspur, 
Amraoti, Akola, Ellichpur, Buldana and Wun; and the fifteen 
tributary states of Makrai, Bastar, Ranker, Nandgaon, Kaira- 
garh, Chhuikhadan, Kawardha, Sakti, Raigarh, Sarangarh, 
Chang Bhakar, Korea, Sirguja, Udaipur and Jashpur. 

The Central Provinces are divided into two parts by the Satpura 
range of hills {q.v.), which runs south of the Nerbudda river from 
east to west; so that, speaking generally, it consists of central 
districts north of the Satpuras, districts on the Satpura proyinces 
plateau, and districts south of the Satpuras. North of 
the Satpuras is the rich valley of the Nerbudda, which may be said 
to begin towards the north of the Jubbulpore district and to extend 
westward through the district of Narsinghpur as far as the western 
limit of Hoshangabad, a distance of nearly 300 m. The elevation 
of the valley above the sea varies from 1400 ft. at Jubbulpore 
to 1 1 20 at Hoshangabad. In breadth it is about 30 m., extending 
between the Satpuras and the southern scarp of the Vindhyas. 
This great plain, 10,613 sq. m. in extent, contains for the most 
part land of extreme fertility. The continuation of the valley west 
of Hoshangabad forms the northern portion of the district of 
Nimar, the farther limit of which touches the Khandesh district 
of the Bombay presidency. Towards the river, though rich in parts, 
this tract of country is generally wild and desolate, but nearer the 
base of the hill range there is a large natural basin of fertile land 
which is highly cultivated. South of the Satpuras lies the great 
plain of Chhattisgarh at a mean elevation above the sea of 1000 ft. ; 
it has an area of 23,000 sq. m., and forms the upper basin of the 
Mahanadi. Farther to the west and again divided off by hills is the 
great plain of Nagpur, extending over 24,000 sq. m. Its general 
surface inclines towards the south from 1000 ft. above the sea at 
Nagpur to 750 ft. at Chanda. To the south the province is shut in 
by the wide mountainous tract which stretches from the Bay of 
Bengal through Bastar to the Godavari, and west of that river is 
continued onward to the rocky ridges and plateaus of Khandesh by 
a succession of ranges that enclose the plain of Berar along its 
southern border. 

Berar consists mainly of the valley lying between the Satpura 
range of mountains in the north and the Ajanta range in the south. 
The Gawilgarh hills, a range belonging to the Satpura Berar. 

mountains, form the northern border. On the east the 
frontier is marked by the Wardha river down to its confluence with 
the Penganga, and on the south by the Penganga for about two-thirds 
of the frontier's length. The tract is half surrounded on the east, 
north and north-west by the Central Provinces, with which it is 
amalgamated. In addition to the Melghat mountain tract which 
walls it in on the north, Berar is divided into two sections, the 
Payanghat or lowland country, bounded on the north by the 
Gdwilgarh hills, and on the south by the outer scarps of the Ajanta 
range, and the Balaghat or upland country above the Ajanta ridge, 
sloping down southwards beyond the ghats or passes which lead 
up to it. The Payanghat is a wide valley running up eastward 
between this ridge and the Gawilgarh hills, varying in breadth from 
40 to 50 m., and broader towards the end than at its mouth. It 
contains all the best land in Berar; it is full of deep, rich, black 
alluvial soil, of almost inexhaustible fertility, and it undulates 
sufficiently to maintain a natural system of drainage, but there is 
nothing picturesque about this broad strip of champaign country. 
The upland tract, on the contrary, is diversified with low-lying 



682 



CENTRAL PROVINCES AND BERAR 



plains, high plateaus, fertile bottoms and rocky wastes, and is 
rendered picturesque by rivers and groves. 

Natural Features.— The provinces may be divided into two tracts 
of upland and three of plain, consisting of the Vindhya and Satpura 
plateaus, and the Berar, Nagpur and Chhattisgarh plains. To the 
north the districts of Saugor and Damoh form the southern boundary 
of the Vindhyan escarpment. In this region the sandstone rocks 
are generally overlaid with heavy black soil formed from the decay- 
ing trap, which is principally devoted to the cultivation of the spring 
crops, wheat and grain, while rice and hill millets are sown in the 
lighter and more sandy soils. Next, the long and narrow valley of 
the Nerbudda from Jubbulpore to Hoshangabad is formed of deep 
alluvial deposits of extreme richness and excellently suited to the 
growth of wheat. To the south of the Nerbudda the Satpura range 
stretches across the province, containing the greater part of five 
districts, its crystalline and sandstone rocks rising in places through 
the superficial stratum of trap, and with large areas of shallow stony 
land still covered to a great extent with forest interspersed by 
black-soil valleys of great fertility. In the latter are grown wheat 
and other spring crops, while the lighter kinds of rice and the hill 
millets are all that the poorer land can bear. To the south of the 
Satpuras and extending along its base from west to east lie success- 
ively the Berar, Nagpur and Chhattisgarh plains. The surface soil of 
Berar is to a great extent a rich black vegetable mould ; and where 
this surface soil does not exist, there are muram and trap with a shallow 
upper crust of inferior light soil. The Nagpur country, drained by 
the Wardha and Wainganga rivers, contains towards the west the 
shallow black soil in which autumn crops like cotton and the large 
millet, juar, which do not require excessive moisture, can be success- 
fully cultivated. The eastern part of the Nagpur country and the 
Chhattisgarh plain, comprising the Mahanadi basin, form the great 
rice tract of the province, its heavy rainfall and hard yellowish soil 
rendering it excellently adapted for the growth of this crop. 

Climate. — -As regards climate the districts of the Central Provinces 
are generally divided into hot and cool ones. In the latter division 
are comprised the two Vindhyan districts of Saugor and Damoh, 
Jubbulpore at the head of the Nerbudda valley, and the four Sat- 
pura districts of Mandla, Seoni, Betul and Chhindwara, which enjoy, 
owing to their greater elevation, a distinctly lower average tem- 
perature than the rest of the province. The ordinary variation is 
from 3 to 4 degrees, the mean maximum reading in the shade in 
a cooler district being about 105 as against 108° in the hotter ones 
for the month of May, and 79 ° as against 83° for the month of 
December. In the cold weather the temperature in Nagpur and the 
other hot districts is about the same as in Calcutta and substantially 
higher than that of northern India. The climate of Berar differs 
very little from that of the Deccan generally, except that in the 
Payanghat valley the hot weather may be exceptionally severe. 
The rainfall of the province is considerably heavier than in northern 
India, and the result of this is a cooler and more pleasant atmosphere 
during the monsoon season. The average rainfall, before it was 
affected by the abnormal seasons which followed 1892, was 51 in., 
varying from 33 in. in Nimar to 65 in Balaghat. In the autumn 
months malarial fever is prevalent in all thickly forested tracts and 
also in the rice country ; but on the whole the province is considered 
to be healthy, and as the rains break fairly regularly in June and 
produce an immediate fall in the temperature, severe heat is only 
experienced for a period of from two to three months. 

Agriculture. — Broadly speaking, the northern districts of the pro- 
vince produce principally cold weather crops, such as wheat and 
grain, and the eastern ones principally rice. At the beginning of the 
decade 1891-1901 ivheat was the staple product of the Vindhyan 
and Nerbudda valley districts, and was also grown extensively in 
all the Satpura districts except Nimar and in Wardha and Nagpur. 
Cotton and juar were produced principally in Nimar, Nagpur, 
Wardha and the southern portion of Chhindwara, and the latter 
also in Chanda. In the Satpura districts the inferior soil was and is 
principally devoted to hill millets. Rice is an important crop in 
Damoh, Jubbulpore, Mandla, Seoni and Chanda, and is the chief 
staple of Bhandara, Balaghat, and the two eastern districts of 
Raipur and Bilaspur. The staple crops of Berar are cotton and juar. 
The succession of bad seasons which marked the end of the decade 
affected the distribution of the principal crops, but with the advent 
of more prosperous seasons things tend to return to their old level. 

Industries. — The only important industries are connected with 
cotton and coal. In 1904 the total number of factories was 391, 
almost entirely cotton presses and ginning factories, which received 
an immense impetus from the rise in cotton prices. In 1896 a 
brewery was established at Jubbulpore. Two coal-mines are 
worked in the Central Provinces, at Warora and Mopani, to each 
of which there is a branch line of railway. Ih T903-1904 there was 
a total yield of 160,000 tons, valued at about £45,000. In connexion 
with the Warora colliery there is a fire-clay business. The Mopani 
colliery, which dates back to i860, is worked by a joint-stock 
company. 

Trade.— The trade of the Central Provinces is conducted mainly 
by rail with Bombay and with Calcutta. The chief imports are 
cotton piece goods, cotton twist, salt, sugar, provisions, railway 
materials, raw cotton, metals, coal, tobacco, spices and kerosene oil. 
The chief exports are raw cotton, rice, wheat, oil-seeds, hides and 



lac. The exports of wheat are liable to extreme fluctuations, 
especially during famine periods. 

Railways. — Until recently, the only railway in the Central Pro- 
vinces was the Great Indian Peninsula, with two branches, one 
terminating at Nagpur, the other at Jubbulpore, whence it was 
continued by the East Indian system to Allahabad. The Bengal- 
Nagpur line has now opened up the eastern portion of the country, 
bringing it into direct connexion with Calcutta; and a new branch 
of the Indian Midland, from Saugor through Damoh, has been partly 
constructed as a famine work. Large portions, however, in the hilly 
centre and in the south-east, are still remote from railways. 

Administration. — The administration of the province is conducted 
by a chief commissioner on behalf of the governor-general of India 
in council, assisted by members of the Indian civil service, provincial 
civil service, subordinate civil service, district and assistant super- 
intendents of police, and officers specially recruited for various de- 
partments. The form of the administration of Berar was in 1903 
entirely reorganized. Under the original settlement concluded by the 
treaties of 1853 and i860 the revenues of the province were assigned 
primarily for the maintenance of the Hyderabad contingent, such 
surplus as accrued from year to year being made over to the nizam, 
while the province itself was administered in trust by the government 
of India through the resident at Hyderabad. In November 1902 
a fresh settlement was arranged and Berar was leased in perpetuity 
to the British government in return for an annual rental of 25 lakhs. 
It remained under the administration of the resident until the 1st of 
October 1903, from which date it was amalgamated with the Central 
Provinces for administrative purposes. As the immediate result of 
this change the offices of heads of departments in Berar, except the 
judicial commissionership and the conservatorship of forests, were 
amalgamated with the corresponding appointments in the Central 
Provinces, and Berar is now treated as one of the divisions of that 
province for purposes of revenue administration, with a divisional 
commissioner as its immediate hea<£ 

Population.- — The population of the Central Provinces and Berar 
as now defined according to the census of 1901 was 10,847,325, and 
is of very diverse ethical construction, having been recruited by 
immigration from the countries surrounding it on all sides. There 
are six main divisions of the people: the Dravidian tribes, who 
formerly held the country; Hindi-speaking immigrants from the 
north and north-west into Saugor, Damoh, the Nerbudda valley 
and the open country of Mandla and Seoni; Rajasthani-speaking 
immigrants from Central India into Nimar, Betul and parts of 
Hoshangabad, Narsinghpur and Chhindwara; Marathi-speaking 
immigrants from Bombay into Berar, the Mahratta districts and the 
southern tahsil of Betul; the Telugu castes in the Sironcha and 
Chanda tahsil of Chanda and the south of Bastar; and the Hindu 
immigrants into Chhattisgarh, who are supposed to have arrived 
many centuries ago when the Haihaya dynasty of Ratanpur rose 
into power. 

Language. — Owing to the diversity of race, the diversity of lan- 
guage is equally great. Thirty languages and a hundred and six 
dialects are found in the Central Provinces alone, and twenty-eight 
languages and sixty-eight dialects in Berar. The chief of these 
languages are Western Hindi, Eastern Hindi, Rajasthani, Marathi, 
Oriya, Telugu and Dravidian dialects. Of these last the chief 
dialects are Gondi, Oraon or Kurukh, Kandhi and Kanarese, of 
which Gondi is by far the most important. There are also the 
Munda languages, of which the chief are Korku, Kharia and Munda 
or Kol. The chief languages of Berar are Marathi, Urdu, Gondi, 
Banjari, Hindi, Marwari, Telugu, Korku and Gujarati. 

History. — The authentic history of the greater part of the 
country embraced in the Central Provinces does not begin till 
the 1 6th century a.d. By the people of northern India the 
country was known as Gondwana, after the savage tribes of 
Gonds by whom it was inhabited. The Mussulman invaders 
of the Deccan passed it by, not caring to enter its mountain 
fastnesses and impenetrable forests; though occasional inscrip- 
tions show that parts of it had fallen from time to time under 
the dominion of one or other of the great kingdoms of the north, 
e.g. of Asoka, of the Guptas of Maghada, or of the ancient Hindu 
kingdom of Vidarbha (Berar) ; and inscriptions and numerous 
discoveries of coins prove that, during the middle ages, the open 
spaces were occupied by a series o Rajput dynasties. Of these 
the most important was that of the Haihayas of Ratanpur, a 
family which, settled from time immemorial in the Nerbudda 
valley, had towards the close of the 10th century succeeded the 
Pandava dynasty of Maha Kosala (Chhattisgarh) and ruled, 
though from the 16th century onwards over greatly diminished 
territories, until its overthrow by the Mahrattas in 1745. The 
second ruler of this dynasty, Ratnaraja, was the founder of 
Ratanpur. 

The irscriptional records cease abruptly in the 12th century, 
and no more is known of the country until the rise of the Gond 



CENTUMVIRI 



683 



dynasties from the 14th to the 16th centuries. The first of these 
is mentioned in 1398, when Narsingh Rai, raja of Kherla, is said 
by Ferishta to have ruled all the hills of Gondwana. He was 
finally overthrown and killed by Hoshang Shah, king of Malwa. 
The 1 6th century saw the establishment of a powerful Gond 
kingdom by Sangram Sah, who succeeded in 1480 as the 47th 
of the petty Gond rajas of Garha-Mandla, and extended his 
dominions so as to include Saugor and Damoh on the Vindhyan 
plateau, Jubbulpore and Narsinghpur in the Nerbudda valley, 
and Seoni on the Satpura highlands. Sangram Sah died in 1530; 
and the break up of his dominion began with the enforced cession 
to the Mogul emperor by Chandra Sah (1563-1575) of Saugor 
and Damoh and of that portion of his territories which after- 
wards formed the state of Bhopal. 

About 200 years after Sangram Sah's time, Bakht Buland, 
the Gond chieftain of a principality seated at Deogarh in Chhind- 
wara, having visited Delhi, set about introducing the civilization 
he had there admired. He founded the city of Nagpur, which 
his successor made his capital. The Deogarh kingdom, at its 
widest extent, embraced the modern districts of Betul, Chhind- 
wara, Nagpur, with parts of Seoni, Bhandara and Balaghat. 
In the south of the province Chanda was the seat of another 
Gond dynasty, which first came into prominence in the 16th 
century. The three Gond principalities of Garha-Mandla, Deo- 
garh and Chanda were nominally subject to the Mogul em- 
perors. In addition to the acquisitions made in the north at 
the expense of Garha-Mandla, the Moguls, after the annexation 
of Berar, established governors at Paunar in Wardha and Kherla 
in Betul. Having thus hemmed in the Gond states, however, 
they made no efforts to assert any effective sovereignty over 
them; the Gond rajas for their part were content with practical 
independence within their own dominions. Under their peaceful 
rule their territories flourished, until the weakening of the Mogul 
empire and the rise of the predatory Bundela and Mahratta 
powers, with the organized forces of which their semi-barbarous 
feudal levies were unable to cope, brought misfortune upon- them. 

In the 17th century Chhatarsal, the Bundela chieftain, deprived 
the Mandla principality of part of the Vindhyan plateau and the 
Nerbudda valley. In 1 733 the peshwa of Poona invaded Bundel- 
khand; and in 1735 the Mahrattas had established their power 
in Saugor. In 1742 the peshwa advanced to Mandla and exacted 
the payment of chauth (tributary blackmail) , and from this time 
until 1 78 1, when the successors of Sangram Sah were finally 
overthrown, Garha-Mandla remained practically a Mahratta 
dependency. Meanwhile the other independent principalities 
of Gondwana had in turn succumbed. In 1 743 Raghoji Bhonsla 
of Berar established himself at Nagpur, and by 1751 had con- 
quered the territories of Deogarh, Chanda and Chhattisgarh. 
In 1741 Ratanpur had surrendered to the Mahratta leader 
Bhaskar Pant without a blow, and the ancient Rajput dynasty 
came to an end. In Chanda and Deogarh the Gond rajas were 
suffered by Raghoji Bhonsla and his successor to carry on a 
shadowy existence for a while, in order to give them an excuse 
for avoiding the claims of the peshwa as their overlord; though 
actually decisions in important matters were sought at Poona. 
Raghoji died in 1755, and in 1769 his son and successor, Janoji, 
was forced to acknowledge the peshwa's effective supremacy. 
The Nagpur state, however, continued to grow. In 1 785 Mudhoji 
(d. 1788), Janoji's successor, bought from the Poona court the 
cession of Mandla and the upper Nerbudda valley, and between 
1796 and 1798 this was followed by the acquisition of Hoshanga- 
bad and the larger part of Saugor and Damoh by Raghoji II. 
(d. 1816). Under this latter raja the Nagpur state covered 
practically the whole of the present Central Provinces and Berar, 
as well as Orissa and some of the Chota Nagpur states. 

In 1803 Raghoji joined Sindhia against the British; the 
result was the defeat of the allies at Assaye and Argaon, and the 
treaty of Deogaon, by which Raghoji had to cede Cuttack, 
Sambalpur and part of Berar. Up to this time the rule of the 
Bhonsla rajas, rough warriors of peasant extraction, had been 
on the whole beneficent; but, soured by his defeat, Raghoji now 
set to work to recover some of his losses by a ruthless exploitation 



of the peasantry, and until the effective intervention of the 
British in 1818 the country was subjected to every kind of 
oppression. After Raghoji II. 's death in 1816 his imbecile son 
Parsaji was deposed and murdered by Mudhoji, known as Appa 
Sahib. In spite of a treaty signed with the British in this year, 
Mudhoji in 181 7 joined the peshwa, but was defeated at Sitabaldi 
and forced to cede the rest of Berar to the nizam, and parts of 
Saugor and Damoh, with Mandla, Betul, Seoni and the Nerbudda 
valley, to the British. After a temporary restoration to the 
throne he was deposed, and Raghoji III., a grandchild of 
Raghoji II., was placed on the throne. During his minority, 
which lasted till 1840, the country was well administered by a 
British resident. In 1853, on the death of Raghoji III. without 
heirs, Nagpur lapsed to the British paramount power. Until 
the formation of the Central Provinces in 1861, Nagpur province, 
which consists of the present Nagpur division, Chhindwara and 
Chhatisgarh, was administered by a commissioner under the 
central government. 

The territories in the north ceded in 181 7 by the peshwa (parts 
of Saugor and Damoh) and in 1818 by Appa Sahib were in 1820 
formed into the Saugor and Nerbudda Territories under an agent 
to the governor-general, and in 1835 were included in the newly 
formed North-West Provinces. In 1842, in consequence of a 
rising, they were again placed under the jurisdiction of an agent 
to the governor-general. Restored to the North-West Provinces 
in 1853, they were finally joined with the Nagpur province to 
constitute the new Central Provinces in 1861. On the 1st of 
October 1903 Berar also was placed under the administration of 
the commissioner of the Central Provinces (for history see Berar). 
In 1905 the greater part of Sambalpur district, with the feudatory 
states of Bamra, Rairakhol, Sonpur, Patna and Kalahandi, were 
transferred to Bengal, while the feudatory states of Chang 
Bhakar, Korea, Surguja, Udaipur and Jashpur were transferred 
from Bengal to the Central Provinces. 

During the decade 1891-1901 the Central Provinces suffered 
from famine more severely than any other part of India. The 
complete failure of the rain in the autumn of 1896 caused scarcity 
to develop suddenly into famine, which lasted until the end of 
1897. The total number of persons in receipt of relief reached 
its maximum of nearly 700,000 in May 1897. The expenditure 
on relief alone was about a million sterling; and the total cost 
of the famine, including loss of revenue, amounted to nearly 
twice that amount. During 1897 the death-rate for the whole 
province rose to sixty-nine per thousand, or double the average, 
while the birth-rate fell to twenty-seven per thousand. The 
Central Provinces were stricken by another famine, yet more 
severe and widespread, caused by the complete failure of the 
rains in 1899. The maximum of persons relieved for the whole 
province was 1,971,000 in June 1900. Ih addition, about 68,000 
persons were in receipt of relief in the native states. During the 
three years 1899-1902 the total expenditure on famine relief 
amounted to about four millions sterling. Berar also suffered 
from the famines of 1897 and 1900. 

See The Imperial Gazetteer of India (Oxford, 1908), x. 99, for list 
of authorities. 

CENTUMVIRI (centum, hundred; vir, man), an ancient court 
of civil jurisdiction at Rome, probably instituted by Servius 
Tullius. 1 Its antiquity is attested by the symbol and formula 
used in its procedure, the lance (hasta) as the sign of true owner- 
ship, the oath or wager (sacramentum) , the ancient formula for 
recovery of property or assertion of liberty. It is probably 
alluded to in Livy's account of the Valerio-Horatian laws of 
449 B.C. (Livy iii. 55, Consules . . . fecerunt sanciendo ut qui 
tribunis plebis, aedilibus, judicious, decemviris nocuisset, ejus 
caput Jovi sacrum esset). If the judices here mentioned are the 
centumviri, it is clear that they formed a tribunal which repre- 
sented the interests of the plebs. This is in accordance with 
Cicero's account {de Orat. i. 38. 173) of the sphere of their juris- 
diction. He says this was mainly concerned with the property 
of which account was taken at the census; it was therefore in 

1 Mommsen (Staatsrecht, i 3 . 275, n. 4, ii 3 . 231, n. 1, 590 f.) believed 
that the Centumviri were instituted about 150 b. c. 



68 4 



CENTURION— CEPHALONIA 



their power to make or unmake a citizen. They also decided 
questions concerning debt. Hence the plebs had an interest in 
securing their decisions against undue influence. They were 
never regarded as magistrates, but merely as judices, and as such 
would be appointed for a fixed term of service by the magistrate, 
probably by the praetor urbanus. But in Cicero's time they were 
elected by the Comitia Tributa. They then numbered 105. 
Their original number is uncertain. It was probably increased 
by Augustus and in Pliny's time had reached 180. The office 
was probably open in quite early times to both patricians and 
plebeians. The term is also applied in the inscriptions of Veii to 
the municipal senates and Cures, which numbered 100 members. 

Authorities. — Tigerstrom, De Judicibus apud Romanos (Berlin, 
1826) ; Greenidge, Legal Procedure of Cicero's Time, pp. 40 ff., 58 ff., 
182 ff., 264 (Oxford, 1901); Bethmann-Hollweg, Der romische 
Civilprozess, ii. 53 ff. (Bonn, 1864); Pauly-Wissowa, Realencyclo- 
pddie, iii. 1935 ff. (Wlassak). (A. M. Cl.) 

CENTURION (Lat. centurio), in the ancient Roman army, an 
officer in command of a centuria, originally a body of a hundred 
infantry, later the sixtieth part of the normal legion. There 
were therefore in the legion sixty centurions, who, though 
theoretically subordinate to the six military tribunes, were the 
actual working officers of the legion. For the most part the 
centurions were promoted from the ranks: they were arranged 
in a complicated order of seniority; the senior centurion of the 
legion {primus pilus) was an officer of very high importance. 
Besides commanding the centuries of the legion, centurions were 
" seconded " for various kinds of special service, e.g. for staff em- 
ployment, the command of auxiliaries. See further Roman Army. 

CENTURIPE (formerly Centorbi, anc. KevTopura or Cen- 
turipae), a town of Sicily, in the province of Catania, situated 
2380 ft. above sea-level in a commanding situation, 7 m. N. of 
the railway station of Catenanuova-Centuripe, which is 28 m. 
W. from Catania. Pop. (1901) 11,311. Thucydides mentions it 
as a city of the Sicels. It became an ally of the Athenians at 
the time of their expedition against Syracuse, and maintained 
its independence almost uninterruptedly (though it fell under 
the power of Agathocles) until the First Punic War. Cicero 
describes it, perhaps with some exaggeration, as being far the 
largest and richest city of Sicily, and as having a population of 
10,000, engaged in the cultivation of an extensive territory. 
It was granted Latin rights before the rest of Sicily. It appears 
to have suffered much in the war against Sextus Pompeius, and 
not to have regained its former prosperity under the empire. 
Frederick II. entirely destroyed it in 1233, but it was soon 
rebuilt. Considerable remains of the ancient city walls and of 
buildings, mostly of the Roman period, still exist, and numerous 
antiquities, including some fine Hellenistic (erra-cottas, have been 
discovered in casual excavations. 

See F. Ansaldi, / Monumenti dell' antica Centuripi (Catania, 1 851) ; 
P. Orsi in Atti del Congresso Internationale di Scienze Storiche (Rome, 
1904), v. 177. (T. As.) 

CENTURY (from Lat. centuria, a division of a hundred men), 
the name for a unit in the Roman army, originally amounting 
to one hundred men, and for one of the divisions into which the 
Roman people was separated for voting purposes (see Comitia). 
The word is applied to any group of one hundred, and more 
particularly to a period of a hundred years, and to the suc- 
cessive periods of a hundred years, dating before or after 
the birth of Christ. The " Century-plant " is a name given to 
the Agave (q.v.), or American aloe, from the supposition that it 
flowered once only in every hundred years. 

CEOS (Gr. Kecos, mod. Zea or Tzia), an island in the Aegean 
Sea, belonging to the group of the Cyclades and the eparchy of 
Syra, 14 m. off the coast of Attica. Its greatest length is about 
15 m. and its breadth about 8 m. It rises gradually towards the 
centre, where it culminates in Mount Elias, 1864 ft. high. Among 
its natural productions are lemons, citrons, olives, wine and 
honey; it also exports a considerable quantity of valonia. 
There were formerly four towns of some importance in the 
island: — Iulis, about 3 m. from the north-west shore; Coressia, 
the harbour of Iulis, with a temple of Apollo Smintheus in the 
neighbourhood; Carthaea, in the south-east, with a temple of 



Apollo; and Poieessa, in the south-west. Of these Iulis is 
represented by the town of Zea, and Carthaea by the village of 
'S tais Polais; traces of the other two can still be made out. 
Iulis was the birthplace of the lyric poets Simonides and 
Bacchylides, the philosophers Prodicus and Ariston, and the phy- 
sician Erasistratus ; the excellence of its laws was so generally 
recognized that the title of Cean Laws passed into a proverb. 
One of them forbade a citizen to protract his fife beyond sixty 
years. The people of Ceos fought on the Greek side at 
Artemisium and Salamis; they joined the Delian League and 
also the later Athenian alliance in 377 B.C. They revolted in 
363-362, but were reduced again, and the Athenians established 
a monopoly of the ruddle, or red earth, which was one of the most 
valuable products of the island. In a.D; 1207 it was divided 
between four Italian adventurers; after forming part of the 
duchy of Naxos in 1537, it passed under Turkish rule in 1566. 
Silver coins of Carthaea and Coressia have been found dating 
from the 6th century B.C. (see Numismatics: Greek, " Cyclades 
and Sporades "). The present population of the island is about 
4000, of which the capital has about 2000. 

See Pridik, De Cei Insulae rebus (1892). (E. Gr.) 

CEPHALIC INDEX, the term in use by anthropologists to 
express the percentage of breadth to length in any skull. The 
principle employed by Retzius is to take the longer diameter of 
a skull, the antero-posterior diameter, as 100; if the shorter or 
transverse diameter falls below 80 the skull may be classed as 
long (dolichocephalic), while if it exceeds 80 the skull is broad 
(brachycephalic) (see Craniometry). 

CEPHALONIA (Ital. Cefalonia, ancient and modern official 
Greek Cephallenia, Ke4>a\~kqvia) , an island belonging to the 
kingdom of Greece, and the largest of those known as the Ionian 
Islands, situated on the west side of the mainland, almost 
directly opposite the Gulf of Corinth. The name was traditionally 
derived from Cephalus, the Attic hero who was regarded as 
having colonized the island. The tradition, which is repeated by 
Aristotle, is probably due solely to the similarity of the names 
(see J. G. Frazer, Pausanias, i. 37, 6 note). Pop. (1907) 71,235. 
Its extreme length is 31 m., and its breadth varies from about 
20 m. in the southern portion to 3 m. or less in the projecting 
part, which runs parallel with the island of Ithaca, at a distance 
of about 4 m.' across the strait of Guiscardo or Viscaro. The 
whole island, with its area of 348 English sq. m., is covered with 
rocky hills of varying elevation, the main range running from 
north-west to south-east. The ancient Mount Aenos, now Elato, 
Monte Negro, or the Black Mountain (53 1 5 ft.), frequently retains 
the snow for several months. It is not only the loftiest part of 
the sierra, but also the highest land in the whole Ionian group. 
The name " Black" was given from the darkness of the pine 
woods which still constitute the most striking feature in Cepha- 
lonian scenery, although their extent has been greatly curtailed 
by fire. The summit is called Megalo Soros. The island is ill 
supplied with fresh water; there are few permanent streams 
except the Rakli, and springs are apt to fail in dry summers. 
In the western part of the island a gulf runs up from the south, 
a distance of about 7 m. ; on its east side stands the chief town 
Argostoli, with about 10,000 inhabitants, and on its west side 
the rival city of Lixouri, with 6000. About a mile west of the 
town are the curious sea mills; a stream of sea water running 
down a chasm in the shore is made to turn the wheels. About 
5 m. from Argostoli is the castle of St George, a building of 
Venetian origin, and the strongest fortification in the island. 
On an eminence east-south-east of Argostoli are the ruins of the 
ancient Cranii, and Lixouri is close to or upon those of Pale; 
while on the other side of the island are the remains of Samos 
on the bay of the same name, of Proni or Pronni, farther south 
above the vale of Rakli and its blossoming oleanders, and of 
an unknown city near the village of Scala. The ruins of this 
city include Roman baths, a brick-built temple, rock-cut tombs, 
and tessellated pavements; and Cranii, Proni and Samos are 
remarkable for stretches of Cyclopean and Hellenic walls, partly 
of the most irregular construction, and partly preserving almost 
unimpaired the results of the most perfect skill. The inhabitants 



CEPHALOPODA 



685 



of Cephalonia have all along been extremely active; and no 
slight amount of toil has been expended in the construction of 
terraces on the steep sides of the hills. Owing to the thinness 
of the population, however, but a small proportion of the soil 
is under cultivation, and the quantity of grain grown in the 
island is comparatively-meagre. The staple is the currant, in 
the production of which the island surpasses Zante. The fruit 
is smaller than that of the Morea, and has a peculiar flavour; it 
finds a market mainly in Holland, Belgium and Germany. The 
grape vine also is grown, and the manufacture of wine is a rising 
industry. The olive crop is of considerable importance, and the 
culture of cotton in the low grounds has been successfully 
attempted. Manufactures are few and undeveloped, but lace 
from the aloe fibre, Turkey carpets and basket-work are pro- 
duced by the villagers, and boats are built at both the principal 
towns. Of all the seven Ionian islands Cephalonia and Zante are 
most purely Greek, and the inhabitants display great mental 
activity. 

In the Homeric poems Cephalonia is generally supposed to 
be mentioned under the name of Same, and its inhabitants, 
among the subjects of Ulysses, to be designated Cephallenes 
(see, however, under Ithaca) . In the Persian War they took but 
little part; in the Peloponnesian they sided with the Athenians. 
The town of Pale was vainly besieged by Philip of Macedon in 
218 B.C., because it had supported the Aetolian cause. In 189 
B.C. all the cities surrendered to the Romans, but Same afterwards 
revolted, and was only reduced after a siege of four months. 
The island was presented by Hadrian to Athens, but it appears 
again at a later date as " free and autonomous." After the 
division of the Roman empire, it continued attached to Byzan- 
tium till 1082, when it was captured by Robert Guiscard, who 
died, however, before he could repress the revolt of 1085. In 
1204 it was assigned to Gaius, prince of Tarentum, who accepted 
the protection of Venice in 121 5; and after 1225 it was held 
along with Santa Maura and Zante by a succession of five counts 
of the Tocco family at Naples. Formally made over to Venice 
in 1350 by the prince of Tarentum, it was afterwards captured 
by the Turks in 1479; but the Hispanico-Venetian fleet under 
Benedetto Pessaro and Gonsalvo of Cordova effected their 
expulsion in 1 500, and the island continued in Venetian possession 
till the fall of the republic. For some time it was administered 
for the French government, but in 1809 it was taken by the 
British under Cuthbert, Lord Collingwood. Till 1813 it was in 
the hands of Major de Bosset, a Swiss in the British service, who 
displayed an industry and energy in the repression of injustice 
and development of civilization only outdone by the despotic 
vigour of Sir Charles Napier, who held the same office for the nine 
years from 18 18 to 1827. During the British protectorate the 
island made undoubted advances in material prosperity, but 
was several times the scene of political disturbances. It retained 
longer than the sister islands traces of feudal influence exerted 
by the landed proprietors, but has been gradually becoming 
more democratic. Under the Venetians it was divided into eight 
districts, and an elaborate system of police was jn force; since 
its annexation to Greece it has been broken up into twenty 
demarchies, each with its separate jurisdiction and revenues, 
and the police system has been abolished. 

Authorities. — A special treatise on the antiquities of Cephalonia 
was written by Petrus Maurocenus. See Holland's Travels (1815); 
Ansted's Ionian Islands (1863); Viscount Kirkwall's Four Years 
in Ionian Islands (1864); Wiebel's Die Insel Kephalonia; parlia- 
mentary papers. Riemann, Recherches archeologiques sur les lies 
Ioniennes (Paris, 1879-1880); Partsch, Kephallenia und Ithaka 
(1890); see also Corfu; Ionian Islands. (E. Gr.) 

CEPHALOPODA, the fifth of the classes into which the 
zoological phylum Mollusca is divided (see Mollusca). The 
Cephalopoda are mainly characterized by the concrescence of the 
foot and head. The foot grows forward on each side so as to 
surround the mouth, the two upgrowths meeting on the dorsal 
side of the head — whence the name Cephalopoda. The perioral 
portion of the foot is drawn out into paired arm-like processes; 
these may be beset with sheathed tentacles or with suckers or 
hooks, or both. The epipodia are expanded into a pair of 



muscular lobes right and left, which are bent round towards one 
another so that their free margins meet and constitute a short 
tube — the siphon or funnel. The hind-foot is either very small 
or absent. A distinctive feature of the Cephalopoda is their 
bilateral symmetry and the absence of anything like the torsion of 
the visceral mass seen in the Anisopleurous Gastropoda. 

The anus, although it may be a little displaced from the median 
line, is approximately median and posterior. The mantle-skirt is 
deeply produced posteriorly, forming a large sub-pallial chamber 
around the anus. By the side of the anus are placed the single or 
paired apertures of the nephridia, the genital apertures (paired only 
in Nautilus, in female Octopoda, female Ommatostrephes and male 
Eledone), and the paired ctenidia. The visceral hump or dome is 
elevated, and may be very much elongated in a direction almost at 
right angles to the primary horizontal axis of the foot. 

A shell is frequently, but not invariably, secreted on the visceral 
hump and mantle-skirt. The shell is usually light in substance or 
lightened by air-chambers in correlation with the free-swimming 
habits of the Cephalopoda. It may be external or internal, that is, 
enclosed in folds of the mantle. Very numerous minute pigmented 
sacs, capable of expansion and contraction, and known as chromato- 
phores, are usually present in the integument. The sexes are separate. 

The ctenidia are well developed as paired gill-plumes, serving as 
the efficient branchial organs (figs. 4, 24), 

The vascular system is very highly developed ; the heart consists 
of a pair of auricles and a ventricle (figs. 12, 28). Branchial hearts 
are formed on the afferent vessels of the branchiae. It is not known 
to what extent the minute subdivision of the arteries extends, or 
whether there is a true capillary system. 

The pericardium is extended so as to form a very large sac, passing 
among the viscera dorsalwards and sometimes containing the ovary 
or testis — the viscero-pericardial sac — which opens to the exterior 
either directly or through the renal organs. It has no connexion 
with the vascular system. The renal organs are always paired sacs, 
the walls of which invest the branchial afferent vessels (figs. 28, 29). 
They open each by a pore into the viscero-pericardial sac, except in 
Nautilus. The anal aperture is median and raised on a papilla. 
Jaws (fig. 6, e) and a radula (fig. 9) are well developed. The jaws 
have the form of powerful beaks, either horny or calcified (Nautilus), 
and are capable of inflicting severe wounds. 

Cerebral, pleural and pedal ganglia are present, but the connectives 
are shortened and the ganglia concentrated and fused in the cephalic 
region. Large special ganglia (optic, stellate and supra-buccal) are 
developed. Sense-organs are highly developed; the eye exhibits 
a very special elaboration of structure in the Dibranchiata, and a 
remarkable archaic form in the nautilus. Otocysts are present in 
all. The typical osphradium is not present, except in Nautilus, but 
other organs are present in the cephalic region, to which an olfactory 
function is ascribed both in Nautilus and in the other Cephalopoda. 

Hermaphroditism is unknown in Cephalopoda, male and female 
individuals always being differentiated. The genital aperture and 
duct is sometimes single, when it is the left; sometimes the typical 
pair is developed right and left of the anus. The males of nearly all 
Cephalopoda have been shown to be characterized by a peculiar 
modification of the arm-like processes or lobes of the fore-foot, con- 
nected with the copulative function. The term hectocotylization 
is applied to this modification (see figs. 6, 24). Elaborate spermato- 
phores or sperm-ropes are formed by all Cephalopoda, and very 
usually the female possesses special capsule-forming and nida- 
mental glands for providing envelopes to the eggs (fig. 4, g.n). The 
egg is large, and the development is much modified by the presence 
of an excessive amount of food-material diffused in the protoplasm 
of the egg-cell. Trochosphere and veliger stages of development 
are consequently not recognizable. 

The Cephalopoda are divisible into two orders, Tetrabranchiata 
and Dibranchiata, the names of which (due to Sir R. Owen) 
describe the number of gill-plumes present; but in. fact there are 
several characters, of as great importance as those derived from 
the gills, by which the members of these two orders are separated 
from one another. 

Order i. Tetrabranchiata ( = Schizosiphona, Tentaculifera) . 

Characters. — The inrolled lateral margins of the epipodia are 
not fused, but form a siphon by apposition (fig. 4). The circum- 
oral lobes of the fore-foot carry numerous retractile tentacles, 
not suckers (fig. 6). There are two pairs of ctenidial gills (hence 
Tetrabranchiata), and two pairs of renal organs, consequently 
four renal apertures (fig. 4). The viscero-pericardial chamber 
opens by two independent apertures to the exterior, and not into 
the renal sacs. There are two oviducts (right and left) in the 
female, and two sperm-ducts in the male, the left duct in both 
sexes being rudimentary. A large external shell, either coiled or 
straight, is present, and is not enclosed by reflections of the 



686 



CEPHALOPODA 



mantle-skirt. The shell consists of a series of chambers, the last- 
formed of which is occupied by the body of the animal, the 
hinder ones (successively deserted) containing gas (fig. i). The 
pair of cephalic eyes are hollow chambers (fig. 14, A), opening to 
the exterior by minute orifices (pinhole camera), and devoid of 
refractive structures. A pair of osphradia are present at the base 
of the gills (fig. 4, 0//). Salivary glands are wanting. An ink-sac 
is not present. Branchial hearts are not developed on the 
branchial afferent vessels. 

Visceral Hump and Shell.— The visceral hump of Nautilus (if 
we exclude from consideration the fine siphuncular pedicle which 
it trails, as it were, behind it) is very little, if at all, affected by the 
coiled form of the shell which it carries, since the animal always 
slips forward in the shell as it grows, and inhabits a chamber 




Fig. I. — Lateral vie* of the female Pearly Nautilus, contracted by spirit 
and lying in its shell, the right half of which is cut away (from Gegenbaur, 
after Owen). 



a, Visceral hump. 

b, Portion of the free edge of the 

mantle-skirt reflected on to the 0, 
shell, — the edge of the mantle- t, 
skirt can be traced downwards 
and forwards around the base 
of the mid-foot or siphon i. 
1,1, Superficial origin of the retractor 
muscle of the mid-foot(siphon), 
more or less firmly attached to v, 
the shell, of which a small piece 
(s) is seen between the letters 

1,1. 

s, (farther back) points to the siph- V, 
uncular pedicle, which is broken 
off short and not continued, as 
in the perfect state, through the 



whole length of the siphuncle of 
the shell, also marked i and s'. 
points to the right eye. 
is placed near the extremities of 
the contracted tentacles of the 
outer or annular lobe of the 
fore-foot — the jointed tentacles 
are seen protruding a little from 
their long cylindrical sheaths. 

The dorsal " hood " formed by 
an enlargement in this region 
of the annular lobe of the fore- 
foot {m in figs. 2,3). 

A swelling of the mantle-skirt, 
indicating the position on its 
inner face of the nidamental 
gland (see fig. 4, g.n.). 



which is practically cylindrical (fig. 1). Were the deserted 
chambers thrown off instead of being accumulated behind the 
inhabited chamber as a coiled series of air-chambers, we should 
have a more correct indication in the shell of the extent and form 
of the animal's body. Amongst Gastropods it is not very un- 
usual to find the animal slipping forward in its shell as growth 
advances and leaving an unoccupied chamber in the apex of the 
shell. This may indeed become shut off from the occupied 
cavity by a transverse septum, and a series of such septa may be 
formed, but in no Gastropod are these apical chambers known to 
contain a gas during the life of the animal in whose shell they 
occur. A further peculiarity of the nautilus shell and of that of 
the allied extinct Ammonites, Scaphites, Orthoceras, &c, and of 
the living Spirula, is that the series of deserted air-chambers is 
traversed by a cord-like pedicle extending from the centro- 



dorsal area of the visceral hump to the smallest and first-formed 
chamber of the series. No structure comparable to this siphun- 
cular pedicle is known in any other Mollusca. The siphuncle 
does not communicate with the coelomic cavity; it is a simple 
vascular process of the mantle, whose cavity consists of a venous 
sinus, and whose wall contains a ramification of the pallial 
artery. There appears to be no doubt that the deserted chambers 
of the nautilus shell contain in the healthy living animal a gas 
which serves to lessen the specific gravity of the whole organism. 
This gas is said to be of the same composition -as the atmosphere, 
with a larger proportion of nitrogen. With regard to its origin we 
have only conjectures. Each septum shutting off an air-contain- 
ing chamber is formed during a period of quiescence, probably 
after the reproductive act, when the visceral mass of the nautilus 
may be slightly shrunk, and gas is secreted from the dorsal 
integument so as to fill up the space previously occupied by the 
animal. A certain stage is reached in the growth of the animal 
when no new chambers are formed. The whole process of the 
loosening of the animal in its chamber and of its slipping forward 
when a new septum is formed, as well as the mode in which the 
air-chambers may be used as a hydrostatic apparatus, and the 
relation to this use, if any, of the siphuncular pedicle, is involved 
in obscurity, and is the subject of much ingenious speculation. 
In connexion with the secretion of gas by the animal, besides the 
parallel cases ranging from the protozoon Arcella to the physo- 
clistic fishes, from the hydroid Siphonophora to the 
insect-larva Corethra, we have the identical phenomenon 
observed in the closely allied Sepia when recently hatched. 
Here, in the pores of the internal rudimentary shell, gas 
is observable, which has necessarily been liberated by 
the tissues which secrete the shell, and not derived from 
any external source (Huxley). 

The coiled shell of Nautilus, and of the majority of 
extinct Tetrabranchiata, is peculiar in its relation to the 
body of the animal, inasmuch as the curvature of the 
coil proceeding from the centro-dorsal area is towards the 
head or forwards, instead of away from the head and 
backwards as in other discoid coiled shells such as 
Planorbis; the coil is in fact absolutely reversed in the 
two cases. Such a shell is said to be exogastric. But 
in some extinct forms, e.g. Phragmoceras, Cyrtoceras, 
Ptenoceras, the shell is coiled towards the ventral side, 
when it is termed endogastric. Amongst the extinct 
allies of the nautilus (Tetrabranchiata) we find shells of 
a variety of shapes, open coils such as Scaphites, leading 
on to perfectly cylindrical shells with chamber succeeding 
chamber in a straight line {Orthoceras), whence again we 
may pass to the corkscrew spires formed by the shell 
of Turrilites. In some extinct genera, e.g. Gomphoceras, 
among the Nautiloidea the aperture of the shell is con- 
tracted and the edge of the aperture is lobed. In these 
cases the animal was probably able only to protrude its 
appendages and not its whole head. The ventral part 
of the aperture corresponding to the funnel is separated 
from the dorsal part by a constriction. Hence it is 
possible to distinguish the ventral and dorsal sides of 
the shell and to decide whether it was exogastric or 
endogastric. The direction of the coil of the shell cannot be 
determined by the position of the siphuncle, which traverses 
the septa centrally, ventrally or dorsally. Contracted shell 
apertures occur also in Ammonitoidea, the condition reaching 
an extreme in Morphoceras, where the original aperture is sub- 
divided by the ingrowth of the sides, so that only five small 
separate apertures remain. Of these the central probably corre- 
sponded to the mouth, two lateral to the eyes, and the remaining 
two to the pedal appendages. 

Head, Foot, Mantle-skirt and Sub-pallial Chamber. — In the pearly 
nautilus the ovoid visceral hump is completely encircled by the free 
flap of integument known as mantle-skirt (figs. 2, 3, d, e). In the 
antero-dorsal region this flap is enlarged so as to be reflected a little 
over the coil of the shell which rests on it. In the postero-ventral 
region the flap is deepest, forming an extensive sub-pallial chamber, 
at the entrance of which e is placed in fig. 3. A view of the interior 



CEPHALOPODA 



687 



of the sub-pallial chamber, as seen when the mantle-skirt is retro- 
verted and the observer faces in the direction indicated by the 
reference line passing from e in fig. 3, is given in fig. 4. With this 
should be compared the similar view of the sub-pallial chamber of 
the Dibranchiate Sepia. It should be noted as a difference between 
Nautilus and the Dibranchiates that in the former the nidamental 
gland (in the female) lies on that surface of the pallial chamber 




Fig. 2. — Spirit specimen of female Pearly Nautilus, removed from 
its shell, and seen from the antero-dorsal aspect (drawn from nature 
by A. G. Bourne). 



m. 



The dorsal " hood " formed c, 
by the enlargement of the d, 
outer or annular lobe of the 
fore-foot, and corresponding 
to the sheaths of two tenta- 
cles (g, g in fig. 6). 

Tentacular sheaths of lateral 
portion of the annular lobe. 

The left eye. 

The nuchal plate, continuous 
at its right and left posterior 
angles with the root of the g.a. 
mid-foot, and corresponding 
to the nuchal cartilage of 
Sepia. 



Visceral hump. 

The free margin of the mantle- 
skirt, the middle letter d 
points to that portion of the 
mantle-skirt which is re- 
flected over a part of the 
shell as seen in fig. 1,6; the 
cup-like fossa to which b and 
d point in the present figure 
is occupied by the coil of the 
shell. 

points to the lateral con- 
tinuation of the nuchal plate 
b to join the root of the mid- 
foot or siphon. 



formed by the dependent mantle-flap (fig. 4, g.ra. ; fig. I, V), whilst 
in the latter it lies on the surface formed by the body-wall ; in fact 
in the former the base of the fold forming the mantle-skirt comprises 
in its area a part of what is unreflected visceral hump in the latter. 

The apertures of the two pairs of renal sacs, of the viscero-peri- 
cardial sac, of the genital ducts, and of the anus, are shown in 
position on the body-wall of the pallial chamber of Nautilus in 
figs. 4, 5- There are nine apertures in all, one median (the anus) 




Fig. 3. — Lateral view of the same specimen as that drawn in fig. 2. 
Letters as in that figure with the following additions — 



*, 



points to the concave margin 
of the mantle-skirt leading 
into the sub-pallial chamber. 

The mid-foot or siphon. 

The superficial origin of its 
retractor muscles closely 
applied to the shell and 



serving to hold the animal 

in its place. 
/, The siphuncular pedicle of 

the visceral hump broken 

off short. 
v,v, The superior and inferior 

ophthalmic tentacles. 



and four paired. Besides these apertures we notice two pairs of 
gill-plumes which are undoubtedly typical ctenidia, and a short 
papilla (the osphradium) between each anterior and posterior gill- 
plume (see figs. 4, 5, and explanation). As compared with this in a 
Dibranchiate, we find (fig. 25) only four apertures, viz. the median 
anus with adjacent orifice of the ink-sac, the single pair of renal 
apertures, and one asymmetrical genital aperture (on the left side) 
except in female Octopoda and a few others, where the genital ducts 
and their apertures are paired. No viscero-pericardial pores are 
present on th<* surface of the pallial chamber, since in the Dibranchiata 



the viscero-pericardial sac opens by a pore into each nephridium 
instead of directly to the surface. A single pair of ctenidia (gill- 
plumes) is present instead of the two pairsin Nautilus. The existence 
of two pairs of ctenidia and of two pairs of renal sacs in Nautilus, 
placed one behind the other, is highly remarkable. The interest 
of this arrangement is in relation to the general morphology of the 
Mollusca, for it is impossible to view this repetition of organs in a 
linear series as anything else than an instance of metameric seg- 
mentation, comparable to the segmentation of the ringed worms and 
Arthropods. The only other example which we have of this meta- 
merism in the Mollusca is presented by the Chitons. There we find 
not two pairs of ctenidia merely, but sixteen pairs (in some species 
more) accompanied by a similar metamerism of the dorsal integu- 
ment, which carries eight shells. In Chiton the renal organs are 
not affected by the metamerism as they are in Nautilus. It is im- 
possible on the present occasion to discuss in the way which their 
importance demands the significance of these two instances among 
Mollusca of incomplete or partial metamerism; but it would be 




Fig. 4. — View of the postero-ventral surface of a female Pearly 
Nautilus, the mantle-skirt (c) being completely reflected so as to 
show the inner wall of the sub-pallial chamber (drawn from nature 
by A. G. Bourne). 



Muscular band passing from 
the mid-foot to the integu- 
ment. 

The valve on the surface of 
the funnel, partially con- 
cealed by the inrolled lat- 
eral margin of the latter. 

The mantle-skirt retroverted. 

The median anus. 

Post-anal papilla of unknown 
significance. 
g.n., Nidamental gland. 

Aperture of the right oviduct. 



b, 



an, 



l.ov, Aperture of the rudimen- 
tary left oviduct (pyriform sac 
of Owen). 

neph.a, Aperture of the left an- 
terior renal sac. 

neph.p, Aperture of the left pos- 
terior renal sac. 

viscper. Left aperture of the 
viscero-pericardial sac. 

olf, The left osphradium placed 
near the base of the anterior 
gill-plume. 



r.ov, 

The four gill-plumes (ctenidia) are not lettered. 

wrong to pass them by without insisting upon the great importance 
which the occurrence of these isolated instances of metameric seg- 
mentation in a group of otherwise unsegmented organisms possesses, 
and the light which they may be made to throw upon the nature of 
metameric segmentation in general. 

The foot and head of Nautilus are in the adult inextricably grown 
together, the eye being the only part belonging primarily to the 
head which projects from the all-embracing foot. The fore-foot 
or front portion of the foot has the form of a number of lobes carrying 
tentacles and completely surrounding the mouth (figs. 2, 3). The 
epipodia incline towards each other posteriorly so as to form an 
incomplete siphon (fig. 4), a condition which is completed and 
rendered permanent in the tubular funnel of Dibranchiata. The 
epipodial nature of the funnel is well seen in young embryos, in 
which this organ is situated laterally and posteriorly between the 
mantle and the foot. 

The lobes of the fore-foot of Nautilus and of the other Cephalopoda 
require further description. It has been doubted whether these 
lobes were rightly referred (by T. H. Huxley) to the fore-foot, and 
it has been maintained by some zoologists (H. Grenacher, H. von 



688 



CEPHALOPODA 



•5P 



Jhering) that they are truly processes of the head. It appears to 
be impossible to doubt that the lobes in question are the fore-portion 
of the foot, when their development is examined (see fig. 35), further, 
when the fact is considered that they are innervated by the pedal 
ganglion. The fore-foot of Nautilus completely surrounds the buccal 
cone (fig. 6, e), so as to present an appearance with its expanded 
tentacles similar to that of the disk of a sea-anemone (Actinia). 
A. G. Bourne, of University College, prepared from actual specimens 

the drawings of 
this part in the 
male and female 
Nautilus repro- 
duced in fig. 6, 
and restored the 
parts to their 
natural form when 
expanded. The 
drawings show 
ana verv strikingly the 
difference between 
male and female. 
In the females 
ilf. (lower figure), we 
observe in the 
centre of the disk 
the buccal cone e 
carrying the beak- 
like pair of jaws 
which project 
from the finely 
papillate buccal 
membrane. Three 
tentaculiferous 
lobes of the fore- 
foot are in im- 
mediate contact 
with this buccal 
cone ; they are the 
right and left (c, c) 
inner lobes, and 
the inferior inner 




iriscjx 



Fig. 5. — View of the postero-ventral surface 
of a male Pearly Nautilus, the mantle-skirt (c) 
being completely reflected so as to show the 
inner wall of the sub-pallial chamber, and the 
four ctenidia and the foot cut short (drawn from 
nature by A. G. Bourne), pe, Penis, being the 
enlarged termination of the right spermatic 
duct; l.sp, aperture of the rudimentary left 
spermatic duct (pyriform sac of Owen). Other 
letters as in fig. 4. 

lobe (d) — called 
inferior because it really lies ventral wards of the mouth. This 
inner inferior lobe is clearly a double one, representing a right 
and left inner inferior lobe fused into one. A lamellated organ 
on its surface, known as Owen's organ, probably olfactory in 
function (n), marks the separation of the constituent halves 
of this double lobe. Each half carries a group of fourteen 
tentacles. The right and the left inner lobes (c, c) each carry twelve 
tentacles. External to these three lobes the muscular substance of 
the mouth-embracing foot is raised into a wide ring, which becomes 
especially thick and large in the dorsal region where it is notably 
modified in form, offering a concavity into which the coil of the shell 
is received, and furnishing a protective roof to the retracted mass 
of tentacles. This part of the external annular lobe of the fore-foot 
is called the " hood " (figs. 2, 3, m). The median antero-posterior 
line traversing this hood exactly corresponds to the line of concrescence 
of the two halves of the fore-foot, which primitively grew forward 
one on each side of the head, and finally fused together along this 
line in front of the mouth. The tentacles carried by the great an- 
nular lobe are nineteen on each side, thirty-eight in all. They are 
called " digital," and are somewhat larger than the " labial " 
tentacles carried on the three inner lobes. The dorsalmost pair of 
tentacles (marked g in fig. 6) are the only ones which actually belong 
to that part of the disk which forms the great dorsal hood m. The 
hood is, in fact, to a large extent formed by the enlarged sheaths of 
these two tentacles. All the tentacles of the circumoral disk are set 
in remarkable tubular sheaths, into which they can be drawn. The 
sheaths of some of those belonging to the external or annular lobe 
are seen in fig. 3, marked n. The sheaths are muscular as well as the 
tentacles, and are simply tubes from the base of which the solid 
tentacle grows. The functional significance of this sheathing arrange- 
ment is as obscure as its morphological origin. With reference to the 
latter, it appears highly probable that the tubular sheath represents 
the cup of a sucker such as is found on the fore-foot of the Di- 
branchiata. In any case, it seems to the writer impossible to doubt 
that each tentacle, and its sheath on a lobe of the circumoral disk of 
Nautilus, corresponds to a sucker on such a lobe of a Dibranchiate. 
W. Keferstein follows Sir R. Owen in strongly opposing this identi- 
fication, and in regarding such tentacle as the equivalent of a whole 
lobe or arm of a Decapod or Octopod Dibranch. The details of these 
structures, especially in the facts concerning the hectocotylus and 
spadix, afford the most conclusive reasons for dissenting from 
Owen's view. On the ventral side an extensive part of the internal 
surface of the muscular ring is laminated, forming the so-called 
" organ of Valenciennes," peculiar to the female and serving for the 
attachment of the spermatophores. We have so far enumerated 
in the female nautilus ninety tentacles. Four more remain which 
have a very peculiar position, and almost lead to the suggestion 
that the eye itself is a modified tentacle. These remaining tentacles 




FlG. 6. — Male (upper) and female (lower) specimens of Nautilus 
pompilius as seen in the expanded condition, the observer looking 
down on to the buccal cone e \ one-third the natural size linear. The 
drawings have been made from actual specimens by A. G. Bourne, 
B.Sc, University College, London. 

The shell. 



The outer ring-like expansion 
(annular lobe) of the circum- 
oral muscular mass of the 
fore-foot, carrying nineteen 
tentacles on each side — pos- 
teriorly this is enlarged to 
form the " hood " (marked 
v in fig. 1 and m in figs. 2 
and 3), giving off the pair 
of tentacles marked g in the 
present figure. 

The right and left inner lobes 
of the fore-foot, each carry- 
ing twelve tentacles in the 
female, in the male sub- 
divided into p, the "spadix" 
or hectocotylus on the left 
side, and a, the " anti- 
spadix," a group of four 
tentacles on the right side — 
it is thus seen that the sub- 
divided right and left inner 
lobes of the male correspond 
to the undivided right and 
left inner lobes of the female. 

The inner inferior lobe of the 
fore-foot, a bilateral structure 
in the female carrying two 
groups, each of fourteen ten- 
tacles, separated from one an- 
other by a lamellated organ 
n, supposed to be olfactory in 
function — in the male the 
inner inferior lobe of the 
fore-foot is very much re- 
duced, and has the form of 
a paired group of lamellae 
(d in the upper figure). 

The buccal cone, rising from 
the centre of the three inner 



/. 



k, 



n, 



lobes, and fringing the pro- 
truded calcareous beaks or 
jaws with a series of minute 
papillae. 

The tentacles of the outer 
circumoral lobe or annular 
lobe of the fore-foot pro- 
jecting from their sheaths. 

The two most posterior ten- 
tacles of this series belonging 
to that part of the annular 
lobe which forms the hood 
(m in figs. 2 and 3). 

Superior ophthalmic tentacle. 

Inferior ophthalmic tentacle. 

Eye. 

Paired laminated organ on 
each side of the base of the 
inner inferior lobe (d) of the 
female. 

Olfactory lamellae upon the 
inner inferior lobe (in the 
female). 

The siphon (mid-foot). 

The spadix (in the male), the 
hectocotylized portion of the 
left inner- lobe of the fore-foot 
representing four modified 
tentacles, eight being left 
unmodified. 

The anti-spadix (in the male), 
being four of the twelve 
tentacles of the right inner 
lobe of the fore-foot isolated 
from the remaining eight, 
and representing on the right 
side the differentiated spadix 
of the left side. The four 
tentacles of the anti-spadix 
are set, three on one base 
and one on a separate base. 



CEPHALOPODA 



689 



are placed one above (before) and one below (behind) each eye, and 
bring up the total to ninety-four (fig. 3 s, 1). 

In the adult male nautilus we find the following important differ- 
ences in the tentaculiferous disk as compared with the female (see 
upper drawing in fig. 6). The inner inferior lobe is rudimentary, 
and carries no tentacles. It is represented by three groups of lamellae 
(d), which are not fully exposed in the drawing. The right and left 
inner lobes are subdivided each into two portions. The right shows 
a larger portion carrying eight tentacles, and smaller detached 
groups (g) of four tentacles, of which three have their sheaths united 
whilst one stands alone. These four tentacles may be called the 
" anti-spadix." The left inner lobe shows a similar larger portion 
carrying eight tentacles, and a curious conical body behind it corre- 
sponding to the anti-spadix. This is the " spadix." It carries no 
tentacles, but is terminated by imbricated lamellae. These lamellae 
appear to represent the four tentacles of the anti-spadix of the right 
internal lobe, and are generally regarded as corresponding to that 
modification of the sucker-bearing arms of male Dibranchiate 
Siphonopods to which the name " hectocotylus " is applied. The 
spadix is in fact the hectocotylized portion of the fore-foot of the 
male nautilus. The hectocotylized a»-m or lobe of male Dibranchiata 
is connected with the process of copulation, and in the male nautilus 
the spadix has probably a similar significance, though it is not possible 
to suggest how it acts in this relation. It is important to observe that 
the modification of the fore-foot in the male as compared with the 
female nautilus is not confined to the existence of the spadix. The 
anti-spadix and the reduction of the inner inferior lobe are also male 
peculiarities. The external annular lobe in the male does not differ 
from that of the female ; it carries nineteen tentacles on each side. 
The four ophthalmic tentacles are also present. Thus in the male 
nautilus we find altogether sixty-two tentacles, the thirty-two 
additional tentacles of the female being represented by lamelliform 
structures. 

Musculature, Fins and Cartilaginous Skeleton. — Without entering 
into a detailed account of the musculature of Nautilus, we may point 
out that the great muscular masses of the fore-foot and of the mid- 
foot (siphon) are ultimately traceable to a large transverse mass of 
muscular tissue, the ends of which are visible through the integument 
on the right and left surfaces of the body dorsal of the free flap of the 
mantle-skirt (fig. 1, /, /, and fig. 3. *)• These muscular areae have a 
certain adhesion to the shell, and serve both to hold the animal in 
its shell and as the fixed supports for the various movements of the 
tentaculiferous lobes and the siphon. They are to be identified with 
the ring-like area of adhesion by which the foot-muscle of the limpet 
is attached to the shell of that animal. In the Dibranchs a similar 
origin of the muscular masses of the fore-foot and mid-foot from the 
sides of the shell— modified, as this is, in position and relations— can 

In Nautilus there are no fin-like expansions of the integument, 

whereas such occur in the 
^,lvv\ v * i — e Decapod Dibranchs along 

the sides of the visceral 
hump (figs. 15, 16). As an 
exception among Octopoda 
lateral fins occur in Pin- 
noctopus (fig. 38, A), and 
in Cirrhoteuthis (fig. 38, D). 
In Nautilus there is a 
curious plate-like expansion 
of integument in the mid- 
dorsal region just behind 
the hood, lying between 
that structure and the por- 
tion of mantle-skirt which 
is reflected over the shell. 
This is shown in fig. 2, b. 
If we trace out the margin 
of this plate we find that 
it becomes continuous on 
each side with the sides of 
the funnel. In Sepia and 
other Decapods (not in 
Octopods) a closely similar 
plate exists in an exactly 
corresponding position (see 
b in figs. 10, 26). In Sepia a 
cartilaginous development 
occurs here immediately be- 
low the integument forming 
the so-called " nuchal plate," drawn in fig. 8 > D. The morpho- 
logical significance of this nuchal lamella, as seen both in Nautilus 
and in Sepia, is not obvious. Cartilage having the structure shown 
in fig. 7 occurs in various regions of the body of Cephalopoda. In 
all Glossophorous Mollusca the lingual apparatus is supported by 
internal skeletal pieces, having the character of cartilage; but in 
the Cephalopoda such cartilage has a wider range. 

In Nautilus a large H-shaped piece of cartilage is found, forming 
the axis of the funnel (fig. 8, A, B). Its hinder part extends up into 
the head and supports the peri-oesophageal nerve-mass (a), whilst 




Fig. 7. — Minute structure of the 
cartilage of Loligo (from Gegenbaur, 
after Furbringer). 

o, Simple cells. 

b, Dividing cells. 

c, Canaliculi. 

d, An empty cartilage capsule with its 
pores. 

Canaliculi in section. 



e, 



its two anterior rami extend into the tongue-like siphon. In Sepia, 
and Dibranchs generally, the cartilage takes a different form, as 
shown in fig. 8, C. The processes of this cartilage cannot be identi- 
fied in any way with those of the capito-pedal cartilage of Nautilus. 
The lower larger portion of this cartilage in Sepia is called the cephalic 
cartilage, and forms a complete ring round the oesophagus ; it com- 
pletely invests also the ganglionic nerve-collar, so that all the nerves 
from the latter have to pass through foramina in the cartilage. The 
outer angles of this cartilage spread out on each side so as to form 
a cup-like receptacle for the eyes. The two processes springing right 
and left from this large cartilage in the median line (fig. 8, C) are the 
" pre-orbital cartilages "; in front of these, again, there is seen a 
piece like an inverted T, which forms a support to the base of the 
" arms " of the fore-foot, and is the " basi-brachial " cartilage. 
The Decapod Dibranchs have, further, the " nuchal cartilage " 
already mentioned, and in Sepia, a thin plate-like " sub-ostracal " 
or (so-called) dorsal cartilage, the anterior end of which rests on and 
fits into the concave nuchal cartilage. In Octopoda there is no 
nuchal cartilage, but two band-like " dorsal cartilages." In Deca 
pods there are also two cartilaginous sockets on the sides of the funnel 
— " siphon-hinge cartilages " — into which fleshy knobs of the mantle- 




Fig. 8. — Cartilaginous skeleton of Cephalopoda (after Keferstein.) 



A, Capito-pedal cartilage of 

Nautilus pompilius. 
a points to the ridge which 
supports the pedal portion 
of the nerve-centre. 

B, Lateral view of the same — 

the large anterior processes 



are sunk in the muscular 
substance of the siphon. 

C, Cephalic cartilages of Sepia 

officinalis. 

D, Nuchal cartilage of Sepia 

officinalis. 



skirt are loosely fitted. In Sepia, along the whole base-line of each 
lateral fin of the mantle (fig. 15), is a " basi-pterygial cartilage." 
It is worthy of remark that we have, thus developed, in Dibranch 
Cephalopods a more complete internal cartilaginous skeleton than 
is to be found in some of the lower vertebrates. There are other 
instances of cartilaginous endo-skeleton in groups other than the 
Vertebrata. Thus in some capito-branchiate Chaetopods cartilage 
forms a skeletal support for the gill-plumes, whilst in the Arachnids 
(Mygale, Scorpio) and in Limulus a large internal cartilaginous plate 
— the ento-sternite — is developed as a support for a large series of 
muscles. 

Alimentary Tract. — The buccal cone of Nautilus is terminated by 
a villous margin (buccal membrane), surrounding the pair of beak- 
like jaws, of which the ventral projects over the dorsal. These are 
very strong and dense in Nautilus, being calcified. Fossilized beaks 
of Tetrabranchiata are known under the name of rhyncholites. In 
Dibranchs the beaks are horny, but similar in shape to those of 
Nautilus. They resemble in general those of a parrot, the lower 
beak being the larger and overlapping the upper or dorsal beak. 
The lingual ribbon and odontophoral apparatus have the structure 
which is typical for Glossophorous Mollusca. In fig. 9, A is repre- 
sented a single row of teeth from the lingual ribbon of Nautilus, 
and in fig. 9, B, C, of other Cephalopoda. 

In Nautilus a long and wide crop or dilated oesophagus (fig. 10, cr) 
passes from the muscular buccal mass, and at the apex of the visceral 
hump passes into a highly muscular stomach, resembling the gizzard 
of a bird (fig 10, gizz). A nearly straight intestine passes from the 
muscular stomach to the anus, near which it develops a small 
caecum. In other Cephalopods the oesophagus is usually narrower 
and the muscular stomach more capacious, whilst a very important 
feature in the alimentary tract is formed by the caecum. In all 
but Nautilus the caecum lies near the stomach, and may be very 
capacious — much larger than the stomach in Loligo vulgaris — or 
elongated into a spiral coil. The simple U-shaped flexure of the 
alimentary tract, as seen in fig. 10, is the only important one which 
it exhibits in the Cephalopoda. The acini of the large liver of 
Nautilus are compacted into a solid reddish-brown mass by a firm 



690 



CEPHALOPODA 



membrane, as also is the case in the Dibranchiata. The liver has 
four paired lobes in Nautilus, which open by two bile-ducts into the 




Fig. 9. — Lingual dentition of Cephalopoda. A, A single row of 
lingual teeth of Nautilus pompilius (after Keferstein). B, Two 
rows of lingual teeth of Sepia officinalis (after Troschel). C, Lingual 
teeth of Eledone cirrhosa (after Loven). 

alimentary canal at the commencement of the intestine. The bile- 
ducts unite before entering the intestine. In Dibranchiata the two 
large lobes of the liver are placed antero-dorsally (beneath the shell 




Fig. 10. — Diagram representing a vertical approximately median 
antero-posterior section of Nautilus pompilius (from a drawing by 
A. G. Bourne). The parts which are quite black are the cut muscular 
surfaces of the foot and buccal mass. 
a, The shell. 



e. 

r, 
s, 

t, 

X, 



Tentacles of the annular 

lobe. 
Tentacles of the inner in- 
ferior lobe. 
Buccal membrane. 
Upper jaw or beak. 
Lower jaw or beak. 
Lingual ribbon. 
The viscero- pericardial 
sac. 
n.c, Nerve-collar. 
oe, Oesophagus. 
cr, Crop. 
gizz, Gizzard. 
int, Intestine. 
an, Anus. 
nept, Aperture of a nephridial 

sac. 
r.e, Renal glandular masses on 
the walls of the afferent 
branchial veins (see fig. 
II). ■ 
a.b.v, Afferent branchial vessel. 
e.b.v, Efferent branchial vessel. 
vt, Ventricle of the heart. 

in Decapoda), and the bile-ducts open into the caecum. Upon the 
bile-ducts in Dibranchiata are developed yellowish glandular diver- 
ticula, which are known as " pancreas," though neither physio- 
logically nor morphologically is there any ground for considering 
either the so-called liver or the so-called pancreas as strictly 
equivalent to the glands so denominated in the Vertebrata. In 



The nuchal plate, identical 
with the nuchal cartilage of 
Sepia (see fig. 2, b). 

The integument covering the 
visceral hump. 

The mantle flap or skirt in the 
dorsal region where it rests 
against the coil of the shell. 

The inferior margin of the 
mantle-skirt resting on the 
lip of the shell represented 
by the dotted line. 

The pallial chamber with two 
of the four gills. 

The vertically cut median por- 
tion of the mid-foot (siphon) . 

The capito-pedal cartilage (see 
fig. 8). 

The valve of the siphon. 

The siphuncular pedicle (cut 
short). 

m, The hood or dorsal enlarge- 
ment of the annular lobe of 
the fore-foot. 



«, 



Nautilus the equivalents of the pancreatic diverticula of the 
Dibranchs can be traced upon the relatively shorter bile-ducts. 

Posterior salivary glands are not developed in Nautilus, but on 
each side in the wall of the buccal mass is a gland corresponding 
to the anterior salivary gland of the Dibranchiata. No ink-sac is 
present in Nautilus. 

Coelom, Blood-vascular System and Excretory Organs. — Nautilus and 
the other Cephalopoda conform to the general Molluscan characters 
in regard to these organs. Whilst the general visceral cavity forms a 
lacunar blood-system or series of narrow spaces, connected with 
the trunks of a well-developed vascular system, that part of the 
original coelom surrounding the heart and known as the Molluscan 
pericardium is shut off from this general blood-lymph system, and 
communicates, directly in Nautilus, in the rest through the renal 
sacs, with the exterior. In the Cephalopoda this specialized peri- 
cardial cavity is particularly large, and has been recognized as 
distinct from the blood-carrying spaces, even by anatomists who 
have not considered the pericardial space of other Mollusca to be 
thus isolated. The enlarged pericardium, which may even take the 
form of a pair of sacs, has been variously named, but is best known 
as the viscero-pericardial sac or chamber. In Nautilus this sac 




vent 



Fig. 11. — Diagram to show the relations of the four nephridial 
sacs, the viscero-pericardial sac, and the heart and large vessels in 
Nautilus (drawn by A. G. Bourne). 
neph, neph, on the right side 



point to the two nephridia 
of that side (the two of 
the opposite side are not 
lettered)— each is seen to 
have an independent 
aperture. 
x is the viscero-pericardial sac, 
the dotted line indicating 
its backward extension. 

vise. per. apert, marks an arrow 
introduced into the right 
aperture of the viscero- 
pericardial sac. 

r.e, r.e. point to the glandular en- 
larged walls of the afferent 



v.c, 

vent, 

ao, 



a.b.v, 
e.v.b. 



branchial vessels — two 
small glandular bodies of 
the kind are seen to pro- 
ject into each nephridial 
sac, whilst a larger body of 
the same kind depends from 
each of the four branchial 
afferent vessels into the 
viscero-pericardial sac. 

Vena-cava. 

Ventricle of the heart. 

Cephalic aorta (the small 
abdominal aorta not 
drawn). 

Branchial vessel. 

Efferent branchial vessel. 



occupies the whole of the postero-dorsal surface and a part of the 
antero-dorsal (see fig. 10, x), investing the genital and other viscera' 
which lie below it, and having the ventricle of the heart suspended 
in it. Certain membranes forming incomplete septa, and a curious 
muscular band — the pallio-cardiac band — traverse the sac. The 
four branchial afferent veins, which in traversing the walls of the four 
renal sacs give off, as it were, glandular diverticula into those sacs, 
also give off at the same points four much larger glandular masses, 
which hang freely into the viscero-pericardial chamber (fig. 11, r.e). 
In Nautilus the viscero-pericardial sac opens to the exterior 
directly by a pair of apertures, one placed close to the right and one 
close to the left posterior renal aperture (fig. 5, vise. per). This direct 
opening of the pericardial sac to the exterior is an exception to what 
occurs in all other Mollusca. In all other Molluscs the pericardial 
sac opens into the renal organs, and through them or the one renal 
organ to the exterior. In Nautilus there is no opening from the 
viscero-pericardial sac into the renal sacs. Therefore the external 
pore of the viscero-pericardial sac may possibly be regarded as a shift- 
ing of the reno-pericardial orifice from the actual wall of the renal 
sac to a position alongside of its orifice. Parallel cases of such shifting 
are seen in the varying position of the orifice of the ink-bag in 
Dibranchiata, and in the orifice of the genital ducts of Mollusca, which 
in some few cases (e.g. Spondylus) open into the renal organs, whilst 
in other cases they open close by the side of the renal organs on the 
surface of the body. The viscero-pericardial sac of the Dibranchs 
is very large also, and extends into the dorsal region. It varies in 



CEPHALOPODA 



691 



shape — that is to say, in the extensions of it,s area right and left 
between the various viscera — in different genera, but in the Deca- 
pods is largest. In an extension of this chamber is placed the ovary 
of Sepia, whilst the ventricle of the heart and the branchial hearts 
and their appendages also lie in it. It is probable that water is 
drawn into this chamber through the renal sacs, since sand and other 
foreign matters are found in it. In all it opens into the pair of renal 
sacs by an orifice on the wall of each, not far from the external 
orifice (fig. 29, y, y'). There does not seem any room for doubting that 
each orifice corresponds to the reno-pericardial orifice which we have 
seen in the Gastropoda, and shall find again in the Lamellibranchia. 
The circulatory organs, blood-vessels and blood of Nautilus do 
not differ greatly from those of Gastropoda. The ventricle of the 
heart is a four-cornered body, receiving a dilated branchial efferent 
vessel (auricle) at each corner (fig. 11). It gives off a cephalic aorta 
anteriorly, and a smaller abdominal aorta posteriorly. The diagram, 
fig. 12, serves to show how this simple form of heart is related to the 
dorsal vessel of a worm or of an Arthropod, and how by a simple 
flexure of the ventricle (D) and a subsequent suppression of one 
auricle, following on the suppression of one branchia, one may obtain 
the form of heart characteristic of the anisopleurous Gastropoda 
(excepting the Aspidobranchia). The flexed condition of the heart 
is seen in Octopus, and is to some extent approached by Nautilus, 
the median vessels not presenting that perfect parallelism which is 
shown in the figure (B). The most remarkable feature presented 
by the heart of Nautilus is the possession of four instead of two 
auricles, a feature which is simply related to the metamerism of 
the branchiae. By the left side of the heart of Nautilus, attached 




Fig. 12. — Diagram to show the relations of the heart in the 
Mollusca. (From Gegenbaur.) 

A, Part of the dorsal vascular E, Of a Gastropod. 

trunk and transverse trunks a, Auricle, 
of a worm. [Nautilus, v, Ventricle. 

B, Ventricle and auricles of ac, Arteria = cephalica = (aorta). 

C, Of a Lamellibranch, of Chiton, ai, Arteria abdominalis. The 

or of Loligo, arrows show the direction 

D, Of Octopus. of the blood-current. 

to it by a membrane, and hanging loosely in the viscero-pericardial 
chamber, is the pyriform sac of Owen. This has been shown to be 
the rudimentary left oviduct or sperm-duct, as the case may be 
(E. R. Lankester and A. G. Bourne), the functional right ovi-sac and 
its duct being attached by a membrane to the opposite side of the 
heart. 

The cephalic and abdominal aortae of Nautilus appear, after 
running to the anterior and posterior extremes of the animal re- 
spectively, to open into sinus-like spaces surrounding the viscera, 
muscular masses, &c. These spaces are not large, but confined and 
shallow. Capillaries are stated to occur in the integument. In the 
Dibranchs the arterial system is very much more complete; it 
appears in some cases to end in irregular lacunae or sinuses, in other 
cases in true capillaries which lead on into veins. An investigation 
of these capillaries in the light of modern histological knowledge is 
much needed. From the sinuses and capillaries the veins take origin, 
collecting into a large median trunk (the vena cava), which in the 
Dibranchs as well as in Nautilus has a ventral (postero-ventral) 
position, and runs parallel to the long axis of the animal. In Nautilus 
this vena cava gives off at the level of the gills four branchial afferent 
veins (fig. 11, v.c), which pass into the four gills without dilating. 
In the Dibranchs at a similar position the vena cava gives off a right 
and a left branchial afferent vein, each of which, traversing the wall 
of the corresponding renal sac and receiving additional factors, 
dilates at the base of the corresponding branchial plume, forming 
there a pulsating sac — the branchial heart. Attached to each 
branchial heart is a curious glandular body, which may possibly be 
related to the larger masses (fig. II, r.e) which depend into the 
viscero-pericardial cavity from the branchial afferent veins of 
Nautilus. From the dilated branchial heart the branchial afferent 
vessel proceeds, running up the adpallial face of the gill-plume. 
From each gill-plume the blood passes by the branchial efferent 
vessels to the heart, the two auricles being formed by the dilatation 
of these vessels. 

The blood contains the usual amoeboid corpuscles, and a diffused 
colouring matter — the haemocyanin of Fredericque — which has 
been found also in the blood of Helix, and in that of the Arthropods 
Homarus and Limulus. It is colourless in the oxidized, blue in the 
deoxidized state, and contains copper as a chemical constituent. 



The renal sacs and renal glandular tissue are closely connected 
with the branchial advehent vessels in Nautilus and in the other 
Cephalopoda. The arrangement is such as to render the typical 
relations and form of a renal tube difficult to trace. In accordance 
with the metamerism of Nautilus already noticed, there are two 
pairs of renal organs. Each assumes the form of a sac opening by a 
pore to the exterior. As is usual in renal tubes a glandular and a 
non-glandular portion are distinguished in each sac ; these portions, 
however, are not successive parts of a tube, as happens in other cases, 
but they are localized areae of the wall of the sac. The glandular 
renal tissue is, in fact, confined to a tract extending along that part 
of the sac's wall which immediately invests the great branchial 
afferent vein. The vein in this region gives off directly from its wall 
a complete herbage of little venules, which branch and anastomose 
with one another, and are clothed by the glandular epithelium of the 
renal sac. The secretion is accumulated in the sac and passed by its 
aperture to the exterior. Probably the nitrogenous excretory pro- 
duct is very rapidly discharged ; in Nautilus a pink-coloured powder 
is found accumulated in the renal sacs, consisting of calcium phos- 
phate. The presence of this phosphatic calculus by no means proves 
that such was the sole excretion of the renal glandular tissue. In 
Nautilus a glandular growth like that rising from the wall of the 
branchial vessel into its corresponding renal sac, but larger in size, 
depends from each branchial afferent vessel into the viscero-peri- 
cardial sac and forms the pericardial gland — probably identical with 
the " appendage " of the branchial hearts of Dibranchs. 

The chief difference, other than that of number, between the renal 
organs of the Dibranchs and those of Nautilus, is the absence of the 
accessory growths depending into the viscero-pericardial space just 
mentioned, and, of more importance, the presence in the former of 
a pore leading from the renal sac into the viscero-pericardial sac 
(y, y' in fig. 29). The external orifices of the renal organs are also 
more prominent in Dibranchs than in Nautilus, being raised on 
papillae (np in fig. 29; r in fig. 25). In Sepia the two renal sacs give 
off each a diverticulum dorsalwards, which unites with its fellow and 
forms a great median renal chamber, lying between the ventral 
portions of the renal organs and the viscero-pericardial chamber. 
In Loligo the fusion of the two renal organs to form one sac is still 
more obvious, since the ventral portions are united. In Octopus the 
renal sacs are quite separate. 

Gonads and Genital Ducts.^-\n Nautilus it has been shown by 
E. Ray Lankester and A. G. Bourne that the genital ducts of both 
sexes are paired right and left, the left duct being rudimentary and 
forming the " pyriform appendage," described by Sir R. Owen as 
adhering by membranous attachment to the ventricle of the heart, 
and shown by W. Keferstein to communicate by a pore with the 
exterior. The ovary (female gonad) or the testis (male gonad) lies 
in Nautilus, as in the Dibranchs, in a distinct cavity walled off from 
the other viscera, near the centro-dorsal region. This chamber is 
formed by the coelomic or peritoneal wall; the space enclosed is 
originally part of the coelom, and in Sepia and Loligo is, in the adult, 
part of the viscero-pericardial chamber. In Octopus it is this genital 
chamber which communicates by a right and a left canal with the 
renal sac, and is the only representative of pericardium. The ovary 
or testis is itself a growth from the inner wall of this chamber, which 
it only partly fills. In Nautilus the right genital duct, which is 
functional, is a simple continuation to the pore on the postero-dorsal 
surface of the membranous walls of the capsule in which lies the ovary 
or the testis, as the- case may be. The gonad itself appears to repre- 
sent a single median or bilateral organ. 

The ovary forms a large projection into the genital coelom, and 
the coelomic epithelium is deeply invaginated into the mass of the 
gonad, so as to constitute an ovarian cavity communicating with the 
coelom by a narrow aperture. The ova originate in the epithelium, 
migrate below it and then, as they enlarge, project into the ovarian 
cavity, pushing the epithelium before them. Each ovum is sur- 
rounded by a follicular epithelium which is nourished by numerous 
blood-vessels, and which penetrates into the surface of the ovum 
in numerous folds. When mature, the ovum is contained in a mem- 
brane or chorion with a micropyle, and escapes by dehiscence of the 
follicle into the genital coelom and duct. In its passage to the ex- 
terior the ovum passes a glandular structure on the wall of the 
genital capsule, which probably secretes the gelatinous substance 
enclosing the eggs. In addition to this internal gland there are 
other accessory glands, which are not related to the genital duct 
or sac but are differentiations of the wall of the pallial cavity, and 
occur on the inner wall of the pallium in Nautilus, on the somatic 
wall in Dibranchiata. In Nautilus they form a continuous mass. 
These produce the external envelopes of the eggs. 

In the male the testis is a specialized portion of the wall of the 
genital coelom, and has a structure comparable to that of the ovary. 
The spermatozoa pass through an orifice from the cavity of the testis 
to the genital capsule, and thence to the spermiduct. The spermi- 
duct is provided with a glandular pouch, and opens into a terminal 
reservoir known as Needham's sac or the spermatophore sac. The 
function of this pouch is to form the spermatophore, which is an 
elastic tube formed of structureless secretion and invaginated into 
itself. The deeper part contains the spermatozoa, the external part 
is called the connective, and is usually much contracted and spirally 



692 



CEPHALOPODA 



*C'M'J 




coiled. When the spermatophore is expelled into the water the 
connective is extended and evaginated, and the sac containing the 
sperms bursts. In Nautilus the spermatophore when uncoiled is a 
little over 30 mm. in length. These spermatophores are somewhat 
similar to those formed in certain pulmonate Gastropods. 

The eggs are laid shortly after copulation. In Nautilus they are 
laid separately, each being about 4 cm. long and contained in two 
thick shells, the outer of which is partly open. 

Nervous System. — Nautilus, like the other Cephalopoda, exhibits 
a great concentration of the typical Molluscan ganglia, as shown 
in fig. 13. The ganglia take on a band-like form, and are but little 
differentiated from their commissures and 
connectives — an archaic condition remind- 
ing us of Chiton. The special optic out- 
growth of the cerebral ganglion, the optical 
ganglion (fig. 13, 0), is characteristic. The 
cerebral ganglion-pair (a) lying above the 
oesophagus is connected with two sub- 
oesophageal ganglion-pairs, of band-like 
form. The anterior of these is the pedal 
b, b, and supplies the circumoral lobes and 
tentacles, and the funnel, a fact which 
proves the pedal origin of these organs. 
The hinder band is the visceral and 
pleural pair fused; from its pleural por- 
tion nerves pass to the mantle, from its 
visceral portion nerves to the branchiae 
and genital ganglion (fig. 13, d), and in 
immediate connexion with the latter is a 
nerve to the osphradium or olfactory 
papilla. A labial commissure arises by a 
double root from the cerebral ganglia and 
gives off a stomatogastric commissure, 
which passes under the pharynx immedi- 
ately behind the radula and bears a buccal 
ganglion on either side. 

Special Sense-Organs. — Nautilus pos- 
sesses a pair of osphradial papillae (fig. 4, 
olf) corresponding in position and inner- 
vation to Spengel's organ placed at the 
base of the ctenidia (branchiae) in all 
classes of Mollusca. This organ has not 
been detected in other Cephalopoda. 
Nautilus possesses other olfactory organs 
largements on j n the region of the head. Just below the 
nerves passing from eve is a small triangular process (not seen 
the pedal ganglion j n our figures), having the structure of a 
to the inner series shortened and highly-modified tentacle 
of tentacles. and sheath. By A. Valenciennes, who is 

Nerves to the ten- followed by W. Keferstein, this is regarded 
tacles of the outer as an olfactory organ. The large nerve 
or annular lobe. _ which runs to this organ originates from 
Pedal ganglion-pair, the point of juncture of the pedal with 
Cerebral ganglion- the optic ganglion. The lamelliform organ 
pair. _ upon the inner inferior tentacular lobe 

Pleuro-visceralgang- f Nautilus is possibly also olfactory in 
lionic band (fused function. In Dibranchs behind the eye is 
pleural and visceral a pit or open canal supplied by a nerve 
ganglion-pairs). corresponding in origin to the olfactory 

Genital ganglion nerve of Nautilus above mentioned. Pos- 
placed on the course s ibly the sense of taste resides in certain 
of the large visceral processes within the mouth of Nautilus 
nerve, just before an d other Cephalopoda, 
it gives off its bran- The otocysts of Nautilus were discovered 
chialanditsosphra- by J. D. Macdonald. Each lies at the 
dial branches. side of the head, ventral to the eye, rest- 

m, Nerves from the jng on the capito-pedal cartilage, and 
pleural ganglion to supported by the large auditory nerve 
the mantle-skirt. which apparently arises from the pedal 
ganglion but originates in the cerebral. 
It has the form of a small sac, I to 2 mm. in diameter, and contains 
whetstone-shaped crystals, such as are known to form the otoliths 
of other Mollusca. 

The eye of Nautilus is among the most interesting structures of 
that remarkable animal. No other animal which has the same bulk 
and general elaboration of organization has so simple an eye as that 
of Nautilus. When looked at from the surface no metallic lustre, no 
transparent coverings, are presented by it. It is simply a slightly 
projecting hemispherical box like a kettle-drum, half an inch in 
diameter, its surface looking like that of the surrounding integument, 
whilst in the middle of the drum-membrane is a minute hole (fig. 3, u) . 
Sir R. Owen very naturally thought that some membrane had covered 
this hole in life, and had been ruptured in the specimen studied by 
him. It, however, appears from the researches of V. Hensen that 
the hole is a normal aperture leading into the globe of the eye, which 
is accordingly filled by sea- water during life. There is no dioptric 
apparatus in Nautilus, and in place of refracting lens and cornea we 
have actually here an arrangement for forming an image on the 
principle of " the pin-hole camera." There is no other eye known 
in the whole animal kingdom which is so constructed. The wall 



Fig. 13. — Nervous 
system of Nautilus pom- 
pilius (from Gegenbaur, 
after Owen) . 
/,/, Ganglion-like en- 



t', 



d, 



of the eye-globe is tough, and the cavity is lined solely by the naked 
retina, which is bathed by sea-water on one surface and receives 
the fibres of the optic nerve on the other (see fig. 14, A). As in other 
Cephalopods (e.g. fig. 33, Ri, Re, p), the retina consists of two layers 
of cells, separated by a layer of dark pigment. The most interesting 
consideration connected with this eye of Nautilus is found when the 
further facts are noted — (1) that the elaborate lens-bearing eyes of 
Dibranchiata pass through a stage of development in which they have 
the same structure as the eye of Nautilus — namely, are open sacs 
(fig. 34) ; and (2) that amongst other Mollusca examples of cephalic 
eyes can be found which in the adult condition are, like the eye of 
Nautilus and the developing eye of Dibranchs, simple pits of the in- 
tegument, the cells of which are surrounded by pigment and con- 
nected with the filaments of an optic nerve. Such is the structure 
of the eye of the limpet (Patella) , and in such a simple eye we obtain 
the clearest demonstration of the fact that the retina of the Molluscan 
cephalic eye, like that of the Arthropod cephalic eye and unlike that 
of the vertebrate myelohic eye, is essentially a modified area of the 
general epiderm, and that the sensitiveness of its cells to the action 
of light and their relation to nerve-filaments is only a specialization 
and intensifying of a property common to the whole epiderm of the 
surface of the body. What, however, strikes us as especially remark- 
able is that the simple form of a pit, which in Patella serves to 
accumulate a secretion which acts as a refractive body, should in 
Nautilus be glorified and raised to the dignity of an efficient optical 
apparatus. In all other Mollusca, starting as we may suppose from 
the follicular or pit-like condition, the eye has proceeded to acquire 
the form of a closed sac, the cavity of the closed vesicle being then 




■WIP G.op Nop 

Fig. 14. — Diagrams of Sections of the Eyes of Mollusca. 

A, Nautilus (and Patella). I 1 , Outer portion of the lens. 

B, Gastropod (Limax or Helix). Co.ep, Ciliary body. 

C, Dibranchiate Cephalopod R, Retina. 
(Oigopsid). N.op, Optic nerve. 

Pal, Eyelid (outermost fold). G.op, Optic ganglion. 

Co, Cornea (second fold). x, Inner layer of the retina. 

Ir, Iris (third fold). N.S., Nervous stratum of the 

Int 1 , 2 , 3 , 1 , Different parts of the retina. (From Balfour, after 

integument. Grenacher.) 
/, Deep portion of the lens. 

filled partially or completely by a refractive body (lens) secreted by 
its walls (fig. 14, B). This is the condition attained in most Gastro- 
poda. It presents a striking contrast to the simple Arthropod eye, 
where, in consequence of the existence of a dense exterior cuticle, the 
eye does not form a vesicle, and the lens is always part of that cuticle. 
The development of Nautilus is still entirely unknown. Dr Arthur 
Willey, during his sojourn in the East Indies, made special efforts 
to obtain fertilized eggs, both by offering rewards to the native 
fishermen and collectors and by keeping the living adults in cap- 
tivity, but without success. 

Phytogeny and Classification. — As Nautilus is the only living genus 
of the Tetrabranchiata, our knowledge of all the rest is based upon 
the study of their fossil shells. A vast number of species of shell 
similar in structure to that of Nautilus are known, chiefly from 
Primary and Secondary formations. These are divided into two 
sub-orders by differences in the form and structure of' the initial 
chamber. In the Nautiloidea this chamber has the form of an obtuse 
cone, on the apex of which is a slit-like mark or cicatrix, elongated 
dorso-ventrally and placed opposite to the blind end of the siphuncle, 
which indents the front wall of the initial chamber but does not enter 
its cavity. In the Ammonoidea, on the other hand, the initial 
chamber is inflated, and is spheroidal, oval or pyriform in shape, 
with no cicatrix, and separated from the first air-chamber by a 
constriction. The siphuncle also commences with a dilatation 
which deeply indents the front wall of the initial chamber, called 
the protoconch, but does not penetrate into its cavity. Munier- 
Chalmas has shown that the cavity of the protoconch is traversed 
by a tubular organ, the " prosiphon," which does not communicate 
with the true siphuncle, the place of which it is supposed to take in 
the early life of the animal. It is generally held, as suggested by 



CEPHALOPODA 



693 



Alpheus Hyatt, that the initial chamber of the Nautiloidea corre- 
sponds not to the protoconch of the Ammonoids, but to the second 
chamber of the latter, and that there existed in the young Nautiloids 
a true initial chamber, a protoconch which was either uncalcified or 
deciduous. The shell of the living nautilus does not decide this 
question, as its early stages are unknown, and there is a little vacuity 
in the centre of the spirally coiled shell which may have been origin- 
ally occupied by the true protoconch. 

The septa in the Nautiloidea are generally concave towards the 
aperture of the shell, their curvature therefore directed backwards 
(fig. 1); in the Ammonoidea, on the other hand, the convexity is 
usually towards the aperture, the curvature therefore directed 
forwards. The lines along which the edges of the septa are united 
to the shell are known as " sutures," and these in the Nautiloidea 
are simply curved or slightly lobed, whereas in the Ammonoidea 
they are folded in various degrees of complexity; the projections 
of the suture towards the mouth of the shell are called saddles, those 
in the opposite direction lobes. The siphuncle in the Nautilus 
pierces the centres of the septa, and in fossil Nautiloids it is usually 
central or sub-central. In a few cases it is marginal, and in that 
case may be external, i.e. ventral, or internal, i.e. dorsal. In Ammo- 
noids the siphuncle is always marginal, and usually external. Its 
walls in the living Nautilus are strengthened by the deposit of cal- 
careous granules, and in some fossil forms the wall is completely 
calcified. But this proper calcified wall is quite distinct from cal- 
careous tubes surrounding the siphuncle, which are developed from 
the septa. In the pearly nautilus each septum is prolonged back- 
wards at the point where it is pierced by the siphuncle, forming 
a shelly tube somewhat like the neck of a bottle. In many fossil 
forms these septal necks are continued from the septum from which 
they arise to the next, so that the siphuncle is enclosed in a complete 
secondary calcareous tube. In the majority of Nautiloids the septal 
necks are directed backwards, and they are said to be retrosiphonate. 
In the majority of the Ammonoids the septal necks are continued 
forwards from the septa to which they belong, and such forms are 
termed prosiphonate. 

The Tetrabranchiata were most abundant in the Palaeozoic and 
Mesozoic periods. The Nautiloidea are the most ancient, appearing 
first in the Upper Cambrian, the genera being most numerous in the 
Palaeozoic period, and comparatively few surviving into the Second- 
ary. On the other hand, the Ammonoidea are scarce in Palaeozoic 
formations, being represented in deposits earlier than the Carboni- 
ferous only by comparatively simple types, such as Clymenia and 
Goniatites. I n the Secondary period Ammonoids were very abundant, 
both in genera and species and in individuals, and with few local excep- 
tions none are known to have survived even to the commencement 
of the Tertiary. In the widest sense the genus Nautilus has existed 
since the Ordovician (Silurian) period, but the oldest types are not 
properly to be placed in the same genus as the existing form. Even 
with this qualification the genus is very ancient, shells very similar 
to those of the living Nautilus being found in the Upper Cretaceous. 

It has been maintained by some zoologists that the Ammonoidea 
were Dibranchiate, though it would not follow from this that the 
shell was, therefore, internal. They are, howeVer, generally classed 
with the Tetrabranchiata, and the absence of ail evidence of the 
possession of an ink-sac is in favour of this view. There can be 
little doubt that they gave rise to the Dibranchiata. 

About 2500 fossil species are included in the Nautiloidea, but only 
a few species of the genus Nautilus survive. Some of the fossil forms 
are very large, the shell reaching a length of 2 metres, or 6 ft, 6 in. 
Of the Ammonoidea more than 5000 species have been described,' 
and some of the coiled forms are 70 cm., or nearly 2 ft. 6 in. in 
diameter. 

Associated with various forms of Ammonoids there have been 
found peculiar horny or calcified plates, sometimes contained within 
the body-chamber of the shell, sometimes wholly detached. The 
most typical form of these structures has been named aptychus. 
It consists of two bilaterally symmetrical halves, of somewhat semi- 
circular shape, and attached to one another by their straight inner 
margins, like a pair of doors. In some cases the aptychus is thin and 
horny, but more often it is thick and calcified, in which case the 
principal layer has a peculiar cellular structure. The surface may 
be smooth or sculptured, and one side is usually marked by con- 
centric lines of growth. Another type is similar, except that the 
two halves are united in the middle line ; bodies of this character are 
called synaptychus ; they occur in the body-chamber of species of 
Scaphites. Another form called anaptychus consists of a thin horny 
undivided plate which is concentrically striated. This is associated 
with species of Ammonites and Goniatites. 

Many theories have been proposed in explanation of these struc- 
tures. According to Sir Richard Owen, the aptychus is an oper- 
culum developed in a part of the body corresponding to the hood 
of Nautilus. E. Ray Lankester suggested that the double plate was 
borne on the surface of the nidamental gland, with the form and 
sculpturing of which in Nautilus it closely agrees. On this view the 
aptychus would occur only in females. The most recent view is that 
these structures could not have been opercula because of their constant 
position inside the body-chamber, and that they were not external 
secretions at all, but a calcified internal cartilage situated at the 
base of the funnel. 



Classification of Tetrabranchiata. — Cephalopoda in which the 
mantle is entirely enclosed by a multilocular siphunculated shell, 
which may or may not be coiled. Only the last compartment of the 
shell occupied by the body of the animal. Numerous pedal tentacles 
around the mouth, which are retractile within sheaths. Halves of 
the funnel not united. Two pairs of c*—nidia, and two pairs of 
renal tubes without reno-pericardial apertures. Pericardium opens 
directly to exterior. Cephalic cartilage wholly ventral. Optic 
vesicles with apertures, without crystalline lens. 

Sub-order 1. Nautiloidea. — Initial chamber not inflated, with 
dorso-ventral cicatrix at extremity. 

Fam. 1. Orthoceratidae. Shell straight or slightly curved, with a 

simple aperture, large terminal chamber and cylindrical 

siphuncle. Orthoceras, Silurian to Trias. Baltoceras, Silurian. 
Fam. 2. Actinoceratidae. Shell straight or slightly curved, with 

wide siphuncle contracted at level of septa. Actinoceras, 

Silurian to Carboniferous. Discosorus, Silurian. Huronia, 

Silurian. Loxoceras, Silurian to Carboniferous. 
Fam. 3. Endoceratidae. Shell straight, with wide margina" 

siphuncle, necks produced into tubes fitting into one another. 

Endoceras, Silurian. 
Fam. 4. Gomphoceralidae. Shell globular, straight or arcuate, 

aperture contracted. Gomphoceras, Silurian. Phragmoceras , 

Silurian. 
Fam. 5. Ascoceratidae. Shell straight, ampulliform, summit 

truncate, terminal chamber extending nearly whole length ol 

shell ventrally. Ascoceras, Silurian. Glossoceras, Silurian. 
Fam. 6. Poterioceratidae. Shell straight or curved, fusiform, 

aperture simple, siphuncle contracted at septa. Poterioceras, 

Silurian to Carboniferous. Streptoceras, Silurian. 
Fam. 7. Cyrtoceratidae. Shell slightly curved, aperture simple, 

siphuncle wide, septa approximated. Cyrtoceras, Devonian. 
Fam. 8. Lituitidae. Shell coiled in one plane with the terminal 

part uncoiled, aperture contracted. Lituites, Silurian. Ophidio- 

ceras, Silurian. 
Fam. 9. Trochoceratidae. Shell helicoidally coiled, dextral or 

sinistral, the last whorl generally uncoiled. Trochoceras, 

Devonian. Adelphoceras, Devonian. 
Fam. 10. Nautilidae. Shell coiled in one plane, aperture wide 

and simple, siphuncle central. Nautilus, recent. Trockolites, 

Silurian. Gyroceras, Silurian to Carboniferous. Hercoceras, 

Silurian. Ptenoceras, Devonian. Discites, Carboniferous. 
Fam. 11. Bactritidae. Shell straight, conical, siphuncle narrow 

and marginal, necks long, infundibuliform, sutures undulating. 

Bactrites, Silurian and Devonian. 

Sub-order 2. A mmonitoidea.— Initial chamber spheroidal; 
siphuncle narrow and simple; septa convex towards aperture; 
sutures complex. 

Tribe I. Retrosiphonata. — Siphuncular necks projecting behind 
the septa as in Nautiloidea. Sutures form simple undulations. 
Occur exclusively in Palaeozoic strata from Devonian upwards. 
Fam. 1. Goniatitidae. Shell nautiloid, with simple sutures and 
ventral siphuncle. Goniatites, Devonian and Carboniferous. 
Anarcestes, Devonian. 
Fam. 2. Clymeniidae. Shell nautiloid, with simple sutures, 
siphuncle dorsal, that is, internal. Clymenia, Upper Devonian. 
Tribe 2. Prosiphonata. — Siphuncular necks projecting in front 
of the septa. Sutures form deeply indented lobes and saddles. 
Fam. 1. Arcestidae. Globular and smooth or nearly smooth, 
with reduced umbilicus, terminal chamber very deep, an 
aptychus present. Popanoceras, Permian. Cyclolobus, Permian, 
Arcestes, Trias. Lobites, Trias. 
Fam. 2. Tropitidae. Shells globular, but having radiating and 
tuberculated costae. Thalassoceras, Permian. Tropites, Trias. 
Sibirites, Trias. 
Fam. 3. Ceratitidae. Shells coiled, with a large umbilicus, ter- 
minal chamber short, sutures with simple saddles. Trachyceras, 
Upper Trias. Ceratites, Trias. Dinarites, Trias. 
Some genera with helicoidal shells are related to these coiled 
forms, viz. Cochloceras, Trias; also some straight forms, e.g. Rhab- 
doccras, Trias. 

Fam. 4. Pinacoceratidae. Shell compressed, smooth, terminal 
chamber short, sutures very complicated, convex. Pinacoceras, 
Trias. 
Fam. 5. Phylloceratidae. Shell coiled, the whorls overlapping 
each other, sutures formed of numerous lobes and saddles. 
Phylloceras, Jurassic. 
Fam. 6. Lytoceratidae. Shell discoid, whorls loosely united or 
uncoiled, sutures deeply indented, but with only three saddles 
and lobes. Lytoceras, Jurassic and Cretaceous. Macroscaphites, 
Cretaceous. Hamites, Cretaceous. Ptychoceras, Cretaceous. 
Turrilites, Cretaceous. Baculites, Cretaceous. 
Fam. 7. Ammonitidae. Shell coiled, with narrow whorls which 
do not embrace one another, aperture simple, a horny anap- 
tychus present. Ammonites, Jurassic. Arietites, Jurassic. 
Aegoceras, Lias. 
Fam. 8. Harpoceratidae. Shell discord and flattened, with a 
carinated border, aperture provided with lateral projections, 



694 



CEPHALOPODA 



a calcareous aptychus, formed of two pieces. Harpoceras, 
Jurassic. Oppelia, Jurassic. Lissoceras, Jurassic and Cre- 
taceous. 

Fam. 9. Amaltheidae. Shell flattened, with a prominent carina 
continued anteriorly into a rostrum. Amaltheus, Lias. Cardio- 
ceras, Jurassic. Schloenbachia, Cretaceous. 

Fam. 10. Stephanoceratidae. Shell not carinated, but with radiat- 
ing costae, which are often bifurcated, aperture often with 
lateral projections which contract it, aptychus formed of two 
pieces. Stephanoceras , Morphoceras, Perisphinctes, Peltoceras, 
Jurassic. Hoplites, Cretaceous. Acanthoceras , Cretaceous. 
Cosmoceras, Jurassic. Various more or less uncoiled forms are 
related to this family, viz. Scaphites, Crioceras, Cretaceous. 

Order 2. Dibranchiata ( = Holosiphona, Acetabulifera) 

Characters. — Cephalopods in which the inflected margins of 
the epipodia are fused so as to form a complete tubular siphon 
(fig. 24, i). The circumoral lobes of the forefoot carry suckers 




Fig. 15. — Sepia officinalis, L., about \ natural size, as seen when 
dead, the long prehensile arms being withdrawn from the pouches 
at the side of the head, in which they are carried during life when 
not actually in use. a. Neck; b, lateral fin of the mantle-sac; 
c, the eight shorter arms of the fore-foot ; d, the two long prehensile 
arms; e, the eyes. 

disposed upon them in rows, not tentacles (see figs. 15, 24). 
There is a single pair of typical ctenidia (fig. 25) acting as gills 
(hence Dibranchiata), and a single pair of renal organs, opening 
by apertures right and left of the median anus (fig. 25, r) and by 
similar internal pores into the pericardial chamber, which conse- 
quently does not open directly to the surface as in Nautilus. 
The oviducts are sometimes paired right and left (Octopoda, 
Oigopsida), sometimes that of one side only is developed (Myop- 
sida). The sperm-duct is always single except, according to 
W. Keferstein, in Eledone moschata. 

A plate-like shell is developed in a closed sac formed by the 
mantle (figs. 20, 21), except in the Octopoda, which have none, 
and in Spirilla (fig. 17, D) and the extinct Belemnitidae, &c, 
which have a small chambered shell resembling that of Nautilus 
with or without the addition of plate-like and cylindrical acces- 
sory developments (fig. 17, A, C, fig. 19). 

The pair of cephalic eyes are highly-developed vesicles with a 



refractive lens (fig. 33), cornea and lid-folds, — the vesicle being 
in the embryo, an open sac like that of Nautilus (fig. 34). Os- 
phradia are not present, but cephalic olfactory organs are recog- 




Fig. 16. — Decapodous Cephalopods. 

A, Cheiroteuthis Veranyi, d'Orb. (from the Mediterranean). 

B, Thysanoteuthis rhombus, Troschel (from Messina). 

C, Loligopsis cyclura, Fer. and d'Orb. (from the Atlantic Ocean). 

nized. One or two pairs of large salivary glands with long ducts are 
present. An ink-sac formed as a diverticulum of the rectum and 
opening near the anus is present in all Dibranchiata (fig. 25, t), 
and has been detected 
even in the fossil Belem- 
nitidae. Branchial 
hearts are developed on 
the two branchial affer- 
ent blood-vessels (fig. 
28, vc' , m). 

In the Dibranchiata 
the shell shows various 
stages of degeneration, 
culminating in its com- 
plete disappearance in 
Octopus. As in other 
Mollusca, there is a tend- 
ency in Cephalopods for 
the mantle to extend 
over the outside of the 
shell from its edges, and 
when these secondary 
mantle-folds entirely 
cover the shell and meet 
or fuse together the shell 
is surrounded by the 
mantle both externally 
and internally, and is 
said to be internal, 
though it remains always 
a cuticular structure ex- 
ternal to the epidermis, 
by a reduction of the 




Fig. 17. — Internal Shells of Cephalopoda. 

A, Conoteitthis dupiniana, d'Orb. (from 

the Neocomian of France). 

B, Shell Sepia orbigniana. Fer. (Medi- 

terranean). 

C, Shell of Spirulirostra Bellardii, d'Orb. 

(from the Miocene of Turin). The 
specimen is cut so as to show in 
section the chambered shell and the 
laminated " guard " deposited upon 
its surface. 

D, Shell of Spirula laevis, Gray (New 

Zealand). 



This process is generally accompanied 
size of the shell in comparison with 
that of the body, so that the relations of the two are gradu- 
ally reversed, the body outgrows its house and instead of the 



CEPHALOPODA 



6 95 




After Chun, from Lankester's Treatise on Zoology. 

Fig. 18. — Spirula. 



A, Dorsal aspect. 

B, Ventral aspect, 
a, Arms. 

e, Eyes. 
fi. Fins. 
/«, Funnel. 



pa, Mantle. 

po, Posterior fossa. 

sh, Shell. 

te, Tentacular arms. 

td, 



mantle being enclosed by the shell, the shell is enclosed" by 
the mantle. The earliest stage of this process is shown in 

the recent Spirula, 
though it is perhaps 
not impossible that in 
u some of the later fossil 
Ammonoids the shell 
was becoming more 
and more internal. 
The shell of Spirula 
(fig. 18) is coiled 
somewhat like that of 
Nautilus, but the coils 
are not in contact, the 
direction of the coil is 
endogastric or ventral 
instead of exogastric, 
and the shell is very 
much smaller than the 
body. Like that of 
Nautilus it is divided 
by septa and traversed 
by a siphuncle. The 
relation of the animal 
to the terminal 
chamber is as in Nau-, 
tilus, but the body 
Terminal * palTial extends far beyond 
disk. the aperture, and folds 

of the mantle grow up over the shell 
and cover it everywhere except part 
of the dorsal and ventral surfaces. 

The next modification in the en- 
closed shell is the addition to it 
of secondary deposits of calcareous 
matter, by the inner surface of the 
shell-sac. Successive layers are de- 
posited on the posterior part of the 
original shell, whether coiled or straight, 
and these layers form a conical mass, 
which may attain great thickness. A 
somewhat coiled shell with such a 
deposit is seen in Spirulirostra (fig. 
17, C) of the Miocene. In the next 
stage of modification secondary secre- 
tion forms a long and broad 
projection of the dorsal lip of 
the aperture; this is well 
developed in the belemnites 
(fig. 19). Thus in these modi- 
fied shells three parts are to 
be distinguished: the original 
septate shell, which has been 
called the phragmacone; the 
posterior conical deposit, called 
the rostrum or guard; and the 
anterior somewhat flat projec- 
tion, called the proostracum. 
In the living Dibranchiata 
other than Spirula the phrag- 
macone and rostrum have be- 
come very rudimentary. The 
Fig. 19. — Diagram of shell of Sepia (fig. 20) consists 
Belemnite (after Phillips). a i mos t entirely of the probs- 
itS-r "co^d tracum, the little ventral 
cavity or " alveolus," in hollow posteriorly representing 
which the chambered the phragmacone, and the pos- 
" phragmacone " (p) is terior pom t e d projection, the 
guard, rostrum inthe Oigopsida the 
shell is represented by a pro- 
ostracum which is no longer calcified but forms a chitinous 




(fig. 21) and Sepiolidae. Lastly, in the Octopoda the shell is 
represented only by small chitinous rudiments to which the 
retractor muscles of the head and funnel are attached; these are 
paired in Octopus, unpaired in other cases as in Cirrholeuthis. 




Fig. 20. 



Fig. 21. 



Fig. 20. — The calcareous internal shell of Sepia officinalis, the so- 
called cuttle-bone, a, Lateral expansion; b, anterior cancellated 
region ; c, laminated region, the laminae enclosing air. 

Fig. 21. — The horny internal shell or gladius or pen of Loligo. 

The early appearance of the sac of the mantle in which 
the shell is enclosed has led to an erroneous identification 
of this sac with the primitive shell-sac or shell-gland of 
the Molluscan embryo. The first appearance of the shell- 
sac in Dibranchiata is shown in figs. 35, 36. Its forma- 
tion as an open upgrowth of the centro-dorsal area, and 
the fact that it appears and disappears without closing in 
Argonauta and Octopus, was demonstrated by E. Ray Lankester. 



contained ; g, 
or " rostrum. 




Fig. 22. — The Argonaut in life. (After Lacaze-Duthiers.) Tr. Float; 
Br. a, anterior arms ; Br.p, posterior arms ; V, the expanded portion of them, 
once called the sails; B, the beak; C, the shell; En, the funnel. 



In Argonauta (the paper nautilus) the female only possesses 
plume or gladius, and a similar rudiment occurs in Loliginidae | a shell, in which the body is contained; but this is not 



6 9 6 



CEPHALOPODA 



/ 



homologous with the true shell in other cases; it is a structure sui 
generis secreted by the expanded arms of the dorsal pair which 
are closely applied to it on either side (fig. 22). 

Head, Foot, Mantle and Mantle-cavity— If we now compare the 
fore-foot of the Dibranchiata with that of Nautilus, we find in the 
first place a more simple arrangement of its lobes, which are either 
four or five pairs of tapering processes 
(called " arms "), arranged in a series 
around the buccal cone, and a sub- 
stitution of suckers for tentacles on 
the surface of these lobes (figs. 15 
and 24). The most dorsally placed 
pair of arms, corresponding to the two 
sides of the hood of Nautilus, are in 
reality the most anterior, and are 
termed the first pair. In the Octopoda 
there are four pairs of these arms 
(fig. 38), in the Decapoda five pairs, 
of which the fourth is greatly elon- 
gated (figs. 15, 16). In Sepia, Sepiola 
and Rossia, each of these long arms is 
withdrawn into a pouch beside the 
head, and is only ejected for the 
purpose of prehension. In Loligo they 
are completely retractile, very slightly 



d^ 



-J 




Fig. 23. — Head and circum- 
oral processes of the fore-foot 
of Onychoteuthis (from Owen). 

a, Neck. 6, Eye. 

c, The eight short arms. 

d, Long prehensile arms, the 

clavate extremities _ of 

which are provided with 

suckers at e, and with a 

double row of hooks be- 
yond at/. The temporary 

conjunction of the arms 

by means of the suckers 

enables them to act in 

combination. 

so in the majority of the Oigopsida, and in Rhynchoteuthis they 
are united to form a beak-like appendage. A gradual reduction 
of the tentacular arms can be seen in the Decapoda, leading 
to their total absence in Octopoda ; thus in Leachia, Chaunoteutkis 
and others these arms are reduced to mere stumps. In some 
Cheiroteuthidae and Cranchiidae the ordinary or sessile arms, 
especially the dorsal pairs, are reduced. In the Octopoda they 
are not unfrequently connected by a web, and form an efficient 
swimming-bell, e.g. in Cirrhoteuthidae and Amphiiretidae. The 
suckers are placed on the adoral surface of the arms, and may be in 
one, two or four rows, and very numerous. In place of suckers in 
some genera, e.g. Veranya, we find on certain arms or parts of the 



Fig. 24. — Male of Ocy- 
thoe catenulata, Steenstrup 
{Octopus carena, Ver.), 
showing the hectocotylized 
arm. (From Gegenbaur.) 
t l , P, t 3 , t*, The first, second, 
third and fourth arms 
or processes of the fore- 
foot. 
h, The third arm of the 
right side hectocoty- 
lized. 
x. The apical sac of the 

hectocotylized arm. 
y, The filament which 
issues from the sac 
when development is 
complete. 
i, The siphon. 



arms horny hooks; in other cases a hook rises from the centre of 
each sucker. The hooks on the long arms of Onychoteuthis are drawn 
in fig. 23. In various species of Cheiroteuthis the suckers on the 
tentacular arms are very feeble, but the bottom of the cup is covered 
by a number of anastomosed epithelial filaments which are used as 
a fishing-net. The fore-foot, with its apparatus of suckers and 
hooks, is in the Dibranchiata essentially a prehensile apparatus, 
though the whole series of arms in the Octopoda serve as swimming 
organs, and in many (e.g. the common octopus or poulp) the sucker- 
bearing surface is used as a crawling organ. 

In the males of the Dibranchiata one of the arms is more or less 




Fig. 25. — View of the postero-ventral surface of a male Sepia, 
obtained by cutting longitudinally the firm mantle-skirt and drawing 
the divided halves apart. This figure is strictly comparable with 
fig. 4. (From Gegenbaur.) 



The head. 
J, The mid-foot or siphon, 
which has been cut open 
so as to display the valve i. 
R, The glandular tissue of the 
left nephridium or renal- 
sac, which has been cut 
open (see fig. 29). 
P, P, The lateral fins of the 
mantle-skirt. 
The single pair of branchiae 

(ctenidia). 
The anus — immediately 
below it is the opening of 
the ink-bag. 
Cartilaginous socket in the 
siphon to receive c', the 
cartilaginous knob of the 
mantle-skirt — the two con- 



Br 



c, 



apparatus " characteristic 
of Decapoda, not found in 
Octopoda. 

g, The azygos genital papilla 
and aperture. 

'i, Valve of the siphon (possibly 
the rudimentary hind-foot). 

m. Muscular band connected 
with the fore-foot and 
mid-foot (siphon) and 
identical with the muscular 
mass k in fig. 3. 

r, Renal papillae, carrying the 
apertures of the nephridia. 

v.br, Branchial efferent blood- 
vessel. 

v.br', Bulbous enlargements of 
the branchial blood-vessels 
(see figs. 28, 29). 

t, Ink-bag. 



stituting the " pallial hinge 

modified in connexion with tHfe reproductive function, and is called 
the " hectocotylized arm." This name is derived from the condition 
assumed by the arm in those cases in which its modification is 
carried out to the greatest extent. These cases are those of the 
Octopods Argonauta argo and Ocythoe catenulata (fig. 24). In the 
males of these the third arm (on the left side in Argonauta, on the 
right side in Ocythoe) is found before the breeding season to be repre- 
sented by a globular sac of integument. This sac bursts, and from 
it issues an arm larger than its neighbours, having a small sac at 
its extremity in Ocythoe (fig. 24. x), from which subsequently a long 
filament issues. Before copulation the male charges this arm with 
the spermatophores or packets of spermatozoa removed from its 
generative orifice beneath the mantle-skirt, and during coitus the 
arm becomes detached and is left adhering to the female by means 
of its suckers. A new arm is formed at the cicatrix before the next 
breeding season. The female, being much larger than the male, 
swims away with the detached arm lodged beneath her mantle-skirt. 
There, in a way which is not understood, the fertilization of the eggs 



CEPHALOPODA 



697 



is effected. Specimens of the female Ocythoe with the detached arm 
adherent were examined by Cuvier, who mistook the arm for a para- 
sitic worm and gave to it the name Hectocotylus. Accordingly, the 
correspondingly modified arms of other Cephalopoda are said to be 
hectocotylized. J. J. S. Steenstrup has determined the hectocoty- 
lized condition of one or other of the arms in a number of male 
Dibranchs as follows: — in all, excepting Argonauta and Ocythoe 
and Tremoctopus, the modification of the arm is slight, consisting 
in a small enlargement of part or the whole of the arm, and the 
obliteration of some of its suckers ; in Octopus and Eledone the third 
right arm is hectocotylized ; in Rossia and Sepiola the fourth left 
arm is hectocotylized along its whole length, and the fourth right 
arm also in the middle only ; in Sepia the fourth left arm is modified 
at its base only ; in Sepioteulhis, the same at its apex ; in Loligo, the 
same also at its apex; in Loliolus, the same along its whole length; 
in Ommatostrephes , Onychoteuthis and Loligopsis no hectocotylized 
arm has hitherto been observed. Thus, speaking generally, it is 
one or both of the fourth pair of short arms which are modified in the 
Decapoda, of the third pair in the Octopoda. In the pallial cavity 
are situated one pair of gills in the Dibranchiata .(fig- 25), attached 




apj>. 

re 
mux visc.per. 
apert. 

Fig. 26. — Diagram representing a vertical approximately median 
antero-posterior section of Sepia officinalis (from a drawing by A. G. 
Bourne). The lettering corresponds with that of fig. 10, with which 
this drawing is intended to be compared. 

a, Shell (here enclosed by a 0, The fifth or lowermost lobe 
growth of the mantle). of the fore-foot. [foot. 

b, The nuchal plate (here a p, ' The third lobe of the fore- 

cartilage). 5, The buccal membrane. 

c, (The reference line should be v, The upper beak or jaw. 

continued through the black s, The lower beak or jaw. 

area representing the shell /, The lingual ribbon. 

to the outline below it), the x, The viscero-pericardialsac. 

integument covering the vis- n.c, The nerve-collar. 

ceral hump. cr, The crop. 

d, The reflected portion of the gizz, The gizzard. 

mantle-skirt forming the an, The anus, 
sac which encloses the c.t, The left ctenidium or gill- 
shell. _ plume. 

e, The inferior margin of the vent, Ventricle of the heart. 

mantle-skirt (mouth of the a.b.v, Afferent branchial vessel. 

pallial chamber). e.b.v, Efferent branchial vessel. 

/, The pallial chamber. re, Renal glandular mass. 

g, The vertically cut median n.n.a, Left nephridial aperture. 

portion of the siphon. visc.per. apert, Viscero-pericardial 
i, The valve of the siphon.* aperture (see fig. 29). 

m, The two upper lobes of the br.b, Branchial heart. 

fqre-foot. [the same, app, Appendage of the same. 

n, The long prehensile arms of i.s, Ink-bag. 

dorsally along the whole of their afferent borders. On each side of 
the branchia is a series of lamellae, least in number in the Octopoda. 
Each lamella is transversely folded, and the folds are in turn folded, 
so that the respiratory surface is increased. On the somatic wall 
of the pallial cavity, between and ventral to the gills, are the follow- 
ing apertures : the anus and opening of the ink-sac, close together in 
the median line; a pair of apertures of the renal sacs, on either side 
of the median line; external to the renal orifice, on the left side, 
the genital aperture in Cirrhoteuthidae and Myopsida. In other 
Octopoda, and in nearly all the Oigopsida among the Decapoda, the 
genital ducts are paired in the female, but only the left is developed 
in the male. The funnel forms a complete tube in the Dibranchiata, 
and in the majority of the Decapoda, as in Nautilus, it is provided 
with an internal valve projecting from its somatic surface, which 
allows water to pass outwards but prevents it passing inwards. The 
mantle performs rhythmical respiratory movements of expansion and 
contraction, the water entering between funnel and mantle and 
passing out through the funnel. In Decapoda the edge of the mantle 
bears internally on each side a cartilaginous projection which fits 
into a corresponding depression on the external surface of the 
funnel; this is called the " resisting apparatus," and serves to make 
the union of mantle and funnel firmer during expiration. More 
powerful expiratory movements are used for sudden retrograde 
locomotion through the water 



Luminous Organs. — In certain Oigopsida living in deep water, 
e.g. Histioteuthis, Calliteuthis, Histiopsis, Pterygioteuthis, the surface 
of the skin bears photogenous organs directed towards the oral 
extremity. Anatomically these consist of a deeper photogenous 
layer and a more superficial refracting layer. In some cases, e.g. 
Pterygioteuthis, they occur even within the mantle-cavity. 

Fins. — In the majority of the Decapoda and in the Cirrhoteuthidae, 
the mantle is produced into lateral symmetrical expansions which 
have the function of fins. They originate at the aboral extremity 
where they remain in Spirula (fig. 18). In most other Oigopsida they 
are terminal, but more dorsal than ventral, e.g. Loligopsis (fig. 16), 
and there may be two on each side, as in Grimalditeuthis. In other 
cases they extend laterally along a greater length of the body, as in 
Sepia (fig. 15). In Ctenopteryx they have a superficial resemblance 
to the fins of fishes, consisting of a thin membrane supported by a 
series of muscular rods. 

Chromatophores. — These are characteristic of the Dibranchiata, 
apparently absent in Nautilus. They are originally single cells of 
ectodermic origin which sink below the epidermis and become con- 
nected with radiating muscular fibres. The cells are single but 
multinuclear. Different cells contain pigments of different colours, 
yellow, brown, red or blue. Each cell in life is in constant tremulous 
movement ; under the influence of nervous 
excitement the cells are suddenly expanded 
or contracted, producing blushes of colour 
and pallor. By reflex action of which the 
afferent stimulus acts upon the eyes as in 
fishes, the chromatophores assume a con- 
dition which approximates the colour of 
the animal to that of surrounding objects. 
In the Decapoda there are also reflecting 
elements which produce iridescent hues. 

Aquiferous Cavities. — In addition to the 
pockets into which the tentacular arms of 
Decapoda are retracted, there are in several 
Dibranchiata cavities in the integument 
which open to the exterior by special pores 
but have no communication with the vas- 
cular system or other internal cavities of 
the body. In Ocythoe there are such pores 
on the back of the head and at the base of 
the funnel; buccal pouches on the ventral 
side of the mouth, internal to the arms, 
occur in some genera, one in Loligo, two in 
Sepia. In some species of Sepia there are 
pouches in the mantle. 

Alimentary Tube. — The principal differ- 
ences from Nautilus are the following: — 

the mandibles are similar in shape, but are - ■ , , r ,. 

chitinous, not calcified. In the radula there ar y.„ c f n ^ of J Loh ^° 
are three teeth on each side of the median sagittate (from Gegen- 
tooth in each row, except in Gonatus, in " 3aur ); "} e buccal 
which there are only two lateral teeth, and mass is ■omitted, 
the Cirrhoteuthidae, in which the radula has oe, Oesophagus, 
entirely disappeared. In front of the radula v, The stomach 
is the so-called tongue, a fleshy projection opened longitudi- 

corresponding to the sub-radular organ of nally. 

other Mollusca. X, Probe passed 

In most of the Dibranchiata there are two through the py- 

pairs of salivary glands. In the Decapoda 
the ducts of the posterior pair unite into a c, 
median duct which opens on the surface of 
the sub-radular organ. The anterior pair e, Its spiral portion, 
is but slightly developed except in the i, Intestine. 
Oigopsida. In the Octopoda there are also a, Ink-bag. 
two pairs, but the posterior pair, except b, Its opening into 
in Cirrhoteuthis where they are absent, the rectum, 

are large and displaced backwards, being 

situated near the oesophageal proventriculus. Connected with the 
intestine immediately beyond the pylorus is a thin-walled caecum, 
spherical in Rossia and Leachia, elongated in Loligo, but usually 
coiled into a spiral (fig. 17). The hepatic ducts open into the 
caecum. The liver is developed as a paired gland, more or less 
fused into one in the adult, but the ducts are always paired. The 
ducts are covered by a number of glandular follicles forming what 
is called the pancreas. 

The ink-sac, absent in Nautilus, is a rectal caecum developed from 
its dorsal wall. It is present in all Dibranchiata except Octopus 
arcticus, 0, piscatorum and Cirrhoteuthis. It consists of a deeper part 
or gland proper and a reservoir. It extends to the posterior ex- 
tremity of the body in Sepia, but in Octopoda is usually embedded 
in the surface of the liver. The pigment of the secretion is melanin, 
and its function is to produce a dense opacity in the water, which 
conceals the animal. 

Vascular System (fig. 28). — The ventricle lies in the pericardial 
cavity, except in Octopoda where this cavity is much reduced. The 
auricles, one pair, are contractile expansions of the efferent branchial 
vessels. The heart gives off an anterior or cephalic and a posterior 
or abdominal aorta. The vascular system is almost perfect, arteries 
and veins being united by capillaries. The principal vein is a vena 




Fig. 27. — Aliment- 



lorus. 
Commencement of 
the caecum. 



6 9 8 



CEPHALOPODA 



cava passing backwards ventrally from the cephalic region and 
dividing into two afferent branchial veins, each of which receives a 




Fig. 28.- 



-Circulatory and excretory organs of Sepia (from Gegen- 
baur, after John Hunter). 



br. Branchiae (ctenidia). 

c, Ventricle of the heart. 

a, Anterior artery (aorta). 

a', Posterior artery. 

v, The right and left auricles 
(enlargements of the efferent 
branchial veins). 

v', Efferent branchial vein on 
the free face of the gill- 
plume. 

v.c, Vena cava. 



vi, vc', Afferent branchial vessels 
(branches of the vena cava, 
see fig. 20). 

vc", Abdominal veins. [ages. 

x, Branchial heartsandappend- 

re, e, Glandular substance of the 
nephridia developed on the 
wail of the great veins on 
their way to the gills. The 
arrows indicate the direc- 
tion of the blood-current. 



pallial and an abdominal vein. Each of these afferent branchial 
vessels is enclosed in the cavity of a renal organ and is covered ex- 
ternally by the glandular tissue which forms the excretory part of 
the " kidney " (fig. 29). Each afferent vessel is expanded into a 



r.d.v.c 




*' J 

Fig. 29. — Diagram of the nephridial sacs, and the veins which run 
through them, in Sepia officinalis (after Vigelius). The nephridial 
sacs are supposed to have their upper walls removed. 
v.c, Vena cava, [of the same, np, 
r.d.v.c, 
r.s.v.c, 



Vena cava, [of the same. 
Right descending branch 
Left descending branch 
of the same. 

v.b.a, Vein from the ink-bag. 

v.m, Mesenteric vein. 

v.g, Genital vein. 

v.a.d, Right abdominal vein. 

v.a.s, Left abdominal vein. 

v.p.d, Right pallial vein. 

v.p.s, Left pallial vein. 

c.b, Branchial heart. 

*, Appendage of the same. 

c.v, Capsule of the branchial 
heart. 



a.r, 
w.k, 



External aperture of the 
right nephridial sac. 

Reno-pericardial orifice plac- 
ing the left renal sac or 
nephridium in ccmmuni- 
caton with the viscero- 
pericardial sac, the course 
of which below the nephri- 
dial sac is indicated by 
dotted lines. 

The similar orifice of the 
right side. 

Glandular renal outgrowths. 

Viscero-pericardial sac 
(dotted outline). 



contractile branchial heart, which is provided with a glandular 
appendage. The latter corresponds to the glandular masses which 
are attached to the afferent branchial veins in Nautilus, and to the 
pericardial glands of other Molluscs. 

Coelom. — The coelom forms a large sac with a constriction between 





Fig. 30. Fig. 31. 

Figs. 30, 31. — Nerve-centres of Octopus. Figure 30 gives a view 

from the dorsal aspect, figure 31 one from the ventral aspect. 
buc, The buccal mass. oes, Oesophagus. 



/, Foramen in the nerve-mass 
formed by pedal, pleural 
and visceral ganglion-pairs, 
traversed by a blood-vessel. 



ped, Pedal ganglion. 

opt, Optic ganglion. 

cer, Cerebral ganglion. 

pl, Pleural ganglion. 

vise, Visceral ganglion. 

the anterior or pericardial division and the posterior or genital 
division, and it is produced into lateral diverticula which contain 
the branchial hearts; but in the Octopoda the pericardial divi- 
sion is suppressed and the genital division communicates by 
long ducts with sacs containing the appendages of the branchial 
hearts. The renal sacs com- 
municate with the pericardium 
by pores near the external 
renal apertures; in the Octo- 
poda the reno-pericardial open- 
ings are in the capsules of the 
branchial hearts. The genital 
ducts pass from the genital 
coelom to the exterior. They 
are paired in female Oigopsida 
and Octopqda except Ctrrho- 
teuthidae, but only the left 
persists in the males of all 
Dibranchiata, and in the 
female Myopsida. 

In the oviduct is a glandular 
enlargement, and in addition 
to this the females are pro- 
vided with the so-called nida- 
mental glands which are de- 
veloped on the somatic wall of 
the pallial cavity, one on each 
side of the rectum, except in 
certain Oigopsida (Enoploleu- 
this, Cranchia, Leachia) and in 
the Octopoda, in which these 
organs are absent. The latter 
fact is related to the habit of 
the majority of the Octopoda 
of guarding or " incubating " 
their eggs, which have little 
protective covering. In the 
other cases the eggs are sur- Fig. 32. — Lateral view of the 
rounded by a tough gelatinous nervous centres and nerves of the 
elastic material secreted by the right side of Octopus vulgaris (from 
nidamental glands. a drawing by A. G. Bourne). 

The vas deferens is at first bg, Buccal ganglion, 
narrow and convoluted, then cer, Cerebral ganglion, 
dilates into a vesicula semin- ped, Pedal ganglion, 
alis at the end of which is a pl, ~' 
glandular diverticulum called 




Pleural, and vise, visceral region 
of the pleuro-visceral ganglion, 
the prostate. By the vesicula gang, stell, The right stellate ganglion 



and the prostate the sperma- 

tophores are formed. These 

have a structure similar to n.visc, 

those of Nautilus, and in the n.olf, 

Octopoda may be as much as 

50 mm. in length. Beyond the n.br, 

prostate the duct opens into a 

large terminal reservoir which has been called Needham's sac, and 

in which the spermatophores are stored. 

Nervous System and Sense-Organs. — The figures (30, 31, 32) repre- 
senting the nerve-centres of Octopus serve to exhibit the disposition 



of the mantle connected by a 

nerve to the pleural portion. 

The right visceral nerve. 

Its (probably) olfactory 

branches. 

Its branchial branches. 



CEPHALOPODA 



699 



of these parts in the Dibranchiata. The ganglia are more distinctly 
swollen than in Nautilus. In Octopus an infra-buccal ganglion-pair 
are present, corresponding to the buccal ganglion-pair of Gastropoda. 
In Decapoda a supra-buccal ganglion-pair connected with these 
are also developed. Instead of the numerous radiating pallial nerves 
of Nautilus, we have in the Dibranchiata on each side (right and left) 
a large pleural nerve passing from the pleural portion of the pleuro- 
visceral ganglion to the mantle, where it enlarges to form the stellate 
ganglion. From each stellate ganglion nerves radiate to supply the 
powerful muscles of the mantle-skirt. The two stellate ganglia are 
connected, except in Sepiola, by a transverse supra-oesophageal 
commissure, which represents the pallial cords united by a com- 
missure above the intestine in Amphineura. The nerves from the 
visceral portion of the pleuro- visceral ganglion have the same course 
as in Nautilus, but no osphradial papilla is present. An enteric nervous 
system is richly developed in the Dibranchiata, connected with the 
somatic nervous centres through the buccal ganglia, as in the Arthro- 
poda through the stomato-gastric ganglia, and anastomozing with 
deep branches of the visceral nerves of the viscero-pleural ganglion- 
pair. It has been especially described by A. Hancock in Ommato- 
slrephes. Upon the stomach it forms a single large and readily 
detected gastric ganglion. 

In the Dibranchiate division of the Cephalopoda the greatest 
elaboration of the dioptric apparatus of the eye is attained, so that 
ik x> ik 




Fig. 33. — Horizontal section of the eye of Sepia (Myopsid). 
(From Gegenbaur, after Hensen.) 
KK, Cephalic cartilages (see fig. 8). 0, Optic nerve. 



C, Cornea (closed). 
L, Lens. ci, Ciliary body. 

Ri, Internal layer of the retina. 
Re, External layer of the retina. 
p, Pigment between these. 



go, Optic ganglion. 

k and k', Capsular cartilage. 

ik, Cartilage of the iris. 

w, White body. 

ae, Argentine integument. 



we have in this class the extremes of the two lines of development 
of the Molluscan eye, those two lines being the punctigerous and the 
lentigerous. The structure of the Dibranchiate's eye is shown in 
section in fig. 14, C, and in fig. 33, and its development in figs. 34 and 
37. The open sac which forms the retina of the young Dibranchiate 
closes up, and constitutes the posterior chamber of the eye, or 
primitive optic vesicle (fig. 37, A, poc) . The lens forms as a structure- 
less growth, secreted by both the internal and external surfaces of 
the front wall of the optic vesicle (fig. 37, B, I). The integument 
around the primitive optic vesicle which has sunk below the surface 
now rises up and forms firstly nearest the axis of the eye the iridian 
folds (if in B, fig. 37; ik in fig. 33; Ir in fig. 14), and then secondly 
an outer circular fold grows up like a wall and completely closes over 
the iridian folds and the axis of the primitive vesicle (fig. 33, C). 
This covering is transparent, and is the cornea. In the oceanic 
Decapoda the cornea does not completely close, but leaves a central 
aperture traversed by the optic axis. These forms are termed 
Oigopsidae by C. d'Orbigny, whilst the Decapoda with closed cornea 
are termed Myopsidae. In the Octopoda the cornea is closed, and 
there is yet another fold thrown over the eye. The skin surrounding 
the cornea presents a free circular margin, and can be drawn over 
the surface of the cornea by a sphincter muscle. It thus acts as an 
adjustable diaphragm, exactly similar in movement to the iris of 
Vertebrates. Sepia and allied Decapods have a horizontal lower 
eyelid, that is to say, only one-half of the sphincter-like fold of 
integument is movable. The statocysts are situated ventrally 
between the pedal and visceral ganglia, and are entirely enclosed 




Fig. 34. — Diagrams of sections showing the 
early stage of development of the eye of 
Loligo when it is, like the permanent eye of 
Nautilus and of Patella, an open sac. (From 
Lankester.) 

A, First appearance of the eye as a ring- 
like upgrowth. 

B, Ingrowth of the ring-like wall so as to 
form a sac, the primitive optic vesicle of 
Loligo. 



in the cranial cartilage. The cavity of each is continued into a small 

blind process which is the remnant of the embryonic connexion of 

the vesicle with the external surface. The sensory epithelium is at 

the anterior end of 

the vesicle forming a ^b A 

macula acustica, and 

in the cavity is a 

single otolith, partly 

calcareous and partly 

organic except in 

Eledone, in which it' 

is entirely organic. 

The nerve arises 

from the cerebral 

ganglion on each 

side and passes 

through the pedal 

ganglion. 

There is no bran- 
chial osphradium 
in the Dibranchiata 
corresponding to 
that of Nautilus, but 
the olfactory organ 
or rhinophore near 
the eye is present. 
In Sepia and the 
majority of the Dibranchiata it is a simple pit, in some of the 
Oigopsida it is a projection which may be stalked. 

Reproduction and Development. — The modification of one or a 
pair of the arms in the male for purposes of copulation has already 
been described. In many genera the sexes differ from one another 
in other characters also. As a rule the males are more slender or 
smaller than the females. The maximum degree of sexual dimor- 
phism occurs in Argonauta among the Octopods; in this genus 
the female may be fifteen times as large as the male, and the peculiar 
modification of the dorsal arms for the secretion of the shell occurs 
in the female only, no shell being formed in the male. In most 
cases the females are much more numerous than the males, but the 
opposite relation appears to exist in those Octopodia in which the 
hectocotylus is autotomous, for as many as four hectocotyli have been 
found in the pallial cavity of a single female. When the hecto- 
cotylus is not detached it is usually inserted into the pallial cavity 
of the female so as to deposit the spermatophores in or near the 
aperture of the oviduct, but in Sepia and Loligo they are merely 
deposited on the ventral lobes of the buccal membrane. 

The eggs are laid shortly after copulation. In the Octopoda and 
in Sepia, Sepiola and Rossia, each egg has a separate envelope con- 
tinued into a long stalk by which it is attached with several others 
in a cluster. In Argonauta the eggs are carried by the female in the 
cavity of the shell. In Loligo the eggs are very numerous, and are 
enclosed in cylindrical transparent gelatinous strings united at one 
end into a cluster. 

The Cephalopoda appear to be the only Invertebrates in which 
the egg is mesoblastic and telolecithal like that of Vertebrata. This 
is the result of the large quantity of the yolk, and the position the 
latter assumes in relation to the blastoderm. In all other Mollusca 
the segmentation is complete though in some cases very unequal. 
In the egg of Loligo, which has been chiefly studied (fig. 35), the 
protoplasmic pole is at the narrower end of the egg, and segmentation 
is restricted to this end, forming a layer of ectoderm cells. From 
one part of the periphery of the ectoderm proliferation of cells takes 
place and gives rise to a layer of scattered nuclei over the whole 
surface of the yolk. The region of proliferation marks the anal side 
of the ectoderm, and the layer of nuclei forms the perivitelline 
membrane' This process must be regarded as equivalent to the 
first stage of invagination, the yolk being surrounded by hypoblast 
cells or their nuclei. Later on the same anal edge of the ectoderm 
forms another cellular layer, the endoderm proper, which forms a 
continuous sheet below the ectoderm. 

The mesoderm also originates at the anal side of the ectoderm and 
extends in two bands right and left between ectoderm and endoderm. 
After the mesoderm is thus established, a little vesicle lying upon 
and open to the yolk is formed from the endoderm, and this vesicle 
ultimately gives rise to the stomach, the two lobes of the liver and 
the intestine. The buccal mass and oesophagus arise from a stomo- 
daeal invagination, and the anus is formed later from a short procto- 
daeal invagination. 

The external changes of form are as follows: — The mantle is the 
middle of the embryonic area, and in its centre is the shell-gland, 
which, however, behaves in a different way from that seen in other 
Molluscs. Its borders grow inwards and approach each other to form 
the shell-sac. E. Ray Lankester showed that in Argonauta and other 
Octopods the shell-sac disappears before it is closed up, but in other 
forms except Spirula it closes completely and the shell develops 
within it. The lateral and posterior borders of the embryo form the 
foot, and these borders grow out into ten or eight lobes which become 
the arms, and which at first, as seen in fig. 35 (8), are entirely posterior 
to the mouth. Development actually shows the anterior arms 
gradually growing round the mouth and uniting in front of it. 



7oo 



CEPHALOPODA 



3 




Fig. 35. — Development of Loligo. 



View of the cleavage of the 
egg during the first formation 
of embryonic cells. 
Lateral view of the egg at a 
little later stage, a, Limit 
to which the layer of cleav- 
age-cells has spread over the 
e gg'> b, portion of the egg 
(shaded) as yet uncovered by 
cleavage-cells; ap, the auto- 
plasts ; kp, cleavage-pole 
where first cells were formed. 
Later stage, the limit a now 
extended so as to leave but 
little of the egg-surface (6) 
unenclosed. The eyes (d), 
mouth (e) and mantle-sac (m) 
have appeared. 

4. Later stage, anterior surface, 
the embryo is becoming 
nipped off from the yolk- 
sac (g). 

5. View of an embryo similar to 

(3) from the cleavage-pole 
or centro-dorsal area. 

6. Later stage, posterior surface. 

7. Section in a median dorso- 
ventral and antero-posterior 
plane of an embryo of the 
same age as (4) . 
View of the anterior face of 
an older embryo. 



8 



9. View of the posterior face of an 
embryo of the same age as (8). 

Letters in (3) to (9) : — a, lateral 
fins of the mantle ; b, mantle- 
skirt; c, supra-ocular in- 
vagination to form the 
" white body "; d, the eye; 
e, the mouth; f 1 ,*, », 4 , 5 , the 
five paired processes of the 
fore-foot ; g, rhythmically 
contractile area of the yolk- 
sac, which is itself a hernia- 
like protrusion of the median 
portion of the fore-foot; 
h, dotted line showing inter- 
nal area occupied by yolk 
(food-material of the egg); 
k, first rudiment of the epi- 
podia (paired ridges which 
unite to form the siphon or 
funnel) ; /, sac of the radula 
or lingual ribbon; m, 
stomach ; n, rudiments of 
the gills (paired ctenidia) ; 
0, the otocysts — a pair of 
invaginations of the surface 
of the epipodia; p, the optic 
ganglion; q, the distal por- 
tion of the ridges which form 
the siphon, k being the basal 
portion of the same struct- 
ure; r, the vesicle-like 



rudiment of the intestine 
formed independently of the 
parts connected with the 
mouth, s, k, m, and without 
invagination; s, rudiment 
of the salivary glands; t in 
(7), the shell-sac at an earlier 
stage open (see fig. 36), now 
closed up; u, the open shell- 
sac formed by an uprising 
ring-like growth of the centro- 



dorsal area; w in (5), the 
mantle-skirt commencing to 
be raised up around the area 
of the shell-sac. In (7) mes 
points to the middle cell- 
layer of the embryo, ep to 
the outer layer, and h to the 
deep layer of fusiform cells 
which separates everywhere 
the embryo from the yolk or 
food-material lying within it. 




Between the mantle and the foot are two ridges which form the 
funnel, and their position shows them to be the epipodia. The 
otocysts and eyes are formed as invaginations of ectoderm, the 
former behind the eyes, at the sides of the funnel. All the nerve- 
centres, cerebral, visceral, pedal and optic, are formed as prolifera- 
tions of the ectoderm. At the sides of the optic ganglia a pair of 
ectodermic invaginations are formed, which in the adult become the 
white bodies of the eyes, surrounding the optic ganglion. These are 
vestiges of lateral cerebral lobes which degenerate in the course of 
development. 

The coelomic cavity appears as a symmetrical pair of spaces in 
the mesoderm, right and left of the intestine, and from it grow out 
the genital ducts and the renal organs. The gonad develops from 
the wall of the coelom. 

Phytogeny and Classification. — The order is divided into two sub- 
orders, Decapoda and Octopoda, by the presence or absence of the 
tentacular arms. The Decapoda are more adapted for swimming 
than the Octopoda, the body being usually provided with fins. In 
the former also there is generally an internal shell of considerable 
size, often calcified, while in the Octopoda only the merest vestiges 
of a shell remain. There can be no doubt that the Octopoda were 
derived from the Decapoda, although from the absence of skeletal 
structures fossil re- 
mains of Octopods gpin m' 
are almost entirely ' ■' -'' 
unknown. Palae- 
octopus, however, 
occurs in the Cre- 
taceous, while shells 
of Argonauta do not 
appear before the 
Pliocene. The De- 
capoda are abund- 
antly represented in 
the Secondary for- 
mations by the Fig. 36. — Section through aboral end of 
Belemnitidae, whose embryo of Loligo showing shell-sac still open, 
shell (fig. 19) con- ep, ectoderm; m, mesoderm; m', endoderm; 
sists of a straight shs, shell-sac; y, yolk, 
conical phragma- 

cone covered posteriorly by a very thick rostrum, and produced 
anteriorly into a thin long proostracum which is only occasionally 
preserved. In certain cases remains of the arms provided with 
hooks, and of the ink-sac, have been recognized. The Belemnitidae 
appear first in the Upper Trias, attain their maximum development 
in the Jurassic rocks, and are not continued into the Tertiary period, 
though represented in the Eocene by a few allied forms. 

There is no difficulty in deriving the typical existing Decapoda 
from Belemnitidae, and many of the extinct forms may have been 
directly ancestral. Chitinous " pens " like that of Loligo, however, 
begin to appear in the Jurassic and Cretaceous rocks, so that in this 
case as in many others the parent form and the modified form 
existed contemporaneously, and the latter alone has survived. 
The oldest shells of the Sepia type are from the Eocene, and it is 
perhaps possible that the Sepiidae arose separately from the Belem- 
nites. 

It is a curious fact that no fossil specimens of the genus Spirula 
have been found, but this may be due to the fact that it occurs only 
in deep water. At any rate there is no evidence that the shell of 
Spirula has lost a rostrum and a proostracum ; its characters must 
be regarded as primitive, not secondary. In the characters of the 
protoconch and of the commencement of the siphuncle, the shell of 
Spirula agrees with that of the Ammonoids, and in both its position 
is ventral, although in most Ammonoids the shell being exogastric 
the ventral side is the convex or external, while in Spirula the shell 
is endogastric and the siphuncle internal. The fact that the shell 
is not completely enclosed by the mantle is also a primitive character. 

With regard to the general morphology of the Cephalopoda, it is 
difficult to reconcile the existence of two pairs of renal tubes as well 
as a pair of genital ducts in Nautilus with the view that the original 
Mollusc was unsegmented and had only one pair of coelomoducts. 
Considering the great specialization, however, and high degree of 
organization of the Cephalopods, it is evident that the earliest 
Nautiloid whose remains are known to us must have had a long 
evolutionary history behind it, and such metamerism as exists may 
have been developed in the course of its own history. In the other 
direction the evidence seems to prove that the Dibranchiata with 
only two renal ducts have been derived from the Tetrabranchiata. 



CEPHALOPODA 



701 



Suborder i. Decapoda. — Four pairs of ordinary non-retractile 
arms which are shorter than the body, and one pair of tentacular 
arms, situated between the third and fourth normal arms on each 
side and retractile within special pouches. Suckers pedunculated 
and provided with horny rings, on the tentacular arms confined 
usually to the distal extremities. Usually a well-developed internal 
shell, and lateral fins on the edges of the body. Heart in a coelomic 
cavity ; nidamentary glands usually present. 

Tribe 1. Oigopsida. — A wide aperture in the cornea. Two ovi- 
ducts in the female. In fossil genera and Spirula, shell has a multi- 
lobular phragmacone with a siphuncle; initial chamber globular 
and larger than the second chamber. The most ancient forms char- 
acterized by the small size of the rostrum and proostracum, and large 




Fig. 37. — Right and left sections through embryos of Loligo. 
(After Lankester.) 



A, 
B, 



al, 

is, 

ep, 

mes, 

ym, 

ng, 
ot, 
•wb, 



Same stage as fig. 35 (4). 

Same stage as fig. 35 (8) ; 

only the left side of the mtf, 
sections is drawn, and the g, 
food-material which occu- ps, 
pies the space internal to 
the membrane ym is dg, 
omitted. poc. 

Rectum. 

Ink-sac. I, 

Outer cell-layer. r, 

Middle cell-layer. soc, 

Deep cell-layer of fusiform 
cells (yolk- membrane). if, 

Optic nerve-ganglion. C, 

Otocyst. 

The " white body " of the 
adult ocular capsule form- 



ing as an invagination of 

the outer cell-layer. 
Mantle-skirt. 
Gill. 
Pen-sac or shell-sac, now 

closed. 
Dorsal groove. 
Primitive optic vesicle, now 

closed (see fig. 34). 
Lens. 
Retina. 
Second or anterior optic 

chamber still open. 
Iridean folds. 
The primitive invagination 

to form one of the otocysts, 

as seen in fig. 35 (5) and 

(6). 



6ize of the phragmacone. In the living genera, except Spirula, the 
shell is a chitinous gladius. 

Fam. 1. Belemnoteuthidae. Extinct; shell with well-developed 
phragmacone, and rostrum merely a calcareous envelope; 
siphuncular necks directed backwards as in Nautiloidea; ten 
equal arms provided with hooks. Phragmoteuthis, Trias. Belem- 
noteuthis, Jurassic and Cretaceous. Acanthoteuthis , Jurassic. 

Fam. 2. Aulacoceratidae, Extinct; phragmacone with widely 
separated septa; rostrum well developed and clavifprm. 
Aulacoceras, Trias. Atractites, Trias and Jurassic. %ipho- 
teuthis, Lias. 

Fam. 3. Belemnitidae. Extinct; phragmacone short with ventral 
siphuncle, prolonged dorsally into long proostracum; rostrum 
large and cylindrical. Belemnites, 350 species from Jurassic and 
Cretaceous. Diploconus, Upper Jurassic. 

Fam. 4. Belopteridae. Extinct; rostrum and phragmacone 
well developed, phragmacone often curved; initial chamber 
small. Beloptera, Eocene. Bayanoteuthis, Eocene. Spirulirostra, 
Miocene. 

Fam. 5. Spirulidae. Dorsal and ventral sides of posterior ex- 
tremity of shell uncovered by mantle; no rostrum or pro- 
ostracum; shell calcareous, coiled endogastrically and sipnun- 
culated; fins posterior. Spirula, three living species known, 
abyssal. 



Fam. 6. Ommatostrephidae. Shell internal and chitinous, ending 
aborally in a little narrow cone; tentacular arms short and 
thick; suckers with denticulate rings. Ommatostrephes, fins 
aboral, simple and rhomboidal, British. Ctenopteryx, fins 
pectinate, as long as the body; Bathyteuthis, fins terminal, 
rudimentary; tentacular arms, filiform; abyssal. Rhyncho- 
teuthis, tentacular arms united to form a beak-shaped appendage. 
Symplectoteuthis. Tracheloteuthis. Doridicus. Architeuthis ; this 
is the largest of Cephalopoda, reaching 60 ft. in length including 
arms. 

Fam. 7. Thysanoteuthidae. Arms enlarged, bearing two rows 
of suckers and filaments; fins triangular, extending whble 
length of body. Thysanoteuthis, Mediterranean. 

Fam. 8. Onychoteuthidae. Fins terminal; tentacular arms long; 
suckers with hooks. Onychoteuthis , hook-bearing suckers on 
tentacular arms only. Enoploteuthis, hook-bearing suckers 
on all the arms. Veranya, body very short, tentacular arms 
atrophied in the adult, Mediterranean. Chaunoteuthis, body 
elongated, tentacular arms atrophied. Pterygioteuthis. Ancis- 
troteuthis. Abralia. Teleoteuthis. Lepidoteuthis. 

Fam. 9. Gonatidae. Body elongated; .fins terminal; radula 
with only two lateral teeth. Gonaius. 

Fam. 10. Cheiroteuthidae. Tentacular arms long, not retractile; 
resisting apparatus well developed. Cheiroteuthis , suckers 
along the whole length of the tentacular arms. Doratopsis, 
body very long and slender with aboral spine, dorsal arms very 
short. Histioteuthis, six dorsal arms united by membrane, 
photogenous organs present. Histiopsis, membrane of dorsal 




Fig. 38. — Octopodous Cephalopods. 

A, Pinnoctopus cordiformis, Quoy and Gain (from New Zealand). 

B, Tremoctopus violaceus, Ver. (from the Mediterranean). 

C, Cranchia scabra, Owen (from the Atlantic Ocean; one of the 
Decapoda). 

D, Cirrhoteuthis Mulleri, Esch. (from the Greenland coast), 
arms only half-way up the arms, photogenous organs present. 
Calliteuthis, no brachial membrane, photogenous organs present. 
Grimalditeuthis , two fins on each side, no tentacular arms. 

Fam. 11. Cranchiidae. Eight normal arms, very short; eyes 
prominent; fins small and terminal. Cranchia, body short, 

Eurse-shaped, normal arms short, fins entirely aboral. Loligopsis, 
ody elongated, conical, tentacular arms slender. Leachia, 
tentacular arms absent, funnel without a valve. Taonius, body 
elongated, normal arms, rather short, eyes pedunculated. 
Tribe 2. Myopsida. — No aperture in the cornea. Left oviduct 
only developed in female. Internal shell without a distinct phrag- 
macone, calcified or simply chitinous. 
Fam. 1. Sepiidae. Body wide and flat; fins narrow, extending 
the whole length of the body; shell calcareous and laminated. 
Belosepia, a rudiment of rostrum and phragmacone present in 
shell, Eocene. Sepia, shell with a rostrum, British. Sepiella, 
shell without a rostrum. 



yo2 



CEPHEUS— CERAM 



Fam. 2. Sepiolidae. Body short, rounded at the aboral end ; fins 
rounded, inserted in middle of body-length; shell chitinous, 
small or absent. Sepiola, head united to mantle dorsally, 
British. Rossia, head not united to mantle, British. Stoloteuthis 
and Inioteuihis, without shell. Heteroteuthis. Euprymna. 

Fam. 3. Idiosepiidae. Body elongated, with rudimentary ter- 
minal fins; internal shell almost lost. Jdiosepius, 1-5 cm. long, 
Indian Ocean. 

Fam. 4. Sepiadariidae. Body short; mantle united to head 
dorsally; no shell. Sepiadarium, Pacific Ocean. Sepioloidea, 
Australian. 

Fam. 5. Loliginidae. Body elongated and conical ; fins extending 
forward beyond the middle of body-length; shell chitinous, 
well developed. Loligo, fins triangular, aboral, British. Sepio- 
teuthis, fins rounded, extending along whole of body-length. 
Loliolus. Loliguncula. The following fossil genera, known only 
by their gladius and ink-sac, have been placed near Loligo:— 
Teuthopsis, Beloteuthis and Geoteuthis, Lias; Phylloteuthis, 
Cretaceous; Plesioteuthis, Jurassic and Cretaceous. 

Suborder 2. Octopoda. — Only four pairs of arms, all similar 
and longer than the body. Body short and rounded aborally. 




1 

mil i 




1 



B&% 





n 



"mm 



1 






Wmm 



FlG. 39. — Palaeoctopus Newboldi, the oldest Octopod known. From 
the Cretaceous rocks of Lebanon. (After H. Woodward.) 

Suckers sessile. Hearc not contained in coelom. No nidamentary 
glands. 

Tribe I. Leioglossa. — No radula. Arms united by a complete 
membrane. Fins on sides of body. 

Fam. Cirrhoteuthidae. Tentacular filaments on either side of 
the suckers. Cirrhoteuthis , pallial sac prominent, fins large, 
pelagic. Opisthoteuthis, body flattened, with small fins, deep- 
sea. Vampyroteuthis, four fins. Palaeoctopus, fossil, Cretaceous. 
Tribe 2. Trachyglossa. — Radula present. No fins. 
Fam. 1. Amphitretidae. Arms united by membrane; funnel 
attached to mantle, dividing the pallial aperture into two. 
Amphitretus, pelagic. 



Fam. 2. Alloposidae. All arms united by membrane; mantle 

joined to head by dorsal band and two lateral commissures. 

Alloposus, pelagic. 
Fam. 3. Octopodidae. Arms long and equal, without membrane; 

hectocotylus not autotomous. No cephalic aquiferous pores. 

Octopus, two rows of suckers on each arm, British. Eledone, 

single row of suckers on each arm. Scaeurgus. Pinnoctopus. 

Cistopus. Japetetta. 
Fam. 4. Philonexidae. Hectocotylus autotomous; arms unequal 

in size; aquiferous pores on head and funnel. Tremoctopus, 

two dorsal pairs of arms united by membrane. Ocythoi, without 

interbrachial membrane. 
Fam. 5. Argonautidae. Hectocotylus autotomous; no inter- 
* brachial membrane; extremities of dorsal arms in female 

expanded and secreting a shell; males very small, without 

shell. Argonauta. 
Literature. — Use has been freely made above of the article by 
E. Ray Lankester, on Mollusca, in the 9th edition of this Encyclo- 
pedia. For the chief modern works, see Bashford Dean, " Notes 
on Living Nautilus," Amer. Nat. xxxv., 1901 ; Arthur Willey, 
" Contribution to the Natural History of the Pearly Nautilus," 
A. Willey's Zoological Results, pt. vi. (1902) ; Foord, Cat. Fossil 
Cephalopoda in British Museum; Alpheus Hyatt, " Fossil Cephalo- 
pods of the Museum of Comp. Zoology," Bull. Mus. Corrip. Zool. 
(Cambridge, U.S., 1868); Jalta, " I Cefalopodi viventi nel golfo di 
Napoli," Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel, xxiii. (1896); 
Joubin, " Cephalopodes de l'atlantique nord," " Ceph. delaPrincesse 
Alice," Camp, sci, Albert I" de Monaco, ix. (1895), xxii. (1900); 
Paul Pelseneer, " Mollusca," in the Treatise on Zoology, edited by 
E. Ray Lankester. (J. T. C.) 

CEPHEUS, in Greek mythology, the father of Andromeda 
(q.v.) ; in astronomy, a constellation of the northern hemisphere, 
mentioned by Eudoxus (4th century B.C.) and Aratus (3rd 
century B.C.). Ptolemy catalogued 13 stars in this constellation, 
Tycho 11, and Hevelius 51. The most interesting star in it is 
5 Cephei, a remarkable double star, the brighter component of 
which is a short period variable (5-37 days), with a-, range in 
magnitude of 3-7 to 4-9; it is also a spectroscopic binary. 

CEPHISODOTUS, the name of the father and of the son of 
Praxiteles, both sculptors like himself. The former must have 
flourished about 400 B.C. A noted work of his was Peace bearing 
the infant Wealth, of which a copy exists at Munich. Peace is a 
Madonna-like figure of a somewhat conservative type; the child 
Wealth is less successful. Cephisodotus also made, like his son, 
a figure of Hermes carrying the child Dionysus, unless indeed 
ancient critics have made two works of one. He made certain 
statues for the city of Megalopolis, founded in 370 B.C. Of the 
work of the younger Cephisodotus, his grandson, we have no 
remains; he was a prolific sculptor of the latter part of the 4th 
century B.C., especially noted for portraits, of Menander, of the 
orator Lycurgus, and others (see J. Overbeck, Antike Schrift- 
quellen, p. 255). 

CERAM (Sirang), an island of the Dutch East Indies, in the 
Molucca group, lying about 3° S., and between 127 45' and 131 
E. Its length is a little over 200 m., its greatest breadth about 
50 m., and its area, including neighbouring islets, 6621 sq. m. 
It consists of two parts, Great Ceram and Little Ceram or 
Huvamohel, united by the isthmus of Taruno; and, for ad- 
ministrative purposes, is assigned to the residency of Amboyna, 
being divided into Kairatu or West Ceram, Wahai and Amahai, 
the northern and the southern parts of Middle Ceram, and Waru 
or Eastern Ceram. No central chain of mountains stretches 
west and east through the island, but near the north coast hills, 
rising 2300 to 2600 ft., slope steeply to the shore. Near the south 
coast, west of the Bay of Elpaputeh, a complex mass of mountains 
forms, a colossal pyramid, with peaks rising to nearly 5000 ft. 
The isthmus connecting the two parts of the island is very 
narrow, and has a height of only 460 to 490 ft. The chief rivers 
flow north and south into bays, but are navigable only for a few 
miles during the rainy season. The rainfall is very heavy, 
amounting to 121 in. (mean annual) on the south coast. On the 
north coast the bays of Savai and Waru are accessible for small 
vessels. The geological structure, consisting chiefly of eruptive 
rocks and crystalline limestone, is similar to that of northern 
Amboyna. In the eastern section the prevailing rock is crystal- 
line chalk, similar to that of Buru. Several hot springs occur, 
and earthquakes are not infrequent. About 4000 persons 



CERAMICS 



703 



perished in the earthquake of 1899. A large part of the interior is 
covered with dense forests, and except along the coast the popu- 
lation is scanty. For the naturalist Ceram is without much 
interest, lacking characteristic species or abundance of specimens. 
The Bandanese pay occasional visits to shoot bears and deer; 
there are numbers of wild goats and cattle; and among birds are 
mentioned cassowaries, cockatoos, birds of paradise, and the 
swallows that furnish edible nests. A large number of fish are 
to be found in the various rivers; and as early as i860 no fewer 
than 213 species were described. The most valuable timber tree 
is the iron-wood. Rice, maize, cocoa-nuts, sugar-cane and a 
variety of fruits are grown; and some tobacco is exported to 
Europe; but by far the most important production is the sago 
palm, which grows abundantly in the swampy districts, especially 
of Eastern Ceram, and furnishes a vast supply of food, not only 
to Ceram itself, but to other islands to the east. The Dutch 
have established cocoa and coffee plantations at various points. 
The coast-villages are inhabited by a mixed Malay popula- 
tion, Buginese, Macassars, Balinese and other races of the 
archipelago. The interior is occupied by the aborigines, a people 
of Papuan stock. They are savages and head-hunters. The 
introduction of Christianity was hampered by the baneful 
influence of a secret society called the Kakian Union, to which 
pagans, Mahommedans and Christians indiscriminately attached 
themselves; and it has several times cost the Dutch authori- 
ties considerable efforts to frustrate their machinations (see 
Tijdschrift van Ned. Ltd., fifth year). The total population is 
estimated at 100,000, including 12,000 Christians and 16,000 
Mahommedans. The chief settlements are Savai at the north 
and Elpaputeh at the south end of the isthmus of Taruno. 
There was a Dutch fort at Kambello, on the west side of Little 
Ceram, as early as 1646. 

CERAMICS, or KERAMics(Gr.KepOiUos, earthenware), a general 
term for the study of the art of pottery. It is adopted for this 
purpose both in French (ciramique) and in German (Keramik) , and 
thus has its convenience in English as representing an inter- 
national form of description for a study which owes much to the 
art experts of all nations, though " ceramic " and " ceramics " 
do not appear in English as technical terms till the middle of the 
19th century. 

The word " pottery " (Fr. poterie) in its widest sense includes 
all objects fashioned from clay and then hardened by fire, though 
there is a growing tendency to restrict the word to the commoner 
articles of this great class and to apply the word "porcelain" to 
all the finer varieties. This tendency is to be deprecated, as it is 
founded on a misconception; the word " porcelain " should only 
be applied to certain well-marked varieties of pottery. The very 
existence of pottery is dependent on two important natural 
properties of that great and widespread group of rocky or earthy 
substances known as clays, viz. the property of plasticity (the 
power of being readily kneaded or moulded while moist), and 
the property of being converted when fired into one of the most 
indestructible of ordinary things. 

The clays form such an important group of mineral substances 
that the reader must refer to the article Clay for an account of 
their occurrence, composition and properties. In this article we 
shall only deal with the various clays as they have affected the 
problems of the potter throughout the ages. The clays found on 
or close to the earth's surface are so varied in composition and 
properties that we may see in them one of the vital factors that 
has determined the nature of the pottery of different countries 
and different peoples. They vary in plasticity, and in the hard- 
ness, colour and texture of the fired product, through an astonish- 
ingly wide range. To-day the fine, plastic, white-burning clays of 
the south of England are carried all over Europe and America 
for the fabrication of modern wares, but that is a state of affairs 
which has only been attained in recent times. Even down to 
the 18th century, the potters of every country could only use on 
an extensive scale the clays of their own immediate district, and 
the influence of this controlling factor on the pottery of bygone 
centuries has never yet received the attention it deserves. 1 
1 The archaeologist is frequently puzzled as to the place of origin. 



General Evolution of Pottery. — The primitive races of mankind, 
whether of remote ages or of to-day, took perforce such clay as 
they found on the surface of the ground, or by some river-bed, and 
with the rudimentary preparation of spreading it out on a stone 
slab if necessary and picking out any rocky fragments of appreci- 
able size, then beating it with the hands, with stones or boards, or 
treading it with the feet to render it fairly uniform in consistency, 
proceeded to fashion it into such shapes as need or fancy dictated. 
Fired in an open fire, or in the most rudimentary form of potter's 
kiln, such pottery may be buff, drab, brown or red — and these 
from imperfect firing become smoked, grey or black. How many 
generations of men, of any race, handed on their painfully 
acquired bits of knowledge before this earliest stage was passed, 
we can never know; but here and there, where the circumstances 
were favourable or the race was quick of observation, we can 
trace in the work of prehistoric man in many countries a gradually 
advancing skill based on increased technical knowledge. For 
ages tools and methods remained of the simplest — the fingers 
for shaping or building up vessels, a piece of mat or basket- 
work for giving initial support to a more ambitious vase, — until 
some original genius of the tribe finds that by starting to build up 
his pot on the flattened side of a boulder he can turn his support 
so as to bring every part in succession under his hand, and lo! 
the potter's wheel is invented — not brought down from heaven by 
one of the gods to a favoured race, as the myths of all the older 
civilizations or barbarisms, Egyptian, Chaldean, Greek, Scythian, 
and Chinese have fabled, but born from the brain and hand of 
man struggling to fulfil his allotted task. 

Formerly every writer on the history of pottery seemed to 
imagine that the very rudest pottery must have been the inven- 
tion of Egyptian, Chinese or some other distinct race from which 
the knowledge radiated to all the other races of the prehistoric 
world. No conception could be more erroneous. Since the 
middle of the 19th century research has established beyond doubt 
that wherever clay was found men became potters of a sort, just 
as they became hunters, carpenters, smiths, &c, by sheer force of 
need and slowly-gathered tradition. The not yet exploded view 
that Egypt or Assyria was the special cradle of this art, and that 
the pottery of the Greeks and Romans directly descended from 
such a parent stock, cannot survive in view of the incontestable 
evidence that pottery was made by the prehistoric peoples of 
what we now call Greece, Italy, Spain and other countries, long 
before they were aware that any other peoples lived on the earth 
than themselves. 

For centuries this simple hand-made pottery was hardened by 
drying in the sun, so that it would serve for the storage of dried 
grain, &c, but the increasing use of fire would soon bring out the 
amazing fact that a baked clay vessel became as hard as stone. 
Then, too, came the knowledge that even in one district all the 
clays did not fire to the same colour, and colour decoration arose, 
in a rude daubing or smearing of some clay or earth (a ruddle or 
bole perhaps) , which was found to give a bright red or buff colour 
on vessels shaped in a duller-coloured clay — most precious of all 
were little deposits of white clay which kept their purity unsullied 
through the fire, — and by these primitive means the races of the 
dawn made their wares. On this substructure all the pottery 
of the last four thousand years has been built, for behind all 
Egyptian, Greek or Chinese pottery we find the same primitive 
foundations. 

We now reach the beginnings of recorded history, and as the 
great nations of the past emerge from the shadows they each 
develop the potter's art in an individual way. The Egyptians 
evolve schemes of glowing colour — brilliant glazes fired on 
objects, shaped in sand held together with a little clay, or actually 
carved from rocks or stones; the Greeks produce their marvels 

of some example of ancient pottery — was it made in the district 
where it was found, or had it been imported from some other centre? 
When we possess a sufficient body of analytical data obtained by the 
use of one general chemical method, an analysis of a fragment will 
frequently enable such a question to be answered, where now all is 
doubt and speculation, feut the analytical results published hitherto 
are often not worth the paper they are printed on for such a purpose, 
the older methods of silicate analysis being only approximate. 



704 



CERAMICS 



[GENERAL 



of plastic form, and then, excited by their growing skill in metal 
work, turn the plastic clay into imitations of metal forms. These 
nations are overthrown, and the Romans spread some knowledge 
— only a tincture, it must be confessed— over all the lands they 
hold in fee; and from the Euphrates to the Atlantic, from Egypt 
to the Wall of Hadrian, they set alight potters' fires that have 
never since been extinguished. The Roman empire falls, and 
over Europe its pottery is forgotten along with its greater 
achievements; yet still pottery-making goes on in a very simple 
way, to be slowly revived and modified once more by the com- 
munities of monks, who, in later centuries, replace the Roman 
legions as the great civilizing influence in Europe. Meantime 
Egypt and the nearer East continued, in a debased form, the 
splendours of their glorious past, and glazed and painted pottery 
was still made by traditional methods. What part the Byzantine 
civilization and the Persians played during this obscure time, we 
are only just beginning to realize; but we now know that many 
interesting kinds of decorated pottery were made at Old Cairo, at 
Alexandria, at Damascus, in Syria, Anatolia and elsewhere (on 
which the later Moslem potters founded their glorious works), 
at a time when all over Europe crocks of simple red or drab clay, 
covered only with green and yellow lead-glazes, were the sole 
evidence of the potter's skill. What the Arab conquests destroyed, 
and what their breath quickened into life, we can only guess; 
but the fact is indisputable that with the Mahommedan con- 
quests there came a time when the potter's art of the Occident 
reached its highest expression, and when methods and knowledge 
hitherto confined to Egypt, Syria and Persia were spread from 
Spain and the south of France to India — even, it may be, into 
China. 

Meantime, in the farther East, the Chinese — the greatest race 
of potters the world has ever seen — were quietly gathering 
strength, until from their glazed, hard-fired pottery there emerged 
the marvellous, white translucent porcelain, one of the wonders 
of the medieval world. 

With the dawn of the 15th century of our era, the state of 
affairs was practically this:— In European countries proper we 
find rudely fashioned and decorated wares in which we can trace 
the slow development of a native craft from the superposition 
of Roman methods on the primitive work of the peoples. The 
vessels were mostly intended for use and not for show; were 
clumsily fashioned of any local clay, and if glazed at all then only 
with coarse lead-glazes, coloured yellow or green; in no case 
above the level of workmanship of the travelling brick- or tile- 
maker. The finest expression of this native style is to be found 
in the Gothic tile pavements of France, Germany and England, 
where all the colours are due to the clays and there is no approach 
to painting. In the Moslem countries — including the greater 
part of Spain and Sicily, Egypt and the nearer East, probably 
even to the very centre of Asia — pottery was being made either 
of whitish clay and sand, or of a light reddish clay coated with a 
white facing of fine clay or of tin-enamel, on which splendid 
decorative patterns in vivid pigments or brilliant iridescent 
lustres were painted. 

As early as the 12 th century of our era this superior artistic 
pottery of the Moslem nations had already attracted the notice of 
Europeans as an article of luxury for the wealthy; and we may 
well believe the traditional accounts that Saracen potters were 
brought into Italy, France and Burgundy to introduce the 
practice of their art, while Italian potters certainly penetrated 
into the workshops of eastern Spain and elsewhere, and gathered 
new ideas. In Italy certainly, and in the south of France 
probably, efforts were continuously in progress to improve the 
native wares by coating the vessels with a white " slip " and 
drawing on them rude, painted patterns in green, yellow and 
purplish black. The increasing intercourse with Spain, in war 
and peace, also introduced the use of tin-enamel after the fashion 
of the famous Hispano-Moresque wares, and by the end of the 
14th century a knowledge of tin-enamel was widespread in Italy 
and paved the way to the glorious painted majolica of the 15th 
and 16th centuries. From Italy and Spain, France and Holland, 
Germany, and finally, though much later, England learnt this art, 



and the tin-enamelled pottery of middle and northern Europe, so 
largely made during the 17th and 18th centuries, was the direct 
offshoot of this movement of the Italian Renaissance. 1 

During the 15th and 16th centuries Chinese porcelain also 
began to find its way into Europe, and by the whiteness of its 
substance and its marvellous translucence excited the attention 
of the Italian majolists and alchemists. The first European 
imitation of this famous oriental porcelain of which we have 
indubitable record was made at Florence (1575-1585) by alche- 
mists or potters working under the patronage, and, it is said, with 
the active collaboration of Francesco de' Medici. This Florentine 
porcelain was the first of those distinctively European wares, 
made in avowed imitation of the Chinese, which form a connect- 
ing link between pottery and glass, for they may be considered 
either as pottery rendered translucent or as glass rendered 
opaque by shaping and firing a mixture containing a large 
percentage of glass with a very little clay. After the cessation of 
the Florentine experiments we know of no European porcelain 
for nearly a century, though the importation of Chinese porcelain 
had largely increased owing to the activity of the various " India" 
companies. The next European porcelain, made like the 
Florentine of glass and clay, was that of Rouen (1673) and St 
Cloud (1696); and during the 18th century artificial glassy 
porcelain was made in France and England largely, and in other 
countries experimentally. German experimenters worked in 
another direction, and the first porcelain made in Europe from 
materials similar to the Chinese was produced at Meissen by 
Bottger (1710-1712). During the 18th century not only was 
there a very large trade in imported Chinese and Japanese 
porcelain, but there was a great development of porcelain 
manufacture in Europe; and in every country factories were 
established, generally under royal or princely patronage, for the 
manufacture of artificial porcelain like the French, or genuine 
porcelain like the German. The English made a departure in 
the introduction of a porcelain distinct from either, through 
adding calcined ox-bones to the other ingredients; and this 
English bone-porcelain— a well-marked species — is now largely 
made in America, France, Germany and Sweden as well as in 
England. 

By the end of the 18th century the risks and losses attendant 
on the manufacture of the French glassy porcelain had caused its 
abandonment, and a porcelain made from natural materials like 
the Chinese has since been generally made on the continent of 
Europe. 

The older tin-enamelled wares— derived from the Hispano- 
Moresque and the Italian majolica — so largely made in France, 
Holland, Germany and elsewhere during the 17th and 18th 
centuries, met with a fate analogous to that of the French 
porcelain. Tin-enamelled earthenware is always a brittle 
substance, soon damaged in regular use; so that, when, in the 
middle of the 18th century, the English potter first appeared as a 
serious competitor with a fine white earthenware of superior 
durability and precision of manufacture, the old painted faience 
gradually disappeared between the upper millstone of European 
porcelain and the nether millstone of English earthenware. 

The 19th century witnessed a great and steady growth in the 
output of porcelain and pottery of all kinds in Europe and the 
United States. Mechanical methods were largely called in to 
supplement or replace what had hitherto remained almost pure 
handicraft. The English methods of preparing and mixing the 
materials of the body and glaze, and the English device of replac- 
ing painted decoration by machine printing, to a large extent 
carried the day, with a great gain to the mechanical aspects of the 

1 It must always be borne in mind that, side by side with the 
production of artistic wares in all countries, the traditional craft 
of the village pot-maker continued, and has probably been less 
interfered with than is generally imagined, except in the British 
Isles. Any country market-place in Spain. Italy, Greece, France, 
Germany, or Holland is provided to-day with a simple peasant 
pottery little removed in its forms, its decorations, or its technical 
skill from the country work of the middle ages. In England the 
cheapness of machine-made pottery has largely destroyed such 
village industries. 



GENERAL] 

work and in many cases with an entire extinction of its artistic 
spirit. Even the hand-work that still remained was largely 
affected by the growing dominance of machinery; and the 
painting, gilding and decoration of pottery and porcelain, in the 
first half of the 19th century, became everywhere mechanical and 
hackneyed. During the latter half of the 19th century another 
influence was fortunately at work. Side by side with the increas- 
ing mechanica' perfection of the great bulk of modern pottery 
there grew up a school of innovators and experimentalists, who 
revived many of the older decorative methods that had fallen 
into oblivion and produced fresh and original work, in certain 
directions even beyond the achievements of the past. The 20th 
century opened with a wider outlook among the potters of Europe 
and America. In every country men were striving once again to 
bring back to their world-old craft something of artistic taste 
and skill. 

Technical Methods.— All primitive pottery, whether of ancient or 
of modern times, has been made by the simplest methods. 1 he clay, 
dug from the earth's surface, was or is prepared by beating and 
kneading with the hands, feet or simple mallets of stone or wood; 
stones and hard particles were picked out; and the mass, well 
tempered with water, was used without any addition. l<rom this 
clay, vessels were shaped by scooping out or cutting a solid lump 
or ball, by building up piece by piece and smoothing down one layer 
upon another or by squeezing cakes of clay on to some natural object 
or prepared mould or form. The potter's wheel, though very 
ancient, was a comparatively late invention, arrived at independ- 
ently by many races of men. In its simplest form it was a heavy 



CERAMICS 



70S 





Fig. 1. — Potter mould- 
ing a vessel on the wheel 
(from a painting in a tomb 
at Thebesabout 1800B.C.). 
Compare the wheel on the 
left in fig. 5. 



Fig. 2. — Potter's wheel of 
the time of the Ptolemies, 
moved by the foot (from a 
wall-relief at Philae). Com- 
pare fig. 5, the wheel on the 
right. 



disk pivoted on a central point to be set going by the hand, as the 
workman squatted on the ground ; and it may be seen to-day in 
India, Ceylon, China or Japan, in all its primitive simplicity (see 
fig 1) This form of potter's wheel was the only one known until 
about the Christian era, and then, in Egypt apparently, the improve- 
ment was introduced of lengthening the spindle which carries the 
throwing-wheel and mounting on it near the base a much larger disk 
which the potter could rotate with his foot, and so have both hands 
free for the manipulation of the clay (fig. 2). No further advance 
seems to have been made before the 17th century, when the wheel 
was spun by means of a cord working over a pulley ; and though a 
steam-driven wheel was introduced in the middle of the 19th century, 
this form remains the best for the production of fine pottery. 

A prevalent misconception with regard to the potter s wheel 
needs correction. For anything beyond very simple shapes it is 
impossible to carry the work to completion on the wheel at one 
operation as is generally imagined. Ail that the potter can do while 
the clay is soft enough to " throw " on the wheel is to get a rough 
shape of even thickness. This operation completed, the piece is 
removed from the wheel and set aside to dry. When it is about 
leather-hard, it may be re-centred carefully on the wheel (the old 
practice), or placed in a horizontal lathe (since 16th century) and 
turned down to the exact shape and polished to an even, smooth 
surface. The Greek vase-makers were already adepts in what is 
often reckoned a modern, detestable practice. Many Greek vases 
have obviously been " thrown " in separate sections, and when these 
had contracted and hardened sufficiently they were luted together 
with slip, and the final vase-shape was smoothed and turned down 
on the wheel, and even polished to as fine a degree of mechanical 
finish as the modern potter ever attains. So too with the Chinese ; 
many of their forms have been made in two or three portions, subse- 
quently joined together and finished on the outside as one piece. 
Indeed it is remarkable how the Greeks and Chinese had discovered 
for themselves many devices of this kind which are generally held 
up to opprobrium as the debased methods of a mechanical age. 

V. »3 



Always it should be borne in mind that the shaping of pottery by 
" pressing " cakes of clay into moulds is much older than the potter's 
wheel, and has always been the method of making shapes other than 
those in the round. The modern method of " casting " pottery by 
pouring slip, a fluid mixture of clay and water, into absorbent moulds 
seems to have originated in England about the middle of the 18th 
century; and this too is a genuine potter's method which does not 
merit the disapproval with which it has been generally regarded 
by writers on the potter's art. 

In all ages the work of the " thrower " or ' presser has been 
largely supplemented by the modeller, who alters the shape, and 
applies to it handles, spouts or modelled accessories at will. 

Firing. — The firing of pottery has become in modern times such a 
specialized branch of the manufacture that the student can only be 
referred here to the technological works mentioned in the biblio- 
graphy at the end of this 

article. It is, however, /V/> 

necessary that we should 
briefly describe the earlier 
forms of potters' kilns 
used by the nations whose 
pottery counts among the 
treasures of the collector 
and the antiquary. Here 
again we now know that 
the primitive types of kiln 
used by the potters of 
ancient Egypt or Greece 
have not vanished from 
the earth; it is only in 
the civilized countries of 
the modern world that 
they have been replaced 
by improved and perfected 
devices. The potters of 
the North-West Provinces 
of India use to-day a kiln 
practically identical with 
that depicted in severest 
silhouette on the rock- 
tombs of Thebes; and the 
skilful Japanese remain 
content with a kiln very 
similar to the one shown 

in fig. %. This Greek type _ _ , _, , , ., 

of kiln was improved and Fig. 3 --Early Greek pottery^ln 
enlarged by the Romans, about 700-600 B.C. (from a painted 
and its use seems to have votive tablet found at Corinth, now in 
been introduced wherever the Louvre). The section shows the 
pottery was made under probable construction of the kill), 
their sway, for remains of .,/•-, m-^x. ±u 

Roman kilns have been found in many countries (see ng. 4). With the 
end of Roman dominance we have ample evidence that their technical 
methods fell into disuse, and the northern European potter of the 
period from the 6th to the 12th century had to build up his methods 





Fig. 4.— Roman kiln found at Castor. The low arch is for' the 
insertion of the fuel ; the pots rested on the perforated floor, made 
of clay slabs; the top of the kiln is missing,— it was probably a 
dome. 

afresh, and improved kilns were invented. The general type of 
medieval potter's kiln is illustrated for us in the manuscript of an 
Italian potter of the 1 6th century, now in the library of the Victoria 
and Albert Museum 1 (fig. 5)- Kilns of a different type horizontal 
reverberatory kilns, were used for ma king the hard-fired pottery ol 

1 I Ire libri dell' Arte del Vasajo, by Cipriano Piccolpasso of Castel 
Durante, a.d. 1548. 

11 



706 



CERAMICS 



[GENERAL 



Europe (Rhenish stoneware, &c), as well as for Chinese porcelain 
and the earliest German porcelains. With the organization of pottery 
as a factory industry in the 18th century, improved kilns were intro- 
duced, and the type of kiln now so largely used in civilized countries 
is practically a vertical reverberatory furnace of circular section, 
from 10 to 22 ft. in diameter and of similar height, capable, there- 
fore, of containing at one firing a quantity of pottery that would 
have formed the output of a medieval potter for a year. Every 
device that can be thought of for the better utilization of heat and 




Fig. 5. — Two forms of Italian potter's wheels, about 1540. 

its even distribution throughout the kiln or oven has been experi- 
mented with; and, though the results have been most successful 
from the point of view of the potter, even the most recent coal-fired 
ovens remain very wasteful types of apparatus, the amount of 
available heat being relatively small to the fuel consumption. Gas- 
fired kilns and ovens are now being used or experimented with in 
every country, and their perfection, which cannot be far distant, 
will improve the most vital of the potter's processes both in certainty 
and economy. 

Glazes. — We are never likely to known when glaze {i.e. a coating of 
fired glass) was first applied to pottery, though the present state of 
knowledge would incline us to the opinion that the earliest glazed 
objects we possess are those of ancient Egypt, 1 but the practice 
may have been originated independently wherever a knowledge of 
the elements of glass-making had spread, as all the early glazes 
were of the alkaline type, which must first be fused into a glass 
before they can be applied to pottery. 

Many primitive races seem to have burnished their pottery after 
it was fired, in order to get a glossy surface ; and in other cases the 
surface was rendered shining and waterproof by coating it with 
waxy or resinous substances which were often coloured. It is 
possible that the black varnish of Greek vases was obtained by such 
a method, and though that point is not settled, we have many types 
of primitive pottery, both modern and ancient, which are coated in 
this way. Such a coating is only a substitute for glaze in the work of 
peoples who do not know or have not mastered the technical secrets 
of true glazes. We can only consider as glazes those definite super- 
ficial layers of molten material which have been fired on the clay 
substance. Glazes are as varied as the various kinds of pottery, 
and it must never be forgotten that each kind of pottery is at its 
best with its appropriate glaze. The earliest known glazes (Egyptian 
and Assyrian) were silicates of soda and lime containing very little 
alumina and no lead. Such glazes are very uncertain in use, and 
can only be applied to pottery unusually rich in silica {i.e. deficient 
in clay). Consequently these alkaline glazes cannot be used on 
ordinary clay wares, and when they have been used successfully, the 
clay has always been coated with a surface layer of highly siliceous 
substance (e.g. the so-called Persian, Rhodian, Syrian and Egyptian 
pottery of the early middle ages). The fact that glazes containing 
lead-oxide would adhere to ordinary pottery when alkaline glazes 
would not was discovered at a very early period; for lead glazes 
were extensively used in Egypt and the nearer East in Ptolemaic 
times, and it is significant that, though the Romans made singularly 
little use of glazes of any kind, the pottery that succeeded theirs, 
either in western Europe or in the Byzantine empire, was generally 
covered with glazes rich in lead. Throughout Europe, and over the 
greater part of the world, leaded glazes have been continuously used 
and improved for all ordinary pottery, and it is only with certain 
special hard-fired types of ware that they have yet been successfully 
replaced. Chinese porcelain and all the European porcelains made 
by analogous methods are fired at so high a temperature that a glaze 
by felspar softened by lime and silica is found most suitable for them, 
and the hard-fired stonewares, rich in silica, are often glazed with a 
salt glaze, or a melted earth rich in oxide of iron. 

Every kind of potter's clay (the mixture of clay, sand, flint, &c, 
from which the potter shapes his wares) has its own type of glaze, 
and from the earliest time down to our own what the potter could 
produce in form or glaze or colour has been largely decided for him 
by the clay material at his command. With any good plastic play 

1 The earliest glazed objects found in Egyptian tombs (once 
dignified by the name of Egyptian porcelain) are hardly to be called 
pottery at all, though we have no other name for them. The 
material is largely sand held together by a little clay and glass. 



which cannot be fired at the highest temperature, lead glazes have 
always proved the most practicable. A similar clay, to which large 
quantities of sand are added, may be glazed by the vapours of 
common salt ; and mixtures rich in felspar, like Chinese or European 
porcelain, can be glazed by melting felspathic materials upon them . 
Naturally those species of pottery which are the hardest fired are the 
most durable — the glazes of hard porcelain are more unchangeable 
than lead glazes, and these in their turn than alkaline glazes. 

Themost important types of glaze are (1) alkaline glazes {e.g. 
Egyptian, Syrian, Persian, &c), the oldest and most uncertain; 
(2) lead glazes, the most widespread in use and the best for all 
ordinary purposes; (3) felspathic glazes, the glazes of hard-fired 
porcelains, generally unsuited to any other material ; (4) salt glaze, 
produced by vapours of common salt, the special glaze of stonewares. 
Many intermediate glazes have been devised to meet special needs, 
but these remain the only important groups. Fuller details on this 
important subject must be sought in the technical works. 

Colours. — The primitive potters of ancient and modern times 
have all striven to decorate their wares with colour. The simplest, 
and therefore the earliest, colour decoration was carried out in 
natural earths and clays. The clays are so varied in composition 
that they fire to every shade of colour from white to grey, cream, 
buff, red, brown, or even to a bronze which is almost black. One 
clay daubed or painted upon another formed the primitive palette 
of the potter, especially before the invention of glaze. When glaze 
was used these natural clays were changed in tint, and native earths, 
. other than clays, containing iron, manganese and cobalt, were 
gradually discovered and used. It is also surprising to note that some 
of the very earliest glazes were coloured glasses containing copper or 
iron (the green, turquoise and yellow glazes of the ancient Egyptians 
and Assyrians). Marvellous workwas wrought in these few materials, 
but the era of the finest pottery-colour dawns with the Persian, 
Syrian and Egyptian work that preceded the Crusades. By this time 
the art of glazing pottery with a clear soda-lime glaze had been 
thoroughly learnt. Vases, tiles, &c, shaped in good plastic clay, 
were covered with a white, highly siliceous coating fit to receive 
glazes of this type, and giving the best possible ground for the painted 
colours then known. With this rudimentary technique the potters 
of the countries south and east of the Mediterranean produced, 
between the 9th and 16th centuries of our era, a type of pottery 
that remains ideal from the point of view of colour : for, with nothing 
more than the greens given by oxide of copper and iron, the turquoise 
of pure copper, the deep yet vivid blue of cobalt, the beautiful un- 
certain purple of manganese, and in certain districts the rich red of 
Armenian bole, they achieved colour schemes that have never been 
surpassed in their brilliant yet harmonious richness. 

When the coating of white siliceous clay was replaced by an 
opaque tin-enamel as in Spain, Italy, France, Holland, &c, a 
necessary change in the colour schemes resulted. At first only the 
copper-greens and cobalt-blues could be used on such a ground; 
the fine manganese purple turned to brown or black and the rich 
iron-reds to filthy shades of yellow. We cannot wonder that the 
Spanish-Arab potters paid more attention to their lustre decoration, 
for* that was the natural thing to do. How strong and fine a palette 
could be evolved for use on a tin-enamel ground was shown by the 
Italian majolists of the 15th and 16th centuries; and when the 
later developments of tin-enamelled pottery took place in France, 
Holland, Germany, &c, their colour schemes are only echoes of 
Italian majolica crossed with Chinese porcelain. Delft, Nevers, 
Moustiers and Rouen may each charm us with its individuality; 
Nuremberg and other south German towns may show us that they 
too had mastered the use of tin-enamel; yet our minds always go 
back to the colour schemes of Italian majolica and of the Persian and 
Syrian pottery that lie behind and beyond them. 

The colours already spoken of were either clay colours or what are 
known as "under glaze" colours, because they were painted on th« 
pottery before the glaze was fired. 

The earliest glazes of the Egyptians appear not to have been 
white, but were coloured throughout their substance, and this use of 
coloured glazes as apart from painted colour was developed along 
with the painted decoration by the later Egyptian, Syrian and 
Persian potters. Green, yellow and brown glazes were almost the 
only artistic productions of the medieval European potters' kilns, 
and their use everywhere preceded the introduction of painted 
pottery. The most extensive application of coloured glazes was, 
however, that made by the Chinese, who developed this type of 
colour decoration before they used painted patterns in underglaze 
colour. The earliest Chinese porcelains, and the hard-fired stone- 
wares out of which their porcelain arose, were decorated in this way, 
and the beauty of many of the early Sung coloured glazes has never 
been surpassed. 

With the exceedingly refractory felspathic glazes of Chinese 
porcelain very few underglaze colours could be used; and the 
prevalence of blue and white among the early specimens of Chinese 
porcelains is due to the fact that cobalt was almost the onlj' substance 
known to the potters of the Ming dynasty which would endure the 
high temperature needed to melt their glazes. Consequently the 
Chinese were driven to invent the method of painting in coloured 
fusible glasses on the already fired glaze. They adopted for this 
purpose the coloured enamels used on metal; hence the common 



primitive; 



CERAMICS 



707 



term " enamel decoration," which is so generally applied to painting 
in those colours which are attached to the already fired glaze by 
retiring at a lower temperature. With the introduction of this many- 
coloured Chinese porcelain into Europe the same practice was eagerly 
followed by our European potters, and a new palette of colours and 
fresh styles of decoration soon arose amongst us. Painting in on- 
glaze colours, being executed on the fired glaze, resembles glass 
painting, and it generally offers a striking contrast both in technique 
and colour-quality to the painting executed in colours under the 
glaze. In the former the work can be highly finished and the most 
mechanical execution is possible, but the colours are neither so rich 
nor so brilliant as under-glaze colours, nor have they the same 
softness as is given by the slight spread of the under-glaze colour 
when the glaze is melted over it. 

It must be pointed out that the colour possibilities in any method 
of pottery decoration are largely dependent on the temperature at 
which the colour needs to be fired. The clay colours are naturally 
more limited in range than the under-glaze colours, and these in 
their turn than the on-glaze colours. 

When, about the middle of the 18th century, European pottery 
took on its modern form, of earthenware made after the English 
fashion, and porcelain like the French and German, the lead or 
felspathic glazes used brought about another revolution in the 
potter's palette. The growing ideal of mechanical perfection dis- 
counted the freedom of the earlier brushwork, and printed patterns, 
or painting that might almost have been printed, removed the mind 
still farther from the richness of painted faience or majolica. It is 
useless to look for the glorious colour of Persian faience, Italian 
majolica, or Chinese porcelain, in modern wares produced by manu- 
facturing processes where mechanical perfection is demanded to a 
degree undreamt of before the 19th century. The finest modern 
pottery colour is only to be sought in the work of those enthusiasts 
and experimenters who are striving to produce work as rich and free 
as the best of past times. 

Metals. — The noble metals, such as gold, platinum and silver, 
have, since the early years of the 18th century, been largely used as 
adjuncts to pottery decoration, especially on the fine white earthen- 
wares and porcelains of the last two centuries. At first the gold was 
applied with a kind of japanner's size and was not fired to the glaze, 
but for the last 150 years or so the metals have generally been 
fired to the surface of the glaze like enamel colours, by mixing the 
metal with a small proportion of flux or fusible ground glass. There 
can scarcely be a doubt that the ancient lustres of Persia, Syria and 
Spain were believed to be a form of gilding, though their decorative 
effect was much more beautiful than gilding has ever been. The 
early Chinese and Japanese gilding appears, like the European, to 
have been " sized " or water-gilt, not fired; and it seems probable 
that the use of." fired " gold was taught to the Oriental by the 
European in the 18th century. To-day " liquid " gold is exported 
to China and Japan from Europe for the use of the potter. 

Primitive Pottery 

We can group together that great and widely-spread class of 
vessels made by the primitive races of mankind, whether before 
the dawn of civilization or at the present day, for it is interesting 
to note that many modern races still make pottery by the same 
rude method as the Neolithic races of Europe and Asia, and with 
striking similarity of result. In fact, the knowledgeof themethods 
and practices of the primitive potters of our own time furnishes 
the best possible guide to the methods of fabrication and orna- 
mentation of the ancient specimens that are dug up from barrows, 
grave mounds, and tumuli. It is only natural that the materials 
and methods of such pottery are always of the simplest. The clay 
is used with very little preparation, and it is no unusual thing to 
find bits of stone, gravel, &c, embedded in the paste of such 
wares, though at a later stage of development they would have 
been removed. It must be remarked, however, that no race of 
potters practised the art for long without discovering that their 
vessels were not so liable to crack in drying, or lose their shape in 
firing, if fine sand or pounded " potsherds " were mixed with the 
clay; and when we are dealing with the work of races that have 
passed beyond the Stone Age and have learned the use of metals 
we find this custom universal. 

There are three methods of shaping which seem to be common 
to almost every primitive race: — 

r. The scooping out of a vessel from a ball of clay. 

2. The building up of a form, often on a piece of basket-work or 

matting, gradually raising the walls higher by applying and 
smoothing down successive layers of clay. 

3. Coiling; in which the clay is rolled out into thin ropes, and 
these are coiled round and round upon each other and 
smoothed down with the hands and with simple tools of bone, 
wood or metal. 



The use of the potter's wheel is unknown, while it is remarkable 
how beautifully true and finely-fashioned much primitive pottery 
is. The primitive red and black vases discovered by Flinders 
Petrie in Egypt, and the somewhat similar vessels of prehistoric 
date from Spain, are remarkable instances of this. Some primi- 
tive races leave their pottery without decoration, especially 
when they have a fine red-burning clay to work in, but, generally 
speaking, primitive pottery of every race and time is elaborately 
decorated, but only with the simplest patterns. Such decora- 
tions consist of lines, dots or lunette-shaped depressions arranged 
in crosses, chevrons, zigzags or all-over repeated pattern. All 
this ornament is scratched or impressed into the clay before it 
is fired. Simplest of all is, perhaps, the pattern which has so 
obviously been produced by pressing a twisted thong round the 
neck or bowl of a vase; though the thong may have been used in 
the first instance merely to serve as a support while the vessel was 
dried. At a later stage the ornament is generally obtained by 
scratching with a tool, by pressing the end of a hollow stick into 
the clay to form rows of circles, by using a stick cut at the end 
into the shape of a half-moon, or other equally simple decorative 
device. In certain tropical countries this rudimentary pottery 
becomes hard enough for a certain amount of use when merely 
dried in the sun, but in all northern and temperate countries 
it must have been fired, probably in the most imperfect way, in an 
open fire or in such a kiln as could be formed by sinking a hole into 
the ground and erecting round it a screen of stones. How imper- 
fect the firing was is shown by the ashen-grey colour due to smoke. 
In those countries where the ware has been more perfectly fired 
the pieces naturally become buff, drab, brown or red. 

The primitive vessels that have been found in the grave- 
mounds of England and the northern countries generally have 
received a number of fanciful names for which there is very little 
warrant except in the case of the cinerary urns. These are 
generally the largest vessels of this class, and as they were used 
to contain burnt bones there seems sufficient warrant for the sup- 
position that they were made for this and for no other purpose. 

Our knowledge of primitive pottery has been greatly improved 
during recent years by the labours of a number of American 
students connected with the United States Geological Survey, 
who have carefully recorded the present-day practices of those 
native tribes who make and use pottery in various parts of North 
America and Mexico; while, in the same way, Peruvian, Bra- 
zilian and other South American pottery has been as closely 
investigated by European observers. It should be noted that no 
primitive pottery reveals any trace of a knowledge of glaze, 
though much of it has been highly polished after firing, and in 
some cases a varnish has been applied which may perhaps be 
regarded as the earliest kind of " glazing " ever applied to pottery 
vessels. 

Literature. — On primitive pottery the following works may be 
specially mentioned. W. Greenwell, British Barrows (1877); Boyd- 
Dawkins, Early Man in Britain (1880); Mortimer, Forty Years' 
Researches in British and Saxon Burial-mounds of East Yorkshire 
(1905); Abercromby, "The Oldest Bronze-age Ceramic Type in 
Britain," /. Anth. Inst. vol. xxxii. (1902), 373; Guide to Antiquities 
of the Bronze Age (British Museum, 1904) ; Koenen, Gefdsskunde 
der vorrbmischen, romischen und frankischen Zeit in den Rheinlandern 
(1895); Wosinsky, Der inkrustierte Keramik der Stein- und Bronze- 
zeit (1904); Walters, History of Ancient Pottery (Greek and Roman) 
(1905); Holmes, Aboriginal Pottery of the Eastern United States 
(Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, 1899); also Holmes and Cush- 
ing in Report of Bureau of Ethnology for 1882; Wiener, Perou et 
Bolivie (1880); Von der Steinen, Natur-Vblkerei Central Brasiliens 
(1894); Hartman, Archaeological Researches in Costa Rica (1905); 
Strebel, on " Mexican Pottery " in Publications of Museum fur 
Volkerkunde (Berlin, vol. 6, 1899); Werner, British Central Africa 
(1907) ; Fullborn, Deutsche Ost-Afrika, vol. ix. (1907) ; Macluer, 
" Kabyle Pottery," Journ. Anth. Inst. vol. xxxii. p. 245, and " Upper 
Egypt," ibid. xxxv. p. 20; Myres, " Early Pottery Fabrics of Asia 
Minor," Journ. Anth. Inst, xxxiii. p. 367; Turveren Museum, Notes 
analytiques surles collections ethnographiques du Congo, tome ii. (1907) ; 
Cupart, Debuts de I'art de I'ancienne Egypte (1903). (W. B.*) 

Egypt and Western Asia 
Egyptian Pottery. — Egypt affords us the most striking instance 
of the development of the potter's art. As in other countries 



7o8 



CERAMICS 



[EGYPT 



pottery was made even in Neolithic times, for the Nile mud forms 
a fine plastic clay and sand is of course abundant. With these 
materials various kinds of pottery, often extremely well made 
and of good form, have been continuously produced for common 
domestic requirements, but such pottery was never glazed. 

The wonderful glazes of the Egyptians were applied to a 
special preparation which can hardly be called pottery at all, 
it contained so little clay. Yet as early as the 1st Dynasty 
the Egyptians had learnt to shape little objects in this tender 
material and cover them with their wonderful turquoise glazes. 
We have therefore to study the development of two independent 
things: (i) the ordinary pottery of common clay left without 
glaze; (2) the brilliant glazed faience which appears to be special 
to Egypt, though it may have been the groundwork for the 
technique of the slip-faced painted and glazed pottery of the 
nearer East. 

We probably do not possess any specimens of the most 
primitive Neolithic pottery; the oldest type known to us, the 
black and red ware of B alias and Nagada (1), dates from the later 
Neolithic age, when copper was just beginning to be used. This 
ware is very hard and compact and the face is highly burnished. 
The red colour was produced by a wash of fine red clay; the 
black is an oxide of iron obtained by limiting the access of air 
in the process of baking, which was done, Professor Petrie 
suggests, by placing the pot's mouth down in the kiln, and 
leaving the ashes over the part which was to be burnt black. 
Both red and black colour go right through in every case. All-red 
and all-black vases are occasionally found, the red with geo- 
metrical decorations in white colour, and the black with incised 
decoration. The forms are usually very simple, but at the same 
time graceful, and the grace of form is more remarkable when it 
is remembered that none of this early pottery was made on the 
wheel. Pottery of almost similar technique was found in Crete 
in 1905 during the American excavations at Vasiliki near Hiera- 
petra. The general appearance of the Cretan pottery is much 
the same as that of the Egyptian, and the duller red and black 
decoration (which here has a spotted or mottled appearance) was 
probably obtained in the same way, the black spots being due to 
the action of separate fragments of the baking material. This 
discovery is important in view of the probable early connexion 
of the Cretan and Egyptian culture-centres. 

A very similar red and black ware, usually of thinner and 
harder make, and often with a brighter surface, was introduced 
into Egypt at a later date (Xllth Dynasty), probably by Nubian 
tribes who were descended from relatives of the Neolithic 
Egyptians. From their characteristic graves these people are 
called the Pan- Grave people, and their pottery is known by the 
same name. 

Perhaps rather later in date than the early red and black wares, 
but by no means certainly so, the second characteristic type of 
primeval Egyptian pottery is a ware of buff colour with surface 
decorations in red. These decorations are varied in character, 
including ships, birds and human figures; wavy lines and 
geometrical designs commonly occur. The whole fades of this 
ware seems very un-Egyptian, and it has been compared with 
the decorated " Kabyle pottery " of modern times. To call the 
people who made this ware " Libyans " on the strength of this 
resemblance of their pottery to that of the modern Kabyles, six 
thousand years later, seems, however, rash. The prehistoric 
Egyptians were not Kabyles or Libyans, but Nilotes, and the 
peculiar decoration of their pottery, which seems so strangely 
barbaric, is in reality merely the most ancient handiwork of the 
Egyptian painter, and marks the first stage in the development 
of pictorial art on the banks of the Nile (2). Other types of 
pottery (3), in colour chiefly buff or brown, were also in use at 
this period; the most noticeable form is a cylindrical vase with 
a wavy or rope band round it just below the lip, which developed 
out of a necked vase with a wavy handle on either side. This 
cylindrical type outlived the red and black and the red and buff 
decorated styles (which are purely Neolithic and predynastic) 
and continued in use in the early dynastic period, well into 
the Copper age. The other unglazed pottery of the first three 



dynasties is not very remarkable for beauty of form or colour, 
and is indeed of the roughest description (4), but under the 
IVth Dynasty we find beautiful wheel-made bowls, vases and 
vase-stand? of a fine red polished ware (4) . This fine ware con- 
tinued in use at least as late as the XVIIIth Dynasty, though 
the forms of course differed from age to age. Under the Xllth 
Dynasty, and during the Middle Kingdom generally, either this 
or a coarser unpolished red ware was in use. The forms of this 
period are very characteristic (5) ; the vases are usually footless, 
and have a peculiar globular or drop-like shape — some small 
ones seem almost spherical. At this period the foreign " Pan- 
Grave " black and red pottery was also in use (see above). 

The art of making a pottery consisting of a siliceous sandy 
body coated with a vitreous copper glaze seems to have been 
known unexpectedly early, possibly even as early as the period 
immediately preceding the 1st Dynasty (4000 B.C.). Under 
the Xllth Dynasty pottery made of this characteristic Egyptian 
faience seems to have come into general use, and it continued 
in use down to the days of the Romans, and is the ancestor of the 
glazed wares of the Arabs and their modern successors (6). 
The oldest Egyptian glazed ware is found usually in the shape 
of beads, plaques, &c. — rarely in the form of pottery vessels. 
The colour is usually a light blue, which may turn either white 
or green; but beads of the grey-black manganese colour are 
found, and on the light blue vases of King Aha (who is probably 
one of the historical originals of the legendary " Mena " or 
Menes) in the British Museum (No. 38,010) we have the king's 
name traced in the manganese glaze on (or rather in) the blue- 
white glaze of the vase itself, for the second glaze is inlaid. This 
style of decoration in manganese black or purple on copper-blue 
continued till the end of the " New Empire " shortly before the 
XXVIth (Saite) Dynasty. It was not usual actually to inlay the 
decoration before the time of the XVIIIth Dynasty. The light 
blue glaze was used well into the time of the Xllth Dynasty 
(British Museum, No. 36,346), but was then displaced by a new 
tint, a brilliant turquoise blue, on which the black decoration 
shows up in sharper contrast than before. This blue, and a 
somewhat duller, greyer or greener tint was used at the time 
for small figures, beads and vases, as well as for the glaze of 
scarabs, which, however, were usually of stone-schist or steatite 
— not faience. The characteristically Egyptian technique of 
glazed stone begins about this period, and not only steatite 01 
schist was employed (on account of its softness) , but a remarkably 
brilliant effect was obtained by glazing hard shining white 
quartzite with the wonderfully delicate Xllth Dynasty blue. 
A fragment of a statuette plinth of this beautiful material was 
obtained during the excavation of the Xlth Dynasty temple at 
Deir el-Bahri in 1904 (British Museum, No. 40,948). Vessels of 
diorite and other hard stones are also found coated with the blue 
glaze. A good specimen of the finest Xllth Dynasty blue- 
glazed faience is the small vase of King Senwosri I. (2400 B.C.) 
in the Cairo Museum (No. 3666) (6). The blue-glazed hippopo- 
tami of this period, with the reeds and water-plants in purplish 
black upon their bodies to indicate their habitat, are well known. 
Fine specimens of these are in the collection of the Rev. Wm. 
MacGregor at Tamworth (8). 

The blue glaze of the Xllth Dynasty deepened in colour under 
the XHIth, to which the fine blue bowls with designs (in the 
manganese black) of fish and lotus plants belong (8) (British 
Museum, Nos. 4790, &c). The finest specimens of XVIIIth 
Dynasty blue ware have come from Deir el-Bahri, in the 
neighbourhood of which place there may have been a factory 
for the manufacture of votive bowls, cups, beads, &c, of this 
fine faience, for dedication by pilgrims in the temple of Hathor 
(good collection in British Museum). Towards the end of this 
dynasty polychrome glazes came into fashion; white, light and 
dark blue, violet, purple, red, bright yellow, apple-green and other 
tints were used, not only for smaller objects of faience, such as 
rings, scarabs, kohl-pots, &c, but also for vases, e.g. No. 3965 of 
the Cairo Museum(Amenophis III. wine-bottle) , the ground colour 
of which is white with a decoration of flower wreaths in blue, 
yellow and red, with an inscription in delicate blue (6). This 



EGYPT] 



CERAMICS 



709 



polychrome faience was also now used for the ushaUi figures 
which were placed in the tombs; hitherto they had been made 
exclusively of stone or wood, never of glazed stone or pottery; 
henceforward they were made exclusively of faience, but the 
polychrome glazes {e.g. British Museum, Nos. 34,180, 34,185) 
were soon abandoned, and the plain blue and black of the 
ordinary vases was adopted. The ushabtis of King Seti I. 
(British Museum, No. 22,818, &c.) (9) are fine specimens of this 
type. Under the XXth Dynasty the blue paled and became 
weak in quality, but the priest-king family of the XXIst used 
for their ushabtis a most brilliant blue glaze, an extraordinary 
colour which at once distinguishes the faience of this period 
from that of all others (9). The* same brilliant glaze was used 
for vases of various kinds as well. The polychrome ware had 
developed into a style of inlaying with glazed faience, which we 
see at Tel el-Amarna under the XVIIIth Dynasty (1400 B.C.) 
(10), and at Tel el-Yahudiya under the XXth (1200 B.C.), 
used for wall decoration. After this time polychrome ceramic 
decoration seems to have died out in Egypt, but was retained 
in Asia (see below). 

The technical skill of the New Empire potters is shown by 
such a remarkable object as the gigantic f/as-sceptre of blue 
glazed faience, now in the Victoria and Albert Museum (12, 8). 
This is the largest known piece of Egyptian glazed faience; 
really large vases of faience are not found. Faience vases were 
very commonly built up or carved out of a ball of the dried 
material, perhaps held together by some mucilaginous substance 
— it seems impossible that such a substance could ever have been 
fashioned on the wheel. Sometimes even small vases were made 
of separately moulded pieces united by a glassy material (6). 
Under the XXIInd Dynasty small glazed vases with figures of 
deities or animals in relief became common; these were made in 
moulds (6). In the matter of form the faience pottery of the 
New Empire follows the lead of the new earthenware types. 
Forms had altered considerably from those of the Xllth Dynasty. 
In place of the simple flowing lines of that period, we now find 
egg-shaped bodies with cylindrical necks, with or without 
handles; great amphorae with almost pointed bases, sometimes 
with the handles perched upon the shoulders of the vase; flat- 
tipped, squat jugs; little handleless vases somewhat resembling 
the modern kulla, " mil mehrfach eingezogenem Bauch" (V.B.), 
and the common flat flask -like type known as the " pilgrim 
bottle" (6, 13, 14, 15). 

Owing to the extended foreign relations of Egypt at this time, 
imported vases from Greece and Asia, including Mycenaean 
Bugelkannen and Cypriote black " base ring " jugs, have been 
found in the tombs and deposits of this age (14). Imitations of 
foreign forms, especially the Bugelkannen, are found 1 chiefly in 
faience (British Museum, 22,731, is an imitation of a Minoan jug 
from Crete). The faience forms of 
the XVIIIth and XXIInd Dynasties 
include also the kulla shape, the 
pilgrim bottle, miniature amphorae, 
&c. (see fig. 6), and miscellaneous 
forms not found in common pottery, 
imitating metal and stone vases, e.g. 
the blue-green ribbed pots of the 
XXIInd Dynasty, imitating bronze 
originals, and the alabastron of the XVIIIth; these last go 
back to the Xllth Dynasty. Very pretty cups in the shape of 
lotus flowers (see fig. 7) are to be seen in most museums; they are 
of the XlXth Dynasty, and mostly came from Tuna (6, 8). 

The continuance of the old red polished ware of the IVth 
Dynasty during the Middle Kingdom to the time of the XVIIIth 

1 Foreign pottery had been imported into Egypt at least as early 
as the Xllth Dynasty, e.g. the Cretan polychrome ware of the 
Middle Minoan period (Kamares style) found at Medinet Ghuraib 
(" Kahun ") and the Cypriote (?) ''punctuated " black ware from 
the same site, and from Khata'anah (17). The date between the 
Xllth and Xlllth Dynasties is certain (14), but the Middle Kingdom 
Egyptians do not seem to have imitated these earlier foreign forms. 
British Museum, No. 17,046, is, however, probably an instance of an 
Egyptian idea imitated by the foreign potter (17). 




Fig. 6. — -Egyptian pottei'y 
made of fine blue paste. 




Fig. 7. — Egyptian blue-glazed pottery. 



Dynasty has already been mentioned. Characteristic of the latter 
period of this ware are long jugs with attenuated body and single 
handle, which, because they have been found with Mycenaean 
objects in Cyprus, have 
been considered to be 
of foreign, probably of 
Syrian origin. They 
may, however, be Egyp- 
tian. Vases of the same 
ware in the shape of men 
and animals are not un- 
common (17). Another 
ware of this period has a highly polished yellow face, some- 
times becoming ruddy, and passing off into a pinkish red; in 
this ware the pilgrim bottles are common. An unpolished, 
brittle, and thin yellow ware was also used largely for wine- 
vases. The rougher, commoner red and brown ware at this 
period became decorated with designs, chiefly of lily wreaths, 
&c, in paint of various colours (13). This new development hid 
the ugly colour of the common pottery and was a cheaply 
obtained imitation of the expensive, polychrome glazed ware of 
the period (see fig. 8). This painted pottery continued in use 
until about the time of the XXIInd Dynasty. From this time 
onwards, till the Ptolemaic period, the commonest pottery was a 
red ware, usually covered with a white slip. Under the XXVIth 
Dynasty a finer homogeneous white ware occurs, usually for 
vases with a rude representation of the face of the god Bes on their 
bodies. 

The XXVIth Dynasty marks a new period of development in 
the history of Egyptian faience. The old deep blue colour had 
gradually deteriorated into an ugly green (British Museum, 
No. 8962), which was replaced by the Saite pott ;rs with a new 
light blue of very delicate tint, imitated, in accordance with the 
archaistic spirit of the time, from the old light blue of the earliest 
Dynasties. The glaze itself is very thin and " sugary " in 
texture. The old decoration of the blue with designs and in- 
scriptions in manganese-black is abandoned; on the ushabtis the 
inscriptions are now incised. Side 
by side with this light blue glaze 
was used an unglazed faience, a 
sort of composition paste with the 
colour going right through. 2 It 
has more variety of colour than 
the glazed faience, light green and 
a dark indigo blue being found as 
well as the Saite light blue. Some- 
times it is of a very soft, almost 
chalky consistency. It was used . _. . 

for vases, but more generally for ^P^o™^* and 
small figures and scarabs (6) . 1 he 

commonest vase-form of this period is the pilgrim bottle, now 
made with the neck in the form of a lily flower, and with inscrip- 
tions on the sides wishing good luck in the New Year to the 
possessor. These flasks appear to have been common New 
Year's gifts. 

Under the Sebennyte kings of the XXXth Dynasty a further 
new development of glaze began, of a more radical character than 
ever before. The colour deepened, and the glaze itself became 
much more glassy, and was thickly laid on. The new glaze was 
partly translucent, and differed very greatly from the old opaque 
glaze. It first appeared on ushabtis at the end of the Saite period. 
A curious effect was obtained by glazing the head-dress, the 
inscription &c, of the ushabtis in dark blue, and then covering 
the whole with translucent light blue glaze. This method was 
regularly used during the succeeding Ptolemaic and Roman 
periods, when the new style of glaze came into general use. A 
yellowish green effect was obtained by glazing parts of the body 
of the vases in yellow and covering this with the translucent blue 
glaze. This method was used to touch up the salient portions of 

2 Some of these figures appear to have been made with a mixture 
of sand, clay and coloured glass which produced a real glassy porce- 
lain — the earliest porcelain of which we have any record. 




Fig. 8.— Egyptian pottery 



710 



CERAMICS 



[WESTERN ASIA 



the designs in relief, imitated from foreign originals, a style 
which now became usual on vases. The usual decoration is 
mixed Egyptian and classical, the latter generally predominating. 
A large range of colours was employed; purple, dark blue, blue- 
green, grass-green, and yellow glazes all being found. The glaze 
is very thickly laid on, and is often " crazed " (6, 8). A remark- 
able instance of this Romano-Egyptian faience is the head of the 
god Bes in the British Museum (No. 35,028). A hard, light blue, 
opaque glaze like that of the XXVIth Dynasty is occasionally, 
but rarely, met with in the case of vases (British Museum, 
Nos. 37,407, 37,4o8). 

We know something of the common wares in use during this 
period from the study of the ostraka, fragments of pottery on 
which dated tax-receipts, notes, and so forth were written. 
From the ostraka we see that during the Ptolemaic period the 
commonest pottery was made of red ware covered with white 
slip, which has already been mentioned. At the beginning of the 
Roman period we find at Elephantine a peculiar light pink ware 
with a brownish pink face, and elsewhere a smooth dark brown 
ware. About the 3rd century a.d. horizontally ribbed or fluted 
pots, usually of a coarse brown ware, came into general use. 
These were often large-sized amphorae, with very attenuated 
necks and long handles (see fig. 9)- During the Byzantine 
(Coptic) period most of the pottery in use was ribbed, and usually 

pitched inside to hold water, as 
A the ware was loose in texture and 
porous. 

During the Coptic period, a 
lighter ware was alsO in use, decor- 
ated with designs of various kinds 
in white, brown or red paint on 
the dull red or buff body. In 
Nubia a peculiar development of 
this ware is characteristic of the 
later period (Brit. Mus. No. 30,712). 
A polished red ware of Roman 
origin (imitation Arretine or 
" Samian ") was commonly used as 
well. 

The heavily glazed blue faience 
continued in use until replaced in 
the early Arab period by the well- 
known yellow and brown lead- 
glazed pottery, of which fragments are found in the mounds 
of Fostat (Old Cairo). 

Western Asia. — Palestine. The most ancient Palestinian 
pottery is the rough " Amorite " ware from Lachish (Tel el-Hesi) 
which sometimes has wavy handles like the prehistoric Egyptian 
(18). Later we find actual Mycenaean pottery in Philistia (19), 
an interesting testimony to the truth of the legend which brings 
the Philistines from Crete; the fourth and fifth cities of Lachish 
(1 200-1000 B.C.) show us the first ordinary Phoenician or Israelite 
pottery — buff or red lamps and bowls, the latter with the handles 
sometimes painted in bistre, and vases showing strong Egyptian 
influence; while pottery from Cyprus and elsewhere is found 
as in Egypt. 

The only remarkable later development of Palestinian pottery 
is the Phoenician imitation of Egyptian faience of the Saite 
period, of which the characteristics are well known. Some of 
this may actually have been made in Egypt. 

The course of the potter's art in Mesopotamia and Persia 
appears to have run on lines of development parallel with the 
art in Egypt, for the country between the Tigris and the 
Euphrates is rich in good clays, and, wherever the invention of 
glass arose, its application to pottery decoration was certainly 
developed at an early period in Egypt and in Mesopotamia. 

Two characteristic uses of clay wares must, however, be pointed 
out, though they have nothing to do with vase-making. 

I. The Babylonian and Assyrian use of clay shaped into tablets, 
cylinders and prisms, to produce an imperishable record of the 
literature of the time. The cylinders and prisms were thrown on 
the potter's wheel and are consequently hollow; the circular form 
was then sliced down, and the surface was impressed with cuneiform 




Fig. 9. — Egyptian pottery 
under the Ptolemies, show- 
ing Greek influence in the 
shapes. 



inscriptions, the prism, tablet or cylinder being subsequently dried 
and fired. 

2. The architectural use of glazed bricks and slabs. While the 
Egyptians remained content for the most part with the application 
of their brilliant alkaline glazes to small and delicately-finished 
objects, the Babylonians and Assyrians developed an architecture 
decorated with glazed and coloured brickwork. The bricks were of 
very open texture, and the ornamental pattern or figure subjects 
were obtained by a strong outline in dark-coloured clay which 
formed a kind of cloison or boundary, the shallow cells between being 
filled in with coloured clays — yellow, red or white — or with coloured 
glazes of turquoise, green or blue, yellow and purplish brown. These 
glazes are obviously like the Egyptian, but they are more coarsely 
prepared and are always full of bubbles and consequently more or 
less opaque. Yet the severe simplicity of the method, the splendid 
colour effect, strong yet sumpflious, entitles these productions to 
a very high rank among all the world's work in clay and glaze. 
The " Frieze of the Archers " now in the Louvre may be mentioned 
as one of the finest productions of its kind, and the Louvre and 
British Museum possess the finest collections of this early architec- 
tural use of glazed and coloured clay. (Seealso Mural Decoration.) 

Coming to ordinary pottery we find that in early times well- 
formed vases made of good clay, unglazed and unpainted, were 
made. Small figures of deities made of the same clay are often 
found. It is practically the same terra-cotta as that of the 
inscribed tablets. None of the forms are particularly distinctive 
(see fig. 10). The excavations of the French in Persia have 




Fig. 10. — Assyrian biscuit pottery. 

brought to light at Moussian in Susiana an extremely interesting 
painted ware, which belongs to a very early period. The decora- 
tion is usually geometrical. The technique seems to be analogous 
to the Mycenaean-Greek (Firnismalerei) , and the whole effect 
is very like that of the Greek, Late Mycenaean or Dipylon 
pottery. The ware is buff in colour and fine in texture, with a 
polished surface. The decoration is sometimes in polychrome, 
but usually in the grey-brown iron-glaze (?) alone. This pottery 
degenerates later and finally disappears (20). 

During the Sargonide period in Assyria (7th century B.C.) we 
find a polychrome faience (colours usually white and brown) 
obviously of Egyptian origin. It was used, not for vases, but 
architectonically for friezes, ornamental bosses, &c. Its origin 
may be found in Egypt under the XVIIIth Dynasty, when 
Egyptian influence extended to the Tigris, and Babylonia had 
regular diplomatic relations with Egypt. In Asia this polychrome 
decoration in glazes continued to be used long after it had ceased 




* W^- — y 

FlG. 11. — Assyrian glazed and enamelled pottery. 

to be made in the country of its origin; the enamelled brick 
decoration of Persepolis is the descendant of the glazed inlay 
decorations of Tel el-Amarna, Tel el-Yahudiya and Kuyunjik. 
In the Sargonide period blue glazed vases occur (see fig. 11) 
which are probably of Egyptian origin or are Phoenician imita- 
tions of Egyptian faience. 

Characteristic of the Parthian period is a coarse green glazed 
pottery of which the slipper-shaped coffins of the time were made 



GREEK] 



CERAMICS 



711 



(British Museum, Nos. 1645-1647) (21). This glaze possibly con- 
tains a small amount of lead; in appearance it is not unlike the 
contemporary translucent blue glaze of Egypt. The Egyptian 
glaze certainly spread into western Asia, and we find the last 
specimens of it in the tiles from the destroyed city of Rhagae 
in Persia, which may be as late as the 13th century a.d. The 
lead glazes, unknown in Egypt till the late Roman period, may 
be of Asiatic origin, though this important point is by no means 
clear. 

References. — (1) Petrie-Quibell, Ballas and Nagada (date 
erroneous); (2) Jacques de Morgan, L' Agede la pierre etdesmetaux; 
(3) Petrie, Diospolis Parva, frontispiece (also for " sequence-dates " 
of pottery) ; (4) Garstang, Mahdsna and Bet Khall&f, pis. xxix.- 
xxxii.; (5) Petrie, Illahun, pi. xii. (corr. by V. Bissing in (14)); 
(6) V. Bissing, Catalogue generate du musee de Caire, " Die Fayence- 
gefasse"; (7) Petrie, A bydos, ii., frontispiece; (8) Henry Wallis, 
Egyptian Ceramic Art (Macgregor Collection); (9) Guide to Third 
and Fourth Egyptian Rooms, British Museum, p. 252 ff. ; (10) 
Petrie, Tel-el- Amarna; (11) Guide to Third and Fourth Egyptian 
Rooms, p. 261; (12) Petrie, Nagada, pi. xxviii. ; (13) Petrie, Illahun, 
pis. xx., xxi.; (14) V. Bissing, Strena Helbigiana, p. 20 ff. ; (15) 
Garstang, El Ardbah, pis. xviii.-xxi., xxviii., xxix. ; (16) Hall, 
Oldest Civilization of Greece, p. 143 ff. ibid. figs. 29, 30, 69; (17) 
Guide to Third and Fourth Egyptian Rooms, pi. viii.; (18) Petrie, 
Tell-el-Hesy, pi. v. ; (19) Welch, Ann. Brit. Sch. Ath. vi. ; (20) de 
Morgan, Delegation en Perse, viii. (1905); (21) Brit. Mus.: Guide 
to Babylonian and Assyrian Room. (H. R. H.) 

Greek, Etruscan and Roman 

Greek. Study of Greek Vases. — It is not so many years since 
an account of Greek pottery would naturally have followed 
chronologically the history of Egyptian pottery with little over- 
lapping; but recent discoveries have reversed all such ideas, and, 
while up to the end of the 19th century the earliest remains to be 
traced on Greek soil could be assigned at the furthest to the 
period 2500-2000 B.C., it is now possible not only to show that at 
that period technical processes were highly developed, but even 
to trace a continuous development of Greek pottery from the 
Neolithic age. This result has been mainly brought about by 
Dr Arthur Evans's researches at Cnossus in Crete, but traces of 
similar phenomena are not wanting in other parts of Greece. 
Whether the race which produced this pottery can strictly be 
called Greek may be open to question, but at all events the ware 
is the independent product of a people inhabiting in prehistoric 
times the region afterwards known as Greece; its connexion with 
the pottery of the historic period can now be clearly traced, and 
in its advanced technical character and the genuinely artistic 
appearance of its decoration even this early ware proclaims 
itself as inspired by a similar genius. 

The study of Greek vases has thus received an additional 
impetus from the light that it throws on the early civilization of 
the country, and its value for the student of ethnology. But it 
has always appealed strongly to the archaeologist and in some 
degree also to the artist or connoisseur, to the former from its 
importance as a contribution to the history of Greek art, myth- 
ology and antiquities, to the latter from its beauty of form 
and decoration. Attention was first redirected to the painted 
vases at the end of the 17th century, though for a long time they 
served as little more than an adjunct to the cabinet of the amateur 
or a pleasing souvenir for the traveller; but even during the 
1 8th century it dawned on the minds of students that they were of 
more than merely artistic importance, and attention was devoted 
to the elucidation of their subjects, and attempts made to arrive 
at a chronological classification. Two facts must, however, 
be borne in mind: firstly, that down to the middle of the 19th 
century the great majority of painted vases had been found only 
in Italy; secondly, that these vases were mostly of the later and 
more florid styles, which, if artistically advanced, are now known 
to represent a decadent phase of Greek art. 

From the former cause arose the notion that these vases were 
the product not of Greek but of Etruscan artists, and so the 
term " Etruscan vase " arose and passed into the languages of 
Europe, surviving even at this day in popular speech in spite of 
a century of refutation. Meanwhile, the study of the subjects 
depicted on the vases passed through the successive stages of 




Fig. 12. — Jug from Cyprus of 
Oriental style, 10 in. high. 



allegorical, historical and mystical interpretation, until a century 
and more of painstaking study led to the more rational principles 
of modern archaeologists. 

Sites and Discoveries. — The sites on which Greek vases have been 
found cover the whole area of the Mediterranean and beyond, from 
the Crimea to Spain, and from Marseilles to Egypt. By far the great 
majority, at all events of the finer specimens, have been extracted 
from the tombs of Vulci and other sites in Etruria; those of the 
later period or decadence have been found in large numbers on 
various sites in southern Italy, such as Capua, Cumae and Nola in 
Campania, Anzi in Lucania, and Ruvo in Apulia. In the western 
Mediterranean, Sicily has also been a fruitful field for this pottery, 
early varieties being found at Syracuse, later ones at Gela, Girgenti 
and elsewhere. Painted vases have also come to light in Sardinia 
and in North Africa, especially in the Cyrenaica, where the finds 
mostly belong to the 4th century B.C. In Greece proper the most 
prolific site has been Athens, where the finds extend from the 
Dipylon vases of the 8th cen- 
tury B.C. down to the decadent 
productions of the 4th century ; 
one group, that of the white 
funeral lekythoi, is almost 
peculiar to Athens. Next to 
this city, Corinth has been 
most productive, especially in 
pottery of the archaic period 
and of local manufacture. 
Large quantities of pottery of 
all periods have been yielded 
by Thebes, Tanagra and other 
sites in Boeotia, and remains 
of the " Mycenaean " period at 
Mycenae, Argos and elsewhere. 
But on the whole painted pot- 
tery is rare in other parts of 
the mainland. Among the 
western islands of the archi- 
pelago, Aegina and Euboea 
have proved fruitful in vases 
of all periods; Thera, Melos 
and others of the Cyclades are 
remarkable for pottery of the 
prehistoric period with rudely painted designs; and above all 
Crete is now famous for the wondrous series of painted and orna- 
mented pottery of pre-Mycenaean date, which can be traced back 
even tothe Neolithic period, and the discovery of which has entirely 
revolutionized the preconceived theories on the appearance of 
painted pottery in 
Greece. This has been 
found in the recent ex- 
cavations at Cnossus, 
Palaeokastro and else- 
where. In Asia Minor 
there have been some 
important finds on the 
mainland, but only 
along the coast; some 
of the islands, more 
especially Samos and 
Rhodes, have been more 
fruitful in this respect. 
At Kertch and else- 
where in the Crimea, 
large numbers of fine 
but somewhat florid 
vases of the 5th and 
4th centuries B.C. have 
come to light. Cyprus 
has long been known as 
a rich field for pottery of all periods, from the Mycenaean onwards, 
the later varieties being marked by strong local quasi-oriental 
characteristics, with little development from the more primitive 
types (figs. 12 and 13). The principal sites are Salamis, Amathus, 
Marion (Poli) and Curium. Lastly, in the Egyptian delta two 
sites, Naucratis and Daphnae, have yielded results of considerable 
importance for the history of early Greek vase-painting. 

The great majority of these vases have been found in tombs; 
but some important discoveries have been made on the sites of 
temples and sanctuaries, as on the Acropolis of Athens, or at Nau- 
cratis. In such cases the vases are seldom complete, having been 
broken up and cast away into rubbish-heaps, where the fragments 
have remained undisturbed. The tombs vary greatly in form, those 
of Greece being usually small rock-graves or shafts, those of Italy 
often fine and elaborate chambers with architectural details, and 
the manner in which the vases are found in these tombs varies 
greatly. Plain unornamented pottery is almost universal, and may 
be considered to have formed the " tomb-furniture " proper — the 
painted vases being as in daily life merely ornamental adjuncts. 




Fig. 13. — Pottery from Cyprus with 
geometrical ornament. 



712 



CERAMICS 



[GREEK 



Shapes and Uses of Greek Vases. — The enormous number of 
painted vases now collected in museums is in itself sufficient evidence 
of the important part they must have played in the daily life, of the 
Greeks, and the care which was bestowed on their decoration shows 
the high estimation in which they were held. It is, however, remark- 
able that, with the exception of general allusions to pottery and its 
use in daily life, there are singularly few passages in classical litera- 
ture which throw light on the purposes for which these vases were 
used. Where any are described at full length there is always evidence 
that metal vases are intended. Athenaeus and the lexicographers 
have indeed put on record a long list of names of shapes, but 
it is only in a few cases that v e can be certain what forms they 
describe, or whether any of the typical forms of existing vases can be 
identified with the literary descriptions. 

We have then two questions to consider in this section: firstly, 
the uses to which painted vases were put by the Greeks; secondly, 
the classical names of the various forms of plain and painted pottery 
which have come down to us. 

As we have seen, the majority of painted vases have been dis- 
covered in tombs, which at first sight seems to suggest that they were 
made principally for sepulchral purposes; but that they also had 
their uses in daily life as much as plain pottery or earthenware 
cannot be doubted. They stand, in fact, in the same relation to the 
commoner wares of their day as china or porcelain does with us, 
being largely ornamental only, but used by wealthy people or on 
special occasions for the purposes of daily life, as for instance at 
banquets or in religious ceremonies. 

Vases were used as measures, as in the case of a small one-handled 
cup in the British Museum (see fig. 15), found at Cerigo (Cythera) and 
inscribed with the word i?Aii/coriiXtoy or " half-kotyle," equivalent 
to about one-fourth of a pint. Another vase found at Athens is 
supposed to represent the official xo'^'f or quart, having a capacity 
of 0-96 litre; it is inscribed brtiibaiov or " official measure," and bears 
the official stamp of the state. Conversely many names of vases, 
such as the amphora or the kotyle, were adopted to indicate measures 
of capacity for liquid or dry commodities. Earthenware vessels were 
used for storing both liquids and food, for the preparation of foods 
and liquids, and for the various uses of the table and the toilet. 
That the painted ware was used at banquets or on great occasions 
we learn from scenes depicted on the vases themselves, in which 
vases painted with subjects appear in use. In connexion with 
athletics, they were given as prizes, as in the case of the Panathenaic 
amphorae, a class of vases given for victories in the games held at 
Athens at the Panathenaic festivals, where, however, they do not 
represent prizes so much as marks of honour corresponding to modern 
racing cups. Vases were also used as toys for children, as is proved 
by the discovery of many diminutive specimens, chiefly jugs, in the 
tombs of children at Athens, on which are depicted children playing 
at various games. They also served a purely decorative use as 
domestic ornaments, being placed on columns or shelves; or, in the 
case of flat cups and plaques, suspended on the wall. Many of the 
later Greek and Italian painted vases are very carelessly decorated 
on the one side, which was obviously not intended to be seen. 

We come now to the use of vases for religious purposes, dedicatory, 
sacrificial or funerary. Of all these uses, especially the last, there 
is ample evidence. That vases were often placed in temples or shrines 
as votive offerings is clear from the frequent mention in literature of 
the dedication of metal vases, and it can hardly be doubted that 
painted pottery served the same purpose for those who could only 
afford the humbler material. Of late years much light has been 
thrown upon this subject by excavations, notably on the Acropolis 
of Athens, at Corinth, and at Naucratis in the Egyptian delta, 
where numerous fragments have been found bearing inscriptions 
which attest their use for such purposes. It was a well-known 
Greek custom to clear out the temples from time to time and form 
rubbish-heaps (javissae) of the disused vases and statuettes, which 
were broken in pieces as useless, but it is to this very fact that we 
owe their preservation. At Naucratis many of the fragments bear 
incised inscriptions, such as ' kirbWoivos elm, " I am Apollo's " 
(possibly a memorandum of the priest's, to mark consecrated 
property), or 6 Sel va. pe avWriKe rjj ' A^poSirn , "So-and-so dedicated 
me to Aphrodite." Fig. 14 gives another example with a dedication 
to Apollo. At Penteskouphia, near Corinth, a large series of painted 
tablets (irLvaKes), dating from 600 to 550 B.C., with representations of 
Poseidon and dedicatory inscriptions to that deity, were found in 
1879. Votive offerings in this latter form were common at all 
periods, and tablets painted with figures and hung on trees or walls 
are often depicted on the vases, usually in connexion with scenes 
representing sacrifices or offerings. 

There is no doubt that vases (though not necessarily painted ones) 
must have played a considerable part in the religious ceremonies of 
the Greeks. We read of them in connexion with the Athenian 
festival of the Anthesteria, and that of the gardens of Adonis. 
They were also used in sacrifices, as shown on an early black-figured 
cup in the British Museum and on a vase at Naples with a sacrifice to 
Dionysus. In scenes of libation the use of the jug and bowl (phiale) 
is invariable. 

But their most important use, and that to which their preservation 
is mainly due, was in connexion with funeral ceremonies. They were 
not only employed at the burial, but were placed both outside the 



tombs to receive offerings, and inside them either to hold the ashes 
of the dead or as " tomb-furniture," in accordance with Greek 
religious beliefs in regard to the future life. Several classes of vases 
are marked out by their subjects as exclusively devoted to this 
purpose, such as the large jars found in the Dipylon cemetery at 
Athens, which were placed outside the tombs, the white Athenian 
lekythoi of the 5th and 4th centuries B.C., and the large krateres and 





Fig. 14. — Part of vase from Naucratis with dedication to Apollo. 



other vases of the 4th century B.C. found in the tombs of Apulia 
and other parts of southern Italy. Their use as cinerary urns was 
perhaps more restricted, at all events as regards the painted vases, 
though the custom is well known and is referred to in literature 
from Homer downwards. In " Mycenaean " times coffers (Xapyaxes) 
of clay were used for this purpose, especially in Crete, where fine 
painted examples have been found; but of Greek pottery of the 
best periods there are but isolated instances. 

The diagrams in fig. 15 show the principal shapes characteristic of 
Greek pottery in all but the earliest periods, when the variety of form 
was as yet too great to permit of more than the vaguest nomen- 
clature; each form has its conventional name appended. These 
shapes may be classified under the following heads: (l) Vases in 
which food or liquids were preserved; (2) vases in which liquids 
were mixed or food cooked; (3) those by means of which liquids 
were poured out or food distributed; (4) drinking-cups; (5) other 
vases for the use of the table or toilet. Thus we have the pithos 
and amphora for storing wine, the krater for mixing it, the psykter 
for cooling it, the kyathos for ladling it out, and the oinochoe or 
prochoos for pouring it out; the hydria was used for fetching water 
from the well. The names and forms of drinking-cups are innumer- 
able, the principal being the kylix, kotyle, kantharos, rhyton (drinking- 
horn) and phiale (libation bowl). The pyxis was used by women 
at their toilet, and the lekythos, alabastron and askos for oil and 
unguents. 

Technical Processes. — Though the Greeks succeeded in making 
pottery of a very high order from the point of view of form and 
decoration, the technical processes remained throughout of the most 
elementary — for glaze was not used at all, the colour was of the 
simplest, and the temperature at which the ware was fired was not 
high enough to _ introduce any serious difficulties. As we should 
expect, it is possible to trace a gradual improvement in the technical 
processes in the direction of greater precision and refinement, for no 
vase-painter of the best period could have achieved his decorative 
triumphs on wares so coarse in substance and so rough in finish as 
those that satisfied his predecessors. As in every other case technical 
and artistic refinement went hand in hand. In the earliest times the 
clay was used with very little preparation ; at all events before the 
introduction of the potter's wheel the finish is not to be compared 
with that of the early races in Egypt. As the practice developed 
no doubt, specially good clays were found in certain districts, and 
these became centres of manufacture or the clays were carried to 
other established centres. The primitive wares usually exhibit the 
natural buff, yellow, grey or brownish colours of other elementary 
pottery, and the surface is somewhat rough and possesses no gloss. 
Thenceforward it becomes appreciably warmer in tone as it becomes 
finer in texture, until it reaches its perfection in the glowing orange, 
inclining to red, of the best Attic vases of the 5th century B.C. In 
the vases of the later Italian centres the colour again reverts to a 
paler hue. 

The clay for the potter was doubtless prepared by a system of 
sedimentation, so as to get rid of all coarse particles. It was mixed 
with water and decanted into a series of vats so that ultimately 
fine clay of two or three grades was obtained. Both red and whitish 
clays were used, and the best potters gradually discovered that 
mixtures of different clays gave the best results. The clay for the 
Athenian vases was obtained from Cape Kolias in Attica ; and as it 
did not burn to a very warm tone, ruddle or red ochre (rubrica) was 
added to it to produce the lovely deep orange glow that distinguishes 
the best vases. Corinth, Cnidus, Samos and other places were 
also famous for their clays, and at the first named tablets have 



GREEK; 



CERAMICS 



713 



been found bearing representations of the digging of clay for 
pottery. 

The improved manipulation of the clays, and the increasing 
knowledge that the colour of a clay could be modified by admixture 
of other substances such as ruddle and ochre, really paved the way 



Bronze age tombs of 2500-1500 B.C. contain only hand-made pottery, 
but in the next period (1500-1000 B.C.) we find hand-made and coarse 
vases side by side with a more developed kind of painted pottery — 
the " Mycenaean "• — obviously made on the wheel. It seems prob- 
able, therefore, that the wheel was introduced into Greece about 




Amphora 



Calyx-krater 



Stamnos 



Kalpis 



Fig. 15. — Shapes of Greek Vases. 



for what is known as the glaze of the Greek painted vases. This 
delicate gloss, so thin as to defy analysis, has been commonly called 
glaze, but it cannot be a glaze in the sense of a separate coating of 
finely-ground glass superimposed upon the clay. In all probability, 
as the Greek potter used finer and finer clays and so was enabled 
to perfect his shapes, he found that after a vase had been " thrown " 
he could get a closer texture on it by dipping it in a slip of still finer 
clay material and then smoothing it down and polishing it on the 
wheel when sufficiently dry. But the mixtures he would use for 
such a purpose — of very siliceous clay and ochre — would, when 
they were burnt in the Greek kiln, not only fire to a beautifully bright 
colour, but also to a glossy surface, especially where the flames had 
freely played about them ; and it is more in accordance with our 
knowledge to believe that the exquisitely thin gloss of the finest 
Greek red vases was produced in this way, for it seems impossible 
that it can have been a coating of any special glaze. 

In any case we may state broadly that the body of Greek vases is 
always fine in grain, fired hard enough to give forth a dull metallic 
sound when it is struck, but seldom fired above a temperature of 
about 900 C, which a modern potter would consider very lqw. 
When broken the inside is generally found to be duller in colour, and 
is often yellow or grey, even where the external surface is red. The 
material is exceedingly porous, and allows water to ooze through it 
'another proof that it was not glazed). Numerous analyses of the 
material of Greek vases have been published, but they tell us nothing 
of the secrets of the Greek potter. The results of a great number of 
these analyses may be summed up as follows: silica, 52-60 parts; 
alumina, 13-19 parts; lime, 5-10 parts; magnesia, 1-3 parts; 
oxide of iron, 12-19 parts. Analyses of a thousand ordinary simple 
red burning clays would give a similar result. It is to the glory of 
the Greek potter that with such ordinary materials, by the exercise 
of selection, patience and skill, he achieved the fine artistic results 
we see. He did as much as can be done with natural clay materials, 
but the glory of painted colour and glaze, like the later Persian or 
Chinese, was not for him. 

Manufacture of Vases. — The earliest Greek pottery is, like all 
primitive pottery, hand-made. The introduction of the potter's 
wheel into Greece was the subject of various ancient traditions, but 
we now know that it can be easily traced by a study of the primitive 
pottery of Crete, Cyprus or Troy. In Cyprus, for instance, the 



1500 B.C.; it was certainly known to Homer, as a familiar allusion 
shows (//. xviii. 600). It was still a low circular table turned with 
the hand, not the foot; representations of its use are seen on several 
vases of the archaic period (fig. 16), and they further prove that the 
vase was replaced on the wheel for the subsequent processes of 
painting, polishing and adding separately modelled parts, as well as 
for the original shaping or " throwing." 

The method of shaping the vase on the wheel, which is the same 
as that still in use, need not be described in detail; the feet, necks, 
mouths and handles were modelled separately or shaped in moulds, 
and attached while 
the clay was moist, 
as is also indicated 
on a vase. Large 
and coarse vases, 
such as wine casks 
{■kLBoi), were always 
modelled by hand 
on a kind of hooped 
mould (navvafios). 

Parts of vases 
were modelled by 
hand at all periods 
by way of decora- 
tion. Even in the . 
geometrical period 
we find horses 
modelled in the ., .. . , , , „ . , 

round on the tIG - l6 - — Votive tablet from Corinth; a 
covers of vases and P otter applying painted bands while the vessel 
later on handles revolves on the wheel. 

enriched with moulded figures of serpents twining round them. Such 
embellishments are frequently, if not always, deliberate imitations 
of metal forms, but the plastic principle is one which obtained in 
Greek pottery from the very first, as for instance in the primitive 
pottery of Troy, in which the vases are often modelled in human or 
animal forms ; and the same principle is involved in the common 
practice of speaking of the " neck," " shoulder " or " foot " of a 
vessel. In the best period the practice of adding moulded ornaments 
or of modelling vases in natural forms took a subsidiary place, but 




7H 



CERAMICS 



[GREEK 



examples occur from time to time, as in the beautiful rhyta or 
drinking-horns of the red- figure period (Plate II., fig. 58) , or in smaller 
details such as are seen in handles enriched with heads in relief, a 
favourite practice of the potter Nicosthenes. In the 4th-century 
vases of southern Italy the handles are often much ornamented in 
this fashion, as in the large krateres, where they are adorned with 
masks in rejief. 

The system of moulding whole vases or ornamenting them with 
designs in relief taken from moulds really belongs to the decadence 
of the art, when imitations of metal were superseding the painted 
pottery. Even then it is rare to find whole vases produced from a 
mould, except in the case of those in the form of human figures or 
animals (Plate II., figs. 57 and 58), which almost come under the 
heading of terra-cotta figures, except for the fact that they are 
usually painted in the manner of the vases. But in southern Italy 
the tendency to imitate metal led to the popularity of ornaments 
made separately from moulds and attached or let in to vases other- 
wise plain. Vases of this period, with reeded bodies, must also have 
been made from moulds, as were a series of phialae or libation-bowls 
associated with Cales in Campania (Plate II., fig. 56), which are 
known to be direct imitations of metal. 

All or nearly all of these vases are covered with a plain black 
glaze or varnish, and painted decoration is rare except in the case of 
those moulded in special forms or of a certain class made in Apulia 
with opaque colouring laid on the varnish. Some of these plain black 
vases of the 4th century are ornamented with stamped patterns made 
with a metal punch impressed in the moist clay. This decoration is 
confined to simple patterns. 

After the vases had been made on the wheel they were dried 
in the sun and lightly baked, after which they were ready for varnish- 
ing and painting; it is also probable that the gloss was brought 
out by a process of polishing, the surface of the clay being smoothed 
with a piece of wood or hard leather. On a vase in Berlin a boy is 
seen applying a tool of some kind to an unfinished cup, probably 
for this purpose ; the cup, being shown in red on the vase, has 
evidently not been varnished. Many vases are varnished black all 
over the exterior (whether decorated with designs or not) with the 
exception of the foot and lip. 

The process of baking was regarded as one of the most critical in 
the potter's art. It was not indeed universal, as we read of sun- 
dried vessels for utilitarian purposes, but all the vases that have 
come down to us have been baked. The amount of heat required 
was regulated by the character of the ware, but was not very high. 
Many examples exist of discoloured vases which have been subjected 
to too much or too little heat, the varnish having acquired a greenish 
or reddish hue. Or again the red gloss is sometimes turned to an 

ashen-grey colour, the black 
remaining unimpaired. 
Other accidents were liable 
to occur in the baking, such 
as cracking under too great 
heat, or the damaging of the 
shape by vases knocking 
against one another and so 
being dented in or crushed. 
The form of the oven was 
of the simplest (fig. 17). No 
furnaces have been found in 
Greece, and only one or two 
in Italy, but we have a 
variety of evidence from 
vase-paintings. They were 
fed by fires from beneath, 
and the vases were inserted with a long shovel. They were 
heated with charcoal or wood fuel, and there are representations 
of men poking or raking the fires with long-handled implements. 
One vase-painting gives a bird's-eye view, in horizontal section, of 
the interior of an oven full of jugs of various forms. Others have 
more complete presentations of potteries, with men engaged in the 
different processes of vase manufacture, modelling, painting or 
supplying the kilns with newly-made wares. 

The Painting of Vases. — We may distinguish three principal 
classes of painted pottery, of which two admit of subdivision. 

1. Primitive Greek vases with simple painted ornaments, chiefly 
linear and geometrical, laid directly on the clay with the brush. 
The colour employed is usually a yellowish or brownish red passing 
into black. The execution varies, but is often extremely coarse. 

2. Greek vases painted with figures. These may be subdivided as 
follows : — 

(a) Vases with figures in shining black on a red glossy ground. 

(b) Vases with figures left in the glossy red on a ground of 

shining black. 

3. Vases with polychrome decoration. 

(a) Vases of various dates with designs in outline or washes in 

various colours on white ground (these range from the 
6th to the 4th century B.C.). 

(b) Vases of various dates with designs in opaque colour laid 

over a ground of shining black (ranging from the primitive 
period to the 3rd century B.C.). 
Of these the second group is by far the largest and most im- 




Fig. 17. 



-Model of Kiln found in 
Essex. 



portant, including the majority of the finest specimens of Greek 
vase-painting, and the following account will deal mainly with the 
technical processes by which the most successful results were ob- 
tained. In both the classes (a) and (b) the colouring is almost 
confined to a contrasting of the glossy red ground and shining black. 

This black varnish (?) is particularly deep and lustrous, but varies 
under different circumstances according to differences of locality, 
of manufacture or accidents of production. It is seen in its greatest 
perfection in the " Nolan " amphorae of the earlier red-figure period, 
at its worst in the Etruscan and Italian imitations of Greek vases. 
The gradations of quality may be partly due to the action of heat, 
i.e. stoving at a higher or lower temperature. It also varies in 
thickness. At present no certainty has been attained as to its 
composition — Brongniart's oft-quoted analysis cannot be accepted 
— nor has any acid been found to have an effect upon it, though the 
chemical action of the earth sometimes causes it to disappear. 

The method of its use forms the chief distinction between the 
black-figured and red-figured vases, but there is a class of the former 
which approaches near in treatment to the latter, the whole vase 
being covered with black except a framed panel which is left red to 
receive the figures. It is obvious that the transition to merely 
leaving the figures red is but a slight one. But in all black-figured 
vases the main principle is that the figures are painted in black 
silhouette on the red ground, the outlines being first roughly indicated 
by a pointed instrument making a faint line. The surface within 
these outlines being filled in with black, details of anatomy, dress, 
&c, were brought out by incising inner lines with a pointed tool. 
After a second baking or perhaps stoving had taken place, 'the 
designs were further enriched by the application of opaque purple 
and white pigments, which follow certain conventional principles in 
their respective use. After a third baking at a lower heat still to fix 
these colours the vase was complete. 

In the red-figured vases the shining black is used as a background. 
But before it is applied the outlines of the figures are indicated not 
by incised lines, but by drawing a thick line of black round their 
contours. Recent researches have attempted to show that the 
instrument with which this was achieved may have been a feather 
brush or pen, by which the lines were drawn separately, not con- 
currently. The other tools used for painting would be an ordinary 
metal or reed pen and a camel's-hair brush, or at any rate something 
analogous. Thus the outlines of the figures were clearly marked, 
and the process is one of drawing rather than painting, but it was 
in draughtsmanship that the best vase-painters excelled. The next 
stage was to mark the inner details by very fine black lines or by 
masses of black for surfaces such as the 
hair; white and purple were also em- 
ployed, but more sparingly than on the 
earlier vases. The main processes always 
remain the same down to the termination 
of vase-painting, though the tendency to 
polychromy, which came in about the end 
of the 5th century B.C., effected some 
modifications. The blacking of the whole 
exterior surface — a purely mechanical 
process — took place after the figures 
had been completed and protected from 
accidents by the thick black border of 
which we have spoken. 

A fragment of an unfinished vase pre- 
served in the Sevres Museum gives a very 
clear idea of the process just described, 
the figures being completed, but the back- 
ground not yet applied (fig. 18). There is 
also another vase in existence which gives 
the interior of a vase-painter's studio, in 
which three artists are at work with their 
brushes, their paint-pots by their side. 

In the class of vases (3 (a)), with polychrome figures on a white 
ground, the essential feature is the white slip or engobe with which 
the naturally pale clay is covered. In the archaic vases of the 7th 
and 6th centuries B.C., especially in the Ionian centres, as at Rhodes, 
Naucratis and Cyrene, this slip is frequently employed, but with this 
difference, that the figures are painted in the ordinary black-figure 
method, the only additional colour being purple laid on the black. 
We first find polychrome decoration, whether in wash or outline, 
in a small class of fragments from Naucratis, of the 6th century B.C., 
which technically are of a very advanced character. The colours 
used either for outline or wash include purple, brown, yellow, 
crimson and rose-colour, but some, if not all, of these colours were 
not fired. 

In the 5th century this practice was revived at Athens, chiefly in 
the class of lekythoi or oil-flasks devoted exclusively to sepulchral 
uses. Here the vases, after leaving the wheel and being fitted with 
handles, &c, were covered with a coating of white clay. A second 
coating of black was applied to the parts not required for decoration, 
and the white was then finely polished, acquiring a dull gloss, and 
finally fired at a low temperature. The decoration was achieved as 
follows: a preliminary sketch was made with fine grey lines, 
ignoring draperies, &c, and not always followed when the colours 
were laid on. This was done when the first lines were dry, the colour 




(From a photo supplied by the 
Director of the Sevres Museum). 

Fig. 18. — Fragment of 
unfinished red -figured 
vase. 



GREEK] 



CERAMICS 



7i5 



being applied with a fine brush in monochrome — black, yellow or 
red — following the lines of the sketch. For the drapery and other 
details polychrome washes were employed, laid on with a large brush. 
All varieties of red from rose to brown are found, also violet, yellow, 
blue, black and green. Hair is treated either in outline or by means 
of washes. 

Finally, we have to deal with the class of vases (3 (&)) in which 
opaque pigments are laid over the surface of the shining black with 
which the whole vase is coated. This method is met with at three 
distinct periods in the history of vase-painting, separated by long 
distances of time. 

We first find it in the earlier Cretan or Kamares ware, where 
it seems to have been introduced not long after the close of the 
Neolithic period, about 2500 B.C., and where it holds its own for about 
a thousand years against the contrasted method of " dark on light " 
painting, till it was finally ousted by the latter at the height of 
" Mycenaean " civilization in Crete. The colouring is very varied, 
orange, brown, pink and white being the principal tints employed. 

The process appears again at the end of the 5th century in a 
small class of Attic vases, which have been regarded as a sort of 
transition between the black-figured and red-figured. White and 
orange-red are here employed, sometimes with accessory details in 
purple and black and incised lines, so that the technique is virtually 
black-figured, though the appearance of the vases is often red- 
figured. Lastly, it appears in southern Italy as a final effort of 
vase-painting to flicker into life again about the end of the 3rd 
century. Some of these vases were made in Campania, where the 
method resembles that of the Attic class just described, others in 
Apulia, probably at Gnathia. The latter have feeble conventional 
decoration in purple and white with details in yellow, confined to one 
side of the vases, and are also distinguished by the use of ornaments 
in relief. They were also occasionally made in Greece proper. 

Remarkably few colours were used by the Greek vase painters, 
especially in the best periods. The deep purple used for accessory 
details was produced from iron oxide, but the red used for lines on 
the white lekythoi is an ochre {iilhros, rubrica). The white also used 
for accessories is an earth or clay; in the slip coating of the white 
ground vases it assumes the consistency of pipe-clay. Yellow, 
where used for details on the later vases, is an ochre, and blue and 
green are produced from artificial compounds containing copper. 
A number of the colours, such as blue, rose and green, used by the 
polychrome painters, are obviously artificial pigments which have 
not been fired. When gilding was employed it was laid on over a 
raised ground of clay finely modelled with a small tool or brush, 
and was attached by varnish, not by fire. 

Potters and Inscriptions. — The potters who made these vases were 
mostly — at least at Athens in the 6th and 5th centuries, B.C. — itkroutoi, 
or resident aliens, as their names in many cases imply. We have an 
Amasis (an Egyptian name), a Brygus (a Scythian), a Lydus and a 
Scythes. The dialect of many of the inscriptions on Attic vases 
seems to show foreign influence, though in other cases peculiarities 
may be merely due to the use of a vernacular. They formed a gild 
or fraternity, and in each pottery there was probably more or less 
division of labour, the more simple processes being the work of slaves. 
This seems to be implied in the vase-paintings representing the 
interior of potteries. Others again "specialized ' in different shapes, 
and were known as x u rpoxXi0ot, XifKvdcmoiol, and so on. 

Over a hundred names of artists are known, found on some five 
hundred vases. They go back to about 700 B.C., the earliest names 
being found on Corinthian and Boeotian vases; but the majority 
of the signatures are found on Attic black- and red-figured wares. 
Some, such as Andocides, made vases in which the two methods are 
combined. The best known is Nicosthenes, whose signature occurs 
eighty times. The ordinary forms of signature are four — (1) 6 btlva 
iirolT](T(v\ (2) 6 5iiva typa^/tv ; (3) 6 del va iypa\//e nal iirolrjcev ; (4) 
A iyparpe- B hcol-qotv. Where broi-qaf. alone occurs (as in a signa- 
ture of Euxitheus), it probably refers to the master of the pottery 
who designed the vase and superintended its production; in other 
cases the share of the actual artist is clearly indicated. Some 
artists, such as Duris and Makron, sign iypai//t alone; in all cases, 
the form of signature affords us a useful guide to their style. 

Space forbids the discussion of other inscriptions found on vases, 
which include those descriptive of subjects or persons, ejaculations 
uttered by the figures, convivial exclamations, or the KaXos names 
discussed below; all these are painted on the designs themselves. 
There is also another class of graffiti inscriptions, which includes those 
incised by the owners with their names and memoranda scratched 
under the foot, probably made by the potter or his workmen relating 
to the number of vases in a batch or " set " and their price. 

Vitreous and Lead-glazed Wares. — In Greek tombs a class of 
pottery is often found which approximates more in appearance to 
porcelain, but, though often spoken of by that name, it is not porce- 
lain at all, but is analogous to the Egyptian glazed faience, of which 
it is in point of fact an imitation. It is distinguished by the white 
gritty material of which it is made, largely composed of sand, and 
forming what is sometimes known as "frit " from its semi-vitreous 
consistency. The surface is covered with a glaze, usually of a pale 
blue or cream colour, but other colours such as a manganese-purple 
or brown are sometimes found. Some of the earliest examples of 
this ware have been found in Mycenaean tombs at Enkomi in Cyprus, 




Fig. 19. — Enamelled 
pottery from tombs in 
Rhodes, made under 



in the form of vases moulded in the shape of human or animal heads. 
These exhibit a remarkably advanced skill in modelling, and are more 
like Greek work of the 6th century B.C. Apart from the technique 
they have nothing in common with the Egyptian importations so 
often found in Mycenaean tombs. 

In a subsequent period (8th~7th century B.C.) Egyptian objects 
in faience became a common import into Greek cities, such as those 
of Rhodes, and to a less degree in Sardinia and southern Italy, 
through the commercial medium of the Phoenicians. Flasks of 
faience occur in the Polledrara tomb at Vulci (610-600 B.C.) and 
similar vases with a pale green glaze at Tharros in Sardinia in tombs 
of the same date. In Rhodes, small flasks and jars are found orna- 
mented with friezes of men and animals in relief, or imitating in 
colour and design the glass vessels of the Phoenicians. It also seems 
probable that the Greeks of Rhodes and 
other centres attempted the imitation of 
this ware (see fig. 19), for we find faience 
aryballi or globular oil-flasks modelled in 
the form of helmeted heads or animals, 
which are purely Greek in style. 

In the Hellenistic period the fashion was 
revived at Alexandria,' and under the 
Ptolemies large jugs of blue-enamelled 
faience with figures in relief and bearing 
the names of reigning sovereigns were 
made and exported to the Cyrenaica and 
to southern Italy. Two of these are in the 
British -Museum (Egyptian department). 

The same collection includes a very beauti- 

ful glazed vase in the form of Eros riding Egyptian influence, 
on a duck, found in a tomb at Tanagra, 
but undoubtedly of Alexandrine make, and a head of a Ptolemaic 
queen, with a surface of bright blue glaze. 

Subsequently in the 1st century B.C., this so-called porcelain ware 
was replaced by a variety of ware characterized by a brilliantly 
coloured glaze coating, in which the presence of lead is often indicated. 
This ware was principally made at three centres ; at Tarsus in Asia 
Minor, at Alexandria and at Lezoux in central Gaul. But it was 
probably also made in western Asia Minor and in Italy. It is not 
confined to vases, being also employed for lamps and small figures ; 
the vases are usually of small size, in shapes imitated from metal 
(Plate II., fig. 59). The colour of the glaze varies from a deep green 
to bright yellow, and the inside of a vessel is often of a different 
tint from the exterior. Many of these vases are decorated with 
figures or designs in relief, others are quite plain. The colours of 
these glazes are of course due to the addition of oxide of copper and 
oxide of iron to a lead glaze, and they are strictly analogous to the 
green and yellow glazes of medieval Europe. 1 

Historical Account of Greek Vase-painting. — It has been 
indicated in the section dealing with technical processes that 
Greek vases may be classified under four headings according to 
the character of the decoration, and this classification may with a 
slight modification be adopted as a chronological one, the history 
of the art falling under four main heads, under which it will be 
convenient to describe its development from the earliest speci- 
mens of painted pottery down to the period when it was finally 
replaced by other methods of decoration. 

These four classes and their main characteristics may be sum- 
marized as follows: — 

' I. Vases of the Primitive Period from about 2500 or 2000 to 600 
B.C., including both the Cretan-Mycenaean epoch and the early ages 
of historical Greece. In the former the pottery is either decorated 
in polychrome on a shining black ground or conversely in shining 
black on a buff ground; in the latter, the decoration is in brown 
or black (usually dull, not shiny) on an unglazed ground varying 
from white to pale red. In the former again the decoration is marked 
by its naturalistic treatment of plant and animal forms; in the 
latter the ornaments are chiefly linear, floral or figures of animals; 
human figures and mythological scenes being very rare. 

II. Black-figured Vases from about 600-500 B.C.; figures painted 
in shining black on a glossy ground varying from cream colour to 
bright orange red, with engraved lines and white and purple for 
details; subjects mainly from mythology and legend. 

III. Red-figured Vases, from 520 to 400 B.C.; figures drawn in 
outline on red clay and the background wholly filled in with shining 
black, inner details indicated by painted lines or dashes of purple 
and white, scenes from daily life or mythology. With these are 
included the vases with polychrome figures on white ground. In 
these, which are exclusively made at Athens, the perfection of 
vase-painting is reached .between 480 and 450 B.C. 

IV. Vases of the Decadence, from 400 to 200 B.C. ; mostly from 
southern Italy, technique as in Class III., but the drawing is free 

1 On this subject see in particular Mazard, De la connaissance par 
les anciens des glacures plombiferes, a scientific and valuable mono- 
graph (1879); also Rayet and Collignon, Hist, de la ceramique 
grccquc, p. 365 (or B.M. Cat. of Roman Pottery, Introduction). 



7 i6 



CERAMICS 



[GREEK 



and often careless, and the general effect gaudy ; subjects funereal, 
theatrical and fanciful. At the end of this period vases are largely 
replaced by plain shining black pottery modelled in various forms, 
or with decorations in relief, all these being imitations of the metal 
vases which began to take the place of painted wares in the estimation 
of the Hellenistic world. 

I. Vases of the Primitive Period. — It has been noted in the 
introductory section that it is possible to trace the development 

of pottery in Greece as far 
back as the Neolithic period, 
lowing chiefly to the light 
recently thrown on the sub- 
ject by the excavations in 
Crete. These have yielded 
large quantities of painted 
pottery of high technical 
merit, usually with decoration 
in polychrome or white on a 
dark ground, in what is known 
as the Kamares ware, cover- 
ing the period 2500-1500 B.C. 
(fig. 20). This was gradually 
superseded by painting in dark 
shining pigments on a light 
glossy ground during the later 
Minoan period (1500-1000 
B.C.), forming what is known 
as the " Mycenaean " style. 
... ..__ ,, The subjects, though chiefly 

;« n ° a „l°k£ amares confined to floral ornaments or 
aquatic plants and creatures, 




From Annual of the British School at 
Athens. 



Fig. 20.- 



ware, from Crete. 



are marvellously naturalistic yet decorative in their treatment, 
often rivalling in this respect the pottery of the Far East. 
In the latter part of this period this class of pottery was spread 
all over the Mediterranean, and large quantities have been found 
in Greece, especially at Mycenae, in 
Rhodes and other Greek islands, and 
in Cyprus, where a series of vases 
with animals, monsters, and even 
human figures shows what is prob- 
ably the latest development of the 
pure Minoan or Mycenaean style. 

Outside Crete the earliest Greek 
pottery has been found in Cyprus 
and at Troy, with simple incised or 
painted patterns on a black polished 
ground, the vases being all hand- 
made, and often treated in a plastic 
fashion with rude modelling of 
human or animal forms (figs. 21, 22); these cover the period 
2500-2000 B.C. Early painted pottery, parallel with the 
Kamares ware, has been found in Thera and in the important 
cemeteries of Phylakopi in Melos. But until the general spread 




Fig. 21. — Primitive black 
pottery from the Troad. 




Fig. 22. — Primitive red pottery from the Troad. 

of Mycenaean civilization and art in the latter half of the second 
millennium there is no site except Crete where a continuous and 
successful development can be studied. 

About the time which is represented in Greek tradition by 
the Dorian invasion (1100 B.C.) the then decadent Mycenaean 
civilization was replaced by a new one much more backward in 
development, making pottery of a far simpler and more con- 



ventional type, the decoration being largely confined to geo- 
metrical patterns to the exclusion of motives derived from plant 
forms. This is usually known as the geometrical style, and the 
pottery covers the period from about 1000 to 700 B.C. It is 
found all over the mainland and islands of Greece, and exhibits 
a certain development towards a more advanced stage. The 
patterns include the chevron, the triangle, the key or maeander, 
and the circle, in various combinations, painted in dull black on 
a brown ground. In most places the art advanced no further, 
but in Boeotia, and still more at Athens, we can trace the gradual 
growth of decorative skill, first in 
the introduction of animals, and 
then in the appearance of the 
human figure. In the Athenian 
cemetery outside the Dipylon gate 
a series of colossal vases has come 
to light, on which are painted such 
subjects as sea-fights and funeral 
processions. The human figures 
are exceedingly rude and conven- 
tional, painted almost entirely in 
silhouette, but there is a distinct 
striving after artistic effect in the 
composition and arrangement. In 
Boeotia the vases do not advance 
beyond the animal stage, and 
many exhibit a tendency to de- 
cadence in their carelessness, as Fig. 23.— Vase with bands 
contrasted with the painstaking of animals, Oriental in style, 
helplessness of the Athenian (British Museum.) 
artists. 

1 In Ionia and the islands of the Aegean such as Rhodes, the 
art of vase-painting from the first carried on the Mycenaean 
tradition, and was distinguished by its naturalism and originality, 
and by the bold and diverse effects produced by variety of colour 





* 

Fig. 24. — Ionic amphora, with contest between Heracles and Hera, 
and bands of birds and animals ; black, with incised lines. 

or novelty of subject. The ornamentation is at first elementary, 
consisting of friezes of animals, especially lions, deer and goats 
(figs. 23 and 24). These figures stand out sharply in black 
against the creamy buff ground which is characteristic of nearly 
all Ionic pottery, and details are brought out by means of en- 
graved lines, patches of purplish iron pigment, or by drawing 
parts of the figures, especially the heads, in outline on the clay 
ground. Another feature is the general use of small ornaments 
such as rosettes and crosses in great variety of form to cover 



GREEK] 



CERAMICS 



7*7 



the background and avoid the vacant spaces which the Greek 
artist abhorred. The system of decoration has been thought to 
owe much to Assyrian textile fabrics. 

One of the best though most advanced examples of early Ionic 
pottery is a pinax or plate from Rhodes in the British Museum, 
on which is represented the combat of Menelaus and Hector over 
the body of Euphorbus (fig. 25); their names are inscribed 
over the figures, and this is almost the earliest known instance 
of a mythological subject, the date of the painting being not later 
than 600 B.C. To a slightly later date belongs another remark- 
able group of cups with figures on a white ground, probably 
made at Cyrene in North Africa. Of these the most famous has 
a painting in the interior, of Arcesilaus II., king of Cyrene from 
580 to 550 B.C., weighing goods for export in a ship. Others have 
mythological subjects, such as Zeus, Atlas and Prometheus, 
Cadmus and Pelops. 

But these vases, though still retaining the older technique, 
really belong to the second class, that of black-figured vases, 
and they belong to a time when in all Ionian centres this method 
was being superseded by the new technique which Corinth had 




Fig. 25. — Early inscribed pinax from Rhodes, with contest of 
Menelaus and Hector over the body of Euphorbus. 

introduced and Athens perfected, to the consideration of which 
we must return. 

For some 1 50 years Corinth almost monopolized the industry 
of pottery on the west of the Aegean. Large numbers of examples 
have been found in or near the city itself, many bearing inscrip- 
tions in the peculiar local alphabet. They show a continuous 
progress from the simplest ornamentation to fully-developed 
black-figured wares. In the earliest (Plate I. fig. 52) oriental 
influence is very marked, the surface being so covered with the 
figures and patterns that the background disappears and the 
designs are at times almost unintelligible. The general effect is 
thus that of a rich oriental tapestry, and the subjects are largely 
chosen from the fantastic and monstrous creations of Assyrian 
art, such as the sphinx and gryphon. The vases are mostly 
small, the ground varies from cream to yellow, and the figures 
are painted in black and purple. 

Both in Ionia and at Corinth during the early part of the 6th 
century the same tendencies are seen to be at work, tending to a 
unification of styles under the growing influence of Athens. 
In Ionia (see above) figure subjects become more common, and 
the technique approaches gradually nearer to the black-figure 
method. Similarly at Corinth the ground ornaments diminish 
and disappear, the friezes of animals are restricted to the borders 
of the designs, and human figures are introduced, first singly, 
then in friezes or groups, and finally engaged in some definite 



action such as combats or hunting scenes. In the last stages 
Greek myths and legends are freely employed. A new develop- 
ment, traditionally associated with the painter Eumarus of 
Athens, was the distinguishing of female figures by the use of 
white for flesh tints. A somewhat similar development was in 
progress at Athens, though represented by comparatively few 
vases. Here the adoption of Corinthian and Ionian technical 
improvements evolved by the middle of the 6th century the 
fully developed black-figure style which by degrees supplanted 
or assimilated all other schools. 

II. Black-figured Vases. — At the head of this new development 
stands the famous Francois vase at Florence, found at Chiusi 
in 1844 (Plate I. fig. 53). Its shape is that of a krater or mixing- 
bowl, and it bears the signatures of its maker and decorator in 
the form " Ergotimos made me, Klitias painted me." It might 
be described as a Greek mythology in miniature, with its 
numerous subjects and groups of figures all from legendary 
sources such as the stories of Peleus, Theseus and Meleager, or 
the return of Hephaestus to heaven. All the figures have their 
names inscribed. 

The general technique of the black-figured vases has already 
been described. It may be noted as a chronological guide that 
the use of purple for details is much commoner in the earlier 
vases, white in the later, but towards the end of the century 
when the new fashion of red figures was gaining ground, both 
colours were almost entirely dropped. The drawing of the 
figures is, as might be expected, somewhat stiff and conventional, 
though it advanced considerably in freedom before the style 
went out of fashion. Many vases, otherwise carefully and 
delicately executed, are marred by an excess of mannerism and 
affectation, as in the works of the artists Amasis and Exekias 
(Plate I. fig. 54). The treatment of drapery is a good indication 
of date, ranging from flat masses of colour to oblique flowing 
lines of angular falling folds. 

The shapes most commonly employed by the Athenian potters 
of this period are the amphora, hyalria, hylix, oinochoe and lekythos, 
the first-named being the most popular. A special class of 
amphorae is formed by the Panathenaic vases, which were given 
as prizes in the Athenian games, and were adorned with a figure 
of the patron goddess Athena on one side and a representation 
of the contest in which they were 
won on the other (fig. 26) . They 
usually bear the inscription ruv 
'hBT\vrfitv aO'Siov djxi, " I am 
(a prize) from the games at 
Athens." Some of these can be 
dated by the names of Athenian 
archons which they bear, as late 
as the 4th century, the old 
method of painting in black 
figures with a stiff conventional 
pose for the goddess being re- 
tained for religious reasons. 

The chief interest of the black- 
figured vases is really derived 
from their subjects, which range 
over every conceivable field, the 
proportion of myth and legend 
to scenes from daily life being 
much greater than in the suc- 
ceeding period. They include 
groups of Olympian and other deities, and the various scenes 
in which they take part, such as the battle of the gods and giants, 
or the birth of Athena (treated in a very conventional manner, 
as on a fine amphora in the British Museum) ; Dionysus and his 
attendant satyrs and maenads, the labours and exploits of 
Heracles and other heroes, subjects taken from the tale of Troy 
and other less familiar legends; and scenes from daily life, 
battle scenes, athletics, the chase and so on. The same classifica- 
tion of course holds good for the later periods of vase-painting, 
f with some exceptions. The proportion of genre-scenes subse- 
I quently becomes greater, and some myths disappear, others rise 




Fig. 26. — Panathenaic amphora; 



7i8 



CERAMICS 



[GREEK 



into prominence, new deities such as Eros (Love), and Nike 
(Victory) appear for the first time, and, generally speaking, the 
later subjects are characterized by a sentimentality or tendency 
to emotion which is entirely foreign to the conventional stereo- 
typed compositions of the 6th century artist. 

A remarkable feature of the subjects on black-figured vases is 
that a stereotyped form of composition is invariably adopted 
at least for the principal figures, but minor variations are gener- 
ally to be found, as, for instance, in the number of bystanders; 
and it is almost an impossibility to find any two vase-paintings 
which are exact duplicates. The form of the composition was 
partly determined by the field available for the design ; when 
this took the form of a long frieze the space was filled up with a 
series of spectators or the repetition of typical groups, but when 
the design is on a framed panel or confined by ornamental borders 
the method of treatment is adapted from that of a sculptured 
metope, and the figures limited to two or three. In many cases 
it is difficult to decide, in the absence of inscriptions, whether or 
no a scene has mythological signification; the mythological 
types are over and over again adopted for scenes of ordinary 
life, even to the divine attributes or poses of certain figures. 

Among the artists of the period who have left their names on 
the vases, besides those already mentioned, the most conspicuous 
is Nicosthenes, a potter of some originality, from whose hand 



the artist Andocides, who not only produced vases in each 
method, but also several in which the two are combined (fig. 27). 
In two or three cases the subject is actually the same on each 
side, almost every detail being repeated, except that the colouring 
is reversed. 

The date at which the change took place was formerly placed 
well on in the 5 th century, on account of the great advance in 
drawing which most of the red-figured vases show, as compared 
with the black. They were thus regarded as contemporary 
with the painter Polygnotus, if not with Pheidias. But the 
excavations on the Acropolis of Athens yielded so many frag- 
ments in the advanced red-figured style which must be earlier 
than 480 B.C., that it has become necessary to find an earlier 
date for its appearance. This is now usually placed at about 
520 B.C., overlapping with the preceding period. 

The red-figure period is usually subdivided into four, marking 
the chief stages of development, and known respectively as the 
"severe," "strong," "fine," and "late fine" periods. Their 
principal characteristics and representative painters may be 
briefly enumerated. 

In the severe period there is no marked advance on the black- 
figured vases as regards style. The figures are still more or less 
stiff and conventional, and some vases even show signs of an 
analogous decadence. The real development is partly technical, 





Vase by Andocides. Black figures on obverse. 



Fig. 27. 



Vase by Andocides. Red figures on reverse. 



we have over seventy examples, a few being in the red-figure 
method. He is supposed to have introduced at Athens a revival 
of the Ionic fashion of painting on a cream-coloured ground 
instead of on red, of which some very effective examples have 
been preserved. He was always a potter rather than a painter, 
and most of his vases are remarkable for their forms — intro- 
ducing plastic imitations of metal vases — rather than for their 
painted decoration. Most of the artists of this period, as in the 
succeeding one, have left their signatures on cups (kylikes), but 
this form did not receive so much attention from the painter 
as at a later period, and many of these examples bear only 
inscriptions and no painted decoration. 

III. Red-figured Vases. — The sudden reversal of technical 
method involved in the change from black figures on a red ground 
to red figures on black is not at first sight easy of explanation. 
Some artists, like Nicosthenes and Andocides, used both methods, 
sometimes on the same vase, and there is no doubt that the two 
went on for some years concurrently. As, however, no inter- 
mediate stage is possible, there is no question of development or 
transition. The new style was in fact a bold and ingenious 
innovation. It may possibly have been suggested by a small 
class of vases in which the figures are painted in the black-figure 
method, but have the converse appearance, that is to say they are 
painted in a thick red pigment on a ground of shining black. 
It may therefore have occurred to the artist that he could 
obtain the same effect merely by leaving the figures unpainted 
on the red clay and surrounding them with the black. The 
change, must, however, be closely associated with the career of 



partly in the introduction of new subjects. Although the change 
of style probably had its actual origin in the amphora, as treated 
by Andocides, the new developments are best seen in the kylix, 
a form of vase which now sprang into popularity and called 
forth the chief efforts of the principal artists. Its curved surface 
gave ample scope for skilful effects of drawing and decorative 
arrangement, and the earlier painters devoted all their attention 
to perfecting it as a work of decorative art. For other shapes, 
such as the hydria and lekythos, the old method was for a time 
preferred. 

The most typical artist of the period was Epictetus, and other 
famous cup-painters were Pamphaeus, Cachrylion and Phintias. 
The earliest cups are decorated in a quite simple fashion like 
those of the black-figure period, often with a single figure each 
side between two large " symbolical " eyes, and a single figure 
in a circle in the interior. To the latter the artist at first devoted 
his chief efforts, though even here his scope was at first limited. 
But although he had not yet attained to skill in composition, 
he did discover that the circular space was well adapted for 
exhibiting his newly-acquired abilities as a draughtsman and 
for disposing figures in ingeniously conceived attitudes. In all 
cases the object was to fill the space as far as possible, a char- 
acteristic of all the best Greek art. By degrees more attention 
was paid to the designs on the exterior, and the single figures 
were replaced by groups, but regular compositions in the form 
of friezes telling some story were not introduced until quite the 
end of this period. Epictetus was throughout his career a 
thoroughly " archaic " artist, but a considerable advance was 



GREEK] 



CERAMICS 



719 




made by Cachrylion, who stands on the verge of the succeeding 
stage. 

The strong period centres round the name of Euphronius, the 
author of a really great artistic movement. His capacity for 
inventing new subjects or new 
poses — or otherwise overcoming 
technical and artistic difficulties 
— marks a great advance on all 
previous achievements, and he 
seems to represent the stage of 
development traditionally associ- 
ated with the painter Cimon of 
Cleonae, the in-_ 
ventor of foreshort- 
ening and other 
novelties. Thus 
figures were no 
longer represented 
exclusively in pro- 
file, as in the black- 
figured vases which 
had made no ad- 
vance beyond the 
conventions of 
Egyptian art. Ten vases signed 
by him are in existence (though 
it is not certain that all were 
actually painted by him), most 
of them having mythological sub- 
jects (fig. 28). 

Of his contemporaries, Duris, 
Hieron and Brygus take foremost 
rank, all three being, like Euphro- 
nius, essentially cup-painters, 
though they use other forms at 
times. For decorative effect and beauty of composition their 
vases have never been surpassed. As an example we may quote 
a kotyle or beaker in the British Museum signed by Hieron, with 
a group of Eleusinian deities. 
The larger vases of this period 
are more rarely signed, but many 
of them rival the, cups in execu- 
tion, though the subjects are 
characterized by greater sim- 
plicity and largeness of style. 

In the fine style (460-440 B.C.) 
breadth of effect and dignity are 
aimed at, and although cup- 
painting had passed its zenith, 
and signed specimens become 
rarer, yet, considering the red- 
figured vases as a whole, this 
period exhibits the perfection 
of technique and drawing. In 
many of the larger vases the 
scenes are of a pictorial char- 
acter, landscape being intro- 
duced, with figures ranged at 
different levels, and herein we 
may see a reflection of the style 
of the painter Polygnotus.. One 
of the finest cups in this style is 
in the Berlin Museum, it is signed 
by the artists Erginus and Aris- 
tophanes, and the subject is the 
battle of the gods and giants. 
To the end of the period belongs 
a beautiful hydria in the British 
Museum by the painter Meidias 
with subjects from Greek legend in twe friezes (fig. 29). 
Generally speaking, there is a reaction in favour of mythological 
subjects 



Fig. 28. — Cup by Euphronius. 




Fig. 29. — Mydria by Meidias in the style of Polygnotus. 



In the late fine style, which begins about 440 B.C., the pictorial 
effect is preserved, but with perfected skill in drawing the com- 
positions deteriorate greatly in merit, and become at once over- 
refined and careless. The figures are crowded together without 

meaningorinterest. The fashion 
also arose of enhancing the de- 
signs by means of accessory 
colours — almost unknown in the 
previous stages — such as white 
laid on in masses, blue and green, 
and even with gilding. Athletic 
and mythological subjects yield 
place to scenes from 
the life of women 
and children or 
meaningless groups 
of figures (fig. 30). 

A good example 
of this style is 
an amphora from 
Rhodes with the 
subject of Peleus 
wooing Thetis, in 
which polychrome 
colouring and gilding are intro- 
duced. There are also many 
imposing and elaborate speci- 
mens found (and perhaps made) 
in the colonies of the Crimea and 
the Cyrenaica; in particular one 
signed by Xenophantus with the 
Persian king hunting, and an- 
other representing the contest of 
Athena and Poseidon for the soil 
of Attica, both from the Crimea. 
Contemporary with the red-figure method is one in which the 
figures are painted on a white slip or engobe resembling pipe- 
clay, with which the whole surface was covered; the figures are 

drawn in outline in red or black, 
and partly filled in with washes 
of colour, chiefly red, purplish 
red, or brown, but sometimes 
also with blue or green. This 
style seems to have been popular 
about the middle of the 5th 
century B.C. and was employed 
for the funeral lekythoi which 
came into fashion at Athens 
about that time. These vases, 
which form a class by them- 
selves, were made specially for 
funeral ceremonies and were 
painted with subjects relating to 
the tomb, such as the laying-out 
of the corpse on the bier, the 
ferrying of the dead over the 
Styx by Charon, or (most fre- 
quently) mourners bringing offer- 
ings to the tomb (fig. 31). They 
continued to be made well on 
into the 4th century, but the 
later examples are very de- 
generate and careless. 

Of other forms, especially the 
kylix and the pyxis (toilet-box), 
some exceedingly beautiful speci- 
mens have come down to us, 
which show a delicacy of draw- 
ing and firmness of touch never 
surpassed, although the lines were probably only drawn with a 
brush. The technique of these vases may reflect the methods of 
the painter Polygnotus and his contemporaries, who used a 



720 



CERAMICS 



[GREEK 



limited number of colours on a white ground. Among them no 
finer specimen exists than the cup in the British Museum with 
Aphrodite riding on a goose; the design is entirely in brown 
outlines, and the drawing, if slightly archaic, full of grace and 
refinement. 
In the subjects on red-figured vases we do not find the same 




Fig. 30. — Painting from a small toilet-box or pyxis, showing 
painted vases used to decorate a lady's room. On the left is a gilt 
pyxis with a tall lid, and an oenochoe on a low table; on the right 
two tall vases (lebes) on a plinth. All except the pyxis are decorated 
with painted figures, and contain flowers. 

variety of choice as on the black-figured, but on the other 
hand there is infinitely greater freedom of treatment. The 
stereotyped form of composition is almost entirely discarded, 
and each painter forms his own conception of his subject. The 
class of slim amphorae, known as " Nolan " 
from the place where they were mostly 
found, are distinguished by having the 
design limited to one or at most two 
figures on each side, often on a large 
scale; these vases are also famous for 
the marvellous brilliance of their shining 
black (fig. 32). 

Towards the middle of the 5th century 
the patriotism of the Athenian artist finds 
expression in the growing importance 
which he attaches to local legends, especi- 
ally those of Theseus, the typical Attic 
hero. He seems to have been regarded 
as the typical Athenian athlete or 
ephebus, and his contests as analogous to 
episodes of the gymnasium. Hence the 
grouping on some vases of scenes from 
his labours are like so many groups of 
athletes (fig. 33), and hence, too, a general 
tendency of the red-figured vases, especi- 
ally the cups, to become a sort of 
glorification of the Attic ephebus, the 
representations of whom in all sorts of 
occupations are out of all proportion to 
other subjects. . 

We find evidence of this, too, in another 
Fig. 31. — Funeral form. Many vases, especially the cups of 
1 e k y t h o s showing the « seyere ., and « strong » periods, bear 

vases placed inside , . ., 5 4. v. j„„- .„ 

tomb. names of persons inscribed on the designs 

with the word koX&s, "fair" or " noble," 
attached; sometimes merely, " the boy is fair." The exact 
meaning of this practice has been much discussed, but evi- 
dence seems to show that the persons celebrated must have 
been quite young at the time, and were probably youths famous 
for their beauty or athletic prowess. Some of the names are 
those of historical characters, such as Hipparchus, Miltiades 
or Alcibiades, and, though they cannot always be identified 
with these celebrated personages, enough evidence has been 
obtained te i-v of great value for the chronology of the vases. 




Further, the practice of the vase-painter of adopting his own 
particular favourite name or set of names has enabled us to 
increase our knowledge of the characteristics of individual 
artists by identifying unsigned vases with the work of particular 
schools. 

IV. Vases of the Decadence. — For all practical purposes the 
red-figure style at Athens came to an end with the fall of the 
city in 404 B.C. Painted vases did not then altogether cease to 
be made, as the Panathenaic prize vases and the funeral lekythoi 
testify, but at the same time a rapid decadence set in. The 
whole tendency of the 4th century B.C. in Greece was one of 
decentralization, and the art of vase-painting was no exception, 
for we find that there must have been a general migration of 
craftsmen from Athens, not only to the Crimea and to North 
Africa, but also to southern Italy, which now becomes the chief 
centre of vase production. Here there were many rich and 
flourishing Greek colonies or Grecianized towns, such as Taren- 
tum, Paestum and Capua, ready to welcome the new art as an 
addition to their many luxuries. In the character of the vases 
of this period we 
see their tend- 
encies reflected, 
especially in their 
splendid or showy 
aspect; the only 
aim being size and 
gaudy colouring. 

The general 
method of paint- 
ing remains that 
of the Athenian 
red-figure vases, 
but with entire 
loss of simplicity 
or refinement, 
either in the orna- 
mentation, the 
choice of colours, 
or the drawing of 
the figures. Large 
masses of white 
are invariably em- 
ployed, especially 
for the flesh of 
women or of Eros, 
the universally 
present god of 
Love, and for 
architectural details. Yellow is introduced for details of hair 
or features, and in attempts at shading, nor is a dull iron- 
purple uncommon. The reverses of the vases, when they have 
subjects, are devoid of all accessory colouring, and the figures 
are drawn with the greatest carelessness, as if not intended to be 
seen. There is throughout a lavish use of ornamental patterns 
such as palmettes, wreaths of leaves, or ornaments strewn over 
the field (a reversion to an old practice). 

The drawing, having now become entirely free, errs in the 
opposite extreme; the forms are soft and the male figures often 
effeminate. The fanciful and richly-embroidered draperies of 
the figures and the frequent architectural settings seem to 
indicate that theatrical representations exercised much influence 
on the vase-painters. The great painters of the 4th century may 
also have contributed their share of inspiration, but rather 
perhaps in the subjects chosen than in regard to style; though 
the effect of many scenes on the larger vases is decidedly pictorial, 
they are chiefly remarkable for their emotional and dramatic 
themes. 

The influence of the stage is twofold, for tragedy as well as 
comedy plays its part. Many subjects are taken directly, others 
indirectly, from the plays of Euripides, such as the Medea, 
Hecuba (Plate II. fig. 60), or Hercules Furens, and the arrange- 
ment, of the scenes is essentially theatrical. The influence of 




Fig. 32. — ■" Nolan " amphora by Euxitheus 
(c. 450 B.C.), figure of Briseis; the other side 
has Achilles. 



ETRUSCAN] 



CERAMICS 



721 



comedy is seen in subjects derived from the phlyakes, a kind of 
farce or burlesque popular in southern Italy, and here again 
the setting is adapted from the stage, some vases having parodies 
of myths, others comic scenes of daily life. 

Many vases of this period, especially those of large size, were 
expressly designed for funeral purposes. Some of these bear 
representations of the underworld, with groups of figures under- 
going punishment. On others shrines or tombs are depicted — 
sometimes containing effigies of the deceased, at which the 
relatives make offerings — as on the Athenian lekythoi. But by 
far the greater portion of the subjects are taken from daily life, 
many of these being of a purely fanciful and meaningless character 
like the designs on Sevres or Meissen china; the commonest 
type is that of a young man and a woman exchanging presents, 
the presence of Eros implying that they are scenes of courtship. 

The vases of this period are usually grouped in three or four 
different types, corresponding to the ancient districts of Lucania, 
Campania and Apulia, each 
with its special features of 
technique, drawing and sub- 
jects. In Lucanian vases the 
drawing is bold and restrained, 
more akin to that of the Attic 
vases; in Campania a fondness 
for polychromy is combined 
with careless exe- 
cution. In Apulia 
a tendency to mag- 
nificence exempli- 
fied in the great 
funeral and the- 
atrical vases is fol- 
lowed by a period 
of decadence char- 
acterized by small 
vases of fantastic 
form with purely 
decorative sub- 
jects. Besides these we have 
the school of Paestum, repre- 
sented by two artists who 
have left their names on their 
vases, Assteas and Python. 
A well-known example of the 
work of the former is a krater in 
Madrid with Heracles destroy- 
ing his children, a theatrical 
and quasi-grotesque composi- 
tion, and there is a fine example of Python's work in a krater 
in the British Museum, with Alkmena, the mother of Heracles, 
placed on the funeral pyre by her husband Amphitryon, and 
rain-nymphs quenching the flames (Plate I. fig. 55). 

About the end of the 3rd century B.C. the manufacture of 
painted vases would seem to have been rapidly dying out in 
Italy, as had long been the case elsewhere, and their place is 
taken by unpainted vases modelled in the form of animals and 
human figures, or ornamented with stamped and moulded reliefs. 
These in their turn gave way to the Arretine and so-called 
" Samian " red wares of the Roman period. In all these wares we 
see a tendency to the imitation of metal vases, which, with the 
growth of luxury in the Hellenistic age, had entirely replaced 
painted pottery both for use and ornament; the pottery of the 
period is reduced to a subordinate and utilitarian position, merely 
supplying the demands of those in the humbler spheres of life. 

Collections. — The majority of the painted vases now in existence 
are to be found in the various public museums and collections of 
Europe, of which the largest and most important are the British 
Museum, the Louvre and the Berlin Museum. Next to these come 
the collections at Athens, Naples, Munich, Vienna, Rome and 
St Petersburg; isolated specimens of importance are to be found 
in other museums, as at Florence, Madrid or the Bibliotheque 
Ncitionale at Paris. Most of the great private collections of the two 
preceding centuries have now been dispersed. In recent years the 




Fig. 33. — Cup with exploits of Theseus. 



Boston Museum has raised America to a level with Europe in this 
respect; and the Metropolitan Museum at New York contains a 
vast collection of Cypriote pottery. 

Literature. — Important original articles are to be found in 
various archaeological journals such as American Journal of Archae- 
ology (1885, &c ) ; Annual of the British School at Athens (1894, &~0 '< 
Athenische Mitteilungen (1876, &c); Bulletin de correspondence 
hellenique (1877, &c); Comptes rendus de la commission imperiale 
archeologigue (St Petersburg, 1859-1888) ; Gazette archeologigue 
(Paris, 1 875-1 889); Jahrbuch des kaiserlichen deutschen archao- 
logischen Instituts, Berlin (1886, &c); Journal of Hellenic Studies 
(1880, &c.)> Monumenti antichi (Milan, 1890, &c); Monuments 
grecs (Paris, 1872-1898); Monuments Piot (Paris, 1894, &c); 
Revue archeologigue (Paris, 1844, &c). The older works have been 
recently superseded by important publications embodying the latest 
views such as Hartwig, Die griechischen Meisterschalen des strengen 
rolfigurigen. Stils (1893); Louvre, Catalogue des vases antiques de 
terre cuite, by E.Pottier (1896, &c.) ; S. Reinach, Repertoire des vases 
peints (Paris, 1899-1900); H. B. Walters, History of Ancient Pottery 
(Greek, Etruscan and Roman), 1905, with an excellent bibliographical 
list; also art. " Hischylos" in J.H.S. xxix. (1909) p. 103. 

Etruscan Pottery.— 
Parallel with the development of 
the art of pottery in Greece runs 
the course of the art in Etruria, 
though with far inferior results; 
in its later stages it is actually 
no more than a feeble imitation 
of the Greek. The period of 
time which wemust 
consider extends 
from the Bronze 
age (1000 B.C. or 
earlier) down to 
the 3rd century 
B.C., when Etrus- 
can civilization 
was merged into 
Roman. 

The earliest civil- 
ization traced in 
Italy is not, strictly 
speaking, Etruscan, but may 
perhaps be more accurately 
styled "Umbrian." It is 
usually referred to as the 
" Terramare " period from the 
remains discovered in that dis- 
trict in the basin of the 
Po. These people were lake- 
dwellers, barely removed from 
the Neolithic stage of culture, 
and their pottery was of the rudest kind, hand-made and 
roughly baked. Cups and pots have been found sometimes 
with simple decoration in the form of knobs or bosses, and 
many have a crescent-shaped handle serving as a support for 
the thumb. 

The next period, the earliest which" can be spoken of as 
" Etruscan," is known as the " Villanova " period, from a site 
of that name near Bologna, or as the period of pit-tombs (a 
pozzo), from the form of the graves in which the pottery has been 
found (see Villanova). It begins with the 9th century B.C. 
and lasts for about two hundred years. The pit-tombs usually 
contain large cinerary urns or ossuaria (containing the ashes of 
the dead), fashioned by hand from a badly-levigated volcanic 
clay known as impasto Italico. These vessels were irregularly 
baked in an open fire, and the colour of the surface varies from 
red-brown to greyish black. They appear to have been covered 
with a polished slip, intended to give the vases a metallic appear- 
ance. The shape of the urns is peculiar, but uniform; they have 
a small handle at the widest part and a cover in the form of an 
inverted bowl with handle (Plate III. fig. 63) . Their ornamenta- 
tion consists of incised or stamped geometrical ornaments formed 
in the moist clay in bands round the neck and body; more 
rarely patterns painted in white are found. Common pottery 
is also found showing little advance on that of the Terramare 



722 



CERAMICS 



[ETRUSCAN 



period except in variety of decoration. The technique and 
ornament are the same as in the case of the urns. They corre- 
spond in development, though not in date, to the early pottery 
of Troy and Cyprus, as well as to the primitive pottery of other 
races, but one marked difference »is the general fondness of the 
Italian potter for vases with handles. 

Sometimes the cinerary urns take the form of huts (tuguria), 
though these are more often found in the neighbourhood of 
Rome. One of the best examples is in the British Museum; it 
still contains ashes which were inserted through a little door 
secured by a cord passing through rings. The ornamentation 
suggests the rude carpentry of a primitive hut, the cover or roof 
being vaulted with raised ridges to represent the beams. The 
surface is polished, and other specimens are occasionally painted 
with patterns in white. 

In the next stage a change is seen in the form of the tombs, 
the pit being replaced by a trench; this is accordingly known 
as the " trench-tomb " or a fossa period, and extends from the 
8th century B.C. to the beginning of the 6th. Importations of 
Greek pottery now first make their appearance. The character 
of the local pottery actually remains for some time the same as 
that of the preceding period, but it improves in technique. By 
degrees an improvement in the forms is also noted, and new 
varieties of ornamentation are introduced; there is, however, 
no evidence that the wheel was used. 

Two entirely new classes of pottery are found at Cervetri 
(Caere) belonging to the 7th century. One consists of large jars 
(viffoi) of red ware, the lower part being moulded in ribs, while 
the upper has bands of design stamped round it in groups or 
friezes. These designs were either produced from single stamps 
or rolled out from cylinders like those used in Babylonia, The 
subjects are usually quasi-oriental in character, and it is not 
certain that this ware was made in Etruria, especially as similar 
vases have been found in Rhodes and Sicily; either it was 
imported, or it was a local imitation of Greek models. 

The other class is similar as regards the shapes and the nature 
of the clay, but is distinguished by having painted subjects in 
white outlines on a red glossy ground. The clay, a kind of 
impasto Italico, was first hardened by baking, and then a mixture 
of wax, resin and iron oxide was applied and polished; on this 
the pigments, a mixture of chalk and earth, were laid. The 
subjects are from Greek mythology or are at least Greek in 
character, but the technique is purely Etruscan, and the drawing 
is crude and un-Greek in the extreme. 

The fourth period shows a close continuity with the third; 
but the difference is defined firstly by the appearance of a new 
type of tomb in the form of a chamber {a camera) , secondly, by 
the all-pervading influence of oriental art, and to a less extent 
of that of the Greeks The period extends from about 650 to 
550 B.C., and is further marked by the general introduction of 
the wheel into Etruria arid by the appearance of inscriptions in 
an alphabet derived from western Greece. In the earlier tombs 
the typical local pottery is of hand-made impasto Italico resem- 
bling that of the previous periods; in the later we find what is 
known'as bucchero ware — the national pottery of Etruria — which 
is made on the wheel and baked in a furnace, and shows a marked 
tendency to imitate metal. 

To this period also belongs the famous Polledrara tomb or 
Grotto d'lside at Vulci, the contents of which are now in the 
British Museum and include some remarkable specimens of 
pottery. It dates from about 620-610 B.C. The most remarkable 
of the vases is a hydria, of reddish-brown clay covered with a 
lustrous black slip on which have been painted designs in red, 
blue and a yellowish white. The colours have unfortunately now 
almost disappeared, and it is doubtful if they had been fired. The 
principal subject is from the story of Theseus and Ariadne. This 
tomb also contained a large wheel-made pithos of red impasto 
ware with designs painted in polychrome. In the Regulini- 
Galassi tomb at Cervetri (about 650 B.C.) large cauldrons of red 
glossy ware were found, with gryphons' heads projecting all 
round, to which chains were attached. A similar cauldron from 
Falerii on a high open-work stand is now in the British Museum. 



We now come to the bucchero ware, which is characteristic of 
the later portion of this period, though the earliest examples go 
back to the end of the 7th century. Its main feature is the black 
paste of which it is composed, covered with a more or less shining 
black slip. Modern experiments seem to indicate that the clay 
was smoked or fumigated in a closed chamber after baking, 
becoming thereby blackened throughout, and the surface was then 
polished with wax and resin. Analyses of the ware have proved 
that it contains carbon and that it had been lightly fired. The 
oldest bucchero vases are small and hand-made, sometimes with 
incised geometrical patterns engraved with a sharp tool like 
metal-work. Oriental influence then appears in a series of 
chalice-shaped cups found at Cervetri with friezes of animals. 
From about 560 B.C. onwards the vases are all wheel-made, with 
ornaments in relief either stamped from a cylinder or composed of 
separate medallions attached to the vase. The subjects range 
from animals or monsters to winged deities or suppliants making 
offerings (fig. 34) ; in other cases we find meaningless groups of 
figures or plant forms. These types are found chiefly in southern 
Etruria, but at Chiusi (Clicsium) 
a more elaborate variety found 
favour from about 500 to 300 
B.C. The shapes are very varied 
and the ornament covers the 
vase from top to bottom, the 
covers of the vases being also 
frequently modelled in various 
forms. The figures are stamped 
from moulds, incised designs 
being added to fill up the spaces. 
The range of subjects is much 
widened, including scenes from 
Greek mythology and oriental 
types combining Egyptian and 
Assyrian motives, which must 
have been introduced by the 
Phoenicians. 

Thus the technique of the 

bucchero wares is purely native, 

but the decoration is entirely 

dependent on foreign types 

whether Greek or oriental, and 

throughout the whole series the 

tendency to imitate metal-work ■ , r 1 ?' u 34 "~i5' vl r 

. , , J , ,. , . ., black bucchero ware, with figures 




in relief. (British Museum.) 



is to be observed in every detail, 

both in the forms and in the 

methods of decoration. Some are mere counterparts of existing 

work in bronze. 

The last variety of peculiarly Etruscan pottery which call? for 
notice is the Canopic jar, so called from its resemblance to the 
KavuTOt. in which the Egyptians placed the bowels of their 
mummies. They are rude representations of the human figure, 
the head forming the cover, and in the tombs were placed on 
round chairs of wood, bronze or terra-cotta. An example of such 
a jar on a bronze-plated chair may be seen in the Etruscan Room 
of the British Museum (Plate III. fig. 65). Their origin has been 
traced to the funeral masks found in the earliest Etruscan tombs. 
From these a gradual transition may be observed from the mask 
(1) placed on the corpse, (2) on the cinerary urn, (3) the head 
modelled in the round and combined with the vase, and (4) at 
last the complete human figure. The earliest of these jars are 
found in. the " pit-tombs " of the 8th century B.C., and the latest 
and most developed types belong to the 5th century B.C. 

The skill shown by the Etruscans in metal-work and gem- 
engraving never extended to their pottery, which is always purely 
imitative, especially when they attempted painted vases after 
the Greek fashion. The kinds already described are all more or 
less plastic in character and imitative of metal, except in the case 
of the Cervetri and Polledrara finds, which have little in common 
with anything Greek, and exhibit a quite undeveloped art. But 
towards the end of the 6th century B.C., when Greek vases were 
coming into the country in large numbers, attempts were made to 



ROMAN] 



CERAMICS 



723 



imitate the black-figure style, especially of a particular class of 
Ionian vases. Imitations of these are to be found in most 
museums and may be readily recognized as Etruscan from 
peculiarities of style, drawing and subject, as well as their 
inferior technique (fig. 35). 




Fig. 35. — Etruscan Amphora imitating Greek style; parting scene 
of Alcestis and Admetus, with Etruscan inscriptions. 

At a later date (4th-3rd century B.C.) they began to copy red- 
figured vases with similarly unsuccessful results. With the 
exception of a small class of a somewhat ambitious character 
made at Falerii (Civita Castellana), of which there is a good 
example in the British Museum with the subject of the infant 
Heracles strangling the serpents, they are all marked by their 
inferior material and finish and their bizarre decoration. The 
style is often repulsive and disagreeable, as well as ineffective, 
and the grim Etruscan deities, such as Charun, are generally 
introduced. Some of these vases have painted inscriptions in the 
Etruscan alphabet. The latest specimens positively degenerate 
into barbarism. 

Painted vases of native manufacture are also found in the 
extreme south of Italy and have been attributed to the indigenous 
races of the Peucetians and Messapians; their decoration is 
partly geometrical, partly in conventional plant forms, and is 
the result of natural development rather than of imitation of 
Greek types. Some of the shapes are characteristic, especially 
a large four-handled kraler. They cover the period 600-450 
b.c, after which they were ousted by the Graeco-Italian pro- 
ductions we have already described. 

Roman Pottery. — Roman vases are far inferior to Greek; 
the shapes are less artistic, and the decoration, though sometimes 
not without merits of its own, owes most of its success to the 
imitation or adaptation of motives learnt from earlier Grecian, 
Egyptian or Syrian potters. They required only the skill of 
the potter for their completion, and, being made by processes 
largely mechanical, they are altogether on a lower scale of artistic 
production. 

It has been noted that during a certain period — namely, the 
3rd and 2nd centuries B.C. — ceramic art had reached the same 
stage of evolution all round the Mediterranean, painted pottery 
had been ousted by metal-work, and such vases as continued to 
be made were practically imitations of metal both in Greece and 
Italy. These latter we must regard as representing ordinary 
household pottery, or as supplying to those who could not afford 
to adorn their houses and temples with costly works in metal, 
a humble but fairly efficient substitute. There is a terra-cotta 
bowl of the 2nd century B.C. in the British Museum which is 
an exact replica of a chased silver bowl with reliefs in the same 
collection, and may serve as an illustration of this condition of 
things (Plate II. fig. 56). 

These imitations of metal were largely made in southern Italy, 
a district which enjoyed close artistic relations with Etruria, 
and we have already seen that the same principle had long been 
in vogue among the Etruscans. Hence it is not surprising that 
an important centre of pottery manufacture should have sprung 
up in Etruria, in the 2nd century B.C., which for many years set 
the fashion to the whole Roman world. But before discussing 
such products it may be as well to say something on the technical 
character, shapes and uses of Roman pottery in general. 



Technical Processes. — Roman pottery regarded in its purely tech- 
nical aspect is in some ways better known to us than the Greek, 
chiefly owing to extensive discoveries of kilns and potters' apparatus 
in western Europe. It may be classified under two heads, of which 
only the second will concern us for the most part as yielding by far 
the greater amount of material and interest: (1) the plain, dul' 
earthenware used for domestic purposes, and (2) the fine, red 
shining wares, usually known to archaeologists as terra sigittata, 
clay suited to receive stamps {sigilla) or impressions. 

For both classes all kinds of clay were used, varying somewhat in 
different regions, and ranging in colour when fired from black to grey, 
drab, yellow, brown and red. The clays varied greatly in quality; 
most of the pottery made in southern Gaul was fashioned from the 
ferruginous red clay of the Allicr district, but at St-Rcmy-en-Rollat 
and in that neighbourhood a white clay was used. In Italy we find 
a carefully levigated red clay in use, great care being devoted to its 
preparation and admixture. But apart from decoration and style 
there is a great similarity in the general appearance of the Italian 
and provincial pottery made under Roman influence, and it is often 
very. difficult to decide whether the vases were manufactured where 
they had been found or were imported from some famous centre of 
manufacture. The secret of the glossy red surface seems to have 
been common property and found its way from Italy to Gaul, Spain 
and Germany, and perhaps even to Britain. 

The manner in which this glossy red surface was produced has 
been a much-disputed question, some, as for instance Artis, the 
excavator of the Castor potteries in Northamptonshire, claiming 
that it was a natural result obtained in the baking, after polishing 
of the surface, by means of specially contrived kilns. But it is now 
generally agreed that it was artificial. It is true that the Roman 
lamps and many of the commoner wares have a gloss produced by 
polishing only, varying in colour and brightness with the proportion 
of iron oxide in the clay and the degree of heat at which the pieces 
were fired. But the surface finish of the finer or terra sigillata wares 
is something quite distinct, and reaches a high and wonderfully 
uniform perfection. 

It is possible that the technical secret of the potters of the Roman 
world was only a development from the practice of the Greeks, but it 
does seem as if the finer Roman wares were coated with a brilliant 
glossy coating so thin as to defy analysis, yet so persistent as to leave 
no doubt of its existence as a definite glossy coat. Repeated at- 
tempts have been made to determine its nature by analysis, but 
chemists ought to have known better, for the coating is so thin that 
it is impossible to remove it without detaching much more body 
than glaze. Examination shows it to be much more than a surface 
polish or than the gloss of the finest Greek vases, and we shall have 
to wait for a final determination of its nature until some one who is at 
once a chemist and a potter can reconstruct it synthetically. What- 
ever its nature and method of production, it is certain that the glaze 
itself was a transparent film which heightened the natural red colour 
of the clay, until in the finest specimens it has something of the 
quality of red coral. 

In the manufacture of vases the Romans used the same processes 
as the Greeks. They were all made on the wheel, except those of 
abnormal size, such as the large casks (dolia), which were built up 
on a frame. Specimens of potters' wheels have been found at 
Arezzo and Nancy, made of terra-cotta, with a pierced centre for 
the pivot, and bearing small cylinders of lead round the circum- 
ference to give a purchase for the hand and to aid the momentum 
of the wheel. For the ornamental vases with reliefs an additional 
process was necessary, and the decoration was in nearly all cases 
produced from moulds. The process in this case was a threefold 
one: first the stamps had to be made bearing the designs; these 
were then pressed upon the inside of a clay mould which had been 
previously made on the wheel to the size and shape required ; 
finally, the clay was impressed in the mould and the vase was thus 
produced, decoration and all. Handles being of rare occurrence in 
Roman pottery, the vases were thus practically complete, requiring 
only the addition of rim and foot. The stamps were made in various 
materials, and had a handle at the back (Plate III. fig. 64). The 
moulds were of lighter clay than the vases, and were lightly fired 
when completed, so as to absorb the moisture from the pressed-in 
clay. Large numbers of these moulds are in existence (Plate III. 
fig. 61), and the British Museum possesses a fine series from Arezzo. 
Those discovered in various parts of Gaul have afforded valuable 
evidence as to the sites of the various pottery centres, as their 
presence obviously denoted a place of manufacture, and the value of 
this evidence is increased when they bear potters' names. 

Remains of kilns for baking Roman pottery ' are very numerous 
in western Europe, especially in Gaul, where the best examples are 
at Lezoux near Clermont, at Chatelet in Haute-Marne, and near 
Agen in Lot-et-Garonne. In Germany good remains have come 
to light at Heiligenberg in Baden, at Heddernheim near Frankfort, 
Rhcinzabern near Carlsruhe, and Westerndorf in Bavaria. In 
England the best kilns are those discovered by Artis in 1821-1827 at 
Castor in Northamptonshire (see fig. 4). 

Shapes. — As is the case with Greek vases, a long list of names of 



J For a full description and lists of such kilns see Walters, Ancunt 
Pottery, ii. 443-454. 



724 



CERAMICS 



[ROMAN 



shapes may be collected from Latin literature, and the same diffi- 
culties as to identification arise in the majority of cases. They may, 
however, be classified in the same manner; as vases for storing 
liquids, for mixing or pouring wine, for use at the table, and so on. 
In addition Varro and other writers have preserved a number of 
archaic and obscure names chiefly applied to the vases used in 
sacrifices. 

The principal vases for storing liquid or solid food were: — The 
dolium, el large cask or barrel of earthenware ; the amphora, a jar 
holding about six gallons; and the cadus, a jar about half as large 
as the amphora. The dolium had no foot, and was usually buried 
in the earth ; it was also used for purposes of burial. The amphora 
corresponds to the Greek wine-jar of that name, and had, like its 
prototype, a pointed base. Many examples were found at Pompeii 
stamped with the names of consuls (cf. Hor. Od. iii. 21. i), or with 
painted inscriptions relating to their contents. The cadus is men- 
tioned by Horace and Martial. 

Of smaller vases for holding liquids, such as jugs, bottles and 
flasks, the principal were the urceus, answering to the Greek oivoxori, 
the ampulla, a kind of flask with globular body, and the lagena, a 
narrow-necked flask or bottle. Of drinking-cups the Romans had 
almost as large a variety as the Greeks, and the great majority of the 
ornamented vases preserved to the present day were devoted to this 
purpose. The generic name for a cup was poculum, but the Romans 
borrowed many of the Greek names, such as cantharus and scyphus. 
The calix appears to have answered in popularity, though not in 
form, to the Greek kylix, and is probably the name by which the 
ornamented bowls were usually known. The names for a dish are 
lanx, patina and catinum. Another common form is the olla (Greek 
xirpaj, which served many purposes, being used for a cooking-pot, 
for a jar in which money was kept, or for a cinerary urn. The 
form of vase identified with this name has a spherical or elliptical 
body with short neck and wide mouth. Of sacrificial vases the 
principal was the patera or libation-bowl, corresponding to the 
Greek 0taXij. 

Arretine Ware. — The Latin writers, and in particular Pliny, 
mention numerous places in Italy, Asia Minor and elsewhere, 
which were famous for the production of pottery in Roman times. 
Pliny mentions with special commendation the " Samian Ware," 
the reputation of which, he says, was maintained by Arretium 
(Arezzo). Samian pottery is also alluded to by other writers, 
and hence the term was adopted in modern times as descriptive 
of the typical Roman red wares with reliefs, whether found in 
Italy, Germany, Gaul or Britain. But it was only accepted 
with diffidence as a convenient name, and as early as 1840 
discoveries at Arezzo made it possible to distinguish the vases 
found there as a local product, now known as "Arretine" ware. 
The name " Samian " has, however, adhered to the provincial 
wares and at the present day is often used even by archaeologists. 
But recent researches have shown that nearly all the provincial 
wares can be traced to Gaulish or German potteries, and, since 
it is implied by Pliny that " Samian " pottery is older than 
" Arretine," the name may now be fairly rejected altogether, 
as we have rejected the name " Etruscan " for Greek pottery. 
The Romans probably used it as a generic term, just as we speak 
of " china," and the real Samian ware is to be seen in the later 
Greek pottery, with reliefs, of the 3rd century B.C. 

There were, as Pliny and other writers imply, many pottery 
centres in Italy, at Rhegium, Cumae, Mutina and elsewhere, 
as well as at Saguntum in Spain, but all were surpassed in 
excellence by Arretium. In more modern times its pottery came 
under notice even in the middle ages, and discoveries were made 
in the time of Leo X. (about 1500) and again in the 18th century. 
The Arretine ware may be regarded as the Roman pottery par 
excellence, and its popularity extended from about 150 B.C. down 
to the end of the 1st century of the Empire, reaching its height 
in the 1st century B.C., after which it rapidly degenerated, and 
its place was taken by the wares of the provinces. Its general 
characteristics may be summed up as follows: — (1) The fine local 
red clay, carefully levigated and baked very hard to a rich coral 
red or a colour like sealing-wax; (2) the fine red glaze, which 
has already been discussed; (3) the great variety of forms 
employed, showing the marked influence of metal-work; (4) 
the almost invariable presence of stamps with potters' names. 
The majority of the specimens have been found at Arezzo itself, 
but there was a branch of the industry at Puteoli, producing 
pottery almost equal in merit, and it was also exported to central 
and eastern Europe and Spain. 



The earliest examples are of black glossy ware, but the red 
appears to have been introduced by 100 B.C., when the first 
potters' stamps appear. These are usually quadrangular in 
form, though other shapes are found, and are impressed in the 
midst of the design on the ornamented vases, or on plain wares 
on the bottom of the interior. The number of potters' names 
is very large, though some appear to have been more prolific 
than others, and to have employed a large number of slaves, 
whose names appear with their masters' on the stamps. The 
best known is Marcus Perennius, whose wares take highest rank 
for their artistic merit, the designs being copied from good Greek 
models. He employed seventeen slaves, of whom the best known 
is Tigranes, the stamps usually appearing as M-PEREN and 
TIGRAN. The slave-name of Bargates is found on one of his finest 
vases, in the Boston Museum, the subject being the fall of 
Phaethon. We may suppose that the stamps for the figures 
were designed by the masters, but that the vases were actually 
moulded by the slaves. Other important artists are Calidius 
Strigo, who had twenty slaves; P. Cornelius, who had no less 
than forty; Aulus Titius, who signs himself A-TITI-FIGVL- 
ARRET; the Annii and the Tetii; and L. Rasinius Pisanus, 
a degenerate potter of the Flavian period, who imitated Gaulish 
wares. 

The forms of the vases are all, without exception, borrowed 
from metal shapes and are of marked simplicity (see fig. 37, 
Nos. 1, 8, 9, 11). They are mostly of small size and devoid of 
handles, but a notable exception is a bell-shaped krater or mixing- 
bowl, of which there is a very fine example in the British Museum, 
found at Capua and decorated with the four seasons (Plate 
III. fig. 62). For the decoration and subjects the potters 
undoubtedly drew their inspiration from the " new-Attic " re- 
liefs of the Hellenistic period, of which the krater just cited is 
an example. So, too, are such subjects as the dancing maenads 
or priestesses with wicker head-dresses, or the Dionysiac scenes 
which are found, for instance, on the vases of Perennius. Others 
again are distinguished by a free use of conventional ornament, 
figures when they occur being merely decorative. There is 
throughout a remarkable variety both in the ornamentation 
and in the methods of composition. 

Provincial Wares. — The Arretine ware, as has been noted, 
steadily degenerated during the 1st century of the Empire, and 
the manufacture of ornamental pottery appears to have entirely 
died out in Italy by the time of Trajan. Its place was taken by 
the pottery of the provinces, especially by that of Gaul, where the 
transference of artistic traditions led to the rise of new industrial 
centres in the country bordering on the Rhone and the Rhine. 

As to the general characteristics of the provincial wares, that is, 
of the ornamented wares or terra sigillata, the clay is fine and 
close-grained, harder than the Arretine, and when broken shows 
a light red fracture; the surface is smooth and lustrous, of a 
brighter yet darker red colour (i.e. less like coral) than that of 
Arretine ware, but the tone varies with the degree of heat used. 
The most important feature is the fine glaze with which it is 
coated, similar in composition to that of the Arretine; it is 
exceedingly thin and transparent, and laid equally over the 
whole surface, only slightly brightening the color of the clay. 
The ornament is invariably coarser than that of Arretine ware, by 
which, however, it is indirectly inspired. 

The vases are usually of small dimensions, consisting of various 
types of bowls, cups and dishes, of which two or three forms are 
preferred almost to the exclusion of the rest, and they frequently 
bear the stamp of the potter impressed on the inside or outside. 
Although this ware is found all over the Roman world, by far 
the greater portion comes from Gaul, Germany or Britain, and 
evidence points to two — and only two — districts as the principal 
centres of manufacture: the valleys of the Loire and the Rhine 
and their immediate neighbourhood. In the 1st century a.d. 
Gaulish pottery was largely exported into Italy, and isolated 
finds of it occur in Spain and other parts. 

The recent researches of Dr Dragendorff and M. Dechelette 
have shown that a chronological sequence of the pottery may be 
clearly traced, both in the shapes employed and in the method of 



ROMAN] 



CERAMICS 



725 



decoration; and, further, that it is possible — at least as regards 
Gaul — to associate certain potters' names and certain types of 
figures, though found in many places, with two centres in par- 
ticular, Graufesenque near Rodez (department of Aveyron) in 
the district occupied by the Ruteni, and Lezoux near Clermont 
(department of Puy-de-D6me) in the country of the Arverni. 

The periods during 

< ■ ■ ?tf_..-.- » which these potteries 

flourished are con- 
secutive, or rather 
overlapping, but not 
contemporaneous, 
the former being 
practically coinci- 
dent with the 1 st 
century a.d., the 
latter with the 2nd 
and 3rd down to 
about a.d. 260, when 
the manufacture of terra sigillata practically came to an end in 
Gaul. 

There were also certain smaller potteries, some of which mark a 
transition between the Italian and provincial wares, in the north 
of Italy and on the Rhine and upper Loire, e.g. St Remy-en- 
Rollat, and others of later date, as at Banassac and Montans in 
the latter district, but none of these produced pottery of special 




Fig. 36. — Bowl of Gaulish ware, with 
moulded patterns in slight •relief . 



\D 






is usually spoken of as No. 29. This is characterized by its 
moulded rim engraved with finely incised hatchings, and by the 
division of the body by a moulding into two separate friezes for 
the designs (fig. 36). Its ornament is at first purely decorative, 
consisting of scrolls and wreaths, then small animals and birds 
are introduced, and finally figure subjects arranged in rectangular 
panels or circular medallions. About the middle of the century a 
second variety of bowl (known as No. 30; see fig. 37) was intro- 
duced; this is cylindrical in form, and, being found both at 
Graufesenque and Lezoux, may be regarded as transitional in 
character. In the latter half of this century a new form arises 
(No. 37; fig. 37), a more or less hemispherical bowl which holds 
the field exclusively on all sites down to the termination of the 
potteries. In this form and in No. 30 a new system of decoration 
is introduced, the upper edge being left quite plain. The panels 
and medallions at first prevail, but are then succeeded by arcad- 
ing or inverted semicircles enclosing figures, and finally after the 
end of the 1st century (and on form 37 only) we find the whole 
surface covered with a single composition of figures unconfined by 
borders or frames of any kind, but in a continuous frieze; this is 
known as the " free " style (Plate IV. fig. 69). 

As regards the figure subjects, it may be generally laid down 
that the conceptions are good, but the execution poor. Many are 
obvious imitations of well-known types or works of art, and the 
absence of Gaulish subjects is remarkable. They include repre- 
sentations of gods and heroes, warriors and gladiators, hunters 





45 

















Fig. 37.— Shapes used in Roman Pottery. 1-11, Arretine; 18-65, Gaulish and German. 



merit or importance. The early Rhenish wares are, strictly 
speaking, of a semi-Celtic or Teutonic character, while the later 
German terra sigillata, for which the principal centres were 
Rheinzabern near Carlsruhe and Westerndorf in Bavaria, are of 
similar character but inferior to the 2nd-century pottery of 
Lezoux. A mould from Rheinzabern is illustrated, Plate IV. 
fig. 66. 

The ornamented vases produced in these potteries are, as we 
have said, almost confined to two or three varieties, which 
follow one another chronologically. A shape favoured at first is 
the krater, which has been mentioned as one of the characteristic 
Arretine forms; but this enjoyed but a short term of popularity. 
Early in the 1st century we find a typical form of bowl in use, 
which, following the numeration of Dr Dragendorff's treatise, 



and animals, the two latter classes being pre-eminently 
popular. ; 

The potters' names at Graufesenque are nearly all of a common 
Roman type, such as Bassus, Primus, Vitalis; those at Lezoux 
are Gaulish in form, such as Advocisus, Butrio, Illixo or Lax- 
trucisa. This seems to imply that Roman influence was still strong 
in the earlier centre which drew its inspiration more directly from 
Arretium. But even the purely Roman names are sometimes 
converted into Gaulish forms, as Masclus for Masculus, or 
Tornos for Turnus. The stamps are quadrangular in form, 
depressed in the surface of the vase with the letters in relief; 
on the plain wares they are usually in the centre of the interior, but 
on the ornamented vases are impressed on the exterior among the 
figures. The usual formula is OF (for officina) or M (for manu) 



726 



CERAMICS 



[SYRIAN 




with the name in the genitive, or F, FE or FEC for fecit with the 
nominative. 

Besides the ordinary terra sigillata with figures produced in 
moulds we find other methods of decoration employed. In the 
south of France, about Aries and Orange, vases were made with 
medallions separately moulded and attached round the body; 
these have a great variety of subjects, both mythological and 
gladiatorial or theatrical, or even portraits of emperors. There 
is a remarkable specimen in the British Museum with a scene 
from the tragedy of the Cycntts, on which Heracles and Ares are 
represented, with seated deities in the background (Plate IV. 
fig. 67). The date of these reliefs is the 3rd century after Christ. 
Of the same date is a somewhat similar ware made at Lezoux. 
Here each figure is attached separately to the vase, and the 
background is filled in with foliage produced by the method 
known as en barbotine (slip-painting), of which we shall speak 
presently. The effect of these vases, which are mostly large jars 
or ollae (Plate IV. fig. 70), is often very decorative, and there is 
a fine specimen in the British Museum from Felixstowe, on which 
the modelling is really admirable. Other good examples have 
been found in various parts of Britain. 

The " slip-decoration " process is practically unknown in Italy, 
but it is found early in the 1st century of our era in Germany, 
and appears to have originated in the Rhine district. It is not 
confined to the red ware, but in the early German examples is 
applied on a dull grey or black back- 
ground. On the continent its use is 
almost limited to simple decorative 
patterns of scrolls or foliage, but in 
Britain it was largely adopted, as in 
the well-known Castor ware made 
on the site of that name (Durobrivae) 
in Northamptonshire. Many of the 
vases found or made here have 
gladiatorial combats, hunting-scenes, 
or chariots executed by this method 
(fig. 38) . The decoration was applied 
in the form of a thick viscous slip, 
usually of the same colour as the 
clay, but reduced to this consistency 
with water, and was laid on by 
means of a narrow tube or run from the edge of a spatula. The 
Castor ware appears to date from the 3rd and 4th centuries a.d. 
Painted wares are at all times rare, but were occasionally 
produced in Gaul, Germany and Britain. A notable class of such 
ware seems to have been produced in the Rhine district, repre- 
sented by small jars covered with a glossy black coating, on 
which are painted in thick white slip inscriptions of a convivial 
character, such as BIBE, REPLE, DA VINUM, or VIVAS 
(Plate IV. fig. 68) . A very effective ware, obviously imitating cut 
glass, by means of sharply incised patterns, was made at Lezoux 
in both the red and black varieties. 

Literature. — Dragendorff in Bonner Jahrbiicher, xcvi. 37 ff. ; 
Dechelette, Vases ceramiques de la Gaule romaine (1904) ; Walters, 
Ancient Pottery, ii. chaps, xxi.-xxiii. ; British Museum Catalogue 
of Roman Pottery (1908). (H. B. Wa.) 

Persian, Syrian, Egyptian and Turkish Pottery 1 
Formerly, in all general accounts of the potter's art, it was 
the custom to pass over the period between the fall of the Roman 
empire and the appearance of the beautiful Persian and Syrian 
pottery of the early middle ages, as if the intervening centuries 
had produced nothing worthy of note. Even yet the successive 
steps by which this beautiful art arose are largely matters of 
inference and deduction, but it must be borne in mind that while 
the Greeks and Romans made singularly little use of glaze and 
painted colour, the Egyptians and the inhabitants of Syria and 
Mesopotamia had long been noted for their skill in this direction. 
In discussing the pottery of these peoples we have already 
Jlpinted out at what a very early period they had developed the 
production of rich and beautiful coloured glazes — the Egyptians 
1 See examples in colour on Plate V. 



Fig. 38. — Jar of Castor 
ware, with reliefs of a stag 
pursued by a hound, exe- 
cuted in semi-fluid slip. 
6 in. high. 



as a jewel-like decoration of small pieces made in a very sandy 
paste, or actually carved from stone, and the Assyrians, on a 
bolder scale, in their glazed and coloured brickwork. Though 
the Egyptian and Syrian empires were overthrown, the peoples 
of these countries remained; and, as we are now aware, carried 
on their traditional craft, though in a less splendid way. There 
is abundant evidence that pottery was made in the Egypt of 
Roman times and later with rich turquoise blue and yellow 
glazes, though the potters had learned to produce this glaze on 
a material containing more clay and less sand than that used in 
earlier days. We know also that they had learned that the 
addition of lead oxide to a glaze enabled such glaze to be applied 
on vessels formed from clay which was sufficiently plastic to be 
shaped on the wheel. This knowledge was not confined to Egypt, 
but appears to have been spread over Syria and parts of Asia 
Minor; and throughout the Byzantine empire many forms of 
pottery were made which were clearly the starting-points of 
much of the fine pottery produced in Europe in later times. 
We find, for instance, side by side, a manufacture of bowls, 
dishes and vases of very simple shape, yet made of two distinct 
materials: (1) a whitish sandy body on which turquoise blue, 
green or even white glaze, consisting mainly of silicates of soda 
and lime, was used either without ornament or with simple 
painted patterns in black or cobalt blue under the glaze; (2) 
similar vessels made of a lightish red clay, also rather sandy and 
porous, coated with a white slip (pipeclay or impure kaolin) 
covered with a yellowish lead glaze. These vessels were 
decorated in a variety of ways: (1) Graffiati; patterns cut or 
scratched through the coating of white slip while it was still soft, 
down to the red ground, so that when the vessel was glazed it 
displayed a pattern in dark upon a light ground. (2) Yellow 
and red ochre and copper scales were rudely " dabbed " over 
the white slip surface, so that when the vessel was glazed it 
presented a marbled or mottled appearance with touches of red, 
yellow, brown or green, on a yellowish- white ground. (See the 
section on Egyptian pottery above.) (3) Oxides of copper or iron 
were added to the lead glaze, and the resulting green or yellow 
glazes were applied to plain vases or to vessels decorated with 
moulded reliefs. In all these methods we see the continuation 
of old tradition in simpler forms, but we shall also see that these, 
in their turn, became the startingrpoint of much of the medieval 
pottery of Europe, particularly of Italy and the other southern 
countries. 

In the same way, a little farther east, the Persians of Sassanian 
times seem to have preserved some of the traditions of the potters 
of Assyria, just as they inherited their skill; and the Assyrian 
device of raising strong brown outlines round a design to control 
the flow of coloured glazes, which is exemplified in the Frieze 
of Archers in the Louvre, was carried on by them, for it appears 
unchanged in the tiles of the Mosque of Mahommed I. built at 
Brusa in the 15th century. The intercourse between the Persian 
and Byzantine empires at this time must have led to a general 
diffusion of technical knowledge among the pottery centres of 
the various countries round the eastern end of the Mediterranean, 
though our knowledge is too fragmentary to furnish sufficient 
data for any definite placing of the progress made. Our informa- 
tion is mainly derived from the examination of the rubbish 
mounds at Fostat, or Old Cairo, in Egypt, by Dr Fouquet, and 
by eager inquirers like Henry Wallis. Fostat was built in a.d. 640 
by Amr and destroyed in the 12th century; partially rebuilt, 
it was given over to pillage in 1252 by a Mameluke sultan, and 
all that remains is the Old Cairo of to-day, the rest of the site 
being covered with accumulated rubbish heaps. In the same 
way Rhagae or Rai, one of the ancient capitals of Persia, the 
site of which lies a,few miles east of Teheran, was destroyed about 
1 220 by Jenghiz Khan. Like Fostat it was partially rebuilt, but 
was destroyed again in the following century, so that its existence 
practically ceased in the 14th century. Rhagae was once an 
important centre of the ceramic industry, but this was transferred 
to the neighbouring town of Veramin, in the 13th century. 
Excavations have also been made on the site of Rakka, near 
Aleppo, in Syria, and from all these sources, and a few ethers p* 



PERSIAN] 



CERAMICS 



727 



minor importance, much interesting light has been thrown on 
the development of the potter's art in these countries during the 
period between the 4th and 1 2th centuries. Yet, until systematic 
excavations have been made in Persia, Anatolia, Syria and the 
Delta, on the same scale as those which have proved so valuable 
in Greece, Crete, Cyprus and the valley of the Nile, we cannot 
hope to possess sound chronological data of the developments 
of the arts in these countries. Meantime the exact share which 
should be allotted to each district for its discoveries will remain 
ground of contention for scholars of conflicting schools, though 
there can be little doubt that Egypt and the southern part of 
Syria played a more important part than has generally been 
supposed in the development of the potter's art at this period. 

Persian Pottery. — The most important pottery of the nearer 
East, whether considered on its own merits or from the influence 
it has exercised on the pottery of later times, is that so highly 
valued by collectors under the distinctive name of Persian; 
though much that passes under that name may not have been 
made in Persia. From the 10th to the 16th centuries the crafts- 
men of Persia were perfect masters of decorative design and 
colour; and, as potters, they possessed a sense of the forms 
proper to clay, such as none of the great races of antiquity ever 
exhibited. The shapes of Greek pottery speak more strongly 
of metal than of clay, but the best Persian work exhibits a feeling 
for the material that has rarely been equalled. The shapes are 
not only true clay-shapes but they are designed so as best to 
exhibit the qualities of the glaze and colour with which they 
were to be decorated. Certainly from the 12 th to the 16th 
centuries the pottery of the Persians must rank among the 
greatest achievements of the potter's art. The ware was shaped 
from various mixtures such as we have already spoken of — but 
whether its body was a mixture of white clay with a large pro- 
portion of sand, or some inferior clay that burnt to a yellowish 
or red tint, and was surfaced with a fine white coating of siliceous 
slip, or with a mixture of soda-glass, clay and oxide of tin, 
which made it whiter still — the one aim was to produce a white 
pottery. On this white ground — with a coarsish absorbent 
surface — beautiful patterns, in conventional floral or animal 
forms, wert deftly painted in cobalt-blues, manganese-purples, 
copper-greens and turquoise, with mixtures for intermediate 
tints; while a strong brownish-black outline colour was com- 
pounded by mixing the oxides of iron and manganese, to be turned 
into a fine, still black by the addition of a trace of cobalt and 
later of oxide of chromium. Over this freely painted colour, 
often used in broad flat masses, a singularly limpid alkaline glaze, 
generally of considerable thickness, was fired until it just fused; 
and the resultant effect is of the most rich and brilliant colour 
relieved on a ground of slightly toned white. Judging from 
fragments which have been found at Rai, and which can scarcely 
therefore be later than the 13th century, we find the characteristic 
Persian style of ornament already developed; dumpy little 
figures kneeling, standing or riding on grass between cypress 
trees, or animals and birds similarly disposed, with conventional 
borders and bands of Cufic inscriptions. Another well-known 
type of pattern consists of highly conventionalized floral orna- 
ment which often runs to a beautiful tracery of " arabesque " 
lines. The drawing is generally finely outlined with brown 
, or black (a survival of the ancient Assyrian practice), and in the 
earliest pieces the flat washes of colour are laid in only in cobalt- 
blue, turquoise or green from copper, and shades of purple and 
brown from manganese. From the 16th century onwards 
Chinese influence is strongly felt both in the designs and in the 
colour schemes, particularly in the wares painted with patterns 
in blue only (fig. 39), which sometimes carry the imitation of 
Chinese porcelain so far as to bear forged Chinese marks. Finally, 
Shah Abbas I. (1 587-1629) is said to have brought a number 
of Chinese artificers, among them many potters, to Ispahan, 
and we find that Chinese porcelain was largely painted at King- 
tfi-Chen, with blue decorations in the Persian taste, so that we 
cannot be surprised at the growth of a hybrid Perso-Chinese style 
of decoration. From this period, however, Persian pottery 
deteriorated both in its technical and artistic aspects. Crudely 



moulded figures in fairly high relief, coloured with an opaque 
yellow and green as well as with transparent blue and turquoise, 
began to make their appearance, especially on the famous 
Persian tiles; and in the 18th century the brown and black 
outlines of the drawing (a most valuable decorative resource) 
vanish, and we get brighter and more glittering, yet poorer 
colours, including a rose-red enamel fired over the glaze, evidently 
imitated from the Chinese famille-rose porcelains of the 18th 
century. 

The finest work appears to have been produced from the 
nth to the 14th centuries; yet so imperfect is our knowledge 
of what is truly Persian, Syrian or Egyptian, that we are forced 
to accept many conventional names that have perhaps little but 
custom to recommend them. There is, for instance, animportant 
class of pottery known, until recently, only from a few remark- 
ably handsome vases, and once called " Siculo-Arab " because 
these few examples had been mostly found in Sicily. This ware 
is characterized by its fine quality and its distinguished ornament 
— leaf-shaped panels with arabesques; interlacing patterns; 
striped and dotted bands ; friezes of animals or birds amidst 




Fig. 39- 



-Persian Plate painted in blues only. 
Albert Museum.) 



(Victoria and 



flowers and foliage, inscriptions, &c; all strongly and firmly 
drawn in black or brown outlines and washed in with a very pure 
cobalt-blue or with turquoise. In spite of the resemblance of 
these pieces to the oldest Persian wares, we know that bowls, 
dishes, vases and spoilt pieces of the same kind have been dug up 
on the site of Rakka near Aleppo; similar ware has been found 
at Fostat, together with evidences of local manufacture, and 
occasional pieces have been brought from Persia; so that 
probably this distinguished ware was made at Rakka in Syria 
between the 9th and the 13th centuries, and was afterwards 
made by Syrian potters both in Persia and Egypt. 

Other Persian Wares. — We have already spoken of the pre- 
valent use of coloured glazes in all the countries of the nearer 
East — from Egypt to Persia — from remote times, either as the 
sole colour decoration or in conjunction with modelled or painted 
ornament. The fragments from Rai and Fostat include rich 
turquoise glazes (derived from the ancient Egyptian), deep and 
light-green glazes containing lead and copper, imitations of 
ancient Chinese celadon-green, a brownish-purple glaze, a coffee- 
brown glaze and a deep cobalt-blue glaze. 1 All these may be 

1 A peculiarity of the Persian and allied blue glazes, of many 
shades, is that they appear to have been produced not by dissolving 
the colouring matter in the glaze, but by coating the white ground 
of the ware with a thin wash of some cobaltiferous substance — 
probably an earth containing varying proportions of cobalt, man- 
ganese and iron — and then melting a thick alkaline glaze over it. 



728 



CERAMICS 



[PERSIAN 



found either on plain vases, or on vessels with modelled orna- 
ment; or covering delicate floral or arabesque patterns painted 
in white slip or incised in the paste. Sometimes, even at this 
early period, there are traces of applied gold-leaf attached, but 
not fired, to the glaze. 

At a Very early period, too, we find those beautiful bowls, 
dishes and vases decorated with geometrical or arabesque 
patterns in a singularly still underglaze black, and covered with 
the blue turquoise or green copper glazes. This characteristic 
and beautiful ware is common to Persia, Syria and Egypt in 
Saracen times, and it was soon prized in Europe, as is shown by 
the famous fragment found by the late Mr Drury Fortnum built 
into the outer walls of S. Cecilia in Pisa, where it was apparently 
placed in the 12th century. 1 

At a later date a shining black glaze made its appearance, 
and in the 13th century pale and lapis-lazuli blues, while there 
is a comparatively modern sage-green glaze found only on pieces 
bearing patterns modelled in low relief. 

Persian Porcelain. — This beautiful and somewhat mysterious 
ware — often called " Gombroon " ware — apparently made its 
appearance in the 13th century, though the bulk of the known 
examples are not earlier than the 17th or 18th century. The 
ware is quite translucent and is of soft and delicate texture. 
Unlike Chinese porcelain, it was made from a mixture of pipe-clay 
and glass, and was glazed with a soft lead glaze; so that a 
fragment of it would melt to an opaque glass in an ordinary 
porcelain oven. It is principally met with in the form of dishes, 
bowls (often mounted on feet) and saucers. The 'pieces are 
generally very thin and are either perfectly plain or bear flutings 
or simple wavy patterns incised in the paste. Most characteristic 
and beautiful is the decoration by means of delicate perforations 
either straight or lozenge-shaped. In the finest pieces the 
perforations are filled with glaze, and then they form a decoration 
analogous to the well-known " rice-grain " decoration of the 
Chinese. Occasional pieces are found decorated with colour, 
either a delicate green, producing an effect like pale bright 
celadon, or the well-known Persian blue ground; and this is 
sometimes decorated with lustre patterns. Nowhere can this 
rare and delicately beautiful ware be so well studied as in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum. 

Lustred Ware. — The decoration of pottery with iridescent 
metallic films is one of the most astonishing and beautiful inven- 
tions ever made by the potter. Hitherto we have seen only 
coloured clays, coloured glazes, or colours fired under the glaze, 
but we are now brought face to face with a colour effect produced 
by retiring the finished glazed pieces, at a lower temperature, 
with pigments painted upon the glaze (fig. 40; see also Plate V. 
13th-century Persian lustre). How such a practice originated 
is probably an idle speculation, but it may have come through 
repeated attempts to decorate pottery with gold. If gold was 
painted under the glazes of these ancient vases, it would probably 
vanish and leave no trace; but gold, alloyed with much silver, 
applied over the finished glaze and retired, in the attempt to make 
it adhere, may have given the first films of iridescent colour. 
We know certainly that before the 13 th century the elements, of 
the process had been mastered, and that the potters of the nearer 
East had learnt that by mixing some compound of silver (doubt- 
less the sulphide) with clay, and painting the mixture on the 
finished vase, which was retired in such a way that the pieces 
were only raised to a dull red heat and were then exposed to the 
vapours of the wood-fuel, glowing lustrous patterns were left 
on the ware that looked like metal — but metal shot over with 
all the hues of the rainbow, golden, rosy, purple and green. 
Numerous fragments of this lustred pottery had been disinterred 
from the site at Rhagae, and it was therefore assumed that the 
beautiful process was of Persian origin, particularly as most of 
the examples then known bore designs of distinctly Persian style. 
We are now inclined to think that the process really arose in 
Egypt or in Syria, and was carried eastward to Persia, just as it 
was afterwards carried westward to Spain. In support of this 
view there is the written record of the Persian traveller Nasiri 
1 See Drury Fortnum, Archaeologia, vol. xlii. 



Khosrau, who visited Old Cairo in the nth century (103 5-1042). 
He was apparently familiar with the pottery of his own country, 
and notes all the novel forms that he found in the bazaars of 
Old Cairo, which was both a great trading emporium for the 
traffic of East and West, and a pottery centre of note. He 
mentions, specially, certain translucent bowls of earthenware 
decorated with colours resembling a stuff called " bougalemoun," 
" the tints changing according to the position which one gives 
to the vase." Such a description could only apply to " lustred " 
pottery, and it would seem as if this process must have been 
known in Egypt or Syria before it was practised in Persia (see 
Plate V., 13th-century Syro-Persian). In any case the secret 
was soon carried to Persia, for we have ample evidence that it 
was practised at Rhagae in the next century. 

The earliest dated example of Persian lustred ware is a star- 
shaped tile of the year a.d. 1217 (a.h. 614), decorated with 
spotted hares, heraldically confronted, in a ground of lustre 
relieved by dots and curls, and surrounded by an inscribed 
border. A vase in the Godman collection bears the date a.d. i 23 i 
(a.h. 629), and some of the well-known " star and cross " tiles 
from Veramin belong to the year a.d. 1262. The early Persian 




Fig. 40. — Persian Ewer, white ground, with pattern in brown 
copper lustre; the upper part has a blue ground. The mounting 
is gilt bronze, Italian 16th-century work. (British Museum.) 

lustre is chiefly known to us through the tiles with which the 
walls of mosques and public buildings were decorated ; the more 
ephemeral vases, bowls and dishes have survived in smaller 
numbers and very rarely in perfect condition. Common motives 
of decoration were animals and birds (sometimes showing 
Chinese influence), the hare and the deer being favourites; 
roughly drawn sack-like figures of men and women, mounted 
or on foot (probably heroes of Persian legend), conventional 
foliage and arabesques. The designs are usually reserved in a 
lustred ground, which is relieved by small scrolls, curls and dots 
etched in the lustre (as though the glazed piece had been covered 
all over with the lustre mixture and the ornament scratched out < 
of this when it was dry), and showing beneath the ivory-white 
tin-enamel with which the early wares are generally coated. 
The lustre itself when viewed directly may look like some golden 
or deep chocolate-brown colour, but as the piece is turned to 
catch a side-light this deep colour is seen to bear a thin iridescent 
film, which glows with golden, green, purple or ruby-red metallic 
reflels. On the earliest examples the decoration is often entirely 
in lustre, but later, lustre is often used to eke out a pattern 
painted with masses of pale cobalt-blue or turquoise under the 
glaze. Similar tiles with rather more elaborate ornament bear 
14th-century dates, and another variety has parts of the decora- 
tion, more particularly the large letters of the inscriptions, raised 
in low relief and heightened with blue. Yet another class, 
belonging to the 14th century, has a fine dark-blue alkaline glaze, 



TURKISH] 



CERAMICS 



729 



with designs in low relief, picked out with scrolls and arabesques 
in white enamel or bold floral sprays in leaf-gold. Lustre is 
frequently found applied to the rich cobalt-blue ground, and 
there are still existing a few magnificent vases which show the 
artistic possibilities of this scheme of decoration. It should be 
noted that when the pieces are in the round, the pattern is 
usually painted in lustre and not reserved in a lustre ground as 
on the flat tiles. In the later examples the tin-enamel was 
replaced entirely by white slip, and the lustre decoration con- 
tinued in use until the end of the reign of Shah Abbas I. 
(1587-1629). To the last period belong many charming bowls, 
narghilis, cups and dishes in a brown lustre, with ruby reflets, 
on a white or a deep blue ground; this ware is pure white in sub- 
stance and generally translucent, and the pieces are occasionally 
signed (see Persian porcelain above). 

Damascus Ware. — This time-honoured name (for " Damas 
Ware " was often mentioned in medieval inventories, and 
appears to have included many varieties of oriental pottery 
which were highly prized in Italy, France and England in the 
middle ages) 1 forms rather a puzzle nowadays for the archaeo- 
logist, for many diverse wares have been included under this 

title, some of which were 
not made at Damascus. 
Yet Damascus is one of 
the oldest cities in the 
world, and has seen 
unnumbered dynasties 
come and go around its 
desert-fringed oasis. An 
important centre of cara- 
van traffic, a nexus of 
palpitating life from east 
and west, north and 
south, we cannot wonder 
if it developed a special 
pottery of its own, tinged 
with something of a cos- 
mopolitan spirit. For- 
merly the Damascus 
wares were treated as a 
variety of the Persian 
pottery we have just de- 
scribed, but the best ex- 
amples of the class now 
known under this name 
exhibit a mingling of 
various influences such as 
we might expect, and have well-marked affinities both with the 
Persian wares and those brilliant productions now commonly 
recognized as Syrian and Turkish, while even far-off echoes of 
Chinese decorative mannerisms are not wanting. The character- 
istic Damascus ware of the collector is marked by its quality; the 
ground is of very clear white, the colours are pure and brilliant, 
and the vessels, whether dishes or vases, are soundly made. The 
decoration, which is purely floral or conventional, recalls the more 
formal Persian style, but the colours recall those of the Turkish 
pottery with one remarkable substitution. The piled-up red-clay 
pigment of the latter is absent, but where it would inevitably 
occur in the design of a Turkish piece its place is taken by a purple 
made from manganese, which is often thin and rather washy in 
quality. Fine examples of this famous ware are to be seen in the 
British Museum and in the Louvre; its characteristic style of 
pattern is well shown in the 16th-century Damascus piece 
reproduced in Plate V. Another splendid example is the lamp 
from the Mosque of Omar at Jerusalem, also in the British 
Museum (fig. 41); and this has generally been classed with the 
Damascus wares, though its colouring and its technique belong 
rather to Lower Syria or to Egypt. This magnificent piece bears 
a dated inscription, " In the year 956 in the month Jemazi-l-oola. 

1 Specimens of Turkish and other Eastern wares exist with elabor- 
ate English silver mounts of the time of Elizabeth, and these were 
doubtless included under the name of " Damas Wares." 




Fig. 41. 



-Lamp from the Mosque of 
Omar. 



The painter is the poor and humble Mustafa." This is reckoned 
